Sex, Ecology, Spirituality

The Spirit of Evolution

SECOND EDITION, REVISED

Ken Wilber

SHAMBHALA

Boston & London

2011

SHAMBHALA PUBLICATIONS, INC.

Horticultural Hall

300 Massachusetts Avenue
Boston, Massachusetts 02115

www.shambhala.com

© 1995, 2000 by Ken Wilber

Cover art: “Group ix, series uw The Dove, nr 2” (Lnr 174) by Hilma af Klint. Courtesy of the Hilma af Klint Foundation, Stockholm, Sweden

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying,

recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Wilber, Ken.

Sex, ecology, spirituality: the spirit of evolution / Ken Wilber.—2nd ed.

p.   cm.

Includes bibliographical references and index.

eISBN 978-0-8348-2108-8

ISBN 1-57062-744-4 (alk. paper)

1. Cosmology. 2. Consciousness. 3. Evolution—Philosophy. 4. Whole and parts (Philosophy) 5. God. I. Title.

BD511.W54 2000

110–dc21
00-044003

Contents

List of Figures
Preface to the Second Edition, Revised
Introduction

BOOK ONE
1.  The Web of Life
2.  The Pattern That Connects
3.  Individual and Social
4.  A View from Within
5.  The Emergence of Human Nature
6.  Magic, Mythic, and Beyond
7.  The Farther Reaches of Human Nature
8.  The Depths of the Divine

BOOK TWO
9.  The Way Up Is the Way Down
10.  This-Worldly, Otherworldly
11.  Brave New World
12.  The Collapse of the Kosmos
13.  The Dominance of the Descenders
14.  The Unpacking of God

Notes
References
Index

LIST OF FIGURES

3-1.
3-2.
3-3.
3-4.

3-5.
3-6.
3-7.
4-1.
4-2.
4-3.
5-1.
9.1.
12.1.
12.2.
12.3.
12.4.
12.5.
12.6.

Typical Holarchy
Popper’s Holarchy
Cosmic Coevolution of Macro- and Microstructures
The history of life on earth expresses the coevolution of self-organizing macro- and microsystems
in ever-higher degrees of differentiation
The Realms of Evolution
The “Triune Brain”
Emergent Geopolitical Systems Levels
The Without and the Within
Levels of Evolution
The Four Quadrants
Some Details of the Four Quadrants
The Great Holarchy according to Plotinus and Aurobindo
The Great Nest of Being
The Great Nest with the Four Quadrants
The Big Three
Correlations of Interior (Consciousness) States with Exterior (Material) States
The Ego and the Eco before the Collapse
Flatland

Preface to the Second Edition, Revised

THE GENESIS OFSEX, ECOLOGY, SPIRITUALITY

SEX, ECOLOGY, SPIRITUALITY was the first theoretical book I had written in almost ten years, following the events

described in Grace and Grit. The previous book, Transformations of Consciousness (with Jack Engler and Daniel P.
Brown), was completed in 1984; I wrote Grace and Grit in 1991; and then I settled down to finally write a textbook
of psychology that I had been planning on doing for several years. I was calling that textbook System, Self, and
Structure, but somehow it never seemed to get written. Determined to complete it, I sat down and began
transcribing the two-volume work, whereupon I realized, with a shock, that four of the words I used in the very first
paragraph were no longer allowed in academic discourse (development, hierarchy, transcendental, universal). This,
needless to say, put a considerable cramp in my attempt to write this book, and poor System, Self, and Structure
was, yet again, shelved. (I recently brought out an abridged version of it with the title Integral Psychology.)

What had happened in my ten-year writing hiatus, and to which I had paid insufficient attention, is that extreme
postmodernism had rather completely invaded academia in general and cultural studies in particular—even the
alternative colleges and institutes were speaking postmodernese with an authoritarian thunder. The politically
correct were policing the types of serious discourse that could, and could not, be uttered in academe. Pluralistic
relativism was the only acceptable worldview. It claimed that all truth is culturally situated (except its own truth,
which is true for all cultures); it claimed there are no transcendental truths (except its own pronouncements, which
transcend specific contexts); it claimed that all hierarchies or value rankings are oppressive and marginalizing (except
its own value ranking, which is superior to the alternatives); it claimed that there are no universal truths (except its
own pluralism, which is universally true for all peoples).

The downsides of extreme postmodernism and pluralistic relativism are now well known and widely
acknowledged, but at the time I was trying to write System, Self, and Structure, they were thought to be gospel and
were as religiously embraced, making any sort of developmental and transcendental studies anathema. I therefore
set System, Self, and Structure aside and began to ponder the best way to proceed, feeling rather like a salmon who
had first to swim upstream in order to have any fun at all.

But I have been dwelling merely on the downsides of postmodernism and pluralistic relativism. Their positive
benefits are equally numerous and far-reaching, and deserve a hearing as well. As I have tried to suggest in several
places (e.g., The Marriage of Sense and Soul, Integral Psychology, and A Theory of Everything), pluralistic relativism
is actually a very high developmental achievement, stemming from the postformal levels of consciousness, which
disclose a series of very important truths. (“Postformal” means the cognitive stages lying immediately beyond linear
rationality or
to
preoperational to concrete operational to formal operational to postformal cognition, to possibly higher modes [see
below].
called it
integral-aperspectival—and it is vision-logic that drives the best of postmodernism.)

thinking. Thus, cognitive development proceeds from sensorimotor

vision-logic—Gebser

formal operational

or

I also refer

to postformal

cognition as

network-logic

As I suggested in those publications, the truths of postmodernism include constructivism (the world is not just a
perception but an interpretation); contextualism (all truths are context-dependent, and contexts are boundless); and
integral-aperspectivism (no context is finally privileged, so an integral view should include multiple perspectives;
pluralism; multi-culturalism). All of those important truths can be derived from the beginning stages of postformal
vision-logic, and postmodernism at its best is an elucidation of their profound importance.

In particular, the previous stages of concrete operational

(which supports a worldview called “mythic-

membership”) and formal operational (which supports a worldview called “universal formalism”) have inherent
limitations and weaknesses in them, and these limitations, when pressed into social action, produce various types of
rigid social hierarchies, mechanistic worldviews that ignore local color, and universalistic pronouncements about
human beings that violate the rich differences between cultures, peoples, and places. But once consciousness
evolves from formal to postformal—and thus evolves from universal formalism to pluralistic relativism—these
multiple contexts and pluralistic tapestries come jumping to the fore, and postmodernism has spent much of the last
two decades attempting to deconstruct the rigid hierarchies, formalisms, and oppressive schemes that are inherent
in the preformal-to-formal stages of consciousness evolution.

But pluralistic relativism is not itself the highest wave of development, as numerous studies have consistently
shown (see Integral Psychology). When vision-logic matures into its middle and late phases, pluralistic relativism
increasingly gives way to more holistic modes of awareness, which begin to weave the pluralistic voices together into
beautiful tapestries of integral intent. Pluralistic relativism gives way to universal integralism. Where pluralism frees
the many different voices and multiple contexts, universal
integralism begins to bring them together into a
harmonized chorus. (Universal integralism thus stands on the brink of even higher developments, which directly
disclose the transpersonal and spiritual realms—developments wherein the postformal mental gives way to the
postmental or supramental altogether.)

But this leaves pluralistic relativism in a difficult position. Having heroically developed beyond a rigid universal
formalism, it became suspicious of any universals at all, and thus it tended to fight the emergence of universal
integralism with the same ferocity that it deconstructed all previous systems. It turned its critical guns not just on
pre-pluralistic stages (which was appropriate), but also on post-pluralistic stages (which was disastrous).
Deconstructive postmodernism thus began to actively fight any higher stages of growth, often turning academia into
a charnel ground of deconstructive fury. Little new was created; past glories were simply torn down. Little novel was
constructed; previous constructions were merely deconstructed. Few new buildings were erected; old ones were
simply blown up. Postmodernism often degenerated into the nihilism and narcissism for which it is now so well
known, and the vacant, haunted, hollow eyes of professional academia, peering through the smoking ruins, told the
tale most sadly.

One thing was very clear to me as I struggled with how best to proceed in an intellectual climate dedicated to
deconstructing anything that crossed its path: I would have to back up and start at the beginning, and try to create a
vocabulary for a more constructive philosophy. Beyond pluralistic relativism is universal integralism; I therefore
sought to outline a philosophy of universal integralism.

Put differently, I sought a world philosophy. I sought an integral philosophy, one that would believably weave
together the many pluralistic contexts of science, morals, aesthetics, Eastern as well as Western philosophy, and the
world’s great wisdom traditions. Not on the level of details—that is finitely impossible; but on the level of orienting
generalizations: a way to suggest that the world really is one, undivided, whole, and related to itself in every way: a
holistic philosophy for a holistic Kosmos: a world philosophy, an integral philosophy.

Three years later, Sex, Ecology, Spirituality was the result. During that period I lived the hermit’s life; I saw exactly
four people in three years (Roger Walsh, who is an M.D., stopped by once a year to make sure I was alive); it was
very much a typical three-year silent retreat (this period is described in One Taste, June 12 entry). I was locked into
this thing, and it would not let go.

The hard part had to do with hierarchies. Granted, rigid social hierarchies are deplorable and oppressive social
rankings are pernicious. Postmodernism has fortunately made us all more sensitive to those injustices. But even the
antihierarchy critics have their own strong hierarchies (or value rankings). The postmodernists value pluralism over
absolutism—and that is their value hierarchy. Even the ecophilosophers, who abhor hierarchies that place humans
on the top of the evolutionary scale, have their own very strong hierarchy, which is: subatomic elements are parts of
atoms, which are parts of molecules, which are parts of cells, which are parts of organisms, which are parts of
ecosystems, which are parts of the biosphere. They thus value the biosphere above particular organisms, such as the
human being, and they deplore our using the biosphere for our own selfish and ruinous purposes. All of that comes
from their particular value hierarchy.

Feminists have several hierarchies (e.g., partnership societies are better than power societies; linking is better

than ranking; liberation is better than oppression); systems theorists have hundreds of hierarchies (all natural
systems are arranged hierarchically); biologists and linguists and developmental psychologists all have hierarchies.
Everybody seemed to have some sort of hierarchy, even those who claimed they didn’t. The problem is, none of
them matched with the others. None of the hierarchies seemed to agree with each other. And that was the basic
problem that kept me locked in my room for three years.

At one point, I had over two hundred hierarchies written out on legal pads lying all over the floor, trying to figure
out how to fit them together. There were the “natural science” hierarchies, which were the easy ones, since
everybody agreed with them: atoms to molecules to cells to organisms, for example. They were easy to understand
because they were so graphic: organisms actually contain cells, which actually contain molecules, which actually
contain atoms. You can even see this directly with a microscope. That hierarchy is one of actual embrace: cells
literally embrace or enfold molecules.

The other fairly easy series of hierarchies were those discovered by the developmental psychologists. They all told
variations on the cognitive hierarchy that goes from sensation to perception to impulse to image to symbol to
concept to rule. The names varied, and the schemes were slightly different, but the hierarchical story was the
same—each succeeding stage incorporated its predecessors and then added some new capacity. This seemed very
similar to the natural science hierarchies, except they still did not match up in any obvious way. Moreover, you can
actually see organisms and cells in the empirical world, but you can’t see interior states of consciousness in the same
way. It is not at all obvious how these hierarchies would—or even could—be related.

And those were the easy ones. There were linguistic hierarchies, contextual hierarchies, spiritual hierarchies.
There were stages of development in phonetics, stellar systems, cultural worldviews, autopoietic systems,
technological modes, economic structures, phylogenetic unfoldings, superconscious realizations. . . . And they simply
refused to agree with each other.

G. Spencer Brown, in his remarkable book Laws of Form, said that new knowledge comes when you simply bear
in mind what you need to know. Keep holding the problem in mind, and it will yield. The history of human beings is
certainly testament to that fact. An individual runs into a problem and simply obsesses about that problem until he
or she solves it. And the funny thing is: the problem is always solved. Sooner or later, it yields. It might take a week,
a month, a year, a decade, a century, or a millennium, but the Kosmos is such that solutions are always forthcoming.
For a million years, people looked at the moon and wanted to walk on it. . . .

I believe any competent person is capable of bearing problems in mind until they yield their secrets; what not
everybody possesses is the requisite will, passion, or insane obsession that will let them hold the problem long
enough or fiercely enough. I, at any rate, was insane enough for this particular problem, and toward the end of that
three-year period, the whole thing started to become clear to me. It soon became obvious that the various
hierarchies fall into four major classes (what I would eventually call the four quadrants); that some of the hierarchies
are referring to individuals, some to collectives; some are about exterior realities, some are about interior ones, but
they all fit together seamlessly; the ingredients of these hierarchies are holons, wholes that are parts of other
wholes (e.g., a whole atom is part of a whole molecule, which is part of a whole cell, which is part of a whole
organism, and so on); and therefore the correct word for hierarchy is actually holarchy. The Kosmos is a series of
nests within nests within nests indefinitely, expressing greater and greater holistic embrace—holarchies of holons
everywhere!—which is why everybody had their own value holarchy, and why, in the end, all of these holarchies
intermesh and fit perfectly with all the others.

The universe is composed of holons, all the way up, all the way down. And with that, much of Sex, Ecology,
Spirituality began to write itself. The book is divided into two parts (three actually, counting the endnotes, a
separate book in themselves). Part one describes this holonic Kosmos—nests within nests within nests
indefinitely—and the worldview of universal integralism that can most authentically express it. This part of the book
covers a great deal of ground, and one of my regrets is that I could not include the voluminous research material and
explanations that would flesh out the details with much more persuasion. As those who have seen some of the
research notes will attest, many of the paragraphs in Sex, Ecology and Spirituality (SES) are summaries of short
books. (One reviewer actually spotted this, and began the review, “No summary of this book is possible. The book, all
524 pages of text and 239 pages of notes,
is a summary, which should reveal the depth and breadth of its scope.”

Other reviewers found this very irritating, but I really had no choice. I hope to be able to get these research notes
into print at some point, not so much to show the material itself as to make it available for criticism and scrutiny. But
that reviewer is right: SES is a summary.)

If the first part of the book attempts to outline a universal integralism—a view of the holonic Kosmos from
subconscious to self-conscious to superconscious—the second part of the book attempts to explain why this holistic
Kosmos is so often ignored or denied. If the universe really is a pattern of mutually interrelated patterns and
processes—holarchies of holons—why do so few disciplines acknowledge this fact (apart from their own narrow
specialties)? If the Kosmos is not holistic, not integral, not holonic—if it is a fragmented and jumbled affair, with no
common contexts or linkings or joinings or communions—then fine, the world is the jumbled mess the various
specialties take it to be. But if the world is holistic and holonic, then why do not more people see this? And why do
many academic specialties actively deny it? If the world is whole, why do so many people see it as broken? And why,
in a sense, is the world broken, fragmented, alienated, divided?

The second part of the book therefore looks at that which prevents us from seeing the holistic Kosmos. It looks at

what I call flatland.

(At one point I had named part one and part two, before deciding not to narrow their content with a name; but
part one was “Spirit-in-Action,” and part two was “Flatland.” Part two, in any event, attempts to explain why part
one isn’t more often seen and understood.)

When I went over this book for its inclusion in the Collected Works,

I decided to do a second, revised edition
(which is also the book you now hold in your hands), mostly because I wanted to clarify a few sections in light of the
constructive criticism of the first edition. In particular, I wanted to explain more clearly the historical rise of scientific
materialism (a version of flatland), and thus I added several new sections in several chapters (especially 12 and 13),
along with six new diagrams, which I believe help the narrative considerably. I have also carefully gone over the
endnotes, including new material where appropriate.

Speaking of the endnotes, they really were written as a book in themselves. Many of the most important ideas in
SES are mentioned and developed only in the notes (such as the Basic Moral Intuition), as is much of the dialogue
with other scholars (Heidegger, Foucault, Derrida, Habermas, Parmenides, Fichte, Hegel, Whitehead, Husserl) and
with alternative present-day theorists (Grof, Tarnas, Berman, Spretnak, Roszak). The notes also contain a handful of
polemical bursts, which I will explain in a moment. All of these have been retouched for the second edition.

Once the book was conceived, the actual writing went fairly quickly. It was published in 1995 and, I’m told, was
the largest-selling academic tome in any category for that year, at one point going into three printings in four
months alone. The reactions to it were extreme, from incredibly positive statements to infuriated rants. But the
specific criticisms were straightforward, and they deserve a respectful hearing.

THE MAJOR CRITICISMS OFSEX, ECOLOGY, SPIRITUALITY

Some critics of the book claimed that it too rigidly categorized various approaches and thus marginalized important
differences. They therefore charged the book with various “isms” of one sort or another (sexism, anthropocentrism,
speciesism, logocentrism, and invidious monism). Those defending the book claimed that most of those criticisms
came from individuals whose worldviews were shown to be narrow and partial by comparison, and they were
reacting in a negative fashion for that reason. Both sides refused to budge, generally.

In my opinion, there are a handful of serious criticisms that need to be addressed. Although I believe the bulk of
these criticisms are based on an unfamiliarity with my work as a whole, some are more serious. Here are the major
criticisms.

Piaget

One of the most common charges was that I used Piaget as the basis for my entire view of psychological
development. This is very inaccurate, but I understand how the book gave that impression. One of the most difficult
problems I face in writing about my ideas is that I always assume the audience has no prior knowledge of my work.

With each new book I therefore must start from scratch and explain my “system” from the beginning. Usually,
around the first third of a book is taken up introducing the system, and then the new material is presented in the last
part of the book. This gives readers familiar with my work the impression that I am repeating myself; but this is for
the benefit of those new to the game.

With SES,

I did this introducing using a few shortcuts, which was perhaps a bad idea. For the higher or
transpersonal stages of development, instead of explaining the stages themselves, I simply used examples of each
(Emerson, Saint Teresa, Eckhart, and Sri Ramana Maharshi), and for the ontogenetic development of worldviews, I
simply used the work of Jean Piaget. Many reviewers—especially the postmodern pluralists—jumped on Piaget as an
example of the fact that I was using old-paradigm, hierarchical, Eurocentric, sexist schemes, and therefore the entire
book was suspect.

Of course, those who were familiar with my work knew that Piaget was only one of dozens of theorists that I had
attempted to integrate into a more holistic overview of development, and that, even then, I was not a strict
Piagetian by any means. But before I briefly state my view, let us not rush over the attacks on Piaget too quickly,
because the unfairness of those attacks applies equally to those aimed at SES. For the fact is, if we focus on the
aspects of cognition that Piaget studied, his general scheme has held up to intense cross-cultural investigation. Those
who attack Piaget often seem uninformed of the evidence.

After almost three decades of intense cross-cultural research, the evidence is virtually unanimous: Piaget’s stages
up to formal operational are universal and cross-cultural. As only one example, Lives Across Cultures: Cross-Cultural
Human Development
is a highly respected textbook written from an openly liberal perspective (which is often
suspicious of “universal” stages). The authors (Harry Gardiner, Jay Mutter, and Corinne Kosmitzki) carefully review
the evidence for Piaget’s stages of sensorimotor, preoperational, concrete operational, and formal operational. They
found that cultural settings sometimes alter the rate of development, or an emphasis on certain aspects of the
stages—but not the stages themselves or their cross-cultural validity.

including of Nigerians, Zambians,

Thus, for sensorimotor: “In fact, the qualitative characteristics of sensorimotor development remain nearly
identical in all infants studied so far, despite vast differences in their cultural environments.” For preoperational and
concrete operational, based on an enormous number of studies,
Iranians,
Algerians, Nepalese, Asians, Senegalese, Amazon Indians, and Australian Aborigines: “What can we conclude from
this vast amount of cross-cultural data? First, support for the universality of the structures or operations underlying
the preoperational period is highly convincing. Second, . . . the qualitative characteristics of concrete operational
development (e.g., stage sequences and reasoning styles) appear to be universal [although] the rate of cognitive
development . . . is not uniform but depends on ecocultural factors.” Although the authors do not use exactly these
terms, they conclude that the deep features of the stages are universal but the surface features depend strongly on
cultural, environmental, and ecological factors (as I would put it, all four quadrants are involved in individual
development). “Finally, it appears that although the rate and level of performance at which children move through
Piaget’s concrete operational period depend on cultural experience, children in diverse societies still proceed in the
same sequence he predicted.”

Fewer individuals in any culture (Asian, African, American, or otherwise) reach formal operational cognition, and
the reasons given for this vary. It might be that formal operational is a genuinely higher stage that fewer therefore
reach, as I believe. It might be that formal operational is a genuine capacity but not a genuine stage, as the authors
believe (i.e., only some cultures emphasize formal operational and therefore teach it). Evidence for the existence of
Piaget’s formal stage is therefore strong but not conclusive. Yet this one item is often used to dismiss all of Piaget’s
stages, whereas the correct conclusion, backed by enormous evidence, is that all of the stages up to formal
operational have now been adequately demonstrated to be universal and cross-cultural.

I believe the stages at and beyond formop are also universal, including vision-logic and the general transrational
stages, and my various books have presented substantial evidence for that. But the point is that any model that does
not include Piaget’s stages up to formop is an inadequate model.

Waves, Streams, and States

Although I include the Piagetian cognitive line in my model, as demanded by the cross-cultural evidence, his scheme
is, as I suggested, only a small part of an overall view. In my model, there are the various levels or waves of
consciousness (stretching from matter to body to mind to soul to spirit), through which pass various developmental
lines or streams (including cognitive, affective, moral, interpersonal, spiritual, self-identity, needs, motivations, and
so on). A person can be at a very high level in one line (say, cognitive), at a medium level of development in others
(e.g., emotional intelligence), and at a low level in still others (e.g., morals). Thus, a person’s overall development
follows no linear sequence whatsoever. Development is far from a sequential, ladder-like, clunk-and-grind series of
steps, but rather involves a fluid flowing of many waves and streams in the great River of Life.

Moreover, a person at virtually any wave or stage of development can experience an altered state of
consciousness or a peak experience of any of the transpersonal realms (psychic, subtle, causal, or nondual). Thus,
transpersonal peak experiences and altered states are available to virtually anybody at virtually any stage of
development;
the notion that transpersonal states are available only at higher levels of development is quite
incorrect. My overall model, then, consists of waves, streams, and states, and thus there is precious little about it
that is linear.

And yet that was by far the most common criticism of SES: it represented a model of merely linear development.
Since I had not subscribed to a linear model since 1981 (see the Introduction to Volume Three of the Collected
Works)—and since, in fact, I had written at length criticizing such a view (the rejection of which marked the
transition from phase-2 to phase-3 in my own work)—I must confess I was astonished to see critics ascribe this view
to me and then criticize it at length. A book purporting to be a dialogue with my work contained these or similar
errors throughout, and it has taken several years to dig out from under those unfortunate distortions. Still, it is finally
the case that, due to vigorous support by scholars of my work, one hears less and less the charge that my model is
linear (it is multidimensional), or that it is Eurocentric (it is based on much cross-cultural evidence), or that it is
marginalizing (holarchies transcend and include in multiple contexts), or that transpersonal experiences occur only at
higher levels (they are available as states at virtually any level).

At the same time, I repeat that I understand how critics could have gotten the wrong impression if they only read
I should have made my overall model much clearer, which would have helped to ward off these

SES.
misunderstandings. I have attempted to do so in the second edition and, obviously, in this Introduction.

Spirituality in Children and Dawn Humans

Closely related to the previous criticism was the charge that I denied any sort of spirituality to both children and
early humans. This, too, is an unfortunate misrepresentation of my work, based exactly on the notion that my model
is merely linear. A few critics went apoplectic at my “linear” model and accused me of things slightly worse than
well-poisoning. Since my model is one of waves, streams, and states—and since spiritual states can occur at virtually
any wave of unfolding—that particular criticism is considerably off the mark. I can, as I said, understand how a critic
who had only read SES might get that impression, but the impression is false. (For a specific discussion of spirituality
in children and in early humans, see Integral Psychology, chaps. 10, 11, and 12.)

As is perhaps obvious, a good deal of the major criticisms of SES were based on simple misrepresentations of my
work, with blame to be shared on both sides: I did not clearly outline my overall model, and the critics were not well
informed about my other works. My responses began to sound like a broken record: “That is not my view, that is not
my view, that is not. . . .” Nobody got more tired of this than I.

The Treatment of Ecophilosophies

One quite accurate criticism was that I lumped together the many various ecophilosophies and treated them
indiscriminately. This is true, and the criticism is well taken. In my defense, I can only say that I explained, in several
endnotes, that volume 2 of the Kosmos trilogy (tentatively entitled Sex, God, and Gender: The Ecology of Men and
Women) treats the various ecophilosophies separately and deals with each on its own terms. I was simply stating
certain broad conclusions from those studies. At the same time, SES levels a very powerful critique at many, I would
say most, of the current ecophilosophies, pointing out that they are, in fact, representatives of a very flatland view.

One reviewer of SES concluded that “this presentation, which I believe is generally true, is fatal to most forms of
ecotheory,” and Michael Zimmerman (author of Radical Ecology) pointed out that most (not all) forms of
ecophilosophy do indeed appear to be caught in flatland as described.

SES went on to suggest a type of ecophilosophy that is profoundly ecological but not in flatland terms, and, in my
own opinion, this holonic ecology is one of the book’s most important contributions. However, because SES does
not subscribe to the flatland version of ecology that most (not all) ecophilosophies adopt, SES was not well received
by ecophilosophers generally. It is still not. And yet, as SES carefully explains, most ecophilosophies do indeed
contain the major problems, inherent in flatland, that will very likely continue to hobble them (both theoretically and
practically) until a more holonic ecology is embraced.

Emerson and Plotinus

A few ecophilosophers objected to my treatment of Emerson and Plotinus. I made two minor factual errors in
reporting their views. One, I failed to use ellipses correctly in several Emerson quotes. Two, I reported the final
words of Plotinus according to the translation given by Karl Jaspers, not William Inge as indicated. Both errors were
corrected in subsequent printings. But those minor infractions became the starting point for an agitated onslaught as
to my interpretations of Emerson and Plotinus altogether. (See The Eye of Spirit, chapter 11, endnotes 1, 2, and 3).
Unfortunately, in my opinion, this attack simply allowed some of the ecophilosophers to draw attention away from
my substantial criticisms of their views, and also to ignore the major criticisms that both Emerson and Plotinus
themselves leveled against nature mysticism (and would therefore level against most forms of present-day
ecopsychology, deep ecology, ecofeminism, and neopaganism).

Here, from The Eye of Spirit,

is a summary of the widely accepted interpretation of Emerson’s view: (1) nature is
not Spirit but a symbol of Spirit (or a manifestation of Spirit); (2) sensory awareness in itself does not reveal Spirit but
obscures it; (3) an Ascending (or transcendental) current is required to disclose Spirit; (4) Spirit is understood only as
nature is transcended (i.e., Spirit is immanent in nature, but fully discloses itself only in a transcendence of
nature—in short, Spirit transcends but includes nature). Those points are uncontested by Emerson scholars.

As far as those points go, Plotinus would have completely agreed. Thus, both Emerson and Plotinus would
condemn—as true but partial—most (not all) forms of ecopsychology, Gaia worship, neopaganism, deep ecology,
and ecofeminism. This is why it became important for these particular ecophilosophers to assert that the common
and widely accepted interpretations of Emerson and Plotinus (which I presented) were in fact massive distortions,
because otherwise they could not claim support for their theories from these two towering figures. Of course, one is
free to try to bring fresh and novel interpretations to the classics, which is always worthwhile. But to try to get these
new interpretations across by simply asserting that I had massively distorted these theorists was one of the most
ham-handed of the criticisms aimed at SES (not to mention the fact that, even if it were true, it wouldn’t affect the
conclusions of SES one way or the other). But I must say, it made for some fun and lively fireworks.

Minor Points

Chapter 2 outlines “twenty tenets” that are common to evolving or growing systems wherever we find them. Many
people counted them up and didn’t get twenty, and they wanted to know if they had missed something. This simply
depends on what you count as a tenet. I give twelve numbered tenets. Number 2 contains four tenets, and number
12 contains five. That’s nineteen altogether. Throughout the book, I give three additions. That’s twenty-two. But one
or two of the tenets are not really characteristics, just simple word definitions (e.g., tenet 7 and possibly 9). So that
leaves around twenty actual tenets, or actual characteristics of evolution. But there is nothing sacred about the
number twenty; these are just some of the more noticeable trends, tropisms, or tendencies of evolution.

Chapter 9, “The Way Up Is the Way Down,” discusses evolution and involution. Evolution is the unfolding from
matter to body to mind to soul to spirit, with each higher dimension transcending and including its juniors, resulting
in the Great Nest of Being. Involution is the reverse process, or the higher dimensions “enfolding” and “involving”
themselves in the lower, depositing themselves in the lower as great potentials, ready to unfold into actuality with
evolution. Some readers felt that this made the universe completely deterministic and fated. But involution, in my

opinion, simply creates a vast field of potentials, which are not determined as to their surface features at all. Those
are co-created during evolution, depending on an almost infinite number of variables, from individual initiative to
random chance. (I deal specifically with this topic in the Introduction to Volume Two of the Collected Works and in
Integral Psychology.) Within very broad spaces, evolution is playfully creative at every point!

A few Jungians wished that I had expanded my discussion of archetypes. Further material can be found in The Eye
of Spirit, chapter 11 (which also answers common criticisms from Jungians), and Integral Psychology (especially
chapter 8).

One critic wondered why I had relied so much on Habermas for my account of phylogenetic evolution. Actually, I
relied on dozens of major anthropological researchers—many of which are listed in the bibliography (and hundreds
of which are listed in volume 2 of the trilogy)—but because I was using Habermas as an example of a theorist who
recognizes all three domains of art, morals, and science (the “Big Three”),
I simply presented his extensive
anthropological research as long as it did not conflict with generally accepted conclusions in the field.

Smile When You Say That, Mister

There is, finally, the tone of the book. Sex, Ecology, Spirituality is in some ways an angry book. Anger, or perhaps
anguish, it’s hard to say which. After three years immersed in postmodern cultural studies, where the common tone
of discourse is rancorous, mean-spirited, arrogant, and aggressive; after surveying countless “new paradigm”
treatises, many of which boasted, without irony, that they possessed the new paradigm that was the greatest
transformation in history and that would save the planet and save the world; after being exposed to a relentless
onslaught of anti-Western, anti-male, anti-culture, anti-almost-anything rhetoric that was some of the most toxic
and venomous writing I have ever seen, and which reduced cultural studies to this or that pet theory and narcissistic
display of self—after all of that, in anger and anguish, I wrote SES, and the tone of the book indelibly reflects that.

In many cases it is very specific: I often mimicked the tone of the critic I was criticizing, matching toxic with toxic
and snide with snide. Of course, in doing so I failed to turn the other cheek. But then, there are times to turn the
other cheek, and there are times not to. If you happen to agree with the holistic vision presented in SES, you, too,
might get angry at the narrowness of what passes for cultural studies nowadays. You might also share a sense of
sadness, of melancholy, at the shallowness that pervades postmodernism. Between anger and anguish you might
oscillate, as did I when writing the book. And, to be honest, I think all of that is appropriate. But SES definitely was,
for me, a cry of anger and anguish.

Still, I could have toned the book down. I chose not to. I sincerely believed, as I still do, that the occasional
polemical burst was necessary to get the conversation moving in an integral direction. For over two decades I had
seen numerous excellent books with an integral intent completely ignored by “new paradigm” theorists who claimed
to be integral and holistic. I chose to rattle the cage and see what happened.

Did it work? What was its effect? Several critics took the polemic to be evidence of my nasty character: I just
couldn’t help myself, I had to attack. This overlooked the fact that in all of my first twelve books, stretching over two
decades, there is not a single polemical sentence.

Other critics maintained that the tone prevented its message from getting out. I truly understand what they mean,
but I claim exactly the contrary. These ideas had been studiously ignored for decades, until a little polemical rattling,
whereupon they took center stage, for better or worse.

One critic inadvertently demonstrated what was involved by calling for a “dialogue” in the wake of SES, wherein
all parties would care for each other in a dance of mutual respect, and not conduct theoretical discourse as if it were
a war. This critic then proceeded to do exactly what he professed he despised, and instead of presenting both sides
of the argument fairly and respectfully, simply condemned my tone from start to finish.

The fact is, the pro and con stances on the tone of the book lined up almost exactly with whether or not one
agreed with it. Those who agreed with the holistic vision of SES shared my anger and anguish, and applauded the
polemic. As one critic put it, “Let us not forget: many of us really liked the polemical notes in SES, for their refreshing
critiques and liberating humor.”

On the other side of the aisle, those who were themselves criticized in the book, or found the vision deficient,

lashed out at the tone. As one put it, “Worse than ignorant, Wilber is also unmannered, rude, and offensive.”

No doubt, both sides were right.

THE KOSMOS TRILOGY

But by far the most common overall reaction to SES was one of what I suppose we might call joy. I was flooded with
mail from readers who told of the liberating influence that SES had on their view of the world, on their view of
reality, on their consciousness itself. SES is, after all, a story of the feats of your very own Self, and many readers
rejoiced at that remembrance. Women forgave me any patriarchal obnoxiousness, men told me of weeping
throughout the last chapter. Apart from Grace and Grit,
I have never received such heartfelt and deeply moving
letters as I received from SES, letters that made those difficult three years seem more than worth it.

I am often asked when volume 2 of the trilogy will be published. My original plan was to release one volume a
decade, which means volume 2 would be ready around the year 2005. But now I have no idea exactly when the
other two volumes will be ready. Volume 2 is more or less fully written. Volume 3 exists in outline. But I want each to
have the chance to absorb the constructive criticisms of its predecessor. In the previous section on Objections, I only
focused on the major criticisms, each of which, in my opinion, can be satisfactorily answered. What I didn’t mention
are all the dozens of minor criticisms that I found valid and well taken, and which I have attempted to incorporate in
subsequent writing. I would like the Kosmos trilogy to stand as a solid version of a truly integral philosophy, a
believable, if initial, world philosophy, and thus I would like all the many cogent criticisms to have plenty of time to
sink in.

There is one other reason I am in no rush to bring out the other volumes. SES itself was begun in part due to a
lament at the state of postmodern cultural studies. In the time since SES was conceived, postmodernism’s stance has
weakened perceptibly. We are truly entering a post-postmodern, post-pluralistic world—by any other name,
integral. Genuinely integral philosophies will become, and are becoming, more and more acceptable, even eagerly
embraced. With every passing year, there is one less chapter of criticism I have to write. With every passing year, a
universal integralism becomes more and more welcome.

One critic wrote of SES that “it honors and incorporates more truth than any approach in history.” I obviously
would like to believe that is the case, but I also know that every tomorrow brings new truths, opens new vistas, and
creates the demand for even more encompassing views. SES is simply the latest in a long line of holistic visions, and
will itself pass into a greater tomorrow where it is merely a footnote to more glorious views.

In the meantime, it is quite a ride.

Introduction

IT IS FLAT-OUT strange that something—that anything—is happening at all. There was nothing, then a Big Bang, then

here we all are. This is extremely weird.

To Schelling’s burning question, “Why is there something rather than nothing?,” there have always been two
general answers. The first might be called the philosophy of “oops.” The universe just occurs, there is nothing behind
it, it’s all ultimately accidental or random, it just is, it just happens—oops! The philosophy of oops, no matter how
sophisticated and adult it may on occasion appear—its modern names and numbers are legion, from positivism to
scientific materialism, from linguistic analysis to historical materialism, from naturalism to empiricism—always
comes down to the same basic answer, namely, “Don’t ask.”

The question itself (Why is anything at all happening? Why am I here?)—the question itself is said to be confused,
pathological, nonsensical, or infantile. To stop asking such silly or confused questions is, they all maintain, the mark
of maturity, the sign of growing up in this cosmos.

I don’t think so. I think the “answer” these “modern and mature” disciplines give—namely, oops! (and therefore,

“Don’t ask!”)—is about as infantile a response as the human condition could possibly offer.

The other broad answer that has been tendered is that something else is going on: behind the happenstance
drama is a deeper or higher or wider pattern, or order, or intelligence. There are, of course, many varieties of this
“Deeper Order”: the Tao, God, Geist, Maat, Archetypal Forms, Reason, Li, Mahamaya, Brahman, Rigpa. And although
these different varieties of the Deeper Order certainly disagree with each other at many points, they all agree on
this: the universe is not what it appears. Something else is going on, something quite other than oops. . . .

* * *

This book is about all of that “something other than oops.” It is about a possible Deeper Order. It is about evolution,
and about religion, and, in a sense, about everything in between. It is a brief history of cosmos, bios, psyche,
theos—a tale told by an idiot, it goes without saying, but a tale that, precisely in signifying Nothing, signifies the All,
and there is the sound and the fury.

This is a book about holons—about wholes that are parts of other wholes, indefinitely. Whole atoms are parts of
molecules; whole molecules are parts of cells; whole cells are parts of organisms, and so on. Each whole is
simultaneously a part, a whole/part, a holon. And reality is composed, not of things nor processes nor wholes nor
parts, but of whole/parts, of holons. We will be looking at holons in the cosmos, in the bios, in the psyche, and in
theos; and at the evolutionary thread that connects them all, unfolds them all, embraces them all, endlessly.

The first chapters deal with holons in the physical cosmos (matter) and in the biosphere (life). This is the general
area of the natural and ecological sciences, the life sciences, the systems sciences, and we will explore each of them
carefully. This is particularly important, given not only the ecological crisis now descending on this planet with a
vengeance, but also the large number of movements, from deep ecology to ecofeminism, that have arisen in an
attempt to find spirituality and ecology connected, not divorced; and we will look at the meaning of all of that.

The middle chapters explore the emergence of the mind or the psyche or the noosphere, and at the holons that
compose the psyche itself (the mind is composed of units that have meaning only in contexts: wholes that are parts
of other wholes, endlessly). These psychic holons, like all holons, emerged and evolved—in time and history—and
we will look briefly at the historical evolution of the mind and consciousness, and at how these psychic holons relate
to the holons in the cosmos and in the bios.

The last chapters deal with theos, with the Divine Domain, with a Deeper Order, and how it might indeed be

related to the cosmos, the biosphere, and the noosphere. And here, I think, some surprises await us.

This book is the first of three volumes (the series itself is simply called Kosmos, or The Kosmos Trilogy; brief
summaries of the other two volumes are given throughout this book). Many of the questions raised in this volume
are more carefully examined in the other two; and, in any event, this volume stands more as a broad overview and
introduction, rather than a finished conclusion.

As such, the book is built upon what I would call orienting generalizations. For example, in the sphere of moral
development, not everybody agrees with the details of Lawrence Kohlberg’s seven moral stages, nor with the details
of Carol Gilligan’s reworking of Kohlberg’s scheme. But there is general and ample agreement that human moral
development goes through at least three broad stages: the human at birth is not yet socialized into any sort of moral
system (it is “preconventional”); the human then learns, from itself and from others, a general moral scheme that
represents the basic values of the society it is raised in (it becomes “conventional”); and with even further growth,
the individual may come to reflect on society and thus gain some modest distance from it and gain a capacity to
criticize or reform it (the individual is to some degree “postconventional”).

Thus, although the actual details and the precise meanings of that developmental sequence are still hotly debated,
everybody pretty much agrees that something like those three broad stages do indeed occur, and occur universally.
These are orienting generalizations: they show us, with a great deal of agreement, where the important forests are
located, even if we can’t agree on how many trees they contain.

My point is that if we take these types of largely-agreed-upon orienting generalizations from the various branches
of knowledge (from physics to biology to psychology to theology), and if we string these orienting generalizations
together, we will arrive at some astonishing and often profound conclusions, conclusions that, as extraordinary as
they might be, nonetheless embody nothing more than our already-agreed-upon knowledge. The beads of
knowledge are already accepted: it is only necessary to provide the thread to string them together into a necklace.

These three volumes are one attempt to string together such a necklace; whether it succeeds or not remains to be
seen. But if nothing else, I think it is at least a good example of how this type of work can be done in today’s
postmodern world. In working with broad orienting generalizations, the trilogy delivers up a broad orienting map of
the place of men and women in relation to Universe, Life, and Spirit, the details of which we can all fill in as we like,
but the broad outlines of which really have an awful
lot of supporting evidence, culled from the orienting
generalizations, simple but sturdy, from the various branches of human knowledge.

Nonetheless, this broad orienting map is nowhere near fixed and final. In addition to being composed of broad
orienting generalizations, I would say this is a book of a thousand hypotheses. I will be telling the story as if it were
simply the case (because telling it that way makes for much better reading), but not a sentence that follows is not
open to confirmation or rejection by a community of the adequate. I suppose many readers will insist on calling what
I am doing “metaphysics,” but if “metaphysics” means thought without evidence, there is not a metaphysical
sentence in this entire book.

Because this book (or this trilogy) offers a broad orienting map of men and women’s place in the larger Kosmos (of
matter, life, mind, and spirit), it naturally touches on a great number of topics that have recently become “hot,” from
the ecological crisis to feminism, from the meaning of modernity and postmodernity to the nature of “liberation” in
relation to sex, gender, race, class, creed; to the nature of techno-economic developments and their relation to
various worldviews; to the various spiritual and wisdom traditions the world over that have offered telling
suggestions as to our place in a larger scheme of things.

How can we become more fully human and at the same time be saved from the fate of being merely human?
Where is Spirit in this God-forsaken, Goddess-forsaken world of modernity? Why are we destroying Gaia in the very
attempt to improve our own condition? Why are so many attempts at salvation suicidal? How do we actually fit into
this larger Kosmos? How are we whole individuals who are also parts of something Larger?

In other words, since human beings, like absolutely everything else in the Kosmos, are holons, what does that
mean? How do we fit into that which is forever moving beyond us? Does liberation mean being whole ourselves, or
being a part of something Larger—or something else altogether? If history is a nightmare from which I am trying to
awaken, then what exactly is it that I am supposed to awaken to?

And, most important, can we not stare into that vast and stunning Kosmos and respond with something more

mature than oops?

From those who have already read this book in manuscript come two suggestions for the reader:

First, skip the endnotes on the first reading, and save them for (and if) a second look. This book was intentionally
written on two levels: the main text, which makes every attempt to be as accessible as possible, and the notes (a
small book in themselves), meant for serious students. But in both cases, the notes are, for the most part, best
reserved for a second reading, as they greatly disrupt the narrative flow. (Alternatively, some have simply read the
notes by themselves, as a type of appendix, just for the information, which is fine.)

Second, read the book a sentence at a time. People who try to skip around get competely lost. But pretty much
everybody reports that if you simply read each sentence, the text will carry you along, and any problems
encountered are usually cleared up down the road. This is a long book, obviously, but apparently it comes in nice,
small, bite-sized chunks, and its readers all seem to have a great good time—a bite at a time.

It is often said that in today’s modern and postmodern world, the forces of darkness are upon us. But I think not;
in the Dark and the Deep there are truths that can always heal. It is not the forces of darkness but of shallowness
that everywhere threaten the true, and the good, and the beautiful, and that ironically announce themselves as
deep and profound. It is an exuberant and fearless shallowness that everywhere is the modern danger, the modern
threat, and that everywhere nonetheless calls to us as savior.

We might have lost the Light and the Height; but more frightening, we have lost the Mystery and the Deep, the
Emptiness and the Abyss, and lost it in a world dedicated to surfaces and shadows, exteriors and shells, whose
prophets lovingly exhort us to dive into the shallow end of the pool head first.

“History,” said Emerson, “is an impertinence and an injury if it be anything more than a cheerful apologue or
parable of my being and becoming.” What follows, then, is a cheerful parable of your being and your becoming, an
apologue of that Emptiness which forever issues forth, unfolding and enfolding, evolving and involving, creating
worlds and dissolving them, with each and every breath you take. This is a chronicle of what you have done, a tale of
what you have seen, a measure of what we all might yet become.

BOOK ONE

What is it that has called you so suddenly out of nothingness to enjoy for a brief while a spectacle which
remains quite indifferent to you? The conditions for your existence are as old as the rocks. For thousands of
years men have striven and suffered and begotten and women have brought forth in pain. A hundred years
ago, perhaps, another man—or woman—sat on this spot; like you he gazed with awe and yearning in his
heart at the dying light on the glaciers. Like you he was begotten of man and born of woman. He felt pain
and brief joy as you do. Was he someone else? Was it not you yourself? What is this Self of yours?

—ERWIN SCHRÖDINGER

1

The Web of Life

So the world, grounded in a timeless movement by the Soul which suffuses it with intelligence, becomes a
living and blessed being.

—PLOTINUS

IT’S A STRANGE WORLD. It seems that around fifteen billion years ago there was, precisely, absolute nothingness, and

then within less than a nanosecond the material universe blew into existence. Stranger still, the physical matter so
produced was not merely a random and chaotic mess, but seemed to organize itself into ever more complex and
intricate forms. So complex were these forms that, many billions of years later, some of them found ways to
reproduce themselves, and thus out of matter arose life.

Even stranger, these life forms were apparently not content to merely reproduce themselves, but instead began a
themselves, to produce signs and symbols and

long evolution that would eventually allow them to represent
concepts, and thus out of life arose mind.

Whatever this process of evolution was, it seems to have been incredibly driven—from matter to life to mind.
But stranger still, a mere few hundred years ago, on a small and indifferent planet around an insignificant star,

evolution became conscious of itself.

And at precisely the same time, the very mechanisms that allowed evolution to become conscious of itself were

simultaneously working to engineer its own extinction.

And that was the strangest of all.

THE ECOLOGICAL CRISIS

I will not belabor the point by bringing out all the ghastly statistics, from the fact that we are at present
exterminating approximately one hundred species a day to the fact that we are destroying the world’s tropical
forests at the rate of one football field per second. The planet, indeed, is headed for disaster, and it is now possible,
for the first time in human history, that owing entirely to manmade circumstances,1 not one of us will survive to tell
the tale. If the Earth is indeed our body and blood, then in destroying it we are committing a slow and gruesome
suicide.

Arising in response to the alarming dimensions of this ecological catastrophe (the nature and extent of which I will
simply assume is evident to every intelligent person) have been a variety of popularly based responses generally
referred to as the environmental movement (usually dated from the 1962 publication of Rachel Carson’s Silent
Spring).2 Starting in part within the environmental movement, but going quite beyond it, are two “ecophilosophies”
that will particularly interest us: ecofeminism and deep ecology (and we will see that they almost perfectly embody,
respectively, the female and male value sphere approaches to the same topic).

Central to these ecological approaches is the notion that our present environmental crisis is due primarily to a
fractured worldview, a worldview that drastically separates mind and body, subject and object, culture and nature,
thoughts and things, values and facts, spirit and matter, human and nonhuman; a worldview that is dualistic,
mechanistic, atomistic, anthropocentric, and pathologically hierarchical—a worldview that, in short, erroneously

separates humans from, and often unnecessarily elevates humans above, the rest of the fabric of reality, a broken
worldview that alienates men and women from the intricate web of patterns and relationships that constitute the
very nature of life and Earth and cosmos.

These approaches further maintain that the only way we can heal the planet, and heal ourselves, is by replacing
this fractured worldview with a worldview that is more holistic, more relational, more integrative, more Earth-
honoring, and less arrogantly human-centered. A worldview, in short, that honors the entire web of life, a web that
has intrinsic value in and of itself, but a web that, not incidentally, is the bone and marrow of our own existence as
well.

Fritjof Capra, for example, has argued that the world’s present social, economic, and environmental crises all stem

from the same fractured worldview:

in an [unprecedented] crisis. We can read about its numerous
Our society as a whole finds itself
manifestations every day in the newspapers. We have high unemployment, we have an energy crisis, a crisis in
health care, pollution and other environmental disasters, a rising wave of violence and crime, and so on. The
basic thesis of this book [The Turning Point] is that these are all different facets of one and the same crisis, and
that this crisis is essentially a crisis of perception. It derives from the fact that we are trying to apply the
concepts of an outdated worldview—the mechanistic worldview . . .—to a reality that can no longer be
understood in terms of those concepts. We live today in a globally interconnected world, in which biological,
psychological, social, and environmental phenomena are all
interdependent. To describe this world
appropriately we need an ecological perspective. . . .3

As many scholars have pointed out, because of the perceived closeness of “woman” and “nature,” the
despoliation of the Earth and the subjugation of women have historically gone hand in hand. Ecofeminism is a
powerful response to the denigration of both of these “others.” As Judith Plant explains:

Historically, women have had no real power in the outside world, no place in decision making and intellectual
life. Today, however, ecology speaks for the Earth, for the “other” in human/environmental relationships; and
feminism speaks for the “other” in female/male relations. And ecofeminism, by speaking for both the original
others, seeks to understand the interconnected roots of all domination as well as ways to resist and change.
The ecofeminist’s task is one of developing the ability to take the place of the other when considering the
consequences of possible actions, and ensuring that we do not forget that we are all part of one another . . . ,
as we mend our relations with each other and with the Earth.4

Bill Devall and George Sessions, representing the movement known as deep ecology, point out that “this is the
work we call cultivating ecological consciousness, the insight that everything is connected,” which Jack Forbes
explains as perceiving ourselves as “being deeply bound together with other people and with the surrounding
nonhuman forms of life in a complex interconnected web of life, that is to say, a true community. All creatures and
things [are] brothers and sisters. From this idea comes the basic principle of non-exploitation, of respect and
reverence for all creatures.”5

The extraordinary thing about all these quotes is that, although they might sound rather romantic and poetic and,
some would say, even mushy-minded, they are in fact rooted in the hardest of scientific evidence. After all, holistic
theories of the “web of life” are as old as civilization itself, forming the very core of the world’s great religions and
wisdom traditions (as we will see). But it is one thing to merely have God on your side; quite another to have science
on your side.

And the ecological sciences are just that: hard sciences. What I would like to do, then, is briefly review the systems
(holistic or ecological) sciences, and demonstrate just exactly what they mean when they refer to the
interconnectedness or “weblike” nature of all life. This will give us some necessary background information, and also
serve as a platform for our discussion of ecofeminism and deep ecology.

Finally, as important as the ecological or holistic systems approach is, we will have to make a few very important
revisions in it (for reasons that will become obvious), and, most important, we will have to set it in its own larger

context, a context almost always ignored (with rather dire consequences). And we will find that the same
strengths—and the same weaknesses—beset ecofeminism and deep ecology as well.

We will find, in other words, that those who talk of the “web of life” are basically half right and half wrong (or
seriously incomplete), and the “half-wrong” part has caused almost more problems than the “half-right” part has
solved.

But first, the half that seems definitely right.

TWO ARROWS OF TIME

The new systems sciences are, in a sense, the sciences of wholeness and connectedness. If we now add the notion of
development or evolution—the idea that wholes grow and evolve—we have the essence of the modern systems
sciences. As Ervin Laszlo puts it, “A new system, scientific in origin and philosophic in depth and scope, is now on the
rise. It encompasses the great realms of the material universe, of the world of the living, and of the world of history.
This is the evolutionary paradigm. . . .” As he explains it:

The old adage “everything is connected with everything else” describes a true state of affairs. The results
achieved [by the evolutionary sciences] furnish adequate proof that the physical, the biological, and the social
realms in which evolution unfolds are by no means disconnected. At the very least, one kind of evolution
prepares the ground for the next. Out of the conditions created by evolution in the physical realm emerge the
conditions that permit biological evolution to take off. And out of the conditions created by biological
evolution come the conditions that allow human beings—and many other species—to evolve certain social
forms of organization.6

Laszlo then offers this important conclusion:

Scientific evidence of the patterns traced by evolution in the physical universe, in the living world, and even in
the world of history is growing rapidly. It is coalescing into the image of basic regularities that repeat and
recur. It is now possible to search out these regularities and obtain a glimpse of the fundamental nature of
evolution—of the evolution of the cosmos as a whole, including the living world and the world of human social
history.

To search out and systematically state these regularities is to engage in the creation of the “grand synthesis”

that unites physical, biological, and social evolution into a consistent framework with its own laws and logic.7

Exactly what those laws and logic are, we will explore later in this and the next chapter. For the moment, notice
that Laszlo refers to the three “great realms” of evolution: material, biological, and historical. Erich Jantsch refers to
them as cosmic, biosocial, and sociocultural. Michael Murphy summarizes them as physical, biological, and
psychological.
I will refer to these three general domains as the
physiosphere (matter), the biosphere (life), and the noosphere (mind).8

In popular terms: matter,

life, and mind.

The central claim made by the evolutionary systems sciences is that, whatever the actual nature of these three
great domains, they are all united, not necessarily by similar contents, but because they all express the same general
laws or dynamic patterns. As Ludwig von Bertalanffy, founder of General System Theory, put it, the “Unity of Science
is granted, not by a utopian reduction of all sciences to physics and chemistry, but by the structural uniformities
[regularities of dynamic patterns] of the different levels of reality.”9

Now historically it had been maintained, from the time of Plato and Aristotle until around the end of the
nineteenth century, that all of these great domains—physiosphere, biosphere, noosphere—were one continuous
and interrelated manifestation of Spirit, one Great Chain of Being, that reached in a perfectly unbroken or
uninterrupted fashion from matter to life to mind to soul to spirit.

As Arthur Lovejoy10 demonstrated, the various Great Chain theorists maintained three essential points: (1) all
phenomena—all things and events, people, animals, minerals, plants—are manifestations of the superabundance
and plenitude of Spirit, so that Spirit is woven intrinsically into each and all, and thus even the entire material and

natural world was, as Plato put it, “a visible, sensible God”; (2) therefore, there are “no gaps” in nature, no missing
links, no unbridgeable dualisms, for each and every thing is interwoven with each and every other (the “continuum
of being”); and (3) the continuum of being nonetheless shows gradation, for various emergents appear in some
dimensions that do not appear in others (e.g., wolves can run, rocks can’t, so there are “gaps” in the special sense of
emergents).

Now whatever we moderns might think of the Great Chain as a theory, it nonetheless “has been the official
philosophy of the larger part of civilized humankind through most of its history”; and further, it was the worldview
that “the greater number of the subtler speculative minds and of the great religious teachers [both East and West],
in their various fashions, have been engaged in.”11

Thus, whether or not we accept some version of the Great Chain (and we will be examining this in later chapters),
scholars agree that its worldview saw matter and bodies and minds as a vast network of mutually interweaving
orders subsisting in Spirit, with each node in the continuum of being, each link in the chain, being absolutely
necessary and intrinsically valuable. To give only one example now, Plotinus would soon explain that since each link
was a manifestation of the goodness of Spirit, each had intrinsic value—it was valuable in and of itself—and no link
whatsoever, no matter how “lowly,” existed merely or even primarily for the instrumental use of others: destroy any
precious strand and the whole fabric would come unravelled.

But with the rise of modern science—associated particularly with the names of Copernicus, Kepler, Galileo, Bacon,
Newton, Kelvin, Clausius—this great unified and holistic worldview began to fall apart, and fall apart in ways, it is
clear, that none of these pioneering scientists themselves either foresaw or intended.

And it fell apart in a very peculiar way. These early scientists began their experimental studies in that realm which
is apparently the least complicated: the physiosphere, the material universe, the world of inanimate matter. Kepler
focused on planetary motion and Galileo on terrestrial mechanics; Newton synthesized their results in his universal
law of gravitation and laws of motion; and Descartes worked all the results into a most influential philosophy. In all
of these endeavors, the physiosphere began to look like a vast mechanism, a universal machine governed by strict
causality. And worse, a machine that was running down.

Here was the problem: in the material world, science soon discovered, there are at least two very different types
of phenomena, one described by the laws of classical mechanics and the other by the laws of thermodynamics. In
the former, in classical Newtonian mechanics, time plays no fundamental role, because the processes described are
reversible. For example, if a planet is going one way around the sun or the reverse way around the sun, the laws
describing the motion are the same, because in these types of “classical mechanics” time changes nothing essential;
you can as easily turn your watch forward as you can turn it backward—the mechanism and its laws don’t care which
way you turn it.

But in thermodynamic processes, “time’s arrow” is absolutely central. If you put a drop of ink in a glass of water, in
a day or so the ink will have evenly dispersed throughout the water. But you will never see the reverse process
happen—you will never see the dispersed ink gather itself together into a small drop. Hence, time’s arrow is a crucial
part of these types of physical processes, because these processes always proceed in one direction only. They are
irreversible.

And the infamous Second Law of Thermodynamics added a dismal conclusion: the direction of time’s arrow is
downward. Physical processes, like the inkdrop, always go from more ordered (the inkdrop) to less ordered
(dispersed throughout the water). The universe may be a giant clockwork, but the clock is winding down . . . and will
eventually run out.

The problem was not that these early conceptions were simply wrong. Aspects of the physiosphere do indeed act
in a deterministic and mechanistic-like fashion, and some of them are definitely running down. Rather, it was that
these conceptions were partial. They covered some of the most obvious aspects of the physiosphere, but because of
the primitive means and instruments available at the time, the subtler (and more significant) aspects of the
physiosphere were overlooked.

And yet, as we will see, it was precisely in these subtler aspects that the physiosphere’s connection to the
biosphere could be established. At the time, however,
lacking these connections, the physiosphere and the
biosphere simply fell apart—in the sciences, in religion, and in philosophy. Thus, it was the partialness of the early

natural sciences, and not any glaring errors, that would inadvertently contribute to the subsequent and rather
horrendous fracturing of the Western worldview.

Against this early (and partial) scientific understanding of the physiosphere, which was now seen as a reversible
mechanism irreversibly running down, came the work of Alfred Wallace and Charles Darwin on evolution through
natural selection in the biosphere. Although the notion of evolution, or irreversible development through time, had
an old and honorable history (from the Ionian philosophers to Heraclitus to Aristotle to Schelling), it was of course
Wallace and Darwin who set it in a scientific framework backed by meticulous empirical observations, and it was
Darwin especially who lit the world’s imagination with his ideas on the evolutionary nature of the various species,
including humans.

Apart from the specifics of natural selection itself (which most theorists now agree can account for microchanges
in evolution but not macro-changes), there were two things that jumped out in the Darwinian worldview, one of
which was not novel at all, and one of which was very novel. The first was the continuity of life; the second,
speciation by natural selection.

The idea of the continuity of life—the web of life, the tree of life, the “no gaps in nature” view—was at least as old
as Plato and Aristotle, and, as I briefly mentioned, it formed an essential ingredient in the notion of the Great Chain
of Being. Spirit manifests itself in the world in such a complete and full fashion that it leaves no gaps in nature, no
missing links in the Great Chain. And, as Lovejoy noted, it was the philosophical belief that there are no gaps in
creation that directly led to the scientific attempts to find not only the missing links in nature (which is where that
phrase originated) but also evidence of life on other planets. All of these “gaps” needed to be filled in, in order to
round out the Great Chain, and there was precisely nothing new or unusual
in Darwin’s presentation of the
continuous tree of life.

What was rather novel was his thesis that the various links in the Great Chain, the various species themselves, had
in fact unfolded or evolved over vast stretches of geological time and were not simply put there, all at once, at the
creation. There were precedents for this thesis, particularly in Aristotle’s version of the Great Chain, which, he
maintained, showed a progressive and unbroken development of nature through what he called metamorphosis,
from inorganic (matter) to nutritive (plant) to sensorimotor (animal) to symbol-utilizing animals (humans), all
displaying progressive organization and increasing complexity of form. Leibniz had taken profound steps to
“temporalize” the Great Chain, and with Schelling and Hegel we see the full-blown conception of a process or
developmental philosophy applied to literally all aspects and all spheres of existence.

But it was Darwin’s meticulous descriptions of natural species and his unusual clarity of presentation, combined
with his hypothesis of natural selection, that propelled the concept of development or evolution to the scientific
forefront. Of the biosphere.

And in the biosphere Darwin (and many others) noticed that there is also a crucial time’s arrow. Evolution is
irreversible. We may see amoebas eventually evolve into apes, but we never see apes turn into amoebas. That is,
evolution proceeds irreversibly in the direction of increasing differentiation/integration,
increasing structural
organization, and increasing complexity. It goes from less ordered to more ordered. But obviously, the direction of
this time’s arrow was diametrically opposed to time’s arrow in the (known) physiosphere: the former is winding up,
the latter is winding down.

It was at this point, historically, that the physiosphere and the biosphere fell apart. It was an extremely difficult
situation. For one thing, both physics and biology were supposed to be part of the new natural sciences, relying on
empirical observation, measurement, theory formation, and rigorous testing (this overall procedure was indeed
novel, dating from 1605 with Kepler and Galileo). But although the methods of physics and biology were similar,
their results were fundamentally incompatible, saddled, as Laszlo put it, with “the persistent contradiction between
a mechanistic world slated to run down and an organic world seeming to wind up.”12

A further complication was the relation of physics and biology to the noosphere itself, to mind and values and
history. In the earlier conception of the Great Chain of Being, matter and body and mind were seen as perfectly
continuous aspects of the superabundant overflowing of Spirit. They were all organically related as manifestations
or emanations of the Divine, with no gaps and no holes (we find this from Plato to Plotinus to Pascal). But with the
separation of the physiosphere and the biosphere (due to their two different arrows of time), the links in the entire

Chain began to fall
disembodied mind.

into alienated and seemingly unrelated spheres—dead matter versus vital body versus

There were immediate and rather desperate attempts to repair the damage, to return the universe to a unified
conception. The first and by far the most influential attempt to resurrect a coherent worldview was material
reductionism, the attempt to reduce all mind and all body to various combinations of matter and mechanism
(Hobbes, La Mettrie, Holbach). Equally alluring was the reverse agenda: elevate all matter and bodies to the status of
mental events (as in the phenomenalism of Mach or Berkeley). In between the two extremes of reductionism and
elevationism were a whole host of uneasy compromises: the dualism of Descartes, a noble and, at the time, wholly
understandable attempt to salvage the status of the mind from its reduction to mere material mechanism, by
unfortunately throwing the whole biosphere over to the mechanists and snatching only the noosphere from the jaws
of the sharks; the pantheism of Spinoza (who regarded himself as a good Cartesian), seeing mind and matter as two
parallel attributes of God that
problem); the
epiphenomenalism of T. H. Huxley, who saw the mind as an “epiphenomenon,” real enough in itself, but purely the
byproduct of physiological causes and having no causal power itself—the “ghost in the machine.”

interacted (which he assumed took care of

never

that

All of these attempts were sabotaged from the beginning, not so much by the split between mind and body (which
was at least as old as civilization and had never bothered anybody before), but by the more primitive and radical split
between body and matter—that is, life and matter (the particular form of which was indeed very new and very
disturbing). As Henri Bergson put it, the universe shows two tendencies, a “reality which is making itself in a reality
which is unmaking itself.”

The upshot of all this was that, precisely because the physiosphere and the biosphere had parted ways, the world
was, indeed,
fractured. The immediate effect was that physics and biology went their separate ways. Much more
disturbing, natural philosophy was split from moral philosophy, and the natural sciences were split from the human
sciences. The physiosphere was seen as the realm of facts unaffected by history, and the noosphere as the realm of
values and morals created primarily by history, and this gap was felt to be absolutely unbridgeable. And poor
biology, caught in the middle between the “hard sciences” of the physiosphere and “soft sciences” of the noosphere,
became positively schizophrenic, trying now to ape physics and reduce all life to mechanism, now to ape the
noosphere and see all life as fundamentally embodying élan vital and values and history.

As several researchers have noted, “not until the puzzle of the two and opposing arrows of time was resolved in
the late twentieth century was there a sound basis for bridging the gap between matter and mind, the natural world
and the human world, and thus between the ‘two cultures’ of modern Western civilization.”13 And, as I said, it was
not so much the gap between mind and body as the gap between body and matter that needed to be closed.

THE MODERN EVOLUTIONARY SYNTHESIS

The closing of the gap between the physiosphere and the biosphere came precisely in the rather recent discovery of
those subtler and originally hidden aspects of the material realm that, under certain circumstances, propel
themselves into states of higher order, higher complexity, and higher organization. In other words, under certain
circumstances matter will “wind itself up” into states of higher order, as when the water running down a drain
suddenly ceases to be chaotic and forms a perfect funnel or whirlpool. Whenever material processes become very
chaotic and “far from equilibrium,” they tend under their own power to escape chaos by transforming it into a higher
and more structured order—commonly called “order out of chaos.”

Notice that these types of purely material systems also have an arrow of time, but this arrow is pointed in the
same direction as the arrow of time in living systems, namely, to higher order and higher structural organization. In
other words, aspects of the physiosphere are headed in the same direction as the biosphere, and that, put roughly,
closes the gap between them. The material world is perfectly capable of winding itself up,
long before the
appearance of life, and thus the “self-winding” nature of matter itself sets the stage, or prepares the conditions, for
the complex self-organization known as life. The two arrows have joined forces.

The nature of these chaotic transitions and transformations are still being explored. But the point is that, where
there once appeared a single and absolutely unbridgeable gap between the world of matter and the world of life—a

gap that posed a completely unsolvable problem—there now appeared only a series of minigaps. And whatever the
exact nature of these minigaps, they looked unavoidably like a series of bridges inherently relating matter to life,
and not like a moat forever separating them. Thus the old continuity between the physiosphere and the
biosphere—a continuity that was a hallmark of the Great Chain of Being—was once again established.

As I said, there are still certain types of very important gaps or “leaps” in nature (expressed in emergents), but

these now make sense, and seem somehow inevitable, in ways that early science found incomprehensible.

The new sciences dealing with these “self-winding” or “self-organizing” systems are known collectively as the
sciences of complexity—including General System Theory (Bertalanffy, Weiss), cybernetics (Wiener), nonequilibrium
thermodynamics (Prigogine), cellular automata theory (von Neumann), catastrophe theory (Thom), autopoietic
system theory (Maturana and Varela), dynamic systems theory (Shaw, Abraham), and chaos theories, among others.
I do not mean to minimize the very real differences between these various sciences, or the great advances that
the more recent sciences of complexity (especially self-organizing systems and chaos theories) have made over their
predecessors. But since my aim is very general, I will refer to them collectively as systems theory, dynamic systems
theory, or evolutionary systems theory. For the general claim, remember, of evolutionary systems theory is that
there have now been discovered basic regularities, patterns, or laws that apply in a broad fashion to all three great
realms of evolution, the physiosphere and the biosphere and the noosphere, and that a “unity of science”—a
coherent and unified worldview—is now possible.14 They claim, in other words, that “everything is connected to
everything else”—the web of life as a scientific and not just religious conclusion.

THE PROBLEM WITH HIERARCHY

Before we discuss some of the finer points and conclusions of the evolutionary systems sciences, the first thing that
we can’t help noticing is that these sciences are shot through with the notion of hierarchy—a word that has fallen
on very hard times. All sorts of theorists, from deep ecologists to social critics, from ecofeminists to postmodern
poststructuralists, have found the notion of hierarchy not only undesirable but a bona fide cause of much social
domination, oppression, and injustice.

And yet here are the actual system sciences talking openly and glowingly of hierarchy. I will present the evidence
for this later, but we find it everywhere: from the founder of General System Theory, Ludwig von Bertalanffy
(“Reality, in the modern conception, appears as a tremendous hierarchical order of organized entities”) to Rupert
Sheldrake and his “nested hierarchy of morphogenetic fields”; from the great systems linguist Roman Jakobson
(“Hierarchy, then, is the fundamental structural principle of language”) to Charles Birch and John Cobb’s ecological
model of reality based on “hierarchical value”; from Francisco Varela’s groundbreaking work on autopoietic systems
(“It seems to be a general reflection of the richness of natural systems . . . to produce a hierarchy of levels”) to the
brain research of Roger Sperry and Sir John Eccles and Wilder Penfield (“a hierarchy of nonreducible emergents”),
and even the social critical theory of Jurgen Habermas (“a hierarchy of communicative competence”)—hierarchy
seems to be everywhere.

Now, the opponents of hierarchy—their names are legion—basically maintain that all hierarchies involve a
ranking or dominating judgment that oppresses other values and the individuals who hold them (hierarchies are a
“hegemonic domination that marginalizes differential values”), and that a linking or nonranking model of reality is
not only more accurate but, we might say, kinder and gentler and more just.

So they propose instead, in their various fashions, the notion of heterarchy. In a heterarchy, rule or governance is
established by a pluralistic and egalitarian interplay of all parties; in a hierarchy, rule or governance is established by
a set of priorities that establish those things that are more important and those that are less.

Nowhere in the literature of modern social theory is there more acrimony expressed than over the topic of
hierarchy/heterarchy. On the one side we have the champions of egalitarian and “equalitarian” views (heterarchy),
who see all creatures as equal nodes in the web of life, and who, with good reasons, inveigh against harsh social
ranking and domination, arguing instead for a pluralistic wholeness that intrinsically values each strand in the web,
with “higher” and “lower” being forms not of organization but domination and exploitation. Even the notions of
“higher” and “lower” are said to be part of “old-paradigm” thinking, and not part of the “new-paradigm” or

“network” or “web-of-life” thinking.

And yet, when it comes to the actual sciences of this web of life, the sciences of wholeness and connectedness, we
find them speaking unmistakably of hierarchy as the basic organizing principle of wholeness. They maintain that you
cannot have wholeness without hierarchy, because unless you organize the parts into a larger whole whose glue is
a principle higher or deeper than the parts possess alone—unless you do that, then you have heaps, not wholes. You
have strands, but never a web. Even if the whole is a mutual interaction of parts, the wholeness cannot be on the
same level as the partness or it would itself be merely another part, not a whole capable of embracing and
integrating each and every part. “Hierarchy” and “wholeness,” in other words, are two names for the same thing,
and if you destroy one, you completely destroy the other.

It is ironic, to say the least, that the social champions of the web of life deny hierarchy in any form while the
sciences of the web of life insist upon it. And it is doubly ironic that the former often point to the latter for support
(e.g., “The new physics supports the equalitarian web of life”).

What’s going on here? In part, I will try to show, this is a colossal semantic confusion—the two parties are actually
much closer than either supposes. The real world does indeed contain some natural or normal hierarchies (as we’ll
see), and it definitely contains some pathological or dominator hierarchies. And just as important, it contains some
normal heterarchies and some pathological heterarchies (I’ll give some examples of all four in a moment). The
semantic confusions surrounding these topics are an absolute nightmare, confusions that have bred an inordinate
amount of ideological fury on both sides, and unless we attempt to clear up some of this confusion, the discussion
simply cannot go forward. So let us try. . . .

HOLONS

Hiero- means sacred or holy, and -arch means governance or rule. Introduced by the great sixth-century Christian
mystic Saint Dionysius the Areopagite, the “Hierarchies” referred to nine celestial orders, with Seraphim and
Cherubim at the top and archangels and angels at the bottom. Among other things, these celestial orders
represented higher knowledge and virtue and illuminations that were made more accessible in contemplative
awareness. These orders were ranked because each successive order was more inclusive and more encompassing
and in that sense “higher.” “Hierarchy” thus meant, in the final analysis, “sacred governance,” or “governing one’s
life by spiritual powers.”

In the course of Catholic Church history, however, these celestial orders of contemplative awareness were
translated into political orders of power, with the Hierarchies supposedly being represented in the pope, then
archbishops, then bishops (and then priests and deacons). As Martineau put it in 1851, “A scheme of a hierarchy
which might easily become a despotism.” And already we can start to see how a normal developmental sequence of
increasing wholes might pathologically degenerate into a system of oppression and repression.

As used in modern psychology, evolutionary theory, and systems theory, a hierarchy is simply a ranking of orders
of events according to their holistic capacity. In any developmental sequence, what is whole at one stage becomes a
part of a larger whole at the next stage. A letter is part of a whole word, which is part of a whole sentence, which is
part of a whole paragraph, and so on. As Howard Gardner explains it for biology, “Any change in an organism will
affect all the parts; no aspect of a structure can be altered without affecting the entire structure; each whole
contains parts and is itself part of a larger whole.”15 Or Roman Jakobson for language: “The phoneme is a
combination of distinctive features; it is composed of diverse primitive signaling units and can itself be incorporated
into larger units such as syllables and words. It is simultaneously a whole composed of parts and is itself a part that is
included in larger wholes.”16

Arthur Koestler coined the term holon to refer to that which, being a whole in one context, is simultaneously a
part
in another. With reference to the phrase “the bark of a dog,” for example, the word bark is a whole with
reference to its individual letters, but a part with reference to the phrase itself. And the whole (or the context) can
determine the meaning and function of a part—the meaning of bark is different in the phrases “the bark of a dog”
and “the bark of a tree.” The whole, in other words, is more than the sum of its parts, and that whole can influence
and determine, in many cases, the function of its parts (and that whole itself is, of course, simultaneously a part of

some other whole; I will return to this in a moment).

Normal hierarchy, then, is simply an order of increasing holons, representing an increase in wholeness and
integrative capacity—atoms to molecules to cells, for example. This is why hierarchy is indeed so central to systems
theory, the theory of wholeness or holism (“wholism”). To be a part of a larger whole means that the whole supplies
a principle (or some sort of glue) not found in the isolated parts alone, and this principle allows the parts to join, to
link together, to have something in common, to be connected, in ways that they simply could not be on their own.

Hierarchy, then, converts heaps into wholes, disjointed fragments into networks of mutual interaction. When it is
said that “the whole is greater than the sum of its parts,” the “greater” means “hierarchy.” It doesn’t mean fascist
domination; it means a higher (or deeper) commonality that joins isolated strands into an actual web, that joins
molecules into a cell, or cells into an organism.

This is why “hierarchy” and “wholeness” are often uttered in the same sentence, as when Gardner says that “a
biological organism is viewed as a totality whose parts are integrated into a hierarchical whole.”17 Or why, as soon as
Jakobson explains language as “simultaneously a whole composed of parts and itself a part included in a larger
whole,” he concludes, “Hierarchy, then, is the fundamental structural principle.” This is also why normal hierarchies
are often drawn as a series of concentric circles or spheres or “nests within nests.” As Goudge explains:

The general scheme of levels is not to be envisaged as akin to a succession of geological strata or to a series of
rungs in a ladder. Such images fail to do justice to the complex interrelations that exist in the real world. These
interrelations are much more like the ones found in a nest of Chinese boxes or in a set of concentric spheres,
for according to emergent evolutionists, a given level can contain other levels within it [i.e., holons].18

Thus, the common charge that all hierarchies are “linear” completely misses the point. Stages of growth in any
system can, of course, be written down in a “linear” order, just as we can write down: acorn, seedling, oak; but to
accuse the oak of therefore being linear is silly. As we will see, the stages of growth are not haphazard or random,
but occur in some sort of pattern, but to call this pattern “linear” does not at all imply that the processes themselves
are a rigidly one-way street; they are interdependent and complexly interactive. So we can use the metaphors of
“levels” or “ladders” or “strata” only if we exercise a little imagination in understanding the complexity that is
actually involved.

And finally, hierarchy is asymmetrical (or a “higher”-archy) because the process does not occur in the reverse.
Acorns grow into oaks, but not vice versa. There are first letters, then words, then sentences, then paragraphs, but
not vice versa. Atoms join into molecules, but not vice versa. And that “not vice versa” constitutes an unavoidable
hierarchy or ranking or asymmetrical order of increasing wholeness.

All developmental and evolutionary sequences that we are aware of proceed in part by hierarchization, or by
orders of increasing holism—molecules to cells to organs to organ systems to organisms to societies of organisms,
for example. In cognitive development, we find awareness expanding from simple images, which represent only one
thing or event, to symbols and concepts, which represent whole groups or classes of things and events, to rules
which organize and integrate numerous classes and groups into entire networks. In moral development (male or
female), we find a reasoning that moves from the isolated subject to a group or tribe of related subjects, to an entire
network of groups beyond any isolated element. And so on.

(It is sometimes said that Carol Gilligan denied, not just the specific nature of the stages of Kohlberg’s scheme, but
his entire hierarchical approach. This is simply not true. Gilligan, in fact, accepts Kohlberg’s general three-stage or
three-tiered hierarchical
to postconventional—“meta-
ethical”—development; she simply denies that the logic of justice alone accounts for the sequence; men seem to
emphasize rights and justice, she says, and that needs to be supplemented with the logic of care and responsibility
with which females progress through the same hierarchy—points we will return to later.)

from preconventional

scheme,

to conventional

These hierarchical networks necessarily unfold in a sequential or stagelike fashion, as I earlier mentioned, because
you first have to have molecules, then cells, then organs, then complex organisms—they don’t all burst on the
scene simultaneously. In other words, growth occurs in stages, and stages, of course, are ranked in both a logical
and chronological order. The more holistic patterns appear later in development because they have to await the
emergence of the parts that they will then integrate or unify, just as whole sentences emerge only after whole

words.

And some hierarchies do involve a type of control network. As Roger Sperry points out, the lower levels (which
means,
less holistic levels) can influence the upper (or more holistic) levels, through what he calls “upward
causation.” But just as important, he reminds us, the higher levels can exert a powerful influence or control on the
lower levels—so-called “downward causation.” For example, when you decide to move your arm, all the atoms and
molecules and cells in your arm move with it—an instance of downward causation.

Now, within a given level of any hierarchical pattern, the elements of that level operate by heterarchy. That is,
no one element seems to be especially more important or more dominant, and each contributes more or less equally
to the health of the whole level (so-called “bootstrapping”). But a higher-order whole, of which this lower-order
whole is a part, can exert an overriding influence on each of its components. Again, when you decide to move your
arm, your mind—a higher-order holistic organization—exerts influence over all the cells in your arm, which are
lower-order wholes, but not vice versa: a cell in your arm cannot decide to move the whole arm—the tail does not
wag the dog.

And so systems theorists tend to say: within each level, heterarchy; between each level, hierarchy.
In any developmental or growth sequence, as a more encompassing stage or holon emerges, it

includes the
capacities and patterns and functions of the previous stage (i.e., of the previous holons), and then adds its own
unique (and more encompassing) capacities. In that sense, and that sense only, can the new and more encompassing
holon be said to be “higher” or “deeper.” (“Higher” and “deeper” both imply a vertical dimension of integration not
found in a merely horizontal expansion, a point we will return to in a moment.) Organisms include cells, which
include molecules, which include atoms (but not vice versa).

Thus, whatever the important value of the previous stage, the new stage has that enfolded in its own makeup,
plus something extra (more integrative capacity, for example), and that “something extra” means “extra value”
relative to the previous (and less encompassing) stage. This crucial definition of a “higher stage” was first introduced
in the West by Aristotle and in the East by Shankara and Lieh-tzu; it has been central to developmental studies ever
since.

A quick example: in cognitive and moral development, in both the boy and the girl, the stage of preoperational or
preconventional thought is concerned largely with the individual’s own point of view (“narcissistic”). The next stage,
the operational or conventional stage, still takes account of the individual’s own point of view, but adds
the
capacity to take the view of others into account. Nothing fundamental is lost; rather, something new is added. And
so in this sense it is properly said that this stage is higher or deeper, meaning more valuable and useful for a wider
range of interactions. Conventional thought is more valuable than preconventional thought in establishing a
balanced moral response (and postconventional is even more valuable, and so on).

As Hegel first put it, and as developmentalists have echoed ever since, each stage is adequate and valuable, but
each deeper or higher stage is more adequate and, in that sense only, more valuable (which always means more
holistic, or capable of a wider response).

It is for all these reasons that Koestler, after noting that all such hierarchies are composed of holons, or increasing

orders of wholeness, pointed out that the correct word for “hierarchy” is actually holarchy.19

He is absolutely correct, and so from now on I will often use “hierarchy” and “holarchy” interchangeably.
Thus heterarchists, who claim that “heterarchy” and “holism” are the same thing (and that both are contrasted to
the divisive and nasty “hierarchy”), have got it exactly backward: The only way to get a holism is via a holarchy.
Heterarchy, in and by itself, is merely differentiation without integration, disjointed parts recognizing no common
and deeper purpose or organization: heaps, not wholes.

PATHOLOGY

That is normal or natural holarchy, the sequential or stagelike unfolding of larger networks of increasing wholeness,
with the larger or wider wholes being able to exert influence over the lower-order wholes. And as natural, desirable,
and unavoidable as that is, you can already start to see how holarchies can go pathological. If the higher levels can
exert influence over the lower levels, they can also overdominate or even repress and alienate the lower levels. And

that leads to a host of pathological difficulties, in both the individual and society at large.

It is precisely because the world is arranged holarchically, precisely because it contains fields within fields within
fields, that things can go so profoundly wrong, that a disruption or pathology in one field can reverberate throughout
an entire system. And the cure for this pathology, in all systems, is essentially the same: rooting out the pathological
holons so that the holarchy itself can return to harmony. The cure does not consist in getting rid of holarchy per se,
since, even if that were possible,
it would simply result in a uniform, one-dimensional flatland of no value
distinctions at all (which is why those critics who toss out hierarchy in general immediately replace it with a new
scale of values of their own, i.e., with their own particular hierarchy).

Rather, the cure of any diseased system consists in rooting out any holons that have usurped their position in the
overall system by abusing their power of upward or downward causation. This is exactly the cure we see at work in
psychoanalysis (shadow holons refuse integration), critical social
theory (ideological holons distort open
communication), democratic revolutions (monarchical or fascist holons oppress the body politic), medical science
interventions (cancerous holons invade a benign system), radical feminist critiques (patriarchal holons dominate the
public sphere), and so on. It is not getting rid of holarchy per se, but arresting (and integrating) the arrogant holons.

In short, the existence of pathological hierarchies does not damn the existence of hierarchies in general. That
distinction is crucial and, for the most part, very easy to spot. Thus Riane Eisler, herself a rather staunch champion of
heterarchy, nonetheless emphatically notes that “an important distinction should be made between domination and
actualization hierarchies. The term domination hierarchies describes hierarchies based on force or the express or
implied threat of force. Such hierarchies are very different from the types of hierarchies found in progressions from
lower to higher orderings of functioning—such as the progression from cells to organs in living organisms, for
example. These types of hierarchies may be characterized by the term actualization hierarchies because their
function is to maximize the organism’s potentials. By contrast, human hierarchies based on force or the threat of
force not only inhibit personal creativity but also result in social systems in which the lowest (basest) human qualities
are reinforced and humanity’s higher aspirations (traits such as compassion and empathy as well as the striving for
truth and justice) are systematically suppressed.”20

Let us further note that, by Eisler’s own definitions, what dominator hierarchies are suppressing is in fact the
individual’s own actualization hierarchies!—what she calls “humanity’s higher aspirations” instead of its “lowest
(basest) qualities.” In other words, the cure for pathological hierarchy is actualization hierarchy, not heterarchy
(which would produce more heaps and fragments, not wholes and cures).

These types of distinctions are crucial, because not only are there pathological or dominator hierarchies, there are
pathological or dominator heterarchies (which is a topic that heterarchists studiously avoid). I just suggested that
normal hierarchy, or the holism between levels, goes pathological when there is a breakdown between levels and a
particular holon assumes a repressive, oppressive, arrogant role of dominance over other holons (whether in
individual or social development). On the other hand, normal heterarchy, which is holism within any level, goes
pathological when there is a blurring or fusion of that level with its environment: a particular holon doesn’t stand out
too much, it blends in too much; it doesn’t arrogate itself above others, it loses itself in others—and all distinctions,
of value or identity, are lost (the individual holon finds its value and identity only through others).

In other words, in pathological hierarchy, one holon assumes agentic dominance to the detriment of all. This
holon doesn’t assume it is both a whole and a part, it assumes it is the whole, period. On the other hand, in
pathological heterarchy, individual holons lose their distinctive value and identity in a communal fusion and
meltdown. This holon doesn’t assume it is both a whole and a part, it assumes it is a part, period. It becomes only
instrumental to some other use; it is merely a strand in the web; it has no intrinsic value.

Thus, pathological heterarchy means not union but fusion; not integration but indissociation; not relating but
dissolving. All values become equalized and homogenized in a flatland devoid of individual values or identities;
nothing can be said to be deeper or higher or better in any meaningful sense; all values vanish into a herd mentality
of the bland leading the bland.

Whereas pathological hierarchy is a type of ontological fascism (with the one dominating the many), pathological
heterarchy is a type of ontological totalitarianism (with the many dominating the one)—all of which we will discuss
in detail
in later chapters (where we will see that pathological hierarchy and pathological heterarchy are,

respectively, types of pathological agency and pathological communion; and we will further see that these two
pathologies are often associated, respectively, with the male and female value spheres—as with the work of
Gilligan, Eisler, et al.—the males “ranking” and the females “linking,” with the possible respective pathologies of
dominance and fusion; feminists center on the male pathologies of dominance and miss the equally catastrophic
pathologies of fusion).

In the meantime, beware any theorist who pushes solely hierarchy or solely heterarchy, or attempts to give
greater value to one or the other in an ontological sense. When I use the term “holarchy,” I will especially mean the
balance of normal hierarchy and normal heterarchy (as the context will make clear). “Holarchy” undercuts both
extreme hierarchy and extreme heterarchy, and allows the discussion to move forward with, I believe, the best of
both worlds kept firmly in mind.

Finally, I would say that in trying to redress the severe imbalances of pathological hierarchy (which, as I indicated,
we will explore under the category of pathological masculinity and pathological agency, sometimes called “the
patriarchy”), we are allowed, even enjoined, to give normal femininity and normal heterarchy an exaggerated
emphasis and a greater value, simply because we are trying to balance the scales. We are not allowed, I believe, to
go to the other extreme and replace pathological masculinity with pathological femininity—or, to say virtually the
same thing, we don’t cure pathological hierarchy with pathological heterarchy.

QUALITATIVE DISTINCTIONS

The fact that actualization hierarchies involve a ranking of increasing holistic capacity—or even a ranking of
value—is deeply disturbing to believers in extreme heterarchy, who categorically reject any sort of actual ranking or
judgments whatsoever. With very good and often noble reasons (many of which I heartily support), they point out
that value ranking is a hierarchical judgment that all too often translates into social oppression and inequality, and
that in today’s world the more compassionate and just response is a radically egalitarian or pluralistic system—a
heterarchy of equal values. And while some of these critics are, as I said, quite nobly inspired, some of them have
become quite rancorous, even vicious, in their vocal condemnation of any sort of value hierarchies. “Higher” has
become their all-purpose dirty word.

What they don’t seem to realize is that their valued embrace of heterarchy is itself a hierarchical judgment. They
value heterarchy; they feel it embodies more justice, and compassion, and decency; they contrast it with hierarchical
views, which they feel are dominating and denigrating. In other words, they rank these two views, and they feel
one is definitely better than the other. That is, they have their own hierarchy, their own value ranking.

But since they consciously deny hierarchy altogether, they must obscure and hide their own. They must pretend
that their own hierarchy is not a hierarchy. Their ranking becomes unacknowledged, hidden, covert. Further, not
only is their own hierarchy hidden,
it is self-contradictory: it is a hierarchy that denies hierarchy. They are
presupposing that which they deny; they are consciously disavowing what their actual stance assumes.

By refusing even to look at hierarchy, even while making massively hierarchical judgments anyway, they are
saddled with a rather crude and very poorly-thought-out hierarchy of values. This all too often, and unfortunately,
lends an unmistakable air of hypocrisy to their stance. With much righteous indignation, they hierarchically
denounce hierarchy. With their left hand they are doing what their right despises in everybody else. By hating
judgments, and by hiding their own, they convert self-loathing into righteous condemnation of others.

In essence, their stance amounts to: “I have my ranking, but you shall not have yours. And further, by pretending
that my ranking is not a ranking”—that move is done unconsciously—“I will say that I am without ranking altogether;
and I shall then, in the name of compassion and equality, despise and attack ranking wherever I find it, because
ranking is very bad.”

By making these hierarchical judgments in an unacknowledged fashion, they avoid and suppress the really difficult
issues of just how we go about making our value judgments in the first place. They are articulate on the lamentable
hierarchical value judgments of others, but strangely inarticulate—totally silent, actually—as to how and why they
arrived at their own. Their self-ethic of inarticulacy and their other-ethic of vocal condemnation combine to form a
large club with which they simply bash others in the name of kindness. This does little to help articulate the nature of

human value systems, the nature of how men and women go about choosing the good, and the true, and the
beautiful, choices that involve ranking, and choices that these critics make and then deny they have made.

Their heterarchy is a stealth hierarchy. They bury their tracks, then claim they have no tracks, and thus avoid and
repress the truly profound and difficult topic: why do human beings always leave tracks? Why is the finding of
value in the world inherent in the human situation? And since, even if we decide to value everything equally, that
involves
rejecting value systems that do not, why is some sort of ranking unavoidable? Why are qualitative
distinctions built into the fabric of the human orientation? Why is trying to deny value itself a value? Why is denying
ranking itself a ranking? And given that, how can we sanely and consciously choose our unavoidable hierarchies,
and not merely fall into the ethics of unacknowledgment and suppression and inarticulacy?

Charles Taylor, whose book Sources of the Self will be one of our constant companions later in this volume, has
done a masterful job of tracing the modern rise of the worldview that claims it is not a worldview. That is, the rise of
certain value judgments that deny they are value judgments, the rise of certain hierarchies that deny the existence
of hierarchies. It is an altogether fascinating story, and one we will later follow in detail, but for the moment we
might observe the following.

Taylor begins by noting that the making of what he calls “qualitative distinctions” is an unavoidable aspect of the
human situation. We simply find ourselves existing in various contexts, in various frameworks (as I would put it, we
are holons within holons, contexts within contexts), and these contexts unavoidably constitute various values and
meanings that are embedded in our situation. “What I have been calling a framework,” says Taylor, “incorporates a
crucial set of qualitative distinctions [a value hierarchy]. To think, feel, judge within such a framework is to function
with the sense that some action, or mode of life, or mode of feeling is incomparably higher than the others which are
more readily available to us. I am using ‘higher’ here in a generic sense. The sense of what the difference consists in
may take many forms. One form of life may be seen as fuller, another way of feeling and acting as purer, a mode of
feeling or living as deeper, a style of life as more admirable, and so on.”21

Thus, even those who embrace heterarchy or radical pluralism are making deep and profound qualitative
distinctions, even though they denounce qualitative distinctions as brutal and vicious, even though they deny the
notion of frameworks altogether. “But this person doesn’t lack a framework. On the contrary, he has a strong
commitment to a certain ideal of benevolence. He admires people who live up to this ideal, condemns those who fail
or who are too confused even to accept it, feels wrong when he himself falls below it. He lives within a moral horizon
which cannot be explicated by his own moral theory.”22

The point is that, even though this individual espouses diversity and equality of values, the idea is never, as

Taylor puts it, that “whatever we do is acceptable.”

I want to defend the strong thesis that doing without frameworks is utterly impossible for us; otherwise put,
that the horizons within which we live our lives and which make sense of them have to include these strong
qualitative discriminations [value hierarchies]. Moreover, this is not meant just as a contingently true
psychological fact about human beings, which could perhaps turn out one day not to hold for some
exceptional individual or new type, some superman of disengaged objectification. Rather, the claim is that
living within such strongly qualified horizons is constitutive of human agency . . . and not some optional extra
we might just as well do without.23

Yet there is a modern outlook, says Taylor, “which is tempted to deny these frameworks altogether. My thesis
here is that this idea is deeply mistaken . . . and deeply confused. It reads the affirmation of life and freedom as
involving a repudiation of qualitative distinctions, a rejection of constitutive goods as such, while these are
themselves reflections of qualitative distinctions and presuppose some conception of qualitative goods.”24

In the course of historically tracing the curious rise of this curious stance, Taylor notes that “the more one
examines the motives—what Nietzsche would call the ‘genealogy’—of these theories, the stranger they appear. It
seems that they are motivated by the strongest moral ideals, such as freedom, altruism, and universalism [i.e.,
universal pluralism]. These are among the central moral aspirations of modern culture, the hypergoods [strong
hierarchies] which are distinctive to it. And yet what these ideals drive the theorists toward is a denial of all such
goods. They are caught in a strange pragmatic contradiction, whereby the very goods which move them push them

to deny or denature all such goods. They are constitutionally incapable of coming clean about the deeper sources of
their own thinking. Their thought is inescapably cramped.”25 They are, Taylor says, morally superior in a universe
where nothing is supposed to be superior.

The resultant “frameworkless agent,” says Taylor, “is a monster,” motivated by the “deep incoherence and self-
illusion which this denial involves.” This hierarchical denial of hierarchy involves an ethics of suppression, according
to Taylor, because “layers of suppression” are required to so thoroughly conceal from oneself the sources of one’s
own judgments.

And this further explains why these theorists are, as Taylor puts it, “parasitic.” Since they can’t “come clean about
the deeper sources of their own thinking,” they necessarily live off nothing but the vocal denouncements of those
views that do manage to consciously acknowledge their own qualitative distinctions. “Because their moral sources
are unavowable, they are mainly invoked in polemic. Their principal words of power are denunciatory. Much of what
they [actually] live by has to be inferred from the rage with which their enemies are attacked and refuted. This self-
concealing kind of philosophy is also thereby parasitic. . . .”

Thus, even the radical pluralists (the heterarchists) are motivated by values of freedom, altruism (universal
benevolence), and universal pluralism. These are deeply hierarchical judgments, and judgments that—rightly, I
believe!—vigorously reject other types of value judgments and other types of hierarchies that have flourished
throughout history. They deeply reject the warrior ethic, the ethic of elite aristocracy, the male-only ethic, and the
master-slave ethic, to name a few.

In other words, their heterarchical values are held in place by hierarchical judgments (most of which I thoroughly
agree with), and they might as well come clean and join the rest of us in trying to consciously understand all that,
and not simply bury their tracks in parasitic and denunciatory and suppressive rhetoric.

The same problems, of course, beset the “cultural relativists,” who maintain that all diverse cultural values are
equally valid (in a functional sense), and that no universal value judgments are possible. But that judgment is itself a
universal judgment. It claims to be universally true that no judgments are universally true. It makes its own universal
judgment and then simultaneously denies all others, because universal judgments are very, very bad. It thus ignores
the crucial issue of how we go about making valid universal judgments in the first place. It exempts
its own
universal claims from any scrutiny by simply claiming they aren’t claims.

The extreme cultural relativists thus maintain that “truth” is basically what any culture can come to agree on, and
thus no “truth” is inherently better than any other. There was a certain vogue for this type of stance during the
sixties and seventies, but its self-contradictory nature became apparent with, to give the most notorious example,
Michel Foucault’s book The Order of Things. In this work Foucault maintained, in essence, that what humans come
to call “truth” is simply an arbitrary play of power and convention, and he outlined several epochs where the “truth”
seemed to depend entirely on shifting and conventional epistemes, or discursive formations governed not by “truth”
but by exclusionary transformation principles. All truth, in other words, was ultimately arbitrary.

The argument seemed quite persuasive, and even caused a bit of an international sensation. Until his brighter

critics simply asked him: “You say all truth is arbitrary. Is your presentation itself true?”

Foucault, like all relativists, had exempted himself from the very criteria he aggressively applied to others. He was
making an extensive series of truth claims that denied all truth claims (except his own privileged stance), and thus his
position, as critics from Habermas to Taylor pointed out, was profoundly incoherent. Foucault himself abandoned
the extreme relativism of this “archaeological” endeavor and subsumed it in a more balanced approach (that would
include continuities as well as abrupt discontinuities; he called the merely archaeological approach “arrogant”).

Nobody is denying that many aspects of culture are indeed different and equally valuable. The point is that that
stance itself is universal and rejects theories that merely and arbitrarily rank cultures on an ethnocentric bias (a
rejection I share). But because it claims that all ranking is either bad or arbitrary, it cannot explain its own stance and
the process of its own (unacknowledged) ranking system. And if nothing else, unconscious ranking is bad ranking, by
any other name.

And the relativists are very bad rankers.26 Jürgen Habermas and numerous others (Charles Taylor, Karl-Otto Apel,
Quentin Skinner, John Searle, etc.) have launched devastating critiques of these positions, pointing out that they all
involve a “performative contradiction”: another way of saying that they are implicitly presupposing universal validity

claims that they deny can even exist.

In short, extreme cultural relativity and merely heterarchical value systems are no longer enjoying the vogue they
once did. The word is out that qualitative distinctions are inescapable in the human condition, and further, that there
are better and worse ways to make our qualitative distinctions.

In many ways, we want to agree with the broad conclusions of the cultural diversity movements: we do want to
cherish all cultures in an equal light. But that universal pluralism is not a stance that all cultures agree with; that
universal pluralism is a very special type of ranking that most ethnocentric and sociocentric cultures do not even
acknowledge; that universal pluralism is the result of a very long history hard-fought against dominator hierarchies
of one sort or another.27

Why is universal pluralism better than dominator hierarchies? And how did we develop or evolve to a stance of
universal pluralism, when most of history despised that view? These are some of the many developmental and
evolutionary themes of this volume. How we arrive at that universal pluralism, and how we can defend it against
those who would,
in a dominating fashion, elevate their culture or their beliefs or their values above all
others—these are the crucial questions whose answers are aborted by merely denying ranking and denying
qualitative distinctions in the first place.

CONCLUSION

But here is my point: if frameworks are inescapable (we are contexts within contexts, holons within holons), and if
frameworks involve qualitative distinctions—in other words, if we are inextricably involved in judgments that are
hierarchical—then we can begin to consciously join these judgments with the sciences of hierarchy, that is, the
sciences of holarchy, of frameworks within frameworks, of contexts within contexts, of holons within holons—with
the result that values and facts are no longer automatically divorced.

This unifying and integrative move was blocked as long as the heterarchists were calling their view “holistic”
(when it was really “heapistic”). Blocked, because the heterarchists insisted that reality was nonhierarchical,
whereas the sciences of wholeness insisted altogether otherwise. But with the understanding that the only way you
get a holism is via a holarchy, we are now in a position to realign facts and values in a gentler embrace, with science
working with us, not against us, in constructing a truly holistic, not heapistic, worldview.

Further, let us simply note that the Great Chain of Being was in fact a Great Holarchy of Being—with each link

being an intrinsic whole that was simultaneously a part of a larger whole—and the entire series nested in Spirit.28

If these various holarchies—in the sciences, in value judgments, in the great wisdom traditions—could in fact be

sympathetically aligned with one another, a truly significant synthesis might indeed lie in our collective future.

2

The Pattern That Connects

Matter, which appears to be merely passive and without form and arrangement, has even in its simplest
state an urge to fashion itself by a natural evolution into a more perfect constitution.

—IMMANUEL KANT

God does not remain petrified and dead; the very stones cry out and raise themselves to Spirit.

—GEORG HEGEL

THE NATURE OF THE PATTERN

WE BEGIN WITH the sciences of wholeness, or dynamic systems theory. The rest of this chapter and all of chapters 3

and 4 will be devoted to exploring some of the basic conclusions of the modern evolutionary sciences, with a view
toward their possible integration in a larger scheme of things.

What follows are twenty basic tenets (or conclusions) that represent what we might call “patterns of existence” or
“tendencies of evolution” or “laws of form” or “propensities of manifestation.” These are the common patterns or
tendencies, recall,
three domains of
evolution—the physiosphere, the biosphere, and the noosphere—and tendencies that therefore make this universe
a genuine uni-versum (“one turn”), or an emergent pluralism undergirded by common patterns—the “patterns that
connect.” (At this point, I don’t want to get involved in intricate arguments over whether these are “eternal laws” or
simply “relatively stable habits” of the universe, and so I will be satisfied with the latter.)1

that modern systems sciences have concluded are operative in all

These patterns (listed as the Twenty Tenets below) are drawn from the modern evolutionary and systems
sciences, but I would like to emphasize that they are not confined to those sciences. As I mentioned earlier, we are
now looking at the “half” of those sciences that seem accurate, and we have yet to examine the half that is
extremely questionable (this will begin in chapter 3). As we will see in great detail, the problem with virtually every
attempt to outline the common patterns found in all three domains of evolution is simply that the patterns are
presented in the language of objective naturalism (“it”-language), and thus they fail miserably when applied to
domains described only in I-language (aesthetics) and we-language (ethics). Every “unified systems attempt” that I
have seen suffers from this crippling inadequacy.

I have been very careful, therefore, to cut these tenets at a level and type of abstraction that is, I believe, fully
compatible with it-, we-, and I-languages (or the true, the good, and the beautiful), so that the synthesis can proceed
nonviolently into domains where previously systems theory was intent upon subtle reductionism to its own
naturalistic and objectifying terms. (All of this will, as I said, be discussed in detail, beginning in chapter 3.)

Finally, a small warning. Many readers have found these tenets to be the most interesting part of the book; others
have found them too abstract and rather boring. If you are of the latter, I should mention that they will be fleshed
out and made obvious, I trust, in the succeeding chapters. In the meantime, a Reader’s Digest version of them
might go as follows:

Reality is not composed of things or processes; it is not composed of atoms or quarks; it is not composed of

wholes nor does it have any parts. Rather, it is composed of whole/parts, or holons.

This is true of atoms, cells, symbols, ideas. They can be understood neither as things nor processes, neither as
wholes nor parts, but only as simultaneous whole/parts, so that standard “atomistic” and “wholistic” attempts are
both off the mark. There is nothing that isn’t a holon (upwardly and downwardly forever).

Before an atom is an atom, it is a holon. Before a cell is a cell, it is a holon. Before an idea is an idea, it is a holon.
All of them are wholes that exist in other wholes, and thus they are all whole/parts, or holons, first and foremost
(long before any “particular characteristics” are singled out by us).

Likewise, reality might indeed be composed of processes and not things, but all processes are only processes
within other processes—that is, they are first and foremost holons. Trying to decide whether the fundamental units
of reality are things or processes is utterly beside the point, because either way, they are all holons, and centering on
one or the other misses the central issue. Clearly some things exist, and some processes exist, but they are each and
all holons.

Therefore we can examine what holons have in common, and this releases us from the utterly futile attempt to
find common processes or common entities on all levels and domains of existence, because that will never work; it
leads always to reductionism, not true synthesis.

For example, to say that the universe is composed primarily of quarks is already to privilege a particular domain.
Likewise, at the other end of the spectrum, to say that the universe is really composed primarily of our symbols,
since these are all we really know—that, too, is to privilege a particular domain. But to say that the universe is
composed of holons neither privileges a domain nor implies special fundamentalness for any level. Literature, for
example, is not composed of subatomic particles; but both literature and subatomic particles are composed of
holons.

Starting with the notion of holons, and proceeding by a combination of a priori

reasoning and a posteriori
evidence, we can attempt to discern what all known holons seem to have in common. These conclusions are refined
and checked by examining any and all domains (from cellular biology to physical dissipative structures, from stellar
evolution to psychological growth, from autopoietic systems to spiritual experiences, from the structure of language
to DNA replication).

Since all of those domains operate with holons, we can attempt to discern what all these holons have in common
when they interact—what their “laws” or “patterns” or “tendencies” or “habits” are. And this gives us a list of some
twenty tenets, which I have grouped into twelve categories (some of these are simple definitions, but for
convenience I will always refer to the entire list as “twenty tenets.” There is nothing special about twenty; some of
these might not hold up, others can be added, and I have not tried to be exhaustive).

TWENTY TENETS

1. Reality as a whole is not composed of things or processes, but of holons. Composed, that is, of wholes that are
simultaneously parts of other wholes, with no upward or downward limit. To say that holons are processes instead
of things is in some ways true, but misses the essential point that processes themselves exist only within other
processes. There are no things or processes, only holons.

Since reality is not composed of wholes, and since it has no parts—since there are only whole/parts—then this
approach undercuts the traditional argument between atomism (all things are fundamentally isolated and individual
wholes that interact only by chance) and wholism (all things are merely strands or parts of the larger web or whole).
Both of those views are absolutely incorrect. There are no wholes, and there are no parts. There are only
whole/parts.

This approach also undercuts the argument between the materialist and idealist camps. Reality isn’t composed of
quarks, or bootstrapping hadrons, or subatomic exchange; but neither is it composed of ideas, symbols, or thoughts.
It is composed of holons.

There is an old joke about a King who goes to a Wiseperson and asks how is it that the Earth doesn’t fall down?
The Wiseperson replies, “The Earth is resting on a lion.” “On what, then, is the lion resting?” “The lion is resting on
an elephant.” “On what is the elephant resting?” “The elephant is resting on a turtle.” “On what is the . . .” “You can
stop right there, your Majesty. It’s turtles all the way down.”

Holons all the way down. “Subatomic particles are—in a certain sense which can only be defined rigorously in
relativistic quantum mechanics—nested inside each other. The point is that a physical particle—a renormalized
particle—involves (1) a bare particle and (2) a huge tangle of virtual particles, inextricably wound together in a
recursive mess. Every real particle’s existence therefore involves the existence of infinitely many other particles,
contained in a virtual ‘cloud’ which surrounds it as it propagates. And each of the virtual particles in the cloud, of
course, also drags along its own virtual cloud, bubbles within bubbles [holons within holons], and so on ad infinitum.
. . .”2

But it’s also turtles all the way up. Take mathematics, for example. The notorious “paradoxes” in set theory
(Cantor’s, Burali-Forti’s, Russell’s), which, among other things, led to Tarski’s Theorem and Gödel’s Incompleteness
Theorem, placed mathematics in an irreversible, ever-expanding, no-upper-limit universe: “The totality of sets
cannot be the terminus of a well-defined generating process, for if it were we could take all of what we had
generated so far as a set and continue to generate still larger universes. The totality of sets [mathematical holons] is
an ‘unconditioned’ or absolute totality which for just that reason cannot be adequately conceived by the human
mind, since the object of a normal conception can always be incorporated in a more inclusive totality. Moreover, the
sets are arranged in a transfinite hierarchy”—a holarchy that continues upwardly forever, and must continue
upwardly forever (“transfinitely”), or mathematics comes to a screeching self-contradictory halt.3 Even mathematics
is set in time’s arrow, and time’s arrow is indefinitely—“transfinitely”—holarchical.

This is important for philosophy as well, and particularly for many of the “new age” paradigms that now trumpet
“Wholism.” “Transfinite” (turtles all the way up) means that the sum total of all the whole/parts in the universe is
not itself a Whole, because the moment it comes to be (as a “whole”), that totality is merely a part of the very next
moment’s whole, which in turn is merely a part of the next . . . and so ad infinitum.

This means that there is no place where we can rest and say, “The universe’s basic principle is Wholeness” (nor, of
course, can we say, “The basic principle is Partness”). This prevents us from ever saying that the principle of the
Whole rules the world, for it does not; any whole is a part, indefinitely.

Thus, holons within holons within holons means that the world is without foundation in either wholes or parts
(and as for any sort of “absolute reality” in the spiritual sense, we will see that it is neither whole nor part, neither
one nor many, but pure groundless Emptiness, or radically nondual Spirit).

This is important because it prevents a totalizing and dominating Wholeness. “Wholeness”—this is a very
dangerous concept (a point that will accompany us throughout this book)—dangerous for many reasons, not the
least of which is that it is always available to be pushed into ideological ends. Whenever anybody talks of wholeness
being the ultimate, then we must be very wary, in my opinion, because they are often telling us that we are merely
“parts” of their particular version of “wholeness,” and so we should be subservient to their vision—we are merely
strands in their wonderful web.

And then, since we are all defined as strands in the web, a totalizing social agenda seems eminently reasonable. It
is not beside the point that theorists as diverse as Habermas and Foucault have seen such totalizing agendas as the
main modern enemy of the life-world (a point we will return to in chapter 12).

I belabor this issue because it is extremely important to emphasize the indefiniteness of holarchy, its openness, its
dizzifyingly nesting nature—an actualization holarchy, not a dominator holarchy. And a dominator holarchy, recall,
occurs precisely whenever any holon is established, not as a whole/part, but as the whole, period. “Ultimate
Wholeness”: this is the essence of dominator holarchies, pathological holarchies. “Pure wholeness”: this is the
totalizing lie.

For all these reasons, I will usually refer to the sum total of events in the universe not as the “Whole” (which
implies the ultimate priority of wholeness over partness) but as “the All” (which is the sum total of whole/parts). And
this sum total is not itself a whole but a whole/part: as soon as you think “the All,” your own thought has added yet
another holon to the All (so that the first All is no longer the All but merely part of the new All), and so off we go
indefinitely, never arriving at that which we symbolize as the “All,” which is why it is never a whole, but an unending
series of whole/parts (with the series itself a whole/part—and so on “transfinitely”).

The Pythagoreans introduced the term “Kosmos,” which we usually translate as “cosmos.” But the original
meaning of Kosmos was the patterned nature or process of all domains of existence, from matter to math to theos,

and not merely the physical universe, which is usually what both “cosmos” and “universe” mean today.

So I would like to reintroduce this term, Kosmos. The Kosmos contains the cosmos (or the physiosphere), the bios
(or biosphere), nous (the noosphere), and theos (the theosphere or divine domain)—none of them being
foundational (even spirit shades into Emptiness).

So we can say in short: The Kosmos is composed of holons, all the way up, all the way down.
Let me end this section with one last example, from perhaps an unexpected source. The “postmodern
poststructuralists”—usually associated with such names as Derrida, Foucault, Jean-François Lyotard, and stretching
back to George Bataille and Nietzsche—have been the great foes of any sort of systematic theory or “grand
narrative,” and thus they might be expected to raise stern objections to any overall theory of “holarchy.” But a close
look at their work shows that it is driven precisely by a conception of holons within holons within holons, of texts
within texts within texts (or contexts within contexts within contexts), and it is this sliding play of texts within texts
that forms the “foundationless” platform from which they launch their attacks.

George Bataille, for instance. “In the most general way”—and these are his italics—“every isolable element of the
universe always appears as a particle that can enter into composition with a whole that transcends it. Being is only
found as a whole composed of particles whose relative autonomy is maintained [a part that is also a whole]. These
two principles [simultaneous wholeness and partness] dominate the uncertain presence of an ipse being across a
distance that never ceases to put everything in question.”4

Everything is put into question because everything is a context within a context forever. And putting everything in
question is precisely what the postmodern poststructuralists are known for. And so in a language that would soon
become quite typical (and is by now almost comical), Bataille goes on to point out that “putting everything into
question” counters the human need to violently arrange things in terms of a pat wholeness and smug universality:
“With extreme dread imperatively becoming the demand for universality, carried away to vertigo by the movement
that composes it, the ipse being that presents itself as a universal is only a challenge to the diffuse immensity that
escapes its precarious violence, the tragic negation of all that is not its own bewildered phantom’s chance. But, as a
man, this being falls into the meanders of the knowledge of his fellowmen, which absorbs his substance in order to
reduce it to a component of what goes beyond the virulent madness of his autonomy in the total night of the
world.”5 Um, and so forth.

The point is

not

that Bataille himself was without any sort of system, but simply that the

system is
sliding—holons within holons. So the claim to simply have “no system” is a little disingenuous. Which is why André
Breton, the leader of the surrealists at the time, began a counterattack on this part of Bataille, also in terms that are
echoed by today’s critics of postmodernists: “M. Bataille’s misfortune is to reason: admittedly, he reasons like
someone who ‘has a fly on his nose,’ which allies him more closely with the dead than with the living, but he does
reason. He is trying, with the help of the tiny mechanism in him which is not completely out of order, to share his
obsessions: this very fact proves that he cannot claim, no matter what he may say, to be opposed to any system, like
an unthinking brute.”6

Both sides are correct, in a sense. There is system, but the system is sliding. It is unendingly, dizzifyingly holonic.
This is why Jonathan Culler, perhaps the foremost interpreter of Jacques Derrida’s deconstruction, can point out that
Derrida does not deny truth per se, but only insists that truth and meaning are context-bound (each context being
a whole that is also part of another whole context, which itself . . .). “One could therefore,” says Culler, “identify
deconstruction with the twin principles of the contextual determination of meaning and the infinite extendability of
context.”7

Turtles all the way up, all the way down. What deconstruction puts into question is the desire to find a final resting
place, in either wholeness or partness or anything in between. Every time somebody finds a final interpretation or a
foundational interpretation of a text (or life or history or Kosmos), deconstruction is on hand to say that the total
context—or Wholistic interpretation—does not exist, because it is also unendingly a part of yet another text forever.
As Culler puts it, “Total context [final Wholism] is unmasterable, both in principle and in practice. Meaning is context
bound, but context is boundless.”8 Transfinite turtles.

Even Habermas, who generally takes Breton’s position to Derrida’s Bataille, agrees with that particular point. As
he puts it, “These variations of context that change meaning cannot in principle be arrested or controlled, because

contexts cannot be exhausted, that is, they cannot be theoretically mastered once and for all.”9

That the system is sliding does not mean that meaning can’t be established, that truth doesn’t exist, or that
contexts won’t hold still long enough to make a simple point. Many postmodern poststructuralists have not simply
discovered holonic space, they have become thoroughly lost in it (a point we will return to in chapter 13; George
Bataille, for example, took a good, long, hard look at holonic space and went properly insane, though which is cause
and which effect is hard to say).

As for our journey, we need only note that there is system, but the system is sliding: The Kosmos is the unending

All, and the All is composed of holons—all the way up, all the way down.

2. Holons display four fundamental capacities:

self-preservation,

self-adaptation,

self-transcendence, and

self-dissolution. These are all very important, and we’ll take them one at a time.

a.

Self-preservation. All holons display some capacity to preserve their individuality, to preserve their own
particular wholeness or autonomy. A hydrogen atom, in a suitable context, can remain a hydrogen atom. It doesn’t
necessarily display intentionality in any developed sense, but it does preserve its agency over time: it manages to
remain itself across time’s fluctuations—it displays self-preservation in the simple sense of maintaining identity
across time (that itself is a remarkable accomplishment!).

A holon in a living context (e.g., a cell) displays an even more sophisticated capacity for self-preservation: the
capacity for self-renewal (autopoiesis); it retains its own recognizable pattern (or structure) even as its material
components are exchanged; it assimilates the environment to itself (it is a “meta-stable dissipative structure”).

In other words, although holons exist by virtue of their interlinking relationships or context, they are not defined
solely by their context but also by their own individual form, pattern, or structure (even particles that are
bootstrappings of other particles retain their individual perspective, as Leibniz put it).

This intrinsic form or pattern is known by various names: entelechy (Aristotle), morphic unit/field (Sheldrake),
regime or code or canon (Koestler), deep structure (Wilber). In the physiosphere, the form of a holon is relatively
simple (although even that is bewilderingly complex); in the biosphere and noosphere, it takes on elaborate rules of
relational exchange with its environment and self-organizing rules for its own structures, all geared to preserve the
stable (or teleologically recognizable), coherent, and relatively autonomous pattern that is the essence of any holon.
Francisco Varela, for example, explains that the “old biology” was based on “heteronomous units operating by a logic
of correspondence,” whereas the entire essence of the new biology is “autonomous units operating by a logic of
coherence.”10

In short, holons are defined, not by the stuff of which they are made (there is no stuff), nor merely by the context
in which they live (though they are inseparable from that), but by the relatively autonomous and coherent pattern
they display, and the capacity to preserve that pattern is one characteristic of a holon: the wholeness aspect of a
holon is displayed in its pattern-preservation.

b. Self-adaptation. A holon functions not only as a self-preserving whole but also as a part of a larger whole,
and in its capacity as a part it must adapt or accommodate itself to other holons (not autopoiesis but allopoiesis;
not assimilation but accommodation). The partness aspect of a holon is displayed in its capacity to accommodate,
to register other holons, to fit into its existing environment. Even electrons accommodate themselves, for example,
to the number of other electrons in an orbital shell; they register, and react to, their environment. This doesn’t imply
intentionality on the part of the electron, just a capacity to react to surrounding actions. As a whole, it remains itself;
as a part, it must fit in—and those are tenets 2a and 2b.

We can just as well think of these two opposed tendencies as a holon’s agency and communion. Its agency—its
self-asserting, self-preserving, assimilating tendencies—expresses its wholeness, its relative autonomy; whereas its
communion—its participatory, bonding, joining tendencies—expresses its partness, its relationship to something
larger.

Both of these capacities or tendencies are absolutely crucial and equally important; an excess of either will kill a
holon immediately (i.e., destroy its identifying pattern); even a moderate imbalance will lead to structural deformity
(whether we’re talking about the growth of a plant or the growth of the patriarchy). And we have already suggested
(in chapter 1) that an imbalance of these two tendencies in any system expresses itself as pathological agency

(alienation and repression) or pathological communion (fusion and indissociation).

This primordial polarity runs through all domains of manifest existence, and was archetypally expressed in the
Taoist principles of yin (communion) and yang (agency). Koestler: “On different levels of the inorganic and organic
hierarchies, the polarisation of ‘particularistic’ [agency] and ‘holistic’ [communion] forces takes different forms, but
it is observable on every level.”11

(I will have much more to say about these two tendencies when we reach the psychological and political levels of
self-organization, and particularly with reference to the male and female value spheres, and to political theories of
rights [agency] and responsibilities [communion]).

c. Self-transcendence (or self-transformation). When an oxygen atom and two hydrogen atoms are brought
together under suitable circumstances, a new and in some ways unprecedented holon emerges, that of a water
molecule. This is not just a communion, self-adaptation, or association of three atoms; it is a transformation that
results in something novel and emergent—different wholes have come together to form a new and different whole.
There is some sort of creative twist on what has gone before. This is what Whitehead referred to as creativity
(which he called “the ultimate category”—the category necessary to understand any other category),12 and what
Jantsch and Waddington call self-transcendence.

Some writers, such as Koestler,

lump together self-adaptation and self-transcendence and refer to them
interchangeably, because both embody a type of “going beyond.” But apart from that similarity, the two are
different in degree and in kind. In self-adaptation or communion, one finds oneself to be part of a larger whole; in
self-transformation one becomes a new whole, which has its own new forms of agency and communion.13 As
Jantsch puts it:

It is not sufficient to characterize these systems simply as open, adaptive, nonequilibrium, or learning systems
[communion]; they are all that and more: they are self-transcendent [his italics], which means that they are
capable . . . of transforming themselves. Self-transcendent systems are evolution’s vehicle for qualitative
change and thus ensure its continuity; evolution, in turn, maintains self-transcendent systems which can only
exist in a world of interdependence. For self-transcendent systems, Being falls together with Becoming. . . .14

As Ilya Prigogine puts it, the various levels and stages of evolution are irreducible to each other because the
transitions between them are characterized by symmetry breaks, which simply means that they are not equivalent
rearrangements of the same stuff (whatever that “stuff” might be), but are in part a significant transcendence, a
novel and creative twist. Jantsch explains:

Symmetry breaks introduce new dynamic possibilities for morphogenesis and signal an act of self-
transcendence. Complexity becomes possible only through symmetry breaks. The world which emerges from
them becomes increasingly irreducible to a single level of basic [properties]. The reality which emerges is
coordinated at many levels.

All of which he summarizes this way: “In the self-organization paradigm, evolution is the result of self-transcendence
at all levels.”15 He also calls this “self-realization through self-transcendence.”

In other words, this introduces a vertical dimension that cuts at right angles, so to speak, to the horizontal agency
and communion. In self-transcendence, agency and communion do not just interact; rather, new forms of agency
and communion emerge through symmetry breaks, through the introduction of new and creative twists in the
evolutionary stream. There is not only a continuity in evolution, there are important discontinuities as well.
“Nature progresses by sudden leaps and deep-seated transformations rather than through piecemeal adjustments.
The diagram of the branching tree of life no longer resembles the continuous Y-shaped joints of the synthetic theory;
it is now pictured in terms of abrupt switches. . . . There is significant evidence accumulated in many fields of
empirical science that dynamic systems do not evolve smoothly and continuously over time, but do so in
comparatively sudden leaps and bursts.”16

Paleontologist George Simpson referred to this as “quantum evolution,” because these bursts “involved relatively
abrupt alterations of adaptive capacity or bodily structure and left little or no evidence in the fossil record of the

transitions between them.”17 This “quantum evolution” led to Niles Eldredge and Stephen Jay Gould’s “punctuational
model,” all of which Michael Murphy summarizes as “evolutionary transcendence.”

Murphy points out that “evolutionary theorists Theodosius Dobzhansky and Francisco Ayala have called these . . .
events instances of ‘evolutionary transcendence’ because in each of them there arose a new order of existence. G.
Ledyard Stebbins, a principal architect of modern evolutionary theory, described certain differences between large
and small steps in organic evolution, distinguishing minor from major advances in grade of plants and animals. The
term grade is used among biologists to denote a set of characteristics or abilities that clearly give descendent
species certain advantages over their ancestors. According to Stebbins, the development of pollination mechanisms
in milkweeds and orchids is an example of minor advances in grade, while the appearance of the digestive tube,
central nervous system, elaborate sense organs, vertebrate limbs, and elaborate social behavior represent major
advances. There have been about 640,000 of the former, he estimated, and from 20 to 100 of the latter during the
several hundred million years of eukaryote evolution.”18

The point is that there is nothing particularly metaphysical or occult about this. Self-transcendence is simply a
system’s capacity to reach beyond the given and introduce some measure of novelty, a capacity without which, it is
quite certain, evolution would never, and could never, have even gotten started. Self-transcendence, which leaves
no corner of the universe untouched (or evolution would have no point of departure), means nothing more—and
nothing less—than that the universe has an intrinsic capacity to go beyond what went before.

d. Self-dissolution—Holons that are built up (through vertical self-transformation) can also break down. Not
surprisingly, when holons “dissolve” or “come unglued,” they tend to do so along the same vertical sequence in
which they were built up (only, of course, in the reverse direction).

If a structure is forced to retreat in its evolution (e.g., by a change in the non-equilibrium), as long as there are
no strong perturbations it does so along the same path which it has come. . . . This implies a primitive, holistic
system memory which appears already at the level of chemical reaction systems.19

This is true for psychological and linguistic (noospheric) holons as well. Roman Jakobson speaks of “those stratified
phenomena which modern psychology uncovers in the different areas of the realm of the mind. New additions are
superimposed on earlier ones and dissolution begins with the higher strata—the amazingly exact agreement
between the chronological succession of these acquisitions and the general laws of irreversible solidarity which
govern the synchrony of all the languages of the world.”20

In other words, that which is vertically built up can vertically break down, and the pathways in both cases are

essentially the same.

Taken together, these four capacities—agency or self-preservation, communion or self-accommodation, self-
transcendence, and self-dissolution—can be pictured as a cross, with two horizontal “opposites” (agency and
communion) and two vertical “opposites” (self-transcendence and self-dissolution).

These four “forces” are in constant tension (as we will see throughout this volume). Horizontally: the more
agency, the less communion, and vice versa. That is, the more intensely a holon preserves its own individuality,
preserves its wholeness, the less it serves its communions or its partness in larger or wider wholes (and vice versa:
the more it is a part, the less it is its own whole). When we say, for example, that an element (such as helium) is
“inert,” we mean it intensely resists joining with other elements to form compounds; it retains its agency and resists
communion—it is relatively inert.

This is a constant tension, as it were, across all domains, and shows up in everything from the battle between self-
preservation and species-preservation, to the conflict between rights (agency) and responsibilities (communions),
individuality and membership, personhood and community, coherence and correspondence, self-directed and other-
directed, autonomy and heteronomy. . . . In short, how can I be both my own wholeness and a part of something
larger, without sacrificing one or the other?

(Part of the answer, we will see, at all stages of evolution, including the human, involves self-transcendence to
new forms of agency and communion that integrate and incorporate both partners in a supersession: not just a
wider whole—a horizontal expansion—but a deeper or higher whole—a vertical emergence—which is indeed why
“evolution is the result of self-transcendence at all
levels,” and why it is “self-realization through self-

transcendence”—but that is somewhat ahead of the story.)

This constant horizontal battle between agency and communion extends even to the forms of pathology on any
given level, where too much agency, too much individuality, leads to a severing (repression and alienation) of the
rich networks of communion that sustain individuality in the first place; and too much communion leads to a loss of
individual integrity, leads to fusion with others, to indissociation, to a blurring of boundaries and a meltdown and
loss of autonomy.

(And we will see that the typical “male pathology” tends to be hyperagency, or fear of relationship, like the
inertness of helium!, and the typical “female pathology” tends to be hypercommunion, or fear of autonomy—the
one leading to domination, the other to fusion; and we will see how this played itself out in the “patriarchy” and the
“matriarchy.”)

If the horizontal battle is between agency and communion, the constant vertical battle is between self-
transcendence and self-dissolution, the tendency to build up or to break down (and, of course, these forces
complexly interact with agency and communion on any given level; for example, either too much agency or too
much communion can both lead to breakdown—as we will see, this is a constant problem in human affairs, where
the desire to find a “larger meaning” often leads to too much communion or fusion with a “greater cause,” and this
fusion is mistaken for transcendence, whereas it is simply loss of autonomy and release from responsibility, which
apparently is the attraction).

Now I have been giving mostly examples from the human domain, but the point is that, in simpler forms, these
four forces are operative in even the simplest of holons, because it’s turtles all the way down. Every holon is actually
a holon within other holons transfinitely—that is, every holon is simultaneously both a subholon (a part of some
other holon) and a superholon (itself containing holons). As a holon, it must preserve its own pattern (agency over
time), and it must register and react to its environment (its communions in space). If it does not appropriately
respond, it is erased: too much agency, or too much communion, will destroy its identifying pattern.

Because each holon is also a superholon, then when it is erased—when it undergoes self-dissolution into its
subholons—it tends to follow the same path down as its subholons followed up: cells break down into molecules,
which break down into atoms, which break into particles, which disappear into transfinite clouds of probabilistic
“bubbles within bubbles.” . . .

Preserve or accommodate, transcend or dissolve—the four very different pulls on each and every holon in the

Kosmos.

3. Holons emerge. Owing to the self-transcendent capacity of holons, new holons emerge. First subatomic
particles, then atoms, then molecules, then polymers, then cells, and so on. The emergent holons are in some sense
novel; they posses properties and qualities that cannot be strictly and totally deduced from their components; and
therefore they, and their descriptions, cannot be reduced without remainder to their component parts. “Levels of
organization involve ontologically new entities beyond the elements from which the self-organization process
proceeds. There is no absolute deterministic level of description.”21 As Hofstadter puts it, “It is important to realize
that the high-level law cannot be stated in the vocabulary of the low-level description”—and, he points out, this is
true from gas particles to biological speciation, from computer programs to DNA replication, from musical scores to
linguistic rules.22

Emergence also means that indeterminacy (and one of its correlates, degrees of freedom) is sewn into the very
fabric of the universe, since unprecedented emergence means undetermined by the past (although pockets of the
universe can regularly collapse in a deterministic fashion, as in classical mechanics). Holons, that is, are
fundamentally indeterminate in some aspects (precisely because they are fundamentally self-transcending). As
Laszlo summarizes the available evidence, “The selection from among the set of dynamically functional alternative
steady states is not predetermined. The new state is decided neither by initial conditions in the system nor by
changes in the critical values of environmental parameters; when a dynamic system is fundamentally destabilized it
acts indeterminately.”23

It now seems virtually certain that determinism arises only as a limiting case where a holon’s capacity for self-
transcendence approaches zero, or when its own self-transcendence hands the locus of indeterminacy to a higher

holon (we will return to this important topic below).

Emergence is neither a rare nor an isolated phenomenon. As Varela, Thompson, and Rosch summarize the
available evidence: “It is clear that emergent properties have been found across all domains—vortices and lasers,
chemical oscillations, genetic networks, developmental patterns, population genetics, immune networks, ecology,
and geophysics. What all these diverse phenomena have in common is that in each case a network gives rise to new
properties. . . . The emergence of global patterns or configurations in systems of interacting elements is neither an
oddity of isolated cases nor unique to [special] systems. In fact, it seems difficult for any densely connected
aggregate to escape emergent properties.”24 As Ernst Mayr put it in his exhaustive work The Growth of Biological
Thought:

Systems almost always have the peculiarity that the characteristics of the whole cannot (not even in theory) be
deduced from the most complete knowledge of the components, taken separately or in other partial
combinations. This appearance of new characteristics in wholes has been designated as
emergence.
Emergence has often been invoked in attempts to explain such difficult phenomena as life, mind, and
consciousness. Actually, emergence is equally characteristic of inorganic systems. . . . Such emergence is quite
universal and, as Popper said, “We live in a universe of emergent novelty.”25

Let me note in passing that this means all sciences are fundamentally reconstructive sciences. That is, we never
know, and never can know, exactly what any holon will do tomorrow (we might know broad outlines and
probabilities, based on past observations, but self-transcendent emergence always means, to some degree:
surprise!). We have to wait and see, and from that, after the fact, we reconstruct a knowledge system.26

However, when a holon’s self-transcendence approaches zero (when its creativity is utterly minimal), then the
reconstructive sciences collapse into the predictive sciences. Historically, the empirical sciences got their start by
studying precisely those holons that show minimal creativity. In fact, they basically studied nothing but a bunch of
rocks
in motion (mass moving through space over time), and thus they mistook the nature of science to be
essentially predictive.

I mean no offense to rocks, but by taking some of the dumbest holons in existence and making their study the
study of “really real reality,” these physical sciences, we have seen, were largely responsible for the collapse of the
Kosmos into the cosmos, for the reduction of the Great Holarchy of Being to the dumbest creatures on God’s green
Earth, and for the leveling of a multidimensional reality to a flat and faded landscape defined by a minimum of
creativity (and thus maximum of predictive power).27

It would take such a turn of events as Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle to remind us that even the constituents
of rocks are neither as predictable nor as dumb as these silly reductionisms. In the meantime, the “ideal” of
knowledge as predictive power would ruin virtually every field it was applied to (including rocks), because its very
methods would erase any creativity it would find, thus erasing precisely what was novel, significant, valuable,
meaningful. . . .

4. Holons emerge holarchically. That is, as a series of increasing whole/parts. Organisms contain cells, but not vice
versa; cells contain molecules, but not vice versa; molecules contain atoms, but not vice versa. And it is that not vice
versa, at each stage, that constitutes unavoidable asymmetry and nested hierarchy (holarchy). Each deeper or
higher holon embraces its junior predecessors and then adds its own new and more encompassing pattern or
wholeness—the new code or canon or morphic field or agency that will define this as a whole and not merely a heap
(as Aristotle clearly spotted). This is Whitehead’s famous dictum: “The many become one and are increased by one.”
Laszlo comments:

The empirical evidence for this process is indisputable. Diverse atomic elements converge in molecular
aggregates; specific molecules converge in crystals and organic macromolecules; the latter converge in cells
and the subcellular building blocks of life; single-celled organisms converge in multi-cellular species; and
species of the widest variety converge in ecologies.28

leading,

Bertalanffy put it very bluntly: “Reality, in the modern conception, appears as a tremendous hierarchical order of
organized entities,
in a superposition of many levels, from physical and chemical to biological and
sociological systems. Such hierarchical structure and combination into systems of ever higher order, is characteristic
of reality as a whole and is of fundamental importance especially in biology, psychology and sociology.”29 Likewise,
Edward Goldsmith’s The Way: An Ecological World-view, an explanation of the “new paradigm,” summarizes it thus:
“Ecology explains events in terms of their role within the spatio-temporal Gaian hierarchy.”30 And even Rupert
Sheldrake’s theory of morphic fields—which is considered extremely innovative and very daring—does not evade the
obvious; as Sheldrake concludes: “Thus the morphogenetic fields, like morphic units themselves, are essentially
hierarchical in their organization.”31

Francisco Varela, whose research in the autonomous nature of holonic cognition is a cornerstone of the “new
biology” (see tenet 2a), points out that “it seems to be a general reflection of the richness of natural systems that
indication can be iterated to produce a hierarchy of levels. The choice of considering the level above or below
corresponds to a choice of treating the given system as autonomous or constrained”32—that is, every holon is both a
whole and a part, and can be considered in terms of its autonomy (agency) or in terms of its being constrained by
other holons (in communion), both views being correct (but partial).

Virtually all deep ecologists and ecofeminists reject the notion of holarchy, for rather confused reasons, it seems
to me. From what I can tell, they seem to think that hierarchy and atomism are “bad,” and that their “wholism” is
the opposite of both. But no less than the patron saint of deep ecology, Arne Naess, clearly points out that
“wholism” and “atomism” are actually two sides of the same problem, and that the cure for both is hierarchy. All
reality, he points out, consists of what he calls “subordinate wholes” or “subordinate gestalts”—that is, holons. “We
have therefore,” he says, “a complex realm of gestalts, in a vast hierarchy. We can therefore speak of lower- and
higher-order gestalts.”33

Further, Naess points out, this hierarchic conception is necessary to counteract both wholism (meaning an
emphasis on just wholes) and atomism (just parts), because gestalts are holons; they are both wholes and parts,
arranged in a hierarchic order of higher and lower. As he puts it, “This terminology—a vast hierarchy of lower- and
higher-order gestalts—is more useful than speaking about wholes and holism, because it induces people to think
more strenuously about the relations between wholes and parts. It [also] facilitates the emancipation from strong
atomistic or mechanistic trends in analytical thought.”34

Hierarchy, in short, is for Naess the antidote both to atomism and wholism (extreme heterarchy). I don’t know
why his followers have such a difficult time grasping his notion. Perhaps it is, as I suggested earlier, that they are in
such reaction to pathological hierarchies that they toss the baby out with the bathwater. I think this is very
understandable, because in some early versions of hierarchy, the conception was rather rigid and “fascist,” and
resulted, no doubt, from what we have called pathological agency.

The point, of course, is to tease apart pathological hierarchies—where one holon usurps its position in the
totality—from normal holarchies in general, which express the natural interrelations between holons that are always
both parts and wholes in horizontal and vertical relationships. As we saw earlier, both pathological hierarchies and
pathological heterarchies do exist and need to be addressed as pathologies, but that does not damn the existence of
normal heterarchies and normal hierarchies themselves, both of which are necessary for wholes and parts to coexist.

Jantsch expresses the more recent and balanced understanding:

Evolution [appears] as a multilevel reality in which the evolutionary chain of autopoietic levels of existence
appear in hierarchic order. Each level includes all lower levels—there are systems within systems within
systems . . . within the total system in question. However, it is essential that this hierarchy is not a control
hierarchy in which information streams upward and orders are handed from the top down. Each level
maintains a certain [relative] autonomy and lives its proper existence in horizontal relations [heterarchy] with
its specific environment. [For example:] The organelles within our cells go about their business of energy
exchange in an autonomous way and maintain their horizontal relationships within the framework of the
world-wide Gaia system.35

If the deep ecologists and ecofeminists would follow Naess’s lead, the whole discussion could move forward more

smoothly. As it is now, they are often the defenders of flatland “wholism” and extreme heterarchy, which indeed is
the opposite of atomism: two sides of the same problem.

5. Each emergent holon transcends but includes its predecessor(s). Each newly emergent holon, as we have seen,
includes its preceding holons and then adds its own new and defining pattern or form or wholeness (its new canon
or code or morphic field). In other words, it preserves
their
separateness or isolatedness or aloneness. It preserves their being but negates their partiality or exclusiveness. “To
supersede,” said Hegel, “is at once to preserve and to negate.”36

the previous holons themselves but negates

Another way to express this is: all of the lower is in the higher, but not all of the higher is in the lower. For
example, hydrogen atoms are in a water molecule, but the water molecule is not in the atoms (we might say the
water molecule “pervades” or “permeates” the atoms but is not actually in them, just as all of a word is in a sentence
but not all of the sentence is in a word).

Varela points out that “at a given level of the hierarchy, a particular system can be seen as an outside to systems
below it, and as an inside to systems above it; thus the status of a given system changes as one passes through its
level in either the upward or the downward direction.”37 This is simply another example of asymmetry, and it means
that all holons are not equally internal to all other holons (some have a relation of partial externalness marked by
the emergence or the symmetry break): all of the lower is in the higher, but not all of the higher is in the lower.

Nobel laureate Roger Sperry puts it very straightforwardly: “It is important to remember in this connection that all
of the simpler, more primitive, elemental forces remain present and operative; none has been canceled. These
lower-level forces and properties, however, have been superseded in successive steps, encompassed or enveloped
as it were, by those forces of increasingly complex organizational entities.”38 The higher embraces the lower, as it
were, so that all development is envelopment.

But there is an important distinction that needs to be emphasized, which I indicated earlier by saying that
supersession “preserves the being but negates the partiality” (or “preserves and negates”). A simple example will
suffice: before Hawaii became a state, it was its own nation, and as a nation it had all the prerogatives of
sovereignty: it could declare war, print its own money, conscript an army, and so forth. These were all parts of its
regime or code or cannon—its self-preservation or agency as a whole, as an individual nation.

When Hawaii became an American state, all of its basic property, land, and fundamental features became part of
the U.S.A. All of these basic structures were preserved in the new Union; none of them were destroyed or harmed in
the least. What was not preserved, however, what was lost and actually negated, was Hawaii’s capacity to be its own
nation, to declare war, print its own money, and so on. Hawaii’s isolated and autonomous regime was subsumed in
the higher regime of the United States (where it retained some relatively autonomous rights as a state).

This is what I mean when I say “transcends but includes” or “negates and preserves”—all the basic structures and
functions are preserved and taken up in a larger identity, but all the exclusivity structures and functions that existed
because of isolation, set-apartness, partialness, exclusiveness, separative agency—these are simply dropped and
replaced with a deeper agency that reaches a wider communion.39

This leads to a general phenomenon observed at all levels of holistic organization: in normal holarchies, the new
and senior pattern or wholeness can to some degree limit the indeterminacy (organize the freedom) of its junior
holons (precisely because it transcends but includes them; i.e., via “downward causation,” or more generally,
“downward influence”). Rupert Sheldrake is worth quoting at length, to show exactly what is involved, and how
widespread and crucial the phenomenon is:

In living organisms, as in the chemical realm, the morphogenetic fields [holons] are hierarchically organized:
those of organelles—for example the cell nucleus, the mitochondria and chloroplasts—act by ordering
physico-chemical processes within them; these fields are subject to the higher-level fields of cells; the fields of
cells to those of tissues; those of tissues to those of organs; and of organs to the morphogenetic field of the
organism as a whole. At each level the fields work by ordering processes which would otherwise be
indeterminate.

For example, in the case of free atoms, electronic events take place with the probabilities given by the
unmodified probability structures of the atomic morphogenetic fields. But when the atoms come under the

influence of the higher-level morphogenetic field of a molecule, these probabilities are modified in such a way
that the probability of events leading toward the actualization of the final form are enhanced, while the
probability of other events is diminished. Thus the morphogenetic fields of molecules restrict
the possible
number of atomic configurations which would be expected on the basis of calculations which start from the
probability structures of free atoms. And this is what is found in fact; in the case of protein folding, for
example, the rapidity of the process indicates that the system does not “explore” the countless configurations
in which the atoms could conceivably be arranged. Similarly, the morphogenetic fields of crystals restrict the
large number of possible arrangements which would be permitted by the probability structures of their
constituent molecules.

At the cellular level the morphogenetic field orders the crystallization of microtubules and other processes
which are necessary for the coordination of cell division. But the planes in which the cells divide may be
indeterminate in the absence of a higher-level field: for instance, in plant wound-calluses the cells proliferate
more or less randomly to produce a chaotic mass. Within organized tissue, on the other hand, one of the
functions of the tissue’s morphogenetic field may be to impose a pattern on the planes of cell division, and
thus control the way in which the tissue as a whole grows. Then the development of tissues itself is inherently
indeterminate in many respects, as revealed when they are artificially isolated and grown in tissue culture;
under normal conditions this indeterminacy is restricted by the higher-level field of the organ. Indeed at each
level in biological systems, as in chemical systems, the morphic units in isolation behave more indeterminately
than they do when they are part of a higher-level morphic unit. The higher-level morphogenetic field restricts
and patterns their intrinsic indeterminism.40

This brings us directly to our sixth major tenet.

6. The lower sets the possibilities of the higher; the higher sets the probabilities of the lower. We just saw that as a
higher level of creative novelty emerges, it in many ways goes beyond (but includes) the givens of the previous level.
However, even though a higher level “goes beyond” a lower level, it does not violate the laws or the patterns of the
lower level. It cannot be reduced to the lower level; it cannot be determined by the lower level; but neither can it
ignore the lower level. My body follows the laws of gravity; my mind follows other laws, such as those of symbolic
communication and linguistic syntax; but if my body falls off a cliff, my mind goes with it.

This is what is meant by saying that a lower sets the possibilities, or the large framework, within which the higher
will have to operate, but to which it is not confined. To use Polanyi’s example, nothing in the laws governing physical
particles can predict the emergence of a wristwatch, but nothing in the wristwatch violates the laws of physics. As
Laszlo nicely summarizes it for any level:

The processes of cosmic evolution bring forth a variety of matter-energy systems; these systems define the
range of constraints and the scope of possibilities within which systems on higher levels can evolve. Systems
on the lower level clusters can permit the evolution, but can never determine the nature, of systems on
higher-level clusters. The evolution of physical matter-energy systems sets the stage and specifies the rules of
the game for the evolution of biological species, and biological evolution sets the stage and specifies the rules
of the game for the evolution of sociocultural systems.41

As for the higher restricting the probabilities of the lower, we already heard Sheldrake’s summary of the extensive

evidence, which he concludes in this way:

At every level, the fields of the holons are probabilistic, and the material processes within the holon are
somewhat random or indeterminate. Higher-level fields may act upon the fields of lower-level holons in such a
way that their probability structures are modified. This can be thought of in terms of a restriction of their
indeterminism: out of the many possible patterns of events that could have happened, some now become
much more likely to happen as a result of the order imposed by the higher-level field. This field organizes and
patterns the indeterminism that would be shown by the lower-level holons in isolation.42

Now, a “level” in a holarchy is established by several objective criteria: by a qualitative emergence (as explained by
Popper); by asymmetry (or “symmetry breaks,” as explained by Prigogine and Jantsch); by an inclusionary principle
(the higher includes the lower, but not vice versa, as explained by Aristotle); by a developmental logic (the higher
negates and preserves a lower, but not vice versa, as explained by Hegel); by a chronological indicator (the higher
chronologically comes after the lower, but all that is later is not higher, as explained by Saint Gregory).

Despite the clarity of the concept of levels (and the meaning of “higher” and “lower”), some critics have
maintained that the concept itself cannot be maintained, because of the purely arbitrary nature of the number of
levels in any given holon. It is definitely true that the number of levels in any holon has an element of arbitrariness to
it, simply because there is no upper or lower limit to a manifest holarchy and therefore no absolute referent.

For example, when it was thought that atoms were the ultimate holons, then a simple atom had one level, a water
molecule had two levels, an ice crystal had three levels, and so on. When it was then thought that protons, neutrons,
and electrons were the ultimate holons, then they had one level, a nucleus had two levels, an atom had three levels,
and so forth. But that doesn’t change the relative placement of the holons themselves and thus doesn’t change in
the least the meaning of higher and lower.

Also notice that we can count as one level any truly emergent quality, which means we can divide and subdivide a
series in any number of ways. To give a crude analogy, take a three-story house with a stairway consisting of twenty
steps between each floor. We usually say the house has three main levels (just as we refer to the three general
realms of evolution), but we could also use the stairs as the scale and say the house has sixty levels or steps.
Obviously this is somewhat arbitrary.

The level claim is simply that (1) the existence of floors and steps is not itself purely arbitrary—there are quanta in
the universe with or without the presence of humans—and (2) in making any comparison, use the same ruler, thus
factoring out that particular arbitrariness (just as we can measure the temperature of water with any number of
arbitrary scales, Celsius or Fahrenheit or whatever, as long as we agree which to use). Whenever we refer to the
“number of levels” in a holon, then, we are using a relative scale consistently applied within the particular
comparison.

With that in mind, we can introduce two very important definitions, first clearly suggested by Arthur Koestler. In

his words:

7. “The number of levels which a hierarchy comprises determines whether it is ‘shallow’ or

‘deep’; and the

number of holons on any given level we shall call its ‘span.’”43

For this example, let us arbitrarily assign atoms a depth of three (they contain as components at least two other
levels). We can imagine a time, early in the universe, when there were only atoms and not yet molecules. Atoms had
a small depth (3) but an enormous span, stretching, we presume, throughout the existent universe and numbering in
the megazillions (thus, depth = 3, span = zillions). When molecules first emerged, they had a greater depth, a depth
of four, but initially a very small span (presumably in the hundreds, or whatever, and then growing rapidly).

This again recognizes a crucial distinction found in any holarchy—the vertical dimension and the horizontal
dimension. The greater the vertical dimension of a holon (the more levels it contains), then the greater the depth
of that holon; and the more holons on that level, the wider its span.

This is important, because it points out that it is not merely population size that establishes order of richness (or
order of qualitative emergence), but rather depth. And we will see that one of the greatest confusions in general
ecological or new-paradigm theories (whether “pop” or “serious”) is that they often mistake great span for great
depth. For what we will find is that:

8. Each successive level of evolution produces GREATER depth and LESS span. The greater the depth of a holon,
the more precarious is its existence, since its existence depends also on the existence of a whole series of other
holons internal to it. And since the lower holons are components of the higher, there physically cannot be more
numbers of the higher than there are numbers of components.

Thus, for example, the number of molecules in the universe will always be less than the number of atoms in the
universe. The number of cells in the universe will always be less than the number of molecules in the universe, and
so on. It simply means the number of wholes will always be less than the number of parts, indefinitely.

Thus, greater depth always means less span, in relation to a holon’s predecessor(s). Of course, what we might call
“total span” increases—if there is more of anything, the sum total of everything increases—but simple span, the
span of any given type of holon, becomes less and less vis-à-vis its predecessor(s). (This is why the span of mental
holons is much less than the span of living holons, which is much less than the span of material holons—the so-called
pyramid of development.) We will return to this momentarily.

Throughout this book I will be adding what might be called “fundamental additions” to the twenty tenets. These
additions are tenets that seem crucial to an understanding of evolution and the Kosmos, but tenets that, for reasons
we will be investigating in detail, simply cannot be established in the it-language of instrumental and objectifying
naturalism (i.e., systems theory). Why they cannot be established in systems theory will form a large part of the
discussion about the “wrong half” of modern systems sciences.

These additions do not violate systems theory; they simply can find no place whatsoever in its tenets (the
subjective world of “I,” for example, cannot be captured without remainder in the objectivistic language of “its” and
“objects” and “processes”; nor can the collective worlds of “we” be captured in systems theory without a reduction
to totalitarian principles). As I said, we will later return to all of this in much detail, and so for the moment we need
only note our first addition:

Addition 1: The greater the depth of a holon, the greater its degree of consciousness. The spectrum of evolution is
a spectrum of consciousness. And one can perhaps begin to see that a spiritual dimension is built into the very fabric,
the very depth, of the Kosmos.

But this addition takes us a bit ahead of our story, and so let me return to the more orthodox account and pick up
the story at tenet 7, the distinction between depth and span, or the distinction between vertical richness and
horizontal reach. We have two different scales here: a vertical scale of deep versus shallow, and a horizontal scale of
wide versus narrow.

One of the difficulties in keeping these distinctions in mind is that, once we disavow reductionism, once we
disavow the flatland approach to the Kosmos, then theoretically we are no longer just playing chess, which is hard
enough; we are now playing three-dimensional chess, which is extremely complicated! And I won’t even mention n-
dimensional chess! For wherever development proceeds, we must, at the very least, distinguish between depth and
span, not only because there are objective (real) correlates to the distinction, but because to fail to do so, even
under the guise of being “holistic,” simply reintroduces a subtle form of reductionism, for everything is then
compared merely in terms of population span (bigger or smaller, wider or narrower), and thus all depth is erased
from existence.

As we will see in the next chapter, many such theorists then attempt to construct holistic sequences based only on
size. They completely mistake great span for great depth, because now the only qualitative distinction they possess
is actually quantitative: they only have one way to go—namely, that “bigger is better.” And thus their “holistic
sequences,” because they are based on span alone, are actually in themselves regressive, because evolution is not
bigger and better, but smaller and better (greater depth, less span). These theorists, as we will see in detail, end up
unknowingly recommending pure regression as our salvation.44

One last point in this regard: other critics accept the term “depth,” but strenuously object to the word “height,”
again feeling, apparently, that “height” is the height of human arrogance. And yet they accept “depth,” this being, I
suppose, the depth of human daffiness. Any way we slice it, depth without height is just another name for shallow.

With reference to the vertical scale (which just as well could be any direction we agree upon; I will use vertical),
we can speak of height and depth synonymously. The height of a holon and the depth of a holon refer to the same
thing, the (relative) number of levels of other holons internal to it. Huston Smith, however, makes the interesting
observation that traditionally height was used when referring to the Kosmos (as in “high Heaven”) and depth in
regard to individuals (as in “the depth of her soul”).

But I will use the two words interchangeably, so that the vertical dimension is a scale of depth/height versus

shallow/flat, and the horizontal scale is one of width versus narrowness.

We have, of course, on several occasions already met these two dimensions. Agency and communion (or self-
preservation and self-accommodation) refer to changes in the horizontal dimension; self-transcendence and self-
dissolution refer to changes in the vertical dimension. So we can introduce a few more simple definitions:

Changes in the horizontal dimension I will call

translation, and changes in the vertical dimension I will call

transformation.

The agency (or regime or code) of any given holon translates the world according to the terms of its code or
regime—it will recognize, or register, or respond to, only those items that fit its code. An electron, for example, will
register numerous other physical forces, but will not register or respond to the meaning of literature, nor will it
respond to the sexual advances of a rabbit.

Holons, in other words, do not simply reflect a pregiven world. Rather, according to their capacity, they select,
organize, give form to, the multitude of stimuli cascading around them. Their responses never simply “correspond”
to something “out there”; they register (and thus respond to) only that which fits the coherency of their regime
(or code or agency or deep structure). This is what Varela means, for example, when he says holons are not
“heteronomous units operating by a logic of correspondence,” but rather relatively “autonomous units operating by
a logic of coherence.” Holons
translate their reality according to the patterns of their agency, their relatively
autonomous and coherent deep structures; and stimuli that don’t fit the deep structure or regime are simply not
registered and might as well not exist (in fact, do not exist, do not disclose themselves, for that holon).

In transformation, however, new forms of agency emerge, and this means a whole new world of available stimuli
becomes accessible to the new and emergent holon. The new holon can respond to deeper or higher worlds,
because its translation processes transcend and include those of its subholons. A deer, for example, will register and
respond not only to physical forces that continue to impact it, but also to a whole range of biological forces, from
hunger to pain to sexual drive, that simply make no impression on its constituent atoms. To the individual atom,
these new forces are all “otherworldly”—literally out of this world, or not in its world.

Thus, in transformation (or self-transcendence), whole new worlds of translation disclose themselves. These
“new worlds” are not physically located someplace else; they exist simply as a deeper perception (or deeper
registration) of the available stimuli in this world. They appear to be—and might as well be—“other worlds” to the
junior holons, but these “other worlds” disclose themselves—they become this worldly—via transformation and
self-transcendence. We will see, in later chapters, that development is a constant conversion of “otherworldly” into
“this worldly” via a deepening of perception brought about by emergent evolution and transformation. Greater
depth brings other worlds into this world, constantly. . . .

A holon’s regime or deep structure, then, governs the range of its possible translations, governs the types of

worlds that it can respond to.

This is what actually allows a holon’s stability, its relative autonomy or coherence. We noted that any stable holon
is stable by virtue of its identifying pattern—its relatively autonomous code, canon, regime, entelechy, morphic
unit—what I have been calling its deep structure. The human body, for example, has 208 bones, 1 heart, 2 lungs, and
so forth, wherever it appears. But what we do with the human body—its various modes of play, work, sex, and so
on—varies from culture to culture. These variations within the deep structure I call surface structures. Koestler
refers to this difference as “fixed codes and flexible strategies”—that is, relatively stable deep structures and
changing surface structures within the basic guidelines (or basic limiting principles) of the deep structure.

And so we can say: translation is a change in surface structures (“horizontal”), whereas transformation is a

change in deep structures (“vertical”).

(The relation between deep structures and surface structures I call “transcription,” which we will discuss later, and

for now, in a note.)45

This is yet another reason why evolution cannot be explained merely in terms of horizontal additions—that is,
cannot be explained merely in terms of translation, of horizontal changes in agency and communion. When the
regimes or deep structures of hydrogen and oxygen are brought together in a certain fashion, a water molecule
emerges with a new regime or deep structure, a regime that incorporates the separate regimes of the atoms into a
single “morphic unit,” a holon with a new deep structure that subsumes its predecessors. This is a vertical
transformation, or change in deep structure; it is not the mere addition of more and more atoms, which would
simply produce a mess, not a molecule; a heap, not a whole. Translation shuffles parts; transformation produces
wholes.46

We can use our simple analogy of the three-story building to summarize all of these definitions. Each of the three

main floors is a deep structure; the furniture, chairs, and tables on each floor are the surface structures. Rearranging
the furniture on any given floor is translation; changing floors is transformation. (And the relation of the furniture to
each floor is transcription.)

The point, then, is that evolution is first and foremost a series of transformations (“self-realization through self-
transcendence”). Transformation is how you get levels in the first place. And each major transformation produces
greater depth, and less span, in relation to its previous level(s), in relation to its predecessors.

9. Destroy any type of holon, and you will destroy all of the holons above it and none of the holons below it. There
is an enormous amount of confusion in the literature as to how to determine whether a given holon is “higher” or
“lower” in the developmental sequence—not to mention the large numbers of critics who deny higher and lower
altogether.

But we can actually locate the level of a holon in any evolutionary or holistic sequence very simply, by asking
ourselves, as a type of thought experiment, “What other types of holons would be destroyed if we destroyed this
type of holon?”

For example, take the holistic sequence: subatomic particles, atoms, molecules, cells. Everybody agrees that that
is indeed a holistic sequence—each member includes its predecessor(s) but not vice versa, and thus each successive
member is indeed more encompassing (or more holistic).

But notice what that also unavoidably means: If we destroyed, for example, all of the molecules in the universe,
we would also destroy all of the cells in the universe (all of the holons above molecules in the sequence), but atoms
and subatomic particles would or could still exist (none of the lower holons would have to cease existence).

In other words, destroy any type of holon, and that also destroys all the higher holons in the sequence, because

those higher wholes depend upon the lower as constituent parts.

Molecules cannot exist without atoms; atoms can exist without molecules. There is nothing arbitrary in this
arrangement; it is not the product of a particular “human value judgment.” It is true physically, and logically, and
chronologically as well. (Atoms and molecules existed perfectly well on their own before the emergence of any cells.
Destroy every cell in the universe, and everything that came after it—plants, animals, societies—will likewise be
destroyed, but nothing that came before it—subatomic particles, atoms, molecules, polymers.)

This allows us to easily determine what is lower, and what is higher, in any holistic sequence: destroy the

particular holon, and everything else that is also destroyed is higher; those holons not destroyed are lower.47

This is true for any developmental sequence, and is partially responsible for the “retreat” we see when holons
dissolve: they regress to the next
lower level, whereas if any lower level is destroyed, all the higher levels
automatically go with it. This also points up very clearly why there is a vertical and not just a horizontal dimension to
evolution, and shows why “higher” and “lower” are not arbitrary.48

In the next chapter, we will apply this principle to the work of several theorists who are attempting to construct
“holistic sequences.” These theorists, in order to help men and women more accurately position themselves in the
larger universe, are attempting to find a “more holistic” reality in which humans can situate their communions—an
altogether commendable task. But because so many of these theorists confuse great span with great depth, they end
up creating “holistic sequences” that are in fact regressive, that slide down the pyramid of greater depth / less span
and land us in the shallower end of the Kosmos.

As we will see, the careful application of this thought experiment allows us to determine if their sequences are
really holistic (or merely regressive), and allows us to offer an alternative “big picture” in which men and women can
situate themselves in a truly holistic fashion.

In the meantime, this thought experiment allows us to introduce another important definition, the difference
between fundamental and significant. For what we will find is that the more fundamental a holon is, the less
significant it is, and vice versa. That is:

The less depth a holon has, the more fundamental

it is to the Kosmos, because it is a component of so many
other holons. Atoms, for example, are very fundamental, relatively speaking, because molecules and cells and
organisms all depend upon them. The more fundamental a holon is, the more of the universe contains that holon as
a necessary part or constituent, without which these other holons could not function (or even exist). Less depth

means more fundamental, means the particular holon is a “building block” of so many other holons.

At the same time, the less depth a holon has, the less significant it is to the Kosmos, because it embraces (as its
own components) so little of the Kosmos. There is, relatively speaking, less of the Kosmos that is actually internal to
this holon, that is actually embraced within the being of the holon itself. (Put differently, it is less significant because
more of the Kosmos is external to it.)

On the other hand, the greater the depth, or the greater the particular wholeness of a holon, then the less
fundamental
it is, because fewer other holons depend on it for their own existence. Primates, for example, are not
very fundamental holons, because neither atoms nor molecules nor cells depend upon them. But by the same token,
the less fundamental, the more significant: the more significant that holon is for the universe, because more of the
universe is reflected or embraced in that particular wholeness (more of the Kosmos is internal to it, as part of its own
being). Primates are very significant, relatively speaking, because they represent and contain atoms and molecules
and cells: they signify more of the Kosmos.

Thus an atom, for example, is more fundamental, and less significant, than a cell. More fundamental, because
everything above it (including the cell) depends upon it for its existence. Less significant, because less of the Kosmos
is embraced in it (or is actually internal to it). A cell, on the other hand, is more significant because it embraces
atoms and therefore reflects or
signifies more of the Kosmos in its own being. It is more significant, but less
fundamental, than an atom. And so on.

(We will return throughout the book to this topic, and see that it is related to the issue of intrinsic and extrinsic
values; and see also that theorists who mistake great span for great depth are always confusing more fundamental
with more significant, and thus, once again, end up recommending regression as a direction for further growth; with
a flatland ontology, the crucial depth dimension is missing.)

10. Holarchies coevolve. Holons do not evolve alone, because there are no alone holons (there are only fields
within fields within fields). This principle is often referred to as coevolution, which simply means that the “unit” of
evolution is not an isolated holon (individual molecule or plant or animal) but a holon plus its inseparable
environment. Evolution, that is, is ecological in the broadest sense.

Jantsch refers to this as the interdependence of microevolution and macroevolution, by which he simply means
the coevolution of the individual (micro) and its larger environment (macro). This is just another way of saying that
all agency is always agency-in-communion.49 Jantsch:

The immediate consequence is . . . the simultaneity of macro- and microevolution in the universe. Macroscopic
structures become the environment for microscopic structures and influence their evolution in decisive ways,
or make it possible at all. Vice versa, the evolution of microscopic structures becomes a decisive factor in the
formation and evolution of macroscopic structures. This interdependence constitutes nothing but an aspect of
co-evolution [operative, he says, “in all three realms”]. This principle implies that every system is linked with
its environment by circular processes which establish a feedback link between the evolution of both sides. This
holds not only for systems at the same hierarchical level; the entire complex system plus environment evolves
as a whole.50

In other words, according to Jantsch (and others), micro and macro—individual and social/environmental—evolve

heterarchically to new holarchical levels of each.

This distinction between an individual holon and its social holon (environment in the broadest sense) is not as easy
to draw as it may first appear, however, because it’s almost impossible to define what we mean by an individual in
the first place. The word itself, from the Latin individualis, means not divisible or not separable; by that definition,
there are no individuals anywhere in the Kosmos. There are only holons, or dividuals.51

On the other hand, we do recognize that enduring holons possess a specific form or pattern, and this pattern is to
some degree autonomous, or resistant to environmental obliteration. And this is usually what we mean by calling a
holon an “individual”—we mean an enduring compound individual, compounded of its junior holons and adding its
own defining form or wholeness or canon or deep structure (which is the novel holon in its own compound
individuality). And we further mean, usually (although we might not use these terms), that the overall wholeness or

morphic field of the individual holon organizes the indeterminateness of its junior partners or subholons.

In other words, even though an “individual holon” exists inseparably from its social environment, its defining
factor is its own particular form or pattern. To the degree that we can reasonably recognize that pattern, we will
refer to an individual holon.

This is still somewhat arbitrary, of course, because there are some social holons that seem to act as individual
holons or “superorganisms”—an ant colony, for example. But in human affairs, to give a counterexample, most of us
resist the temptation to describe a social holon, such as the State, as being literally a superorganism, because all
organisms have priority over all of their components, and yet with the rise of democratic structures, we like to think
that the State is subservient to the people, and to the degree that that is true, then the social system is not a true
organism (it is a social or environmental holon, not an individual holon). Further, the State, unlike a concrete
individual, does not have a locus of self-prehension, a unitary feeling as a oneness. In more general terms, it lacks a
locus of individual self-being (one of Whitehead’s main conclusions; and Habermas: the State is not a macrosubject).
And finally, the parts in this social system are conscious, but the “whole” is not.

We will devote much of the next chapter to this topic. For the time being, let us simply recognize that there are
important distinctions between micro- and macroevolution, between an individual holon and a social or
environmental holon (even though they are inseparably interactive, which is the meaning of “coevolution”). A social
holon is still a holon—and not a mere heap or aggregate—because it displays a whole/part pattern, it is rule-bound,
it in a sense develops (we speak coherently of stellar evolution, ecosystem evolution, social evolution, etc.), and it
can function with various degrees of upward and downward causation (depending on its depth). But it is not a true
individual holon, as Whitehead and Habermas and others have noted. Jantsch refers to this as the difference
between “vertical organismic and horizontal ecosystemic (symbiotic) organization”—but the point, again, is that they
coevolve.

11. The micro is in relational exchange with the macro at all levels of its depth. This tenet is extremely important,
particularly when it comes to holons of greater depth and the types of ecosystems (in the broad sense) that they
must co-create and upon which their existence depends.

Take, for example, a human being, using just the three levels of matter, life, and mind: all of these levels maintain
their own existence through an incredibly rich network of relational exchange with holons of the same depth in the
environment. The physical body exists in a system of relational exchange with other physical bodies—in terms of
gravitation, material forces and energies, light, water, environmental weather, and so on—and the physical body
itself depends for its existence on these physical relationships. Further, the human race reproduces itself physically
through food production and food consumption, through social labor organized in an economy for basic material
exchanges in the physiosphere.

Likewise, humanity reproduces itself biologically through emotional-sexual relations organized in a family and an
appropriate social environment, and depends for its biological existence on a whole network of other biological
systems (and ecosystems)—it depends upon harmonious relational exchanges with the biosphere.

Finally, human beings

through exchanges with cultural and symbolic
environments, the very essence of which is the relational exchange of symbols with other symbol exchangers. These
relational exchanges are embedded in the traditions and institutions of a particular society in such a way that that
society can reproduce itself on a cultural level, can reproduce itself in the noosphere.

reproduce themselves mentally

In short, as holons evolve, each layer of depth continues to exist in (and depend upon) a network of relationships
with other holons at the same level of structural organization. I usually refer to this, for short, as “same-level
relational exchange.”52 The point is that all holons are compound individuals, compounded of their previous holons
and adding their own distinctively emergent pattern; and each level of these holons (i.e., every holon) maintains its
existence through relational exchanges with same-depth holons in the social (or macro-) environment.

12. Evolution has directionality. This is the famous arrow of evolutionary time first recognized in the biosphere,
but now understood, in the sciences of complexity, to be present in all three of the great domains of evolution. This
directionality is usually stated as being one of increasing differentiation, variety, complexity, and organization. But I
think it would be helpful to gather together, from different sources, the various indicators of this evolutionary

directionality and briefly examine them one at a time.

We have already seen that evolution is marked by creative emergence (novelty), symmetry breaks, self-
transcendence, increasing depth (and greater consciousness, which we will discuss later as an addition). Those are
already indicators of evolution’s directionality. Here are some others. Aside from regressions, dissolutions, arrest,
etc., evolution tends in the direction of:

a.

Increasing complexity. The German biologist Woltereck coined the term anamorphosis—literally, “not being
formless”—to describe what he saw as the central and universal feature of nature: the emergence of ever-increasing
complexity. As Jantsch puts it,

The evolution of the universe is the history of an unfolding of differentiated order or complexity. Unfolding is
not the same as building up. The latter emphasizes structure and describes the emergence of hierarchical
levels by the joining of systems “from the bottom up.” Unfolding, in contrast, implies the interweaving of
processes which lead simultaneously to phenomena of structuration at different hierarchical levels. Evolution
acts in the sense of simultaneous and interdependent structuration of the macro- and the micro-world.
Complexity thus emerges from the interpenetration of processes of differentiation and integration. . . .53

Ballmer and von Weizsacker, in fact, refer to this maximization of complexity as the “general statement of

evolution,” and L. L. Whyte called it “the fundamental principle of the development of pattern.”

We need one qualification here. As Laszlo points out, the emergence of a new level of complexity also brings with
it, from a slightly different angle, a new simplicity, precisely because the new whole, as a single whole, is simpler
than its many parts. Thus, says Laszlo, “the emergence of a higher-level system is a . . . simplification of system
function.” He continues:

However, once a new hierarchical level has emerged, systems on the new level tend to become progressively
more complex. For example, on the atomic level of organization, hydrogen, the first element to be synthesized
in the processes of cosmic evolution, is structurally simpler than the subsequently synthesized, heavier
elements. On a higher level of organization, a molecule of water is simpler than a protein molecule; on a still
higher organizational level, a unicellular organism is less complex than a multicellular one. . . . Thus, while a
new level of organization means a simplification of system function, and of the corresponding system
structure, it also means the initiation of a process of progressive structural and functional complexification.54

b.

Increasing differentiation/integration. This principle was given its first modern statement by Herbert Spencer
(in First Principles, 1862): evolution is “a change from an indefinite, incoherent homogeneity, to a definite, coherent
heterogeneity, through continuous differentiations and integrations” (this definition of the term evolution allowed
biologists to begin using it instead of Darwin’s phrase “descent with modification”). And we already quoted Jantsch:
“Complexity thus emerges from the interpenetration of processes of differentiation and integration. . . .”

Differentiation produces partness, or a new “manyness”; integration produces wholeness, or a new “oneness.”

And since holons are whole/parts, they are formed by the joint action of differentiation and integration.

The differentiating processes are obviously necessary for the undeniable novelty and diversity created by
evolution, but integration is just as crucial, converting manyness into oneness (the regime or canon or pattern of a
holon is its integrative coherence). Thus Whitehead’s view that “the ultimate character pervading the universe is a
drive toward the endless production of new syntheses [integrations].”55 We saw that Whitehead called this drive
“creativity”; he says it is “the eternal activity,” “the un derlying energy of realization”—“nothing escapes it.”56

Thus Whitehead’s all-important dictum: “The many [differentiation] become one [integration] and are increased

by one [the new holon].”

These two processes are very obvious in the physiosphere (atoms integrating differentiated particles, molecules
integrating differentiated atoms, etc.) and in the biosphere (e.g., the progressive differentiation of the zygote and
the progressive integration of the resultant parts into tissues, organ systems, organism), but they are also rampant in
the noosphere. Even psychoanalysis is on board. Gertrude Blanck and Rubin Blanck, for example, pioneers in
psychoanalytic developmental psychology, have persuasively argued that the aggressive drive is the drive to

differentiation, and Eros is the drive to integration, and disruption of either one results in serious pathology (we will
return to this in chapter 9).

And for all the commotion surrounding Derrida’s notion of différance (to differ and defer)—some critics have
used the notion to deconstruct anything they didn’t happen to like—Derrida himself defines the notion very simply
as “the process of differentiation.”57 Before communication can begin, entities have to be differentiated in the first
place, and in one sense these entities do not exist prior to the differentiating process per se. Différance is thus part
of that “eternal activity” of creativity, a dynamic force of bringing into being—“it has impulsive force, the force of
articulation or differentiation.”58
In other words, as one of his interpreters points out, “Derrida sees the dynamic
difference that characterizes reality as also composing the nature of language itself. This enables language, through
its inherent process of difference, to function as a means of realization . . . language participates in the reality it
manifests .
. the dynamic becoming of reality itself.”59 But differentiating also demands integrations and
syntheses—as Derrida puts it, “The play of differences supposes, in effect, syntheses and referrals. . . .”60

.

This play of differentiating and integrating forces, or différance and synthesis and referral, is behind Derrida’s

notorious critique of “presence.” As Derrida words it:

The play of differences involves syntheses and referrals which prevent there from being at any moment or in
any way a simple element which is present in and of itself and refers only to itself. Whether in written or
spoken discourse, no element can function as a sign without relating to another element which itself is not
simply present. This linkage means that each “element” is constituted with reference to the trace in it of the
other elements of the system. Nothing, in either the elements or the system, is anywhere ever simply present
or absent.61

In other words, there is nothing that isn’t a holon, a context within a context forever. You cannot point to any thing,
to any holon, and say it’s just
that and nothing else, because every holon is simultaneously a superholon and a
subholon: it is composed of holons and composes others (across both space and time); nothing is ever simply
present.62

As for the conjoint operation of differentiation and integration in the noosphere, Habermas notes that “the
different lifeworlds that collide with one another do not stand
next to each other without any mutual
understanding. As totalities [holons], they follow the pull of their claims to universality and work out their
differences until their horizons of understanding ‘fuse’ [integrate] with one another.”63 Across the board we see this
dual operation of extension and condensation, he says: “The increasing reflexivity of culture, the generalization of
values and norms, and the heightened individuation of socialized subjects,
the enhancement of critical
consciousness, autonomous will formation, and individuation, takes place under conditions of an ever more
extensive and ever more finely woven net of linguistically generated intersubjectivity.” And his point is that all of this
“means differentiation and condensation [integration] at once—a thickening of the floating web of intersubjective
threads that simultaneously holds together the ever more sharply differentiated components of culture, society, and
person.”64

That phrase is significant: it is not just an extension of the web, but a thickening: not just span, but also depth.
Finally, to touch bases with Foucault, we might note that his “archaeological holism asserts that the whole
determines what can count even as a possible element. The whole verbal content is more fundamental and thus is
more than the sum of its parts. Indeed, there are no parts except within the field which identifies and individuates
them”—that is, differentiates and integrates them.65 And let us immediately note that Foucault eventually
abandoned archaeology as an exclusive methodology precisely because archaeology was itself merely a part of the
larger holon of social practices: not wholes, but whole/parts.

In sum, evolution requires both differentiation and integration operating together—“the many become one and
are increased by one”—and, indeed, these two normally (in healthy holarchies) occur conjointly, which is why I
usually write it as “differentiation/integration.” These appear as opposites (or utterly opposed tendencies) only in a
flatland ontology, where more of the one means less of the other. But in the multidimensional Kosmos, more of one
means more of the other. They join hands endlessly to produce new whole/parts or many/ones or holons. The
dialectics of depth . . .

c.

Increasing organization/structuration. “The further evolution of the suprasystem leads to the progressive
complexification of its defining system level—and ultimately to the creation of hypercycles that shift it to the next
organizational level. Thus evolution moves from the simpler to the more complex type of system, and from the lower
to the higher level of organization.”66 This is, for example, behind the standard distinction, in evolutionary biology,
between clades and grades: “A group of species with a recent common ancestor forms a clade; a group with the
same level of structural organization forms a grade.”67Grade, of course, is another term for depth.

d.

Increasing relative autonomy. This is a much misunderstood concept. It simply refers to a holon’s capacity for
self-preservation in the midst of environmental fluctuations (relative autonomy is another term for agency). And
according to the sciences of complexity, the greater the depth of a holon, the greater its relative autonomy. This
does not mean greater permanence or greater concrete stubbornness. Worms are less durable than rocks. Relative
autonomy simply refers to a certain flexibility in the face of changing environmental conditions. A fox can maintain
its internal temperature relatively independently of changing weather, whereas a rock’s temperature fluctuates
immediately with every passing circumstance.

By the time we reach the noosphere, in humans, relative autonomy is of such a high degree that it can produce
not just differentiation from the environment, which is necessary, but dissociation from the environment, which is
disastrous—an expression of pathological agency that, among many other things, lands it squarely in ecological hell
(we will, of course, be returning to this topic).

The reason that autonomy is always relative is that there are no wholes, only whole/parts. As a whole, a holon
possesses a degree of autonomy, expressed in its identifying and enduring pattern, its self-preservation. It possesses
coherence and identity across space and time (or else it simply ceases to exist), which is why autonomy is virtually
synonymous with agency, regime, code, canon, deep structure. As a part, however, every holon—the autonomy of
every holon—is subjected to larger forces and systems of which it is merely a component. This doesn’t change its
fundamental pattern or identifying regime, but it does subject it to a host of limiting circumstances and conditions
that can alter its expression, and it often moves the source of the initiation of action to other regimes (e.g., if my
country declares war, I am included, like it or not).

In other words, as we have seen time and again, all agency is agency-in-communion. (This is nicely captured in
Varela’s notion of “structural coupling”: the agency of a biological system is relatively autonomous, but the form of
the autonomy evolved in structural coupling with its environs; i.e., its present agency is the result of evolutionary
communions.)

Thus, autonomy, like all aspects of a holon, is sliding: a holon is relatively autonomous vis-à-vis its juniors and

relatively subservient vis-à-vis its seniors.68

Much of the fun, if one can call it that, of postmodern poststructuralist games consists in the upsetting of
established autonomies by pointing to larger contexts which actually “determine” the supposed “autonomy” of the
isolated unit, whereupon the isolated unit itself is promptly declared “dead” (death of the writer, death of the
subject, death of the patriarchy, death of the mythic god, death of the ego, death of rationality, death of
logocentrism, etc.), with the “autonomy” or systemic structure of the larger context being in turn merely a part of. .
. . The game simply continues until the critic gets tired (or settles on an ideology), because there is nothing in reality
that can stop the sliding game any sooner, for contexts are boundless.

But the “decentering” of previously “autonomous” units is indeed part of the important truths of postmodern
critiques, and we will return to them throughout this volume. Thus, to give a few examples now: the autonomous
ego of the Enlightenment is not that autonomous because it is actually set in the context of its own organic drives
(the psychoanalytic critique of the Enlightenment), and these previously unconscious drives must be integrated for
true autonomy to emerge. But even the entire integrated and autonomous person of psychoanalysis is not really
autonomous, because that individual is actually set in contexts of linguistic structures that autonomously determine
meaning without the individual even knowing about it (the critique launched by structuralism, archaeology). But
linguistic structures aren’t really
autonomous, because they exist only in the context of pre-articulate
worldviews that use language without language ever registering that fact (the critique by Heidegger, Gebser). But
further, worldviews themselves are merely a small component of massive networks and contexts of social practices
(in various ways, Marx, Habermas, the later Foucault). And further yet, theorists from Kierkegaard to Schelling to

that

Hegel would insist that those social practices only exist in, and because of, the larger context of Spirit.

In every one of those cases, the theorist (Freud, Marx, Heidegger, Foucault, Schelling, etc.) tells us something
important about the meaning of our existence by situating our existence in a larger context—since meaning and
context are in important ways synonymous, as we earlier noted. And each successive theorist gives a deeper or
bigger or wider meaning to existence by finding previously hidden contexts that suddenly shift the autonomy out
from under our feet and point to larger communions in which we live and breathe and have our being.

And in a sense, each of them is quite right: the ego does exist in the context of the total organism and its drives,
which does exist in the context of its linguistically disclosed world, which does exist in terms of overall networks of
social practices, which themselves subsist in Spirit. That is the very nature of holon, contexts within contexts within
contexts. And each time we spot one of these larger (deeper) contexts, we find a new meaning conferred on a given
holon, because, as we earlier noted, the larger context confers a meaning on its holons that the holons themselves,
alone and isolated, do not and cannot possess.69

Likewise, each discovery of a new and deeper context and meaning is a discovery of a new therapia, a new
therapy, namely: we must shift our perspectives, deepen our perception, often against a great deal of resistance, to
embrace the deeper and wider context. The self is situated in contexts within contexts within contexts, and each
shift in context is an often painful process of growth, of death to a shallow context and rebirth to a deeper one.

But for just that reason, each time we identify a deeper context, our relative autonomy actually increases, because

in identifying with a deeper perception, we have found a wider freedom.

We will be discussing all these notions as we proceed. The simpler point of this section is just that, even though all
autonomy is relative, nonetheless
increases with evolution (as we said, a fox is more
autonomous than a rock). And the reason that relative autonomy increases with emergent evolution is that more
external
forces cooperating with it (due to
supersession, or transcendence and inclusion). It identifies with deeper contexts and thus finds wider freedom. We
will see numerous examples of this as we proceed.

forces impinging on the autonomy of a holon become internal

relative

autonomy

e.

Increasing telos. The regime, canon, code, or deep structure of a holon acts as a magnet, an attractor, a
miniature omega point, for the actualization of that holon in space and time. That is, the end point of the system
tends to “pull” the holon’s actualization (or development) in that direction, whether the system is physical,
biological, or mental.

Again, this was an item that was largely ignored as long as science was intent on studying a bunch of rocks in
motion, but even in the physiosphere the “entelechy” (regime, canon, deep structure, morphic field) of a holon
governs the final form of its actualization, whether from an electron cloud or a chaotic attractor of complex systems.
“In the geometric orientation that dominates in contemporary dynamic systems theory, the principal features of
dynamic systems are the attractors: they characterize the long-run behavior of the systems. Dynamic systems evolve
from a given initial state along a unique trajectory of states in accordance with the laws of evolution [some version
of the twenty tenets]. This leads eventually to some recognizable pattern where the trajectory remains trapped. The
pattern defines the attractors of the system. . . .”

If the series of system states come to a rest, their evolution is governed by a static attractor [studied, for
example, by René Thom’s topological “catastrophe theory”]. If the states consist of a repeated cycle of states
with a definite periodicity, the system is under the sway of a periodic attractor. And if the trajectory of system
states neither comes to rest nor exhibits periodicity but is highly erratic, it is under the influence of a so-called
chaotic attractor.70

“In recent years chaotic behavior has been discovered in a wide variety of natural systems, and their mathematical
modeling has made rapid progress. An entire discipline has sprung up within dynamic systems theory devoted to the
study of the properties of chaotic attractors and of the systems governed by them; it became popularly known as
chaos theory. Despite its name, the theory seeks to eliminate rather than discover or create chaos—it studies
processes that appear chaotic on the surface but on detailed analysis prove to manifest subtle strands of order.
Chaotic attractors are complex and subtly ordered structures that constrain the behavior of seemingly random and
unpredictable systems.”71

These attractors, in other words, are examples of the regimes or organizing forces of social holons and their
inherent teleological pull to pattern (without which a holon would simply not exist). Of particular interest are
“bifurcations,” which consist of the shift from one type of attractor to another. “Models with catastrophic
bifurcations (conducing from turbulent to newly ordered states through the reconfiguration of the attractors)
simulate rapid evolutionary leaps with the greatest fidelity. The significant simulations occur when dynamic systems
are destabilized and pass through a chaotic phase on the way toward essentially new—and in practice
unpredictable—steady states.”72

The conclusion for chaos theory is that these are “the kind of transformations that underlie the evolution of all
third-state [far from equilibrium] systems in the real world, from atoms of the elements to societies of human
beings.”73 These types of
transformations (not merely translations) generate “a statistically significant tendency
toward greater complexity and a higher level of organization. The system leaps to a new plateau and thus becomes
more dynamic and more autonomous in its milieu.”74 So that, finally, these factors converge to “push bifurcating
systems up the ladder of the evolutionary hierarchy”—that is, holarchy.75

When growing fluctuations upset the dynamic stability of a system, its stable point of periodic attractors can
no longer maintain it in its established state; chaotic attractors appear and with them an interval of transition
hallmarked by transitory chaos. When the system achieves a new state of dynamic stability, the chaotic
attractors of the bifurcation epoch give way to a new set of point or periodic attractors. These attractors
maintain the system in a condition far from thermodynamic equilibrium, with more effective use of
information, greater efficiency in the use of free energies, greater flexibility [relative autonomy], as well as
greater structural complexity on a higher level of organization.76

Telos—the miniature omega-point pull of the end state of a holon’s regime—is, of course, rampant not only in
physical systems but in the biosphere and noosphere as well. An acorn’s code (its DNA) has oak written all over it.
Through processes of
transcription, and transformation, the seed unfolds into a tree, holarchically.
These biological processes have been studied so much, and are so familiar to most readers, that I will not dwell on
them (we will see many examples later); we need only note that biologists “recognize the existence of direction
toward future functions,” and that “the purposeful aspect of organisms is incontrovertible.”77

translation,

In the noosphere, once the mental and linguistic sciences stopped trying to ape the study of moving rocks and
concentrated on mental processes, the mind’s telos inexorably came to the fore. Freud’s psychoanalysis, for
example, was profoundly developmental
in nature, and the whole point of development is that it is not a random
hopping about but is indeed going somewhere, and therefore it can be derailed and sabotaged, with resultant
pathology.

An old joke from Vermont: A city fellow, driving through the Vermont countryside, sees a man in a truck on the
side of the road. The truck is axle-deep in the mud, and the wheels are spinning. “Are you stuck?” asks the city
fellow. “I would be, if’n I was goin’ somewhere.”

Well, the psyche, for better or worse,

is going somewhere, and that is why the process can get stuck, why it is
fraught with frustration, arrest, fixation, stick points, logjams. If the mind weren’t going somewhere, it could never
get stuck, never get “sick.” And these “sick points,” these “stick points,” can only be understood in terms of the
mind’s omega points, of where it wants to go. And not just Freud. “In an oft-cited formula, Piaget declares that there
is no structure which lacks a development, and that the process of development can only be understood in view of
the structure which exists at the beginning and the structures into which it will evolve.”78 The basin and their
attractors, their miniature omega points.

Or America’s undeniable philosophical genius, Charles Peirce: “The being governed by a purpose or other final
cause is the very essence of the psychical phenomenon.” He adds that “to say that the future does not influence the
present is untenable doctrine.”79 Or Roman Jakobson, who was one of the first to introduce, as he put it, “a
consistent application of a means-ends [telos] model to language design, to its self-regulating maintenance of
integrity and dynamic equilibrium, as well as to its mutations [transformations],” so that the “adoption of teleology
was a central concern.”80 All the way to Habermas: “There is a relentless pressure built into the use of language
oriented toward mutual understanding.”81 And even Derrida: “This arche-trace contains within itself all the

possibilities of manifestation as the primordial ‘difference.’ This ‘difference’ is the inherent teleological force within
us that leads to self-manifestation.”82

Now, I haven’t actually mentioned the nature or the actual content of the mind’s omega point(s), its basic
attractor, its end state toward which earlier stages are struggling to reach, because here the story becomes truly
fascinating. The mind’s omega point, for each theorist, is the context that they believe cannot be outcontexted,
the context beyond which growth or expansion cannot or does not or should not proceed.

For Freud, the omega point, the end of development, was genital organization and integrated ego: all stages and
all roads lead to that Rome. For Piaget, the omega point is formal operational thinking, which alone reaches
“equilibration” and thus alone marks the end of development. For Habermas, rational intersubjective exchange of
uncoerced mutual understanding: when this fully unfolds, the relentless pressure subsides.

And so the omega points would proceed, with each theorist postulating, in some sense, the “end of history,” the
omega point that, when reached, would answer all the really difficult questions and usher in some sort of relatively
paradisiacal condition. For Hegel, a rational State in which individuals could realize absolute Spirit acting in and
through them in a mutual community. For Marx, a classless society in which alienation of labor and produce would
be healed in shared mutual care. And most people are familiar with Teilhard de Chardin’s ultimate omega point, the
resurrection of Christ consciousness in each and all, which, like all omega points, is maintained to be the purpose of
history and evolution itself.

Once again, there are important moments of truth in all of those omega points. Each stage of growth, because it is
a holon, faces a dual tension. As a whole, it is relatively autonomous and relatively “healthy, happy, whole.” But as a
part, it is in some sense alienated, set apart, or disconnected from those contexts that are beyond its own
perception. And until it takes the larger and deeper context into account, the limitations of its own shallower
position will torment it, inflict it with the agony of incompleteness, tear at its boundaries with hints of something
deeper, higher, more meaningful. . . .

And I don’t mean that poetically. Piaget, for example, found that the earlier/lower stages of cognition, such as
preoperational and concrete operational thinking, had inherent limitations or conflicts built into them, and that
thought stuck in those levels wobbles endlessly without resolution around certain very important tasks. Only with
the emergence of formal operational thinking could these conflicts come to some sort of peace or resolution, which
Piaget called equilibration, a type of balanced but dynamic harmony. And further, it was only from the view of
formal operational that these earlier conflicts made any sense at all: they were struggling to their resolution,
struggling to their omega point, struggling to equilibration in the larger context of formal operational cognition, and,
put rather simply, they could not be happy until they found that larger horizon.83

Limited contexts find resolution, not by anything that can be done on the same level, but only by transcending
that level, by finding its deeper and wider context. Deeper and wider contexts exert a pull, a telos, on present
limited contexts.

And that is the truth common to all omega-point theorists (and any decent theorist is an omega-point theorist).
Assuming that their contexts are well founded, and assuming that they do not engage in reductionism, then there is
much we can learn from each of these types of theorists. They always point to ways beyond our present perception,
and assuming their contexts are genuine, they are right: we will never be happy until we, too, can live with a larger
horizon. Until we, too, can accept the therapia of embracing gently a greater depth. . . .

And a final Omega Point? That would imply a final Whole, and there is no such holon anywhere in manifest
existence. But perhaps we can interpret it differently. Who knows, perhaps telos, perhaps Eros, moves the entire
Kosmos, and God may indeed be an all-embracing chaotic Attractor, acting, as Whitehead said, throughout the world
by gentle persuasion toward love.

But that, to say the least, is quite ahead of the story.

3

Individual and Social

If I am what I am because you are what you are, and you are what you are because I am what I am, then I
am not I and you are not you.

—HILLEL

WE SAW, in chapter 1, that various theorists with a “holistic” orientation—systems theorists, ecological theorists,

“new paradigm” thinkers, deep ecologists, ecofeminists, and so on—maintain that the various crises facing the
modern world are all fundamentally due to a “fractured” worldview: we lack a unifying vision, and thus our world is
fragmented, broken, alienated. And so, they maintain, what is required is some sort of systems theory orientation,
some way for us to see and feel that we are all interwoven into the single Web of Life. We need, they would all
maintain in their various fashions, a profoundly ecocentric worldview.

But no sooner do such theorists make that claim than they run into theoretical problems. First of all, they maintain
that, as John Seed summarizes this view, “the world is seen not as a pyramid but as a web. Humans are but one
strand of that web.” In other words, human beings are a part of a deeper (or greater) web of life, the biosphere. But
we could destroy all humans and the biosphere would still exist (but not vice versa), showing that the biosphere is a
lower and shallower, not deeper or higher, reality. This confuses most ecotheorists; they seem to have no coherent
way to honor the biosphere without absolutizing it.

Second, as Fritjof Capra summarizes the “new paradigm” thought, “In the new paradigm, the properties of the
parts can be understood only from the dynamics of the whole. Ultimately, there are no parts at all. What we call a
part is merely a pattern in an inseparable web of relationships.”1
It’s true that there are no parts, but equally true
that there are no wholes—only whole/parts forever, which therefore resist all totalizing and dominating agendas.
But even if there were only wholes, how would this translate into, say, political theory? Ultimately, there are no free
citizens, only the whole State? If the “whole” is primary, and we are parts of the State, then clearly we exist to serve
the State, and clearly a totalitarian regime would be a shining example of the new paradigm, where all those nasty
parts will disappear in the glorious web.

It is not, as I will repeat a dozen times throughout this volume, that systems theory is wrong; it is that, ironically, it
is incredibly partial and lopsided. And so we will begin, in this chapter and the next, to redress some of these
partialities and imbalances. And we will see, as this book progresses, that systems theory, in and by itself, is not a
force of healing and wholing the planet; rather, we will see, and again ironically, that systems theory (in all its many
variants) is part of the flatland paradigm that is still contributing to the despoliation and devastation of Gaia.

MICRO AND MACRO

Virtually all of the popular theorists of systems theory, deep ecology, and ecofeminism present some version of a
great holarchy of being, with fields within fields within fields. The ecofeminist Julia Russell:

At the same time, a body, a nation, exists in a larger context in which it functions as a part. The nation exists in
the context of all nations that make up the whole political body of humanity. And all of humanity exists in a
biosphere that is the body of the whole Earth. We exist as part of a seamless whole in which everything is

connected to everything else.2

Figure 3-1 is very typical of the various hierarchies (holarchies) that have been presented, either explicitly or
implicitly, by different holistic or ecological or systems-oriented theorists (similar holarchies can be found in Popper,
Laszlo, Sessions, Miller, Engels, and others). Many of these holarchies are represented by the theorists as a series of
levels or “stratified order” (Capra), like a “ladder,” which is perfectly acceptable as long as we remember the circular
complexity that these authors maintain is actually involved and don’t make the unfair and unwarranted charge that
these theorists are being “linear.” That, as we will see, is not the problem.

Biosphere
Society / Nation
Culture / Subculture
Community
Family
Person
Nervous System
Organs / Organ Systems
Tissues
Cells
Organelles
Molecules
Atoms
Subatomic Particles

Figure 3-1. Typical Holarchy

If we look at figure 3-1—or at almost any of the other and similar holarchies—we notice immediately that there is
a confusion and conflation of individual and social holons. That is, micro- and macroworlds are confused. The social
holon is assumed to be of the same type and same nature as the compound individual holon, so that they can be
arranged “above” or “below” each other. Look, for example, at Karl Popper’s biospheric holarchy (fig. 3-2). Popper
(and he is far from alone) counts individuals and populations as being of the same logical (and existential) type, and
thus arrangeable one above the other, as different “levels” on the same scale (such as, in his scheme, level 7 and
level 8, or level 10 and level 11). This is quite incorrect.

We saw in the last chapter (with tenet 9), that in any holistic sequence, individual or social, if we destroy any level,
we destroy all the levels above it and none of the levels below it, by the simple definition of wholeness/partness. A
higher-level holon is in part composed of its lower-level holons, and thus if we destroy any lower level, we will also
destroy any levels above it because we have taken away some of their component parts. But these parts themselves
existed before the whole emerged and therefore can, in general terms, exist without it.

12)  Level of ecosystems (total biosphere)
11)  Level of populations of metazoa and plants
10)  Level of metazoa and multicellular plants

9)  Level of tissues and organs
8)  Level of populations of unicellular organisms
7)  Level of cells and of unicellular organisms
6)  Level of organelles (and perhaps viruses)
5)  Liquids and solids (crystals)
4)  Molecules
3)  Atoms
2)  Elementary particles
1)  Sub-elementary particles
0)  Unknown: sub-sub-elementary particles?

Figure 3-2. Popper’s Holarchy3

Look again at figure 3-1. The claim of these holists is that nation-states exist as parts of a larger biosphere, a
higher (or deeper) wholeness. But if the biosphere were really a higher level of organization than nation-states, if it
really were a higher-level whole organizing or containing nation-states as parts, then (1) you couldn’t have a
biosphere until you had nation-states, since the latter are claimed to be ingredients of the biosphere; and (2) if you
destroyed all nation-states you would destroy the biosphere (since the whole cannot exist without its parts).

Both of those assumptions are obviously not true. In fact, it is just the opposite: destroy the biosphere and you
destroy all nation-states, but theoretically remove all nation-states and the biosphere would and could continue
(just as it did long before nations showed up). This means that the biosphere is a lower and shallower level (which
does not mean less important for existence, but more important for existence, because the lower a level you
destroy, the more higher levels it takes with it; it is, as we put it in tenet 9, more fundamental to existence).

So let us locate the “biosphere” or “total ecosystem” by asking what would or would not be destroyed if we
theoretically “disappeared” it. Looking at Popper’s diagram, we find that if we destroyed the biosphere (if a
thermonuclear holocaust destroyed all
life forms on earth), we would destroy all the levels down to and including
his level 6, but no lower. That means the biological ecosystem starts at his level 6, and not, as he lists it, at level 12.
(This, as we will see, is a crucial error in the ontologies of many ecotheorists as well.)

In other words, we obviously have ecosystems, in the broadest sense, as soon as we have different life forms
interacting with each other and with a physical environment, and this begins to occur in its most fundamental
fashion at the level of prokaryotes (organelles). Putting the ecosystem at level 12 would imply, for example, that
poor level 10—plants and metazoa—don’t have ecosystems.

Thus, if we consider “the” ecosystem as a single level, then it is obvious that both diagrams completely misplace it.
But it’s worse than that. Ecosystem (or “total population”) isn’t a particular level among other levels of individual
holarchy, but the social environment of each and every level of individuality in the biosphere. And neither of these
diagrams distinguishes between micro and macro (or individual and social) on any level; both treat them as
separate levels on the same scale. (This is a second crucial error in most eco-ontologies.)

With reference to Popper’s diagram, for example, level 8 and level 7 are not two different levels, as he imagines,
but the individual and social aspects of the same level. (We know this to be true because if we destroy either
“level,” the other is also destroyed, which means neither is higher or lower relative to the other.) If one were really
lower—if level 7 were really lower than level 8, as he states—then it could exist without the higher. But you cannot
have cells without a society (population) of other cells, and you cannot have a population of cells with no cells at
all—nothing exists alone without an environment of the similar.

In other words, the individual and social are not two different coins, one being of a higher currency than the other,
but rather the heads and tails of the same coin at every currency. They are two aspects of the same thing, not two
fundamentally different things (or levels).

What is necessary, then, is to construct a series of true holarchies of compound individuals and then indicate, at
the same level of organization, the type of environment
(or social holon) in which the individual holon is a
participant (and on whose existence the individual holon depends). And this needs to be done in all three of the
great realms of evolution—physiosphere, biosphere, and noosphere.

Fortunately, much of this work has already been done by Erich Jantsch, the only theorist, to my knowledge, to
have investigated extensively (and often brilliantly) the relationships between micro and macro (individual and
social) patterns of coevolution in all three domains (although, as we will see, his argument becomes somewhat
garbled as he approaches the noosphere).

Figures 3-3 and 3-4 are Jantsch’s schematic diagrams of the coevolution of micro and macro patterns in,
respectively, the physiosphere and the biosphere. Figure 3-4 picks up where figure 3-3 leaves off (namely, the
passing of matter into life). The explanations under each diagram are his own. (With the exceptions that I will
mention, I am in substantial agreement with everything in these two diagrams and with his explanations of them.)

The lower portion of each diagram represents microevolution—the evolution of individual holons. The upper
level of social or environmental relationships (relational

portion represents macroevolution—the

correlative

exchanges) in which the individual holons are inextricably embedded. The idea is fairly simple: when you have a
specific type of individual holon (say, heavy atoms), what kind of social or collective environment results? (in this
case, stars). When molecules emerge, planets emerge (i.e., they coemerge, coevolve). When eukaryotes emerge,
ecosystems emerge; when complex animals emerge, families emerge; and so on. All of these correspondences are
listed on figures 3-3 and 3-4.

Figure 3-3. Cosmic Coevolution of Macro- and Microstructures. The asymmetrical unfurling of the four physical forces calls into
play step by step new structural levels, from the macroscopic side as well as from the microscopic. These levels mutually stimulate
their evolutions. (Jantsch, The Self-Organizing Universe, p. 94)

Figure 3-4. The history of life on earth expresses the coevolution of self-organizing macro- and microsystems in ever-higher
degrees of differentiation. (Jantsch, The Self-Organizing Universe, p. 132)

And notice: since evolution produces greater depth, less span, then the individual holons tend to get bigger (i.e.,
molecules are bigger than atoms, because they embrace and contain them), but social holons tend to get smaller.

Because there are fewer holons at the greater depth (there are always fewer molecules than atoms), then when you
put them together into collectives, the collectives are smaller. Thus families are smaller than ecosystems, which are
smaller than planets, which are smaller than stars. (We will return to this increasing depth/decreasing span in a
moment.)

The earlier figures (3-1 and 3-2) suffer badly by comparison because they treat micro and macro as different
levels of the overall evolutionary process, instead of seeing them as two different aspects of each level of the overall
evolutionary process, and they leave out altogether the macro component of the lower levels, a grave omission.

Notice in particular that both the micro and macro holarchies given by Jantsch (in both the physiosphere and the
biosphere) constitute a genuine higher/lower relationship: destroy any lower (whether individual or social), and the
levels above it are also destroyed, but not vice versa. Jantsch is presenting genuine holarchies of both individual and
social holons.

GAIA

Notice, in figure 3-4, where Jantsch places “Gaia”—it is the social holon composed primarily of the individual holons
of prokaryotes. Jantsch is here using the term Gaia in its technically correct sense, as originally proposed by Lynn
Margulis and James Lovelock (and named by William Golding, author of Lord of the Flies). As Jantsch explains, “The
autocatalytic units in this system [Gaia] which make possible the formation of a dissipative structure far from
equilibrium and maintain the through-flow of the various gases [in the atmosphere] are none else but the
prokaryotes. It seems that after the profound transformations of the earth’s surface by the oxidation of sediments
and the accumulation of free oxygen, they have been instrumental
in bringing the overall system bio- plus
atmosphere into global, autopoietic stability, reigning now for 1500 million years.”4

The prokaryotes mediate exchanges with the atmosphere (the physiosphere), but also form a global and
interconnected network with all other prokaryotes—the overall Gaia system. This is precisely tenet 11, “The micro is
in relational exchange with the macro at all levels of its depth.” Further, and this is the fascinating part, since some
prokaryotes were taken up and incorporated into higher (eukaryotic) cells and these in turn in complex organisms,
the prokaryotic Gaia system is still serving its original global function. As Jantsch puts it, “The descendents of the
prokaryotes, in the form of parts of more highly developed cells, are still at their old job.” And this, of course, is
precisely tenet 5, “Each emergent holon transcends but includes its predecessor(s).”

Jantsch points out that the Gaia system is the largest living social holon on the planet (has the most units, or the
greatest span), precisely because it is the shallowest (most primitive). Again, evolution produces greater depth, less
span. At the same time, precisely because Gaia is the shallowest of all living social holons, it is exactly the most
fundamental. As we earlier put it, the less depth a holon has, the more fundamental
it is to the Kosmos, because it
is a component of so many other holons. And thus Gaia is the most fundamental (and least significant) of all living
social holons: all higher life forms depend upon it (destroy higher life forms, and Gaia is basically untouched; destroy
Gaia, and everything else goes with it). Gaia is indeed our roots and our foundation.

But aside from this technical usage, Gaia has come to mean, for many people, the total biosphere; for some, it
means the total planet and all life forms; and for a few, it means Spirit itself, or the Goddess, as the total Life Force of
the planet. There is in all these approaches a tendency to confuse fundamental with significant. Nonetheless,
although none of these usages is technically correct, using Gaia to mean the overall biosphere or overall life
dimension of the planet is acceptable enough, as long as we are clear about what exactly is meant. I will often use
Gaia in both the narrow technical sense (prokaryotic network) and the broader “mythic” sense (total biosphere or
living planet as a whole), and the context will make clear which is intended.

SIZE, SPAN, EMBRACE

Notice that in both figures 3-3 and 3-4 Jantsch plots spatial extension (or physical size) against evolutionary time,
and his conclusion in both figures is that, with increasing evolution, individual holons tend to become larger (in the
sense that organisms are larger than molecules) and social holons tend to become smaller (planets are smaller

than galaxies)—and he explicitly indicates this on his diagrams. Both of these are, we have seen, examples of the fact
that evolution produces greater depth, less span.

On the one hand, individual holons transcent but include their predecessors—development is envelopment—and
so the total depth or embrace of individual holons increases: cells embrace molecules which embrace atoms which
embrace particles. Likewise, the greater the depth of a holon, the fewer of them that are produced and maintained,
relative to the number of their predecessors (fewer molecules than atoms, fewer cells than molecules), and
therefore the population of greater-depth holons will always be less than the population of its predecessors. Thus,
greater depth, less span.

These correlations are important, we will see, because many ecotheorists and systems theorists confuse larger

span with greater depth, and thus often recommend regressive ontologies and regressive directions for salvation.

But before we get to that, a simple point about Jantsch’s important correlations. In equating these changes with
actual size (or physical extension), Jantsch goes too far (or becomes too simplistic). Depth or embrace always
increases, but embrace is not necessarily translatable into simple sizes. In the same way, increasing evolution means
less relative span (or decreasing simple span), but this does not necessarily show up as decreasing physical size (see
below).5

Of course, once a given level has emerged, then its simple span can begin to increase, and this will often show up
as an increase in the spatial extension of the population—i.e., for a given depth, span can increase up to its carrying
limits; thus human span has increased from small villages to global villages.6 When this starts happening in human
evolution, Jantsch gets confused, because, he supposes, macro-evolution is supposed to get physically smaller, and
yet human sociocultural evolution keeps getting larger and more global, which leads Jantsch to saying that human
evolution completely “turns on its head” the previous trend seen everywhere else in evolution; but, of course, it
does nothing of the sort—all that gets turned on its head is his incorrect assumption about size. Because the fact is,
although actual size or spatial extension is often a good indicator of these yardsticks, neither necessarily and always
translates into simple physical dimensions.

The reason Jantsch’s “size rule” gets into so much trouble with human or sociocultural evolution is that the human
mind, as Descartes knew, is characterized more by intention than extension. That is why it is so important to state
the “rule” strictly in terms of embrace (depth of holon, regardless of size of holon) and span (number of individuals
at that depth, regardless of their actual size). A concept, we will see, always embraces a symbol (it is a symbol plus
another cognitive function; it has greater depth), but we can’t say a concept is physically bigger than a symbol. One
value might be better than another, but it doesn’t occupy a bigger space.

THE PROBLEM WITH SIZE AND SPAN

All of these seemingly hair-splitting distinctions are actually very important when it comes to the prevalent “holistic
theories,” because many of them try to construct their holarchies based on increasing size (or, secondarily,
increasing span)—just as in figure 3-1—and this leads to some very unpleasant and confusing results. Whether they
base their theories on size or span, they confuse those with depth, and this often leads to regressive ontologies and
soteriologies. Understanding the “errors” in figure 3-1 is important for unraveling these common confusions found
in many holistic, ecological, and systems thinkers.

I will mention only two problems at this point. For the evolution of individual holons, greater embrace means
that more of the universe is being taken into the holon (is actually internal to that holon). As we will see, an
individual holon can eventually embrace the entire Kosmos—its depth can go to infinity—but the actual number of
holons (the span) that can realize this total embrace might be very, very few. Kosmic consciousness means Kosmic
embrace, it doesn’t mean Kosmic span.

Many holistic theorists are admirably trying to construct a series of “wider and wider wholes,” and this series is of
absolutely crucial significance, they maintain, because it is meant to help us humans find our place, our context, in
the larger scheme of things, so that we may more accurately orient ourselves—morally, emotionally, cognitively,
spiritually—to our fellows and to our world. I am in complete sympathy with that approach.

But if depth is confused with span (or with size), then the resultant “holistic sequence of wider wholes” ends up

being perfectly regressive and anti-holistic! Since, with evolution, simple span always gets
smaller, then by
constructing a holistic sequence of bigger span, we are headed in precisely the opposite and altogether wrong
direction.

For example, many holistic theorists create their “holistic” sequences using simple span, and end up with this: the
noosphere is part of the larger whole called the biosphere, which itself is part of the larger whole called the
cosmos (or the entire physiosphere).

Absolutely not true. Absolutely the other way around. As we have seen, if the noosphere were really a part of the
biosphere, then if we destroyed the noosphere the biosphere would disappear, and that is clearly not the case. An
atom is genuinely a part of a molecule, and thus if we destroy the atoms we also destroy the molecule: the whole
needs its parts. Just so, if the noosphere were really a part of the biosphere, then destroying the noosphere would
eliminate the biosphere, and yet it is just the other way around: destroy the biosphere, and the noosphere is gone,
precisely because the biosphere is a part of the noosphere, and not vice versa.

In other words, because these theorists look mostly at simple span (and its size), and because they think that
bigger span is a “higher or deeper whole,” and since in fact greater evolution produces less span, then these
theorists get the holistic sequence exactly backward.

What these holists mean to say, correctly, is that the noosphere depends on the biosphere, which depends on
the physiosphere—and that is true precisely because the physiosphere is a lower component of the biosphere,
which is a lower component of the noosphere, and not the other way around.

Because this is such an important topic, I want to go over it using some very simple examples.

SAME-LEVEL RELATIONAL EXCHANGE

We said that with emergent evolution we are, in effect, playing three-dimensional checkers or chess, not flatland
chess. So imagine this: imagine one chessboard (or checkerboard) with forty black checkers placed on it. The depth is
one, the span is forty. Place another chessboard over it, but leave it empty for the moment. The depth is two, the
span zero.

Now, in evolution, the only way to get to level 2 is through level 1, and, in fact, the checkers on level 2 are
composed in part of checkers from level 1—they are all holons or compound individuals. Represent this by taking
one black checker from level 1, placing it on level 2, then adding a red checker on top of it. The new and “total
holon” on level 2 thus incorporates its predecessor (the black checker) and adds its own distinctive properties (the
red checker). If we did this, say, three times, the holons on level 2 would have a depth of 2 and a span of 3.

Now, the individual holons or checkers on level 1 (the physiosphere) depend for their existence on intricate
networks of interrelationships with all the other black checkers in their environment—depend, that is, on networks
of their own social holons (the coevolution of micro and macro). They exist in intricate networks of relational
exchange with holons at the same level of structural organization (tenet 11).

But the situation on level 2 (the biosphere) is much more complicated, because the new total holon (the black-
and-red compound checker) depends for its existence on intricate relationships on both levels. The red-and-black
checkers on level 2 depend in part on their relationships with other red-and-black checkers—depend, that is, on
ecological or macro relations with other living holons at the same level of structural organization. In other words,
the “red” component of the red-and-black checkers depends on interrelations with the “red” component of other
red-and-black holons—depends on relational exchanges such as sexual reproduction (which are not found on the
black level and cannot be sustained by that level).

However, because the red-and-black checkers also have a black component, they also depend on the intricate
relationships that sustain black holons themselves—depend, that is, on all of the mutually sustaining relationships
and processes that constitute level 1 holons. So level 2 holons depend not only on the new and “red” relationships or
social holons found only on level 2, they also depend upon the prior “black” relationships and sustainable patterns
established on level 1 (but not vice versa: destroy level 1, and level 2 is destroyed; destroy level 2, and level 1 black
checkers will still exist).

So any holon, or compound individual, depends on a whole series of intricate relational exchanges with social

environments of the same level of structural organization for each level
in the individual holon. And that means
that a holon of depth three, for example, has to exist in an environment that also possesses holons of at least the
same depth. So any holon is fundamentally a compound individual and its same-level relational exchanges at all of
its levels—a compound individual in a compound environment, exchanging black with black and red with red and so
forth.

We need one last point. The red-and-black checkers are not in the black universe. The only things that are in
level 1 are more black checkers. The red-and-black checkers are to some degree beyond the level 1 universe (that is
the meaning of emergence). In their “redness” they are beyond the mere blackness of level 1. They are a perfect
expression of the self-transcending thrust of evolution, of the creative emergence of a “redness” that cannot be
reduced to, or found in, the black universe.

And, in a sense, it is just the opposite. The red-and-black checkers contain “redness” as well as “blackness.” The
level 2 holons embrace level 1 holons and then go beyond them with their own defining emergents (tenet 5). Since
the red-and-black checker depends for its existence on its own component black checkers, and since the black
checkers themselves depend ultimately for their particular type of existence on all the other black checkers in their
universe, then any level 2 holon in essence embraces all of its level 1 world by simple virtue of its own compound
individuality. A single living cell embraces its entire physical universe. The many has become one and is increased by
one—another meaning of Whitehead’s crucial dictum. And according to Whitehead, in this “prehensive unification”
all antecedent actual occasions participate to some degree (in a holarchy of embrace, as he carefully points out).

And that is what I mean when I say that a level 2 holon is not in level 1, but level 1 is in level 2, utterly and totally
embraced by it—one of the meanings, we will see, of love, a loving embrace which, like consciousness and creativity
and self-transcendence, is built into the very depth of the Kosmos.

All of this means, in short, that the biosphere is not in the physiosphere. The biosphere is not a component or a
part of the greater whole called the physiosphere, because the only thing “greater” about the physiosphere is its
span, not its depth or wholeness. The bios is not a part of the cosmos, but just the opposite: the cosmos is a part of,
a component of, the bios.

Thus, a part of the biosphere (namely, its physical component) is indeed a part of the larger physiosphere; but
its defining, emergent qualities are not in the set of physically definable determinants governing nonliving forms (as
Maturana and Varela point out, autopoiesis is found nowhere in the nonliving world; autopoiesis is a red-checker
quality found nowhere in black checkers). The biosphere is not in the physiosphere, but the physiosphere is indeed
in the biosphere, contained in it as a part.

Thus, just as an atom is in a molecule but a molecule is not in an atom—even though the span of atoms is much,
much larger than molecules—so the cosmos is in the bios but the bios is not in the cosmos, even though the span of
the cosmos is astronomically larger.

And note: the bios is a part of the Kosmos, but not a part of the cosmos, and in that simple move we have forever
disavowed reductionism: physics is the most fundamental, and least significant, of the sciences (the reason physics
can’t explain biology is precisely because the bios is not in the cosmos).7

This is just the opposite of what a naive faith in simple span or size would tell us. Just because the cosmos is bigger
than the bios, we assume that the cosmos must be more significant. But it is only more fundamental; the bios is
much more significant than the cosmos, because it contains much more reality internal to it, embraces a much
deeper and greater wholeness, has more depth, and in fact subsumes the entire cosmos in its own being: transcends
and includes.

Likewise, as we will see, the noosphere is not a part of the biosphere, but just the opposite: the bios is a lower
component, a part of, the noosphere. So of course the biosphere has a greater span (is “bigger”), just as the cosmos
is bigger than the bios. But from what we have now seen, that, of course, just proves my point.

Precisely because the biosphere is a component part of the noosphere, the destruction of the biosphere
guarantees the destruction of the noosphere—and that is one of the points we will be returning to throughout this
volume. This is a profoundly ecological orientation without
regressively absolutizing the biosphere (or the
noosphere, as we will see).

But for now, let us note that the number (the span) of holons at a higher level of development will always be less

than the number at a preceding level (tenet 8). The number of red-and-black checkers will always be less than the
number of black checkers. There are no exceptions, because the number of wholes will always be less than the
number of parts contained in them. There will always be fewer fifth-graders than fourth-graders, because you have
to go through the fourth to get to the fifth. There are always fewer oaks than acorns—the so-called pyramid of
development that necessarily gets smaller and smaller toward the top. Laszlo, for example, represents this pyramid
as in figure 3-5 (which also indicates accurately that, for example, the biosphere is not in the physiosphere). Where
matter is favorable, life emerges. Where life is favorable, mind emerges. Greater depth, less span.

Figure 3-5. The Realms of Evolution (Laszlo, Evolution, p. 55)

Accordingly, when holistic theorists construct their holarchies in terms of increasing span (“wider and wider”),
they take us right down the pyramid, scraping off more and more levels of depth in search of a bigger (and therefore
shallower) span. They should be taking us to a greater depth that involves both a deeper embrace and a wider
identity—an expansion vertically and horizontally, not just horizontally.

Thus, we can start to see why diagrams like figure 3-1 are such an unfortunate map: they confuse micro and

macro, they confuse depth and span.

THE BRAIN OF A HUMAN HOLON

Jantsch’s diagrams (figs. 3-3 and 3-4) cover the physiosphere and the biosphere. It is now time to look at the
emergence of the noosphere.

It is with the brain that we usually associate the emergence of the noosphere from (or rather through) the
biosphere. Jantsch, following Gunther Stent, divides communication in the biosphere into genetic, metabolic, and
neural (and the highest part of the latter is said to correlate with noospheric evolution). Jantsch:

Genetic communication acts in time intervals which are long compared to the lifetime of an individual. It
makes phylogeny and coherent evolution across many generations possible. Metabolic communication which
in the organism is transmitted by special messenger molecules, the hormones, fulfils two tasks within an
organism. One task is the regulation of the development of multicellular organisms, in plants as well as in
animals. The other task concerns the damping of the consequences of environmental fluctuations for the
organism, or in other words, the enhancement of the organism’s autonomy [tenet 12d]. Metabolic
communication based on hormones acts relatively slowly, from seconds to minutes. The third type of
biological communication is transmitted by the nervous system. This type acts in organisms typically within a
hundredth to a tenth of a second and is thus about a thousand times faster than metabolic communication.8

Jantsch points out that these three systems emerge holarchically, and he then proceeds to give a holarchical
breakdown of neural structures themselves, based primarily on Paul MacLean’s highly influential notion of the triune
brain (see fig. 3-6). In MacLean’s own words:

Man finds himself in the predicament that Nature has endowed him essentially with three brains which,
despite great differences in structure, must function together and communicate with one another. The oldest
of these brains is basically reptilian. The second has been inherited from lower mammals, and the third is a
later mammalian development, which, in its culmination in primates, has made man peculiarly man.

Speaking allegorically of these three brains within a brain [i.e., holons], we might imagine that when the
psychiatrist bids the patient to lie on the couch, he is asking him to stretch out alongside a horse and a
crocodile. . . . The reptilian brain is filled with ancestral lore and ancestral memories and is faithful in doing
what its ancestors say, but it is not very good for facing up to new situations [relatively low autonomy
expressed in reflex and instinctive behavior].

In evolution one first sees the beginning of emancipation from the ancestral [inflexibility] with the
appearance of the lower mammalian brain, which Nature builds on top of the reptilian brain. . . . Investigations
of the last twenty years have shown that the lower mammalian brain plays a fundamental role in emotional
behavior. It has a greater capacity than the reptilian brain for learning new approaches and solutions to
problems on the basis of immediate experience. But like the reptilian brain, it does not have the ability to put
its feelings into words.

MacLean is very specific about the holarchical nature of these three brains.

Figure 3-6. The “Triune Brain” (After MacLean)

In its evolution, the brain of [humans] retains the hierarchical organization of the three basic types which can
be conveniently labelled as reptilian, paleo-mammalian and neo-mammalian. [The brain stem represents the
reptilian brain, inherited from reptilian ancestors.] The limbic system represents the paleo-mammalian brain,
which is an inheritance from lower mammals. Man’s limbic system is much more highly structured than that of
lower mammals, but its basic organization, chemistry, etc., are very similar. The same may be said of the other
two basic types. And there is ample evidence that all three types have their own special subjective, cognitive
(problem-solving) memory and other parallel functions.9

In other words, each of the brains is a relatively autonomous holon. And because each is a holon, we cannot say

that any specific function is simply located in one of the holons; they all mutually act and interact with upward and
downward influence. But in general, the three brains have the following basic functions:

Reptilian brain (or brain stem): “This is the phylogenetically oldest part of the brain, its core or chassis, roughly
corresponding to the basic structures of the reptile’s brain. It contains the essential apparatus for internal (visceral
and glandular) regulations, for primitive activities based on instincts and reflexes, and also the centers for arousing
the animal’s vigilance or putting it to sleep.”10 We may refer to it as the overall level of rudimentary sensorimotor
intelligence and instinctive drives or impulses.

Paleomammalian brain (or limbic system): “The limbic system is intimately connected by two-way neural
pathways with the hypothalamus and other centers in the brain-stem concerned with visceral sensations and
emotional reactions—including sex, hunger, fear and aggression; so much so that the limbic system once bore the
name ‘the visceral brain.’”11
In short, “The limbic system processes information in such a way that it becomes
experienced as feelings and emotions, which become guiding forces for behavior.”12

Neomammalian brain (or neocortex): “The explosive growth of the neocortex,” says Jantsch, “in a later phase of
evolution is one of the most dramatic events in the history of life on earth,” and presumably connected with the
emergence of the noosphere. It acts as “an immense neural screen on which the symbolic images of language and
logics (including mathematics) appear. The neocortex is the location at which information is processed in the ways
characteristic of the self-reflexive mind.”13

MacLean underscores the holoarchic nature of these three brains by comparing them with the components of

literature, which Jantsch elegantly summarizes in this fashion:

The reptilian brain stands for the [basic] figures and roles which underlie all literatures. The limbic system
brings emotional preferences, selection and development of the scenarios into play. And the neocortex,
finally, produces on this substrate as many different poems, tales, novels and plays as there are authors.14

Again we see the lower setting the possibilities and the higher setting the probabilities (or actualizing potentials).

THE HUMAN SOCIAL HOLON

Jantsch gives several diagrams, similar to figures 3-3 and 3-4, which he believes represent developments in the
noosphere (or what he calls sociocultural evolution). I will not reproduce them here, because I believe they are
fundamentally confused. Jantsch says that once evolution reaches the noosphere, “things become completely
inverted.” But all that is inverted is his own prior confusion between span and size, and his insistence on finding
extension where there is largely intention. Without that confusion, the same principles and the same evolutionary
process can be seen at work—greater depth, less span—there is no “inversion.” As I said, Jantsch often attempts to
make spatial extension (physical size) a fundamental correlate of mental (sociocultural) growth, and as even
Descartes was well aware, in the noosphere, extension gives way to intention, upon which rulers do not well fit.

I will return to that point in a moment and go over it carefully, but for now let us look instead to the work of those
systems theorists who have plotted out the growth of human social holons during humanity’s million-or-so-year
history.

Keep in mind that we have already outlined (however briefly) the growth of individual holons, from atoms to cells
to multicellular organisms to complex animals (the micro components as suggested roughly in the bottom halves of
figs. 3-3 and 3-4), and we also indicated the correlative environmental or social holons at each stage (the macro
components suggested in the upper halves in figs. 3-3 and 3-4). We then briefly sketched the further evolution of
the individual holon of complex animals up to and including those with the triune brain (from reptile to mammal to
primate). We want to look now at the social environment in which the triune-brained organisms existed, and the
types of social holons upon which the triune-brained organism existed for its own relational exchanges.

And this moves us directly into the noosphere, or the realm of sociocultural (and not just biosocial) evolution. We

are adding a third chessboard to the game—matter, life, mind.

If we look at Jantsch’s

figure 3-4, we will be reminded that individual complex animals, up to and including
primates (which includes humans), needed social holons at the level of groups/families, and if given those

appropriate social holons, the individual holons could be sustained quite adequately (assuming, of course, that all
junior levels in the compound individual are also existing in a balanced and sustainable set of relationships with their
own environments—assuming, that is, that the whole multilevel arrangement is ecologically sound in the broadest
sense, which we have every reason to believe was the case at this point in evolution).

Put more simply, the social holon of the family/group could have sustained the human triune brain indefinitely,
just as it still sustains the roughly similar triune brain of other primates (who continue to exist in kinship social
holons). But the human holon pushed beyond an environment of kinship (or biospherically based) social holons such
as the family and began also producing villages, towns, cities, states. . . . As I said, a third chessboard had been added
to the evolutionary game.

Of course, this raises all the old and thorny problems, from the relation of mind and body to the whole issue of
whether the noosphere itself was a good idea in the first place. All I can say is that I will try to address these issues as
best I can, but we must proceed one step at a time, and each step will have its own true meaning disclosed only as
the whole picture begins to emerge.

So, for the moment, let us simply note that there was no compelling biological reason to produce villages and
cities and states. The social holon of the family/group could have sustained the human triune brain, just as it does
other primates to this day. But just as matter had pushed forth life, the self-transcendent drive within biology
pushed forth something beyond biology, pushed forth symbols and tools that both created and depended upon
new levels of social holons in which the users of symbols and tools could exist and reproduce themselves, but the
reproduction was now the reproduction of culture through symbolic communication and not just the reproduction
of bodies through sexuality. Kinship gave way to “cultureship”: add a blue checker on top of the red checker on top
of the black checker.

And only a reductionist will be bold enough to claim that culture was really just a nifty new way to gain food, that
the blue checker is just a sneaky rearrangement of red checkers, that the noosphere is nothing but a new twist on
the biosphere. But just as the biosphere is not in the physiosphere (you can’t find red checkers anywhere on level
1), so the noosphere is not
in the biosphere (there are no blue checkers on level 2, no self-reflexive linguistic
concepts, for example; no calculus, poetry, or formal logic).

As far as we can tell, the human brain has remained virtually unchanged in the past fifty thousand years. And yet
during that fifty-thousand-year period, the same triune brain produced an extraordinary range of cultural
achievements and cultural disasters. In other words, nothing truly novel happened to the triune brain during that
period, no new major biospheric evolution occurred. And yet the entire majesty and catastrophe of culture paraded
across the scene, all on the same biological base, but a majesty and catastrophe that could not be reduced to,
explained by, or contained in that base.

Once again the lower had set the foundation and prepared the possibilities for (but did not determine) evolution
in the higher, and those new possibilities were now played out in the noosphere, in the realm of culture and symbols
and toys and tools.

We will be looking at the noospheric changes in the individual holons in the next chapter. For the moment let us
center on the evolution of the social holons in the newly emerging noosphere. Figure 3-7 is adapted from Alastair
Taylor’s “sociocultural nonequilibrium systems model,” a social approach based on dynamic systems theory (and at
this point we are centering on the “true” aspects of systems theory). Taylor maintains that each succeeding social
holon “builds upon the properties and societal experiences of the level(s) below and in turn contributes its own
‘emergent qualities,’ which take the form of new technologies and societal structures, accompanied by new
apperceptions of the human-environment relationship. We can discern progressive developments in complexity and
heterogeneity (although in any one historical situation a different, or even contrary, experience may occur)”15—all
familiar concepts (all found in the twenty tenets).

We could of course include an enormous number of components in the evolving noosphere of social humans,
from types of tools to various worldviews, from political institutions to styles of art, from modes of production to
legal codes. And, indeed, we will be returning to these various aspects as we proceed with our story. But for the
moment, figure 3-7 may serve as one example of the growth of social holons in the newly emergent noosphere.16
Serve enough, that is, to allow us a few important observations.

DIFFERENTIATION AND DISSOCIATION, TRANSCENDENCE AND REPRESSION

The evolution of holons is not all sweetness and light, as some proponents of “evolutionary progress” seem to
maintain. For the grim fact is that greater structural complexity—whether individual or social—means that more
things can go horribly wrong. Atoms don’t get cancer; animals do. Nonetheless, the opposite conclusion, that most
evolution is really devolution, is not warranted either. The existence of cancer does not damn the existence of
animals per se. And we will want to tease apart the cancers of the noosphere without damning the noosphere in
toto.

As I indicated in the last chapter, the fact that evolution always produces greater transcendence and greater
differentiation means that a factor of
pathology is built into every evolutionary step, because
transcendence can go too far and become repression—the higher does not negate and preserve the lower, it tries
only to negate (or repress or deny) the lower, which works about as well as denying our feet.

possible

Figure 3-7. Emergent Geopolitical Systems Levels (Taylor)

Likewise, differentiation can go too far and become dissociation—a failure to adequately integrate the newly
emergent differences into a coherent whole that is both internally cohesive and externally in harmony with other

correlative holons and with all junior components. Whenever a new differentiation is not matched by a new and
equal integration, whenever there is negation without preservation, the result is pathology of one sort or another, a
pathology that, if severe enough, evolution sets about to erase in earnest.

This becomes particularly acute in the noosphere, in cultural evolution, simply because the human holon contains

so many levels of depth—physiosphere and biosphere and noosphere—and something can go wrong at every level.

When the biosphere was first emerging on Earth, we can imagine all the fits and starts, all the dead-ends, that the
first populations of cells tried out in their attempt to fit with the preconditions set by the physiosphere, whose
territory the living cells were now invading. A false start—a start not consonant with the physiosphere—was simply
erased. And throughout biological evolution, as the biosphere itself began adding layers and layers of new depth,
each of these levels had to be brought into an adequate harmony with both its predecessors and its peers—no
easy or trivial task, as the awesome example of the dinosaurs reminds us.

All of that was still true with humans, but with an extra and rather gruesome burden: fit the noosphere not only
with its peers (holons at the same level) but also with all of its predecessors—mineral to plant to reptile to
paleomammal—that not only continue to inhabit the same environmental space but also exist as components in the
human beings’
own compound individuality. When MacLean said that when humans lie on the couch for
psychoanalysis, they lie down with a crocodile and a horse, that wasn’t the half of it: we lie down with the planets
and the stars, the lakes and the rivers, the plankton and the oaks, the lizards and the birds, the rabbits and the
apes—and, to repeat, not simply because they are neighbors in our own universe, but because they are components
in our own being, they are literally our bones and blood and marrow and guts and feelings and fears.

And just as the biosphere had to find its acceptable niche in (and beyond) the physiosphere, so too the noosphere
had to find its allowable or harmonious place in (and beyond) the biosphere. And to borrow Shakespeare’s phrase:
“Aye, there’s the rub.”

The noosphere evolved. And as various

linguistic, and technical development
emerged—incorporating and transcending their predecessors—not only could these higher stages of cultural
development repress and alienate their own previous connections in the noosphere (as we will see), they could also
come perilously close to severing their connections with the biosphere as well, and to such an alarming degree that,
today, humans have earned, through enormously hard work and labor, the privilege and the possibility of being the
first cultural dinosaurs in the fragile noosphere.

stages of political,

Instead of transcendence, repression; instead of differentiation, dissociation; instead of depth, disease. Because of
the very nature of evolution, that type of dissociation can occur at any and all stages of growth and development.
The noosphere is not privileged or unique in this regard. It is simply more alarming now because of its global
dimensions. If we violate the possibilities given us by the biosphere, then the biosphere will flick us off its back like a
bunch of fleas, and be none the worse for it.

But just as the existence of cancer does not damn the existence of animals per se, so the existence of cultural
diseases and repressions does not damn cultural evolution itself. This particularly applies to successive stages of
cultural evolution, from the hunt to the farm to the engine to the computer. Each successive stage brought new
information, new potentials, new hopes and new fears; brought a greater complexity, a greater differentiation, a
greater relative autonomy—and the capacity for a new and greater pathology if a corresponding integration and
embrace did not ensue. And we will see that the history of cultural evolution is the history of new achievement, the
history of new disease.

But I have no sympathy for those theorists who simply confuse differentiation and dissociation, transcendence

and repression, depth and disease.

Whenever evolution produces a new differentiation, and that differentiation is not integrated, a pathology results,

and there are two fundamental ways to approach that pathology.

One is exemplified by the Freudian notion (introduced by Ernst Kris) of “regression in service of ego.” That is, the
higher structure relaxes it grip on consciousness, regresses to a previous level where the failed integration first
occurred, repairs the damage on that level by reliving it in a benign and healing context, and then integrates that
level—embraces that level, embraces the former “shadow”—in the new and higher holon of the ego (or total self-
system). For the ego’s problem was that during its formative growth, where it should have transcended and included

its lower-level drives (such as sex and aggression), it transcended and repressed them, split them off, alienated
them—one of the prerogatives of a higher-level structure with its greater relative autonomy, but a prerogative, we
have seen, that is bought only and always at the price of pathology. Thus the cure: regression in service of a higher
reintegration—a regression that allows evolution to move forward more harmoniously by healing and wholing a
previously alienated holon.

The other general approach is the retro-Romantic, which often recommends regression, period. This approach, in
my opinion, simply confuses differentiation and dissociation, confuses transcendence and repression. Thus,
whenever evolution produces a new differentiation, and that differentiation happens to go into pathological
dissociation, then this approach seeks to permanently turn back the pages of emergent history to a time prior to
the differentiation. Not prior to the dissociation—we all agree on that!—but prior to the differentiation itself!

That will indeed get rid of the new pathology, at the cost of getting rid of the new depth, the new creativity, the
new consciousness. By that retro-Romantic logic, the only way to really get rid of pathology is to get rid of
differentiation altogether, which means everything after the Big Bang was a Big Mistake.

All the more disturbing in the retro-Romantic approach is the whole problem of where these theorists rather
arbitrarily decide to stop their retrogression. For example, many theorists, looking with justifiable alarm at the
repressions and alienations that often accompanied the Machine Age, maintain that we should never have gone past
farming, and there then follows a wonderful eulogizing of
the “nonmechanized” and
“nondehumanizing” farming societies, where few humans were alienated from the products of their own labor and
the “Great Mother” ruled in peaceful and holistic happiness. Never mind that many of these societies introduced
deliberate human sacrifice, multiplied the extent and means of war, put gender stratification at its peak, and made
vast numbers of its populations into slaves.

the glories of

Spotting those obvious difficulties, other theorists then go further and maintain that most of humankind’s
problems came with the invention of farming itself, because with farming the human animal began to deliberately
alter the biosphere for its own gratification, produced a written language that ensconced power in the dogmatic
text, produced an agricultural surplus that allowed some individuals to begin to economically control and enslave
others, and began the wholesale subjugation of women. And, indeed, most of that did begin with agrarian farming.

So, these theorists maintain, we really should never have gone past hunting-and-gathering societies. The delightful
things then said about these societies—some of which were peace-loving and rather egalitarian, and some of which
most definitely were not—are, at the least, astonishingly one-sided. Until other theorists carefully point out that
precious few of these societies were actually egalitarian, that warfare most definitely existed, that the very seeds of
sexist subjugation were planted here, that slavery was not unheard of. . . .

We really should never have gone past gorillas, who at least don’t deliberately sacrifice their own or engage in

renegade warfare, where slavery is nonexistent and no animal is alienated from its own labors. Until you realize . . .

And so it goes, scraping layers and layers of depth off the Kosmos looking for a Garden of Eden that ever recedes

into a shallower darkness.

My point is that it is one thing to remember and embrace and honor our roots; quite another to hack off our
leaves and branches and celebrate that as a solution to leaf rot. So we will celebrate the new possibilities of
evolution even as we gasp in horror—and try to redress—the multiplicity of new pathologies.

But to reiterate the one point of strong agreement with the Romantics in general: we have added such depth
(height) to the noosphere itself that it is in danger of sliding off the biosphere altogether. And while that will merely
detour and in no way stop the biosphere, which will go its merry way with or without us, it does spell catastrophe for
the animal that not only transcends but represses.

INTERIORITY

If we look now at all of the diagrams presented in this chapter, we notice a startling fact. All of these diagrams claim
to be holistic, to cover all of reality in an encompassing fashion. That is, if we take out the errors in their presentation
(like confusing micro and macro), and put all of these diagrams together, the systems theorist would claim that the
resultant “big picture” covers the whole of reality, from atoms to cells to animals, from stars to planets to Gaia, from

villages to towns to planetary federations (all of which are on our diagrams). The noosphere transcends but
embraces the biosphere, which transcends but embraces the physiosphere—one huge holistic and all-embracing
system, stretching from here to eternity.

And yet, and yet. Something is terribly wrong. Or rather, terribly partial. All of these diagrams represent things
that can be seen with the physical senses or their extensions (microscopes, telescopes). They are all, all of them, how
the universe looks from the outside. They are all the outward forms of evolution, and not one of them represents
how evolution looks from the inside, how the individual holons feel and perceive and cognize the world at various
stages.

For example, take the progression: irritability, sensation, perception, impulse, image, symbol, concept. . . . We
might believe that cells show protoplasmic irritability, that plants show rudimentary sensation, that reptiles show
perception, paleomammals show images, primates show symbols, and humans show concepts. That may be true
(and is true, I think), but the point is that none of those appear on any of our diagrams. Our diagrams (thus far)
show only the outward forms of evolution, and none of the corresponding “interior prehensions” of the forms
themselves (sensation, feelings, ideas, etc.).

So the diagrams themselves are not wrong (once we have revised a few errors), but they are terribly partial. They

leave out the insides of the universe.

And there is a reason for this. The general systems sciences seek to be empirical, or based on sensory evidence (or
its extensions). And thus they are interested in how cells are taken up into complex organisms, and how organisms
are parts of ecological environments, and so on—all of which you can see, and thus all of which you can investigate
empirically. And all of which is true enough.

But they are not interested in—because their empirical methods do not cover—how sensations are taken up into
perceptions, and perceptions give way to impulses and emotions, and emotions break forth into images, and images
expand to symbols. . . . The empirical systems sciences cover all of the outward forms of all that, and cover it very
well; they simply miss, and leave out entirely, the inside of all of that.

Take, for example, the mind and the brain. Whatever else we may decide about the brain and the mind, this much
seems certain: the brain looks something like figure 3-6 (or some anatomically correct figure), but my mind does
not look like figure 3-6. I know my mind from the inside, where it seems to be seething with sensations and feelings
and images and ideas. It looks nothing like figure 3-6, which is simply how my brain looks.

In other words, my mind is known interiorly “by acquaintance,” but my brain is known exteriorly “by description”
(William James, Bertrand Russell). That is why I can always to some degree see my own mind, but I can never see my
own brain (without cutting open my skull and getting a mirror). I can know a dead person’s brain by simply cutting
open the skull and looking at it—but then I am not knowing or sharing that person’s mind, am I? or how he felt and
perceived and thought about the world.

The brain is the outside, the mind is the inside—and, as we will see, a similar type of exterior/interior holds for
every holon in evolution. And the empirical systems sciences or ecological sciences, even though they claim to be
holistic, in fact cover exactly and only one half of the Kosmos. And that is especially what is so partial about the web-
of-life theories: they indeed see fields within fields within fields, but they are really only surfaces within surfaces
within yet still other surfaces—they see only the exterior half of reality.

It is time now to look at the other half.

4

A View from Within

Things have their within. I am convinced that the two points of view require to be brought into union, and
that they soon will unite in a kind of phenomenology or generalised physic in which the internal aspect of
things as well as the external aspect of the world will be taken into account. Otherwise, so it seems to me, it
is impossible to cover the totality of the cosmic phenomenon by one coherent explanation.

—PIERRE TEILHARD DE CHARDIN

ALONGSIDE THE without of things, the without of individual and social holons, which we presented in the last chapter,

we need to present the within of things, the within of those same holons. This part of our approach might seem at
first a somewhat strange notion. How, for example, can we know the insides of a cell, the “interiority” of a cell? The
answer, I believe, rests on the fact that cells are a part of us, we embrace cells in our own compound individuality.
That is, nothing in the preceding stages of evolution can be ultimately foreign to us since they are all, in various
degrees and ways, in us, as part of our very being.

Thus, it is through an interior feeling of the shades of myself that I might reasonably know the shades of other
holons—which is how they know me, too; for we are all ultimately in each other, in various degrees, and right now.
Gravity pulls at the minerals in my bones just as surely as it pulls on the distant planets; hunger churns my belly as it
does in every starving wolf; the terror in the eyes of the gazelle being eaten by the lion is not alien to me, or to you;
and is that not joy in the song of the robin at the rising of the morning sun?

Nobody is more wary than I of the dangers of what Lovejoy called “retrotension”—reading “higher” thoughts and
feelings into “lower” forms simply because we humans feel them—the anthropomorphic fallacy. But we are aided in
this quest by precisely those evolutionary sciences that have already mapped the outward forms of the various
holons at each stage of development, for we can reasonably make correlations between outward form and interior
perception.

For example, it seems quite likely that, at this point in evolution anyway, intentional symbolic logic is found only
where the outward form known as the complex neocortex has developed, and thus any other living holon on Earth
whose exterior lacks the form of that neocortex—such as a plant, a lizard, a horse—will probably lack an interior that
contains intentional symbolic logic. Likewise, animal holons that lack the exterior form known as the limbic system
will probably also lack an interior that contains differentiated emotions, and so on. This puts a sharp curb to our
“retrotensive tendencies,” and helps us dig out, in the depths of our own feelings, just how far (and which of) those
feelings extend into the depth of other beings.

Thus, we do indeed want to try to avoid retrotension, but this still leaves us in a far different place from the
empiricists, who stare blankly at the rose and wonder how the epistemological gap shall ever be bridged, as if they
were staring at an alien creature materialized from a wholly different dimension. They actually refer to it, with a
puzzled expression, as “knowledge of the outer world.” But I can know the outer world because the outer world is
already in me, and I can know me. All knowledge of other is simply a different degree of self-knowledge, since self
and other are of the same fabric, and speak softly to each other at any moment that one listens.

And, of course, this approach is not new. We find something like it from Aristotle to Spinoza, from Leibniz to
Whitehead, from Aurobindo to Radhakrishnan. We don’t find it in empiricism or positivism, and we don’t find it in

the “holistic” systems theories, which want ever so much to be empirical. That imbalance we wish to redress,
drawing on, among others, the theorists I just mentioned.

Finally, we will want to look also at the higher stages of growth in the human holon, the higher stages of
consciousness that, in mystical experience, for example, are said to issue forth in illuminations of the superconscious,
illuminations of the very Divine (if such indeed exists). We will want to look, that is, at the field known as
transpersonal psychology. For we are now entering the domain of our first Addition: the greater the depth of
evolution, the greater the degree of consciousness.

INTERIORITY AND CONSCIOUSNESS

Spinoza, Leibniz, Schopenhauer, Whitehead, Aurobindo, Schelling, and Radhakrishnan are just a few of the major
theorists who have explicitly recognized that the within of things, the interiority of individual holons, is in essence
the same as consciousness, though of course they use different names with slightly different meanings.

Whitehead uses “prehension” to describe the contact and thus “feeling” of an object by any subject, no matter
how “primitive,” including atoms (thus his famous statement, “Biology is the study of big organisms, physics the
study of little organisms”). Spinoza uses “cognition” for knowing an event “from the inside” and “extension” (or
matter) for knowing the same event “from the outside.” Leibniz uses “perception” for the interior of his monads
(holons) and “matter” for the exterior, with the added proviso that only the interior is actually real and can be known
directly—matter (or extension) is only an appearance devoid of any substantial reality; it is simply what mind looks
like from the outside. As for Teilhard de Chardin, he put
it very simply: “The within, consciousness,
spontaneity—three expressions for the same thing.”1

I will not, at this point, get involved in the philosophical nuances of those various positions, which are inextricably
bound up with the problems of panpsychism and historical solutions to the mind-body problem (we will return to
this later). Rather, I will, for the time being, take a more generalized position and simply say that, for me, the within
of things is consciousness, the without of things is form.

Or, as we put it earlier, the within of things is depth, the without is surface. But all surfaces are surfaces of depth,

which means, all forms are forms of consciousness.

Further, I don’t want to haggle over whether the very lowest holons are totally or only mostly devoid of
rudimentary forms of consciousness or prehension. First, there is no lower limit to holons, so there is no rock bottom
to serve as a standard. Second, they are all forms of depth, so the actual amount of consciousness in them is a
completely relative affair. Thus, whatever we take at present as the lowest or most primitive holons (quarks, for
example), I will simply say that they have the least depth, the least consciousness, relatively speaking, and I will,
with Whitehead, call that form “prehension.” You are free to call the lowest levels “totally inert” if you wish, and pick
up the argument from there.

Let me emphasize that it really does not matter, as far as I am concerned, how far down (or not) you wish to push
consciousness. Whitehead, as we said, saw prehension as the irreducible “atom” of existence. Mahayana Buddhism
maintains that literally all sentient beings possess Buddha Mind, and liberation involves a realization of that all-
pervading consciousness. Lynn Margulis, the noted biologist, believes that cells possess consciousness. A handful of
scientists think that plants show proto-sensation. Animal rights activists insist that most animal forms show
rudimentary feelings. And I suppose most orthodox theorists don’t really see consciousness emerging until primates
and usually humans.

But my main point is not where precisely to draw this line—draw it wherever you feel comfortable—but that the
line itself involves preeminently the distinction between interiority and exteriority.2 We will be returning to this
point throughout the book, and in the meantime, I will simply assume that consciousness is synonymous with depth,
and depth goes all the way down, but progressively less and less and less . . . into those dark shades of night. As
Teilhard eloquently put it, “Refracted rear-wards along the course of evolution, consciousness displays itself
qualitatively as a spectrum of shifting shades whose lower terms are lost in the night.”3

Now for some simple correlations. Figure 4-1 lists some of the milestones in the evolution of the outward forms
of individual holons, and alongside them some of the corresponding milestones in the emergent forms of

consciousness that I suggest are correlated with them.

Each new interior holon, of course, transcends but includes its predecessor(s)—incorporates the essentials of
what went before and then adds its own distinctive and emergent patterns4 (as we will see in detail in a moment).
And notice: these interior holons have nothing to do with size or spatial extension; a symbol is not bigger than an
image, an image isn’t bigger than an impulse—this is where the application of physicalist sciences becomes very
distorting.

atoms
cells (genetic)
metabolic organisms (e.g., plants)
proto-neuronal organisms (e.g., Coelenterata)
neuronal organisms (e.g., annelids)
neural cord (fish/amphibians)
brain stem (reptiles)
limbic system (paleomammals)
neocortex (primates)
complex neocortex (humans)

prehension
irritability
rudimentary sensation
sensation
perception
perception/impulse
impulse/emotion
emotion/image
symbols
concepts

Figure 4-1. The Without and the Within

The important point, for now, is simply that each new and emergent interior holon transcends but includes, and
thus operates upon, the information presented by its junior holons, and thus it fashions something novel
in the
ongoing cognitive or interior stream. Hence, each new growth in consciousness is not just the “discovery” of more of
a pregiven world, but the co-creation of new worlds themselves, what Popper calls a “making and matching” of new
epistemological domains, a discovery/creation of higher and wider worlds.

There can be much discussion over the actual details of that list (fig. 4-1), the choice of words and the precise
placement. But I think most people, even if they disagree with the details as given, would agree that something like
that is indeed occurring. Greater depth, greater interiority, greater consciousness. Teilhard expressed this in his “law
of complexity and consciousness”—namely, the more of the former, the more of the latter. Since, as we already saw,
evolution tends in the direction of greater complexity, it amounts to the same thing to say that it tends in the
direction of greater consciousness (again, depth = consciousness).

Most of the words in figure 4-1 are self-explanatory, but I should mention that an image is a mental construct
that represents a thing by resemblance (the image of a dog “looks like” the actual dog); a symbol represents a thing
by correspondence, not resemblance (the word Fido represents my dog but the word itself does not look like my
dog at all—a more difficult cognitive task); and a concept represents an entire class of resemblance (the word dog
represents the class of all dogs, an even more complicated cognitive task).

When a fox spots a rabbit on the other side of a fence and then runs hundreds of yards around the fence to get to
the rabbit, presumably the fox carries an image or proto-image of the rabbit in its mind. Moving up, there is
abundant evidence that apes and chimpanzees are capable of forming symbols (or at least paleosymbols) and
indeed can be taught to recognize and use a simple denotative language. As far as we can tell, only humans create
and consciously utilize fully formed concepts (or universals), and these concepts, among many other things, reach
down and differentiate and color all previous levels in the human compound individual (a paleomammal may feel
rage, but only humans conceptually elaborate that into anger and then hatred, a long slow burn maintained
conceptually).

In other words, concepts transcend and include symbols, which transcend and include images (which transcend

and include impulses, etc.)—and none of that has much to do with physical extension.

THE LIMITS OF THE EXTERIOR APPROACH

In the previous chapter I said that holistic systems theories leave out the interiority of the holons they describe. Let

me be more precise. Some of the theories do, indeed, attempt to take into account the insides of the universe, for
they at any rate mention things like feelings and symbols and ideas. But they then subject these interiors to the same
analysis as they apply to the surfaces, because they are trying to be empirical, and this produces some very
unpleasant results.

We can explain this with reference to figure 4-2. Here I have indicated the three general domains of evolution
from the angle of a compound individual holon on level 3. The physiosphere is labeled A, the biosphere B, and the
noosphere C, so that the holon on level 3 can be represented as A + B + C, transcending but including its
predecessors.

Now the claim of the evolutionary systems theories (from Bertalanffy to Laszlo to Jantsch) is that, although none
of the levels can be reduced to any other, general laws or regularities of dynamic patterns can be found that are the
same in all three realms. These are called “homolog laws” and not “analog laws,” which means they are basically the
same laws across domains.

Figure 4-2. Levels of Evolution

I agree with that position (as far as it goes), and in chapter 2 we outlined twenty tenets, or “homolog laws,” that

are characteristic of holons wherever they appear. So far, so good.

But these tenets have to be of such a general nature that they will apply to all three general realms, and that
means, in essence, that they apply basically to the realm labeled A, since A is the only thing that all three realms
have in common. A runs from A through the core of B and the core of C, and thus what holds for A will hold for (but
not totally cover) whatever happens on all three levels. Thus, on level 1, or A, we already find dissipative or self-
organizing structures, holons with depth and span, creative emergence,
increasing complexity, evolutionary
development, differentiation, self-transcendence, teleological attractors, and so forth. When I presented the twenty
tenets, I used examples from all three realms, but all of the tenets can be found, to some degree or another, in the
physiosphere itself (thus acknowledging some degree of continuity in the overall evolutionary process—the “no
gaps in nature” side of the equation). And all of that, too, is just fine.

But none of the twenty tenets—as crucially important as they are—describes specifically what is happening in B
and C. To the extent that B and C are composed of holons—and they are—they will follow all of the twenty tenets.
But holons with Life injected into them also do other things that A holons do not—such as sexual reproduction,
metabolic communication, autopoietic self-preservation, and so forth; and holons with Mind injected into them do
still other things that B holons do not—such as verbal communication, conceptual self-expression, artistic endeavors,

and so on. The B and C qualities and functions and cognitions will follow the same tenets that also apply to A, but
they will further follow other laws and patterns and actions not specifically derivable from the twenty tenets (which
state, for example, that evolution gets more complex, but do not state that evolution will produce poetry). There is
nothing in the twenty tenets that will tell us how to resolve an Oedipus complex, or why pride can be wounded, or
what honor means, or whether life is worth living.

In other words, the twenty tenets—by which I mean dynamic systems theory in general—are the most
fundamental tenets of all of development, and therefore the least interesting, least significant, least telling tenets
when it comes to B and especially C (and super-especially anything higher). Systems theory—precisely in its claim
and desire to cover all systems—necessarily covers the least common denominator, and thus nothing gets into
systems theory that, to borrow a line from Swift, does not also cover the weakest noodle.

And the weakest noodles, the lowest holons, have the

least
consciousness—so that a science of that is correspondingly a weakest noodle science. It is a science of surfaces.
And this is invariably why, in such “systems books” as Laszlo’s, one finds a very rich and impressive setting forth of
something like the twenty tenets, and a rich application of them to the physiosphere and somewhat to the
biosphere, but then the presentation, as it really explores the biosphere and then gets into the noosphere, becomes
pale and anemic and thins out very quickly.

interiority, the

least

depth, the

least

When it comes to social or historical evolution, for example, Laszlo correctly points out that noospheric evolution
proceeds from less ordered to more ordered, from less complex to more complex, that it is irreversible, and a few
other such items. That’s about all he says, and that’s about all he can say as a systems scientist. But we already
know that; that’s what happens to any complex system far from equilibrium. About the really interesting and
utterly unique things that make history history and not just a dissipative structure, systems science can tell us
precious little. Of the system A + B + C, it will tell us about the lowest common-denominator patterns, which, I
repeat, are the most fundamental—and least significant—of patterns for the higher levels.

(Of course, many system theorists actually use the dynamics of B, or living systems, and make them paradigmatic
for all
levels, with equally unsatisfactory results but now in both directions: B underexplains C and overexplains or is
retrotensive with A, trying, for example, to read autopoiesis into the physiosphere—unconvincingly. All of these
difficulties come from the lowest common denominator approach and/or the attempt to privilege any single
domain).5

This is why presentations that are otherwise often so brilliant, such as Jantsch’s, will say things like, “In the same
way, these mathematical relationships may be applied to the modelling of dynamics at other than the chemical
levels”—by which he means (and explicitly states) that the system patterns holding for A are significantly inclusive
for levels B and C. He then adds, “A certain imagination is required, of course. . . .”6

It takes more than imagination; it takes hallucination. This is exactly what Sheldrake is objecting to when he says,
“In a similar way, to return to one of Prigogine’s examples, a mathematical model of urbanization may shed light on
the factors affecting the rate of urban growth, but it cannot account for the different architectural styles, cultures,
and religions found in, say, Indian and Brazilian cities.”7 Cannot account, that is, for a single thing that is specifically
cultural.

Michael Murphy makes the same point in a strong fashion. He first points out the similarities (or continuities) in
the three major domains: “Though the kinds of development that occur in the physical, biological, and psychosocial
domains are shaped by different processes and have different patterns, they proceed in sustained, irreversible
sequences that are called evolutionary—these three domains have many features in common.” These common
features I have distilled in the twenty tenets. Yet Murphy then emphasizes, “But
the three kinds of
evolution—inorganic, biological, and psychosocial—though having many features in common, operate according to
separate principles. Helpful scientific reductions do not erase the fact that these [domains] proceed according to
their own distinctive patterns.”8

So the twenty tenets are the backbone of our system, holding true for holons anywhere, or so I maintain. But for
the meat and flesh and feelings and perceptions—for these we will have to look elsewhere, look instead to an
empathic feel from within of those degrees of the All that are degrees of us as well. And we do not honor the
richness of these feelings—in us, in others—by reducing or narrowing them to the lowest common denominator.

The robin, the deer, and the amoeba, I presume, are as insulted by this as I. Our answer, as always, is never to be
found in flatland, in the world of black checkers scurrying endlessly, meaninglessly, dimly, and disappearing finally
into those dark shades of the night that are ever so fundamental, ever so insignificant.

THE EVOLUTION OF THE WITHIN OF HUMAN HOLONS

We have sketched the evolution of the without of individual holons up to the complex triune brain (embracing or
enfolding all previous exteriors) and the correlative evolution of the interior of the same holons up to that of
concepts (embracing or enfolding all previous interiors). It is time now to pick up the story with the emergence of
the first human animals—with a complex triune brain producing concepts or proto-concepts and living in a social
holon of the group/family—and briefly follow the succeeding evolution up to the present day.

Once again, most of our work has already been done for us, and we have two major sources to draw on in this
regard. One is my own previous work in this area, published in Up from Eden and Eye to Eye. The other is the work
of Jürgen Habermas, whom many (myself included) consider the world’s foremost living philosopher and social
theorist. The conclusions of these two sources are in strong agreement, even though they were arrived at
independently and from very different angles. When I was working on Up from Eden, I was only beginning to come
into contact with Habermas, and so I unfortunately did not have the chance to include his incisive commentaries. I
drew instead on the works of such pioneers as Jean Gebser, Erich Neumann, L. L. Whyte, Georg Hegel, and Joseph
Campbell. In a sense this was fortunate; the fact that Habermas, working from a very different direction, arrived at
the same general conclusions lends added strength to the overall thesis.

What I would like to do, then, in this and the next chapter, is very briefly outline Habermas’s observations on the
evolution of human consciousness and social communication (and parenthetically indicate the points of agreement
with my own work; those familiar with Eden and Eye to Eye will immediately spot the similarities). Habermas’s
overall views on communication and the evolution of society are set in the context of his theory of communicative
action (or action geared toward mutual understanding as an omega point); I will be cutting many corners and giving
only the briefest skeleton of a small part of his rich theory; readers are urged to consult his original works.9

In Up from Eden (and Eye to Eye) I followed the groundbreaking work of Jean Gebser in recognizing four major
epochs of human evolution, each anchored by a particular structure (or level) of
individual consciousness that
correspondingly produced (and was produced by) a particular social worldview. These general stages Gebser called
the archaic, the magic, the mythic, and the mental.

Habermas, we will see, is in general agreement with this conclusion.
I (and to a lesser extent Gebser) further suggested that each of these structures of consciousness generated a
different sense of space-time, law and morality, cognitive style, self-identity, mode of technology (or productive
forces), drives or motivation, types of personal pathology (and defenses), types of social oppression/repression,
degrees of death-seizure and death-denial, and types of religious experience.

In this chapter, and especially in the next, we will carefully examine the archaic, the magic, the mythic, and the

mental worldviews (and suggest possible higher developments as well).

But first, let me be very clear about what is being attempted here. I have suggested that there are individual and
social holons, each of which has an interior and an exterior. Thus, in evolution in general, and human evolution in
particular, we are tracing four different strands, each of which is intimately related and indeed dependent upon all
the others, but none of which can be reduced to the others.

The four strands are the interior and the exterior of the individual and the social, or the inside and the outside of

the micro and the macro.

We have already looked at (1) the development of the exterior forms of individual holons, ranging from atoms
to molecules to cells to organisms to neural organisms to triune-brained neural organisms. And we have already
looked at (2) the development of the exterior forms of the social holon, from superclusters to galaxies to planets
to Gaia to ecosystems to groups/families (and briefly suggested its continuation into villages, nation-states, and
planetary systems). Further, we have already suggested (3) the interior development of the individual holon, from
prehension to sensation to impulse to image to symbol to concept (and briefly suggested its continuation into

concrete and formal operational thought, with higher stages yet to come). And finally, we have just suggested that,
in human evolution anyway, (4) the interior development of the social holon evidences itself in a series of shared
worldviews
(from magic to mythic to mental, and possibly higher). (We’ll go over all these correlations in a
moment.)

The lower levels possess a “worldview”—by which I mean, a “common worldspace”—to precisely the same degree
that you believe they possess a degree of consciousness or prehension. If depth is consciousness, which I believe it is,
and if lower holons possess depth, which I believe they do, and if any holon exists only in a system of relational
exchange with other same-level holons, which it does, then any holon possesses a shared depth with its peers, and
that is a “worldview” or “common worldspace” in the broadest sense. We have already agreed, for example, that if a
holon possesses a reptilian brain stem, then it possesses an interiority of impulse, and we have already agreed that
that interiority cannot be captured without remainder in objective it-language, and thus it must possess a subjective
(or proto-subjective) space, a space shared with similar-depth holons. It is not just shared surfaces, but shared
depths, or a common worldspace.

Or again: if holons share common exteriors, which they do, then they share common interiors (or worldspaces).
How far down we push this is a matter of reasonable disagreement, but confining it to humans alone is
preposterous.

Nonetheless, as before, feel free to pick up the argument at the point in evolution where you feel that some form
of rudimentary consciousness or prehension enters the scene; presumably, by the time we reach humans, we can all
agree that shared worldviews exist, and these shared worldviews are simply the inside feel of a social holon, the
inside space of collective awareness at a particular level of development; it is not just how “I” feel, it is how “we”
feel.

THE FOUR QUADRANTS

We will be going into these distinctions in much detail as we proceed. For the moment, a quick summary is given in
figure 4-3. (It might also help to glance at the more detailed diagram given in the next chapter, fig. 5-1.) The upper
half of the diagram represents individual holons; the lower half, social or communal holons. The right half represents
the exterior forms of holons—what they look like from the outside; and the left half represents the interiors—what
they look like from within.

Thus we have four major quadrants or four major aspects to each and every holon. The Upper-Right (UR) is the
exterior
form or structure of an individual holon. This quadrant runs from the center—which is simply the Big
Bang—to subatomic particles to atoms to molecules to cells to neural organisms to triune-brained organisms. With
reference to human beings, this quadrant is the one emphasized by behaviorism. Behavior can be seen, it is
empirical—which is precisely why empirical science is always concerned only with the behavior of holons (the
behavior of atoms, the behavior of gases, the behavior of fish, the behavior of humans) and wants nothing to do with
nasty ol’ introspection, which involves, of course, the interiors of individuals.

Figure 4-3. The Four Quadrants

Which would be the Upper-Left (UL) quadrant. This quadrant—the interior form of an individual holon—runs
from the center to prehension, sensation, impulse, image, symbol, concept (and so on). These interiors (UL) are
correlated, we saw, with specific exteriors (UR), so that emotions “go with” limbic systems and concepts “go with”
the neocortex of complex triune brains, and so forth (that is, every point on the right side has a correlate on the left
side: every exterior has an interior). With reference to human beings, this quadrant contains all the “interior”
individual sciences (among other things), from psychoanalysis to phenomenology to mathematics (nobody ever saw
the square root of a negative one running around in the external world; that is apprehended only interiorly).

But individuals only exist in relational exchanges with other holons of similar depth (micro and macro, individual
and social). In other words, every point on the upper half of the diagram has a corresponding point on the lower half
(so that all four quadrants have corresponding points with each other). Taking the two lower quadrants one at a
time:

The Lower-Right (LR) quadrant runs, as we saw, from the Big Bang to superclusters to galaxies to stars to planets
to (on Earth) the Gaia system to ecosystems to societies with division of labor to groups/families (each getting
“smaller” owing to less simple span). With reference to humans, this quadrant then runs from kinship tribes to
villages to nation-states to global world-system (getting “bigger” on its own level). But this quadrant also refers to
any of the concrete, material, embedded social forms of communities (the exterior forms of social systems),
including modes of tools and technology, architectural styles, forces of production, concrete institutions, even
written (material) forms, and so on.

The Lower-Right quadrant, in other words, represents all the exterior forms of social systems, forms that also
can be seen, forms that are empirical and behavioral (everything on the Right half of the diagram is empirical,
because it involves the exterior forms of holons; in this case, the social holon). This is why the study of human

“sociology” (especially in Anglo-Saxon countries) has usually been the study of the observable behavior of social
systems (or “social action systems”). Something is a “really real” science if its data can be seen empirically, and since
all social holons do have an exterior form that can be seen empirically, sociology has all too often confined its studies
to this one component (the LR quadrant) and been very distrustful of the study of anything other than monological,
observable variables in a social action system.

This is why it has been so hard for sociologists to buck the positivistic trend of studying only behavior-oriented
action systems, and to study not just society but also culture, or the shared values that constitute the common
worldviews of various social systems—that is, the interiors of the social systems, the Lower Left (LL) quadrant.
Thus, for example, a recent anthology entitled Cultural Analysis (as opposed to “social analysis”) could find only
four major theorists working this side of the street: Peter Berger, Mary Douglas, Michel Foucault, and Jürgen
Habermas (we could certainly add Charles Taylor and Clifford Geertz, among a few others; the influence of these six
theorists can be heavily felt throughout this presentation).

But the editors’ point is well taken: “While theories, methods, and research investigations in other areas of the
social sciences have accumulated at an impressive pace over the past several decades, the study of culture appears
to have made little headway.” The reason is that the orthodox and positivistically oriented researchers “turned from
the ephemeral realm of attitudes and feelings . . . intersubjective realities . . . beliefs and values—the stuff of which
culture is comprised—to the more obdu-rate [empirical] facts of social life—income inequality, unemployment,
fertility rates, group dynamics, crime, and the like. On the whole, it may be only slightly presumptuous to suggest
that the social sciences are in danger of abandoning culture entirely as a field of enquiry.”10 Abandoning, that is, the
Lower Left in favor of the Lower Right.

At the same time, the editors note, these four theorists are nonetheless at the forefront of a revolution in the
approach to the study of culture. However “ephemeral” aspects of culture might be, various phenomenological and
analytical and structural tools can nonetheless be brought to bear on the issue. To say something is “subjective” is
not to say it doesn’t exist or can’t be carefully studied. Each of these theorists, the editors point out, “have
attempted to identify systematic patterns among the elements of culture itself, or patterns within culture”—as I
would put it, cultural holons, structures or patterns from within, not just without. “Largely outside the mainstream of
social sciences, these approaches have been oriented primarily toward the realms of meaning, symbolism, language,
and discourse. Each is rooted in deeper philosophical traditions themselves quite distinct and in significant ways
alien to the so-called ‘positivist’ tradition of contemporary social science. The first, and perhaps most familiar of
these, is phenomenology [Berger]; the second, cultural anthropology [Douglas]; the third, structuralism [Foucault];
and the fourth, critical theory [Habermas].”11 These approaches have already had a profound impact and are helping
to reverse the positivistic trend where, as the editors put it, “nuts and bolts have replaced hearts and minds.”

But this distinction between social

(in the sense of social action system, the empirical nuts and bolts) and
cultural
(meaning shared worldviews and values, hearts and minds) is very much the distinction between the
exterior and the interior of a social (or communal) holon. These two dimensions are in intimate interaction and
correlation, but neither can simply, without further ado, be reduced to the other (and thus not explained, but
explained away).

Notice that, because we have only so many words to go around, I am forced to use social

in two senses: in the
narrow sense (as the social system or exterior observable patterns in a society [LR], contrasted to “cultural,” or the
interior values and meanings that cannot be captured empirically [LL]), and social
in the broad or general sense
(where it means both social, in the narrow sense, and cultural; where it means the entire lower half of the diagram).
I trust that in the following discussion the context will make clear which meaning is intended. By and large, however,
from now on I will use “cultural” to mean the Lower Left and will reserve “social” for the Lower Right.

As for the difference between social and cultural, here’s a simple example. Imagine you go to a foreign country
where you do not speak the language. As soon as you arrive in that country, you are in the social system, or the
actual material components of the country. You are in that country. People around you are speaking a foreign
language, which you do not understand, but the physically spoken words hit your ears just like they do anybody
else’s; you and the natives are both immersed in the identical physical vibrations of the social system.

But you don’t understand a word. You are in the social system, but you are not in the worldview, you are not in

the culture. You hear only the exteriors, you do not understand the interior meaning. All the social signifiers impinge
on you, but none of the cultural signifieds come up. You are an insider to the social system but an outsider to the
culture.

The study of the interior cultural meanings cannot be reduced to a study of exterior action systems (even though
they have various correlations), or else you could know everything there is to know about a community without ever
learning the language: you would just report the “behavior” of the inhabitants (like the behavior of gas particles),
and to hell with that tricky “meaning” stuff. (Foucault, in his reductionistic archaeology phase, actually proceeded in
just this manner, bracketing both the truth and the meaning of linguistic statements, and just reported their
systematic behavior, which caused quite an uproar. He later recanted and labeled the exclusive use of that
approach “arrogant.”12 But it is an arrogance that all such “happy positivism” is prone to.) Every holon has a
component in the Lower-Right quadrant; it’s just not the whole story.

The Lower-Left quadrant is the study of shared interior meanings that constitute the worldview (or common
worldspace) of collective or communal holons. With regard to humans, we have seen that these run from archaic to
magic to mythic to mental (with all sorts of variations, and holding open the possibility of still-further developments).
And as for the worldspace of lower holons, I simply mean a shared space of what they can respond to: quarks do
not respond to all
stimuli in the environment, because they register a very narrow range of what will have
meaning to them, what will affect them. Quarks (and all holons) respond only to that which fits their worldspace:
everything else is a foreign language, and they are outsiders. The study of what holons can respond to is the study
of shared worldspaces.13

THE RIGHT- AND LEFT-HAND PATHS

There are an enormous number of correlations between this scheme of the four quadrants and the work of other
theorists, and we will be exploring these in more detail as we proceed. For the moment, just a few preliminary notes.
The entire Right half of figure 4-3, the exterior half, can be described in “it” language (or “object” language) and
can be studied empirically (in behavioristic or positivistic or monological terms). The entire Right half, as we said, is
something you can see “out there,” something you can register with the senses or their extensions (telescopes,
microscopes, photographic plates, etc., and you tie your theorizing to these empirical observables, which is what
“monological” or “empiric-analytic” means).14 The components of the Right half—both the Upper-Right and Lower-
Right quadrants—are, in themselves, neutral surfaces, neutral exteriors, neutral forms, all of which can fairly be
described in “it” language. You don’t ever have to engage the interiors of any of those holons: you don’t have to
engage in introspection or interpretation or meaning or values. You just describe the exterior form and its behavior.
Nothing is better or worse, good or bad, desirable or undesirable, good or evil, noble or debased. The surface forms
simply are, and you simply observe and describe them.

And you can do that; the surfaces forms are there; it is a legitimate and altogether necessary story. It is just

not the whole story.

I will often refer to the study of both the Upper-Right and Lower-Right quadrants as the Right-Hand path: the path
of that which can be seen with the eye of flesh or its extensions. In short, the path of “it”-language (objectivist,
monological, observable, empirical, behavioral variables).

The Right-Hand path has two major and warring camps: the atomists, who study the surfaces of only individuals,
and the wholists, who insist that whole systems, and not individuals, are the primary object of study. But both are
equally exterior approaches confined to surfaces only. They are the two camps of flatland ontology: that which can
be seen, detected with the senses, empirical through and through.

The entire Left half of the diagram, on the other hand, cannot be seen with the eye of flesh (except as those Left-
side aspects become embedded in material or exterior forms, which we will discuss later). In other words, the Left
half cannot be described in “it” language. Rather, the Upper-Left is described in “I”-language, and the Lower-Left is
described in “we”-language (as I will explain in a moment). I will refer to both of them as the Left-Hand path.

Whereas the Right half can be seen, the Left half must be interpreted. The reason for this is that surfaces can be
seen—there they are, anybody can look at them; but depth cannot be directly perceived—depth must be

interpreted. The Right-Hand path always asks, “What does it do?” or “How does it work?” The Left-Hand path asks,
“What does it mean?”

A deer sees me approach. It sees my exterior form, my shape, and registers all the appropriate physical stimuli
coming from my form to the deer. But what do they mean? Am I the friendly fellow with the food, or the hunter
with the rifle? The deer must interpret its stimuli in the context of its own worldspace and how I might affect it.
And this is not just a matter of seeing: the deer sees just fine. But it might be mistaken in its interpretation; I might
actually have the rifle, not the food. All the physical stimuli are hitting the deer fully (that’s not the problem); the
problem is, what do they actually mean? The surfaces are given, but what is lurking in the depths? What are the
intentions lying behind the surfaces? What is transmitted empirically but not merely given empirically?

Almost from its inception, and down to today, social theory has divided into two often sharply disagreeing camps:
hermeneutics and structural-functionalism (or systems theory). Hermeneutics (the art and science of interpretation)
attempted to reconstruct and empathically enter the shared cultural worldspace of human beings, and thus bring
forth an understanding of the values contained therein. Structural-functionalism, on the other hand, dispensed with
meaning (in any participatory sense) and looked instead at the external social structures and social systems that
governed the behavior of the action system.

Both were holistic, in the sense that both situated individual existence in a larger network of communal practices
and insisted that the individual could not be understood without reference to the holistic background of shared
practices. But they were, almost exactly, representatives of the Left-Hand and Right-Hand paths, with hermeneutics
asking always, “What does it mean?” and structural-functionalism asking instead, “What does it do?”

To reconstruct meaning (the Left-Hand path) I must engage in interpretation (hermeneutics); I must try to enter
the shared depths, shared values, shared worldviews of the inhabitants; I must try to understand and describe the
culture from within (while maintaining a delicate distance so as to be able to report at all). I cannot simply see
meaning; meaning does not sit on the surface waiting, like a patch of color, to hit my senses. Rather, to the extent
that I can, I must resonate with the interior depth of the inhabitants. The depth in me (“lived experience”) must
empathically align itself, intuitively feel into, the corresponding depth (or lived experience) that I seek to understand
in others, and not simply blankly register an empirical patch. Mutual understanding is a type of interior harmonic
resonance of depth: “I know what you mean!”

What, for example, does the Hopi Rain Dance mean? I might find, as many “participant observers” have, that it
means, that it expresses, a connection with nature felt to be sacred, so that the dancing is both an expression of
sacred nature and a request directed toward that same nature. To understand and articulate this in a sociological
fashion (and not simply become a member of the tribe), I must look into the whole network of shared social
practices and the “background unconscious” of linguistically (and prelinguistically) structured meanings and
intersubjective exchanges that constitute the “pre-understanding” or “background” or “foreknowledge” of the
particular worldspace or worldview—all of the contexts within contexts within contexts that structure the interior
values and meanings of a culture, some of them explicit (requiring understanding), and some of them implicit
(requiring excavation). (That is a short summary of the hermeneutic program from Wilhelm Dilthey and Weber and
Heidegger down to today with Paul Ricoeur and Hans Gadamer and Geertz and Taylor.)

On the other hand, to reconstruct

function (the Right-Hand path), I must carefully, and in largely detached
fashion, observe not what the natives say they are doing, but what function the dance actually serves in the overall
social action system (a function unknown to the natives). The detached observer concludes (as Talcott Parsons did)
that the dance performs the function of securing social solidarity and social cohesion. Whether it is really going to
make rain or not, or trying to make rain or not, is quite secondary to our concerns; because what it is really doing is
providing an occasion that binds individuals together into the social fabric of the tribe (i.e., the self-organizing and
autopoietic regime of the social action system). In order to determine this, the tribe is viewed as a holistic system,
with its overall pattern (structure) and overall function (behavior) carefully observed, and then the “meaning” of any
individual event is simply its place (or function)
(And that is a summary of the
structural/functional and “system theory” program in various forms, from Comte to Parsons to Niklas Luhmann, and
even in its structuralistic and archaeological variants, Claude Lévi-Strauss to early Foucault).15

in the overall system.

The one path asking always, “What does it do?” and thus seeking to offer explanations based on naturalistic,

empirical, observable variables; the other path asking always, “What does it mean?” and thus attempting to arrive
at understanding that would be mutual.16

Surfaces extend; interiors intend—it’s still almost as simple as that.17

SUBTLE REDUCTIONISM

There are important truths in both the Left- and Right-Hand approaches, and both are required for a balanced or
“all-quadrant” view. My position is that every holon has (at least) these four aspects or four dimensions (or four
“quadrants”) of its existence, and thus it can (and should) be studied in its intentional, behavioral, cultural, and social
settings. No holon simply exists in one of the four quadrants; each holon has four quadrants.

Of course, the more primitive the holon, the less we seem to care about its intrinsic value or its intentions or its
culture, which is sad. The point now is that, regardless of what we think of lower holons, when it comes at least to
human beings, none of the four quadrants can be privileged. (If you don’t believe that consciousness or prehension
in any form extends below humans, a study of the four quadrants will at least show you in which directions and in
which ways interiors would extend if you thought otherwise, which itself can be a very useful exercise.)

Which brings us to the subject of gross reductionism versus subtle reductionism. Gross reductionists, first of all, do
not believe any interiors exist anywhere, so the issues of meaning, value, consciousness, depth, culture, and
intentionality—these never come up for them; and, in fact, they hope to die with the boast on their lips that they
never saw a value they couldn’t reduce to atoms.

Gross reductionism first

reduces all quadrants to the Upper-Right quadrant, and second—this is the gross
part—then reduces all the higher-order structures of the Upper-Right quadrant to atomic or subatomic particles. The
result is purely materialistic, mechanistic (usually), atomistic (always). Historically, only a very few, highly gifted nuts
have actually taken this path with any sort of brilliance, starting with the Epicureans and running to Holbach, La
Mettrie, and the like (what Polanyi referred to as “prejudice backed by genius” and Lovejoy summarized as, “There is
no human stupidity that has not found its champion”).

Opposed to these flatland atomists are the flatland holists. They do not reduce all holons to atoms. Rather, they
reduce everything on the Left half of the diagram to a corresponding reality on the Right half. That is, they are the
systems theorists and the structural/functionalists, in all their forms, from General System Theory to modern
dynamic systems theory to many of the “new paradigm” and “ecological/holistic” theories.18

As I said, in many cases their hearts are in the right place, but their theories—because they are empirical and
monological, because they are weakest-noodle sciences, because they deal with exteriors than can be seen and not
interiors that must be arduously interpreted—because of all that, they end up with a rather insidious form of
reductionism, insidious because they are almost completely unaware of what they have done. They claim to
embrace the whole of reality, when in fact they have just devastated half of it.

(As only one example now, we can look at Habermas’s withering attack on systems theory, and his demonstration
that, although systems theory has an important but limited place, it is now, by virtue of its reductionism, one of the
great modern enemies of the lifeworld—what he refers to as “the colonization of the lifeworld by the imperatives of
functional systems that externalize their costs on the other. . . . a blind compulsion to system maintenance and
system expansion.”19
in large part, the
systems/instrumental mentality biologized and applied to humans, converting each and all to strands and means in
the great interlocking bio-web—the chief form of coercive power in the modern world?)

And what is Foucault’s biopower—the “modern danger”—if not,

What these systems and “holistic” theorists don’t seem to understand is that while they have indeed avoided
gross reductionism—and for that are to be highly praised—they are nonetheless (and apparently unknown to them)
the exemplars of subtle reductionism. They don’t reduce everything to atoms; they reduce everything in the Left-
Hand to a Right-Hand description in the “system.” They reduce a four-quadrant holism (or Kosmic holism) to merely
a Right-Hand holism, a flatland holism. And they are so understandably proud that they are holists, they overlook the
flatland part.

Gross reductionism still rears its peculiar head every now and then, usually when somebody discovers a recursive
law (a simple procedure that, when repeated, generates complex procedures), but by and large it has not been

historically that influential, and certainly not as influential as many new-paradigm critics seem to think.

The truly devastating contributor to modern flatland ontology, to an erasure of the Kosmos, has been the Right-
Hand path of systems theory or structural/functionalism in its many forms. The systems theorists like to claim that
the reductionistic villains are the atomists, and that in emphasizing the wholistic nature of systems within systems,
they themselves have overcome reductionism, and that they are therefore in a position to help “heal the planet.”
Whereas all they have actually done is use a subtle reduction to overcome a gross one.

These flatland holists claim, for example, that the great “negative legacy” of the Enlightenment was its atomistic
and divisive ontology. But atomism was not the dominant theme of the Enlightenment. As we will see in great detail
(in chapters 12 and 13)—and as virtually every historian of the period has made abundantly clear—the dominant
theme of the Enlightenment was the “harmony of an interlocking order of being,” a systems harmony that was
behind everything from Adam Smith’s great “invisible hand” to John Locke’s “interlocking orders” to the Reformers’
and the Deists’ “vast harmonious whole of mutually interrelated beings.”

To give only a few examples now, Charles Taylor represents the virtually uncontested conclusion of scholars that
“for the mainstream of the Enlightenment, nature as the whole interlocking system of objective reality, in which all
beings, including man, had a natural mode of existence which dovetailed with that of all others, provided the basic
model, the blueprint for happiness and hence good. The Enlightenment developed a model of nature, including
human nature, as a harmonious whole whose parts meshed perfectly,” and the “unity of the order was seen as an
interlocking set calling for actions which formed a harmonious whole.”20 As Alexander Pope would have it, speaking
for an entire generation: “Such is the World’s great harmony, that springs from Order, Union, full Consent of things;
Where small and great, where weak and mighty, made to serve [each other], not suffer; strengthen, not invade;
Parts relate to Whole; All served, all serving; nothing stands alone.”21

Already the Encyclopédie, bastion of Enlightenment thought, had announced that “everything in nature is linked
together,” and Lovejoy points out that “they were wont to discourse with eloquence on the perfection of the
Universal System as a whole.”22

No, the downside of the Enlightenment was that it took a Kosmos of both Left and Right dimensions and reduced
it to a cosmos that could be empirically (or monologically) described: it collapsed the Left half to its correlates on the
Right half. Its great crime was not gross reductionism but subtle reductionism. The Great Holarchy of Being was
collapsed into a “harmonious whole of interlocking orders,” as John Locke put it, but orders that now had no within,
no interiors, no qualitative distinctions, but instead could be approached through an objectifying and empiricist gaze
(all being equal strands in the flatland web).

In short, the Left was reduced to the Right, and thus interiors tended to get lost and flattened into mere exteriors
(and we will see more precisely what that entailed as we proceed). This indeed ended up being a divisive and
dualistic ontology, precisely because, in describing the whole of reality in objective terms as a harmonious
interlocking order or system (the great interlocking web), it left no room for the subject
that was doing the
describing.23
Interpretation, consciousness, and interior depth were converted (reduced) to exterior, objective,
systems interaction—“I” and “we” were reduced to holistic “its”—the precise essence of subtle reductionism.

In short, Nature was a harmonious whole known by a subject that could not fit into it. And once this
holistic/instrumental or “just-parts-of-the-whole” approach was applied to the subject itself—what Foucault called
“knowledge closing in on itself”—the subject inadvertently began to erase itself (and not in the sense of a genuine
transcendence, but in the sense of shooting itself in the foot, or rather, in the head). Precisely because the subject’s
worldview was empirically completely holistic,
the subject aced itself out of the picture altogether, and hovered
above the holistic world, dangling and disengaged, now helplessly, now aggressively (thus the famous, or infamous,
self-defining and disengaged subject cut off from the holistic/instrumental world, the “hyper-autonomous self” that
so defined the Enlightenment, as we will see later in more detail).

In other words, the profound dualism inherent in flatland holism (namely, the isolated subject confronting an
objectively holistic world), although hidden (or not immediately obvious), was nonetheless already at work, and
contributed directly to the Enlightenment’s “dehumanizing humanism” that has been so severely criticized, from
Foucault’s “Age of Man” to Habermas’s philosophy of the subject to Taylor’s disengaged subject of instrumentally
interlocking orders. They all tell a similar tale of the objectifying holistic/instrumental mode of knowing turned back

onto the subject, thus denying or destroying the very subjectivity it sought to understand.

As we will see later in this chapter (and again in chapter 12), the flatland holistic paradigm of the Enlightenment
collapsed a Kosmos that was both interiorly and exteriorly holarchic (and thus included both Left and Right), into a
flatland cosmos that was only exteriorly holarchic (or Right-Hand only): a flatland web that replaced interior depth
with the great universal system of interlocking empirical surfaces, and thus reduced all
interiors to exteriorly
perceived strands in the great functional web. This “holistic” paradigm sounded like it covered “all” of reality (as
against the atomists), but in fact it had just violently torn the Kosmos in half, tossed out depth and interiority, and
settled aggressively on exteriors, surfaces, and the great interlocking web—interwoven “I” and “we” reduced to
interwoven “its,” which ironically left both “I” and “we” isolated, stranded, alienated, and alone, since none could fit
into the harmonious web of holistic its.

To say that the subject is “an inseparable part of the great holistic web”—a web described in objective, process,
dynamical, systems, third-person, it-language—is to destroy the subject in its own terms and devastate its authentic
dimensions, and this, if anything, was the “crime of the Enlightenment.”

A TOUR OF THE FOUR QUADRANTS

Once this flatland reduction occurred (which we will examine in great detail in chapters 12 and 13)—the Left-Hand
aspects of reality were all reduced to their corresponding aspects on the Right Hand. Precisely because there are
correlations between all four quadrants, this type of reductionism can be aggressively carried out. This is what makes
subtle reductionism so hard to spot and so hard to redress.

For example, I have a thought; a thought occurs to me. That’s the given holon, which we will use as an example.
For this holon, in the Upper-Right quadrant, there is a change in brain physiology, a change that can be described in
completely objective terms (it-language): there was a release of norepinephrine between the neural synapses in the
frontal cortex, accompanied by high-amplitude beta waves . . . and so on. All of which is true enough, and all of
which is very important.

But that is not how I experienced the thought, and I will never actually experience my thought in those terms.
Instead, the thought had an interesting and important meaning to me, which I may or may not share with you. And
even if you know what every single atom of my brain is doing, you will never know the actual details of my thought
unless I tell you. That is the Upper-Left quadrant or aspect of this holon, this thought that occurred to me (and that is
one of the many reasons why the Upper Left can never be reduced without remainder to the Upper Right; strong
and general correlations and interactions, yes; detailed reduction, no).

Parenthetically, this is why the brain, even though it is “inside” my organism, is still only the exterior of my
being—the brain is still Upper-Right quadrant, still exterior.24
I can surgically cut open a human body and look at all
the “insides,” even down to the tissues and cells and molecules, but those are not the within or the interior, they
are merely more surfaces, more exteriors that now can be seen. They are inside surfaces, not real interiors (which is
why they are all listed on the Upper-Right quadrant; they are all the aspects of holons that can be empirically
registered).25

But the crucial point is that you can look at the “insides” all you want and you will never see an interior, because
whereas surfaces or exteriors can be seen, interiors must be interpreted. If I want to know what your brain looks like
from within, what its actual lived interior
is like (in other words, your mind), then I must talk to you. There is
absolutely no other way. “What do you think? What’s up? How do you feel?” And as we talk, I will have to interpret
what you say, because all depth requires interpretation (whereas the brain physiologist doesn’t have to talk to you at
all; in fact, if a brain physiologist has got his hands on you, you are probably dead, which severely limits conversation;
the brain physiologist can know all about your brain, and never know a single thought you had).

This is why the surfaces are all referred to as “monological”—they can be examined with a monologue, not a
dialogue (which is why depth is dialogical or dialectical, or empathic in the broadest sense). You can study a bunch of
moving rocks monologically; you can study brain physiology monologically; you can study suicide rates
monologically. But you can only study interiors empathically, as a feel from within, and that means interpretation:
both you and I might be mistaken as we try to assess each other.

In the Right-Hand path, all I basically have to do is look. I will need certain conceptual and material tools, it is true,
but finally and fundamentally I just look: I look at a star with a telescope; I look at a cell with a microscope; I look at
particle trails with a cloud chamber; I look at the behavior of rats in a maze; I look at a social system with empirical
data and statistics. In each of these cases, I don’t have to talk to the object of investigation. I don’t try to reach
mutual understanding. I don’t try to interpret the depths or the interiors. I simply look at the surfaces, describe the
exteriors, describe what I see. It can all be done in a monologue; it never needs a dialogue. And it’s not that one is
right and the other wrong; it’s that both are extremely important.

This emphasizes the importance of the notion of sincerity in investigating the Upper-Left quadrant. When it
comes to the developed forms of depth in humans, I only have access to that depth via interpreting what you tell me
in a dialogue (and in body language or some such communication). And you might be lying. Further, you might be
lying to yourself—which is where the numerous “sciences of depth,” such as psychoanalysis, enter the picture. You
and I can not only translate what we perceive, we can mistranslate. And all the various forms of “the hermeneutics
of suspicion” (as Ricoeur called them) seek to dig beneath the stated surface content and assess the genuine or
actual meaning of a communication: not what’s sitting on the surface, but what hides in the depths.

The therapist, for example, based on formal training and on empathic (or sympathetic) intuition, might conclude
that “the feeling of depression that you are experiencing is actually the disguised feelings of rage at your father for
abandoning you.” And if this makes sense to you, if you go, “Aha! that’s exactly it!,” then you have discovered a
depth in you that you did not know was there, and that you consequently had been mis-translating (or
misinterpreting) all those years. You and the therapist will then begin to retranslate those mistranslated feelings,
correctly labeling them in the context of your own development: you are not “sad,” you are actually “mad.”

In this sense (which we will explore more later), my “unconscious,” my “shadow,” is the sum total of my past
mistranslations carried into the present, where it distorts perception now (“transference”). My feelings of “sadness”
were actually insincere; I was lying to myself in order to hide the worse pain of rage at a loved one; I deliberately
(but “unconsciously”) misinterpreted my feelings in order to protect myself (“defense mechanisms”). My shadow is
the locus of my insincerity, my misinterpretation of my own depth (and this indeed is what all forms of “depth
psychology,” Freudian to Jungian to Gestalt, have in common).

Further, I will also mistranslate or misinterpret the depth in others (“What do you mean by that!”) because I have
mistranslated it in myself. And thus I have to reread the text of my own feelings, locate the source of my insincerity,
and reinterpret my own depth more faithfully, with the help, usually, of somebody who has seen the mistranslation
before and can help interpret me to myself. The issues are meaning, interpretation, and sincerity (or its lack).

Behaviorism, of course, wants nothing to do with any of this “black box” of interior meaning, and consigns the lot
of it, at best, to “intervening variables” lying in that terra incognita between observable stimuli and observable
response, internal variables that are defined merely as “tendencies to behavior,” because behaviorism, being a
Right-Hand path, does not trust anything it cannot see and monologically tinker with or reinforce.26 (I wonder if any
of the behaviorists ever explain to their spouses that their shared love is just an intervening variable.)

In other words, behaviorism, like all Right-Hand paths, is fundamentally concerned with propositional truth.27 I, as
a researcher, make a statement or a proposition about an objective state of affairs, and the research attempts to
ascertain whether that statement is true or false (often by trying to disprove it). But in all cases it boils down to
statements like, “Is it or is it not raining outside?” I go and look, and I find out what the objective situation is (“It is
indeed raining outside”). Other researchers go and look, and if everybody agrees, we say it is propositionally true
that it is raining outside.

All propositional truth is of that variety, although it can get quite complicated, and the monological

looking often
requires telescopes, microscopes, EEGs, and other complex instruments of one sort or another. But they all attempt
to align propositions with an objective state of affairs. They are monological, propositional, empirical. The validity
criterion is one of truth, of matching map and territory accurately enough.

But in the Upper-Left quadrant, the validity criterion is not so much truth as truthfulness, or sincerity. The
question here is not “Is it raining outside?” The question here is: when I tell you it is raining outside, am I telling you
the truth or am I lying? Or perhaps self-deceived? Am I being truthful and sincere, or deceitful and insincere? This is
not so much a matter of objective truth as one of subjective truthfulness. It is not so much whether the map

matches the territory, but whether the mapmaker can be trusted.

Truthfulness, then, is a matter of trust and sincerity. Precisely because depth does not sit on the surface for all to
see, my reporting of depth may or may not be trusted. Truthfulness, sincerity, trustworthiness, integrity—these are
some of the crucial guideposts for navigating in the Upper-Left quadrant.

In short, it is not just a matter of true exteriors, but sincere interiors. And this sincerity cannot be determined
empirically or objectively or monologically. We can give people empirical lie-detector tests, but if they have first lied
to themselves, the monological machine will wrongly indicate they are telling the truth. The locus of sincerity is not
objective, but subjective, and that can only be accessed in dialogical interpretation, not monological indication.

We will be returning to these points later, but those are some of the individual aspects of “this thought that
occurred to me,” this thought holon we are using as an example. The thought holon has brain correlates that can be
determined objectively, monologically, propositionally (UR), guided by truth; and it has interior correlates that can
be determined only dialogically and interpretively, guided by truthfulness. Not only are the two domains different in
nature, they have different criteria for what is valid in each.

But, to continue the example, those individual aspects also have social or communal components (the lower
half). Whether I tell you my specific thoughts or not, those thoughts do indeed have meaning to me (and would
have meaning to you if I tell them to you), because that meaning is itself sustained by a whole network of
background practices and norms and linguistic structures existing in our shared culture. If I tell them to you and you
don’t speak the language, then you won’t get the meaning, even though all the physical words and stimuli freely
bombard you. That is the Lower-Left quadrant, the shared cultural worldspace necessary for the communication of
any meaning at all, and without which most (or even all) of my own private thoughts would be largely meaningless as
well.

The question here is not one of truth so much, nor even truthfulness, but one of

cultural fit, of the
appropriateness or justness or “fitness” of my meanings and values with the culture that helps to produce them. My
own individual meanings and values are not reducible to this cultural fitness (no quadrant is reducible to any other),
but they do depend thoroughly on all the background contexts and cultural practices that allow me to form
meanings in the first place. My thought-holon is inextricably situated in cultural contexts of relational exchange and
intersubjective communications, without which my own subject (and its truthfulness) and the world of objects (with
their truth) would not and could not disclose themselves in the first place.

If my thought-holon does not culturally fit, then I may be a genius rising above conventions, or I may be psychotic
and totally out of touch with my fellows. But the criterion in any case is not so much truth or truthfulness, but
justness, appropriateness: not whether my thought corresponds with a world of objects, nor whether I am being
subjectively truthful, but whether I am intersubjectively in tune, appropriately meshed with the cultural worldspace
that allows subjects and objects to arise in the first place. (Whether I agree or disagree with aspects of that culture, I
have in all cases depended upon it to provide me with the capacity for intersubjective meaning in the first place.)

In other words, the criterion for validity in the Lower-Left quadrant is not just the truth of my statement, nor the
truthfulness with which I put it, but whether you and I can come to mutual understanding with each other. Not
objective, not subjective, but intersubjective.

But none of those meanings, whether individual or cultural, are simply or merely disembodied. My individual
thoughts register a change in my brain physiology; likewise, cultural patterns are registered in exterior, material,
observable social behaviors (even if they can’t be reduced to them). And that is the Lower-Right quadrant.

That is, just as my thoughts have brain correlates, cultural meanings have correlates in objective social institutions
and material social structures. Food production, transportation systems, written records, school buildings,
geopolitical structures, behavioral actions of groups, written legal codes, architectural styles and the buildings
themselves, types of technology, linguistic structures in their exterior aspects (written or spoken signifiers), techno-
economic forces of production and distribution—all the physical components of a social action system, all the
aspects of a social system that can be seen empirically or monologically.

Here the criterion is not the truth of objects, nor the truthfulness of subjects, nor the mesh of intersubjective
understanding and meaning, but rather the functional fit or the interobjective mesh of social systems. A social
action system, for example, can only produce so much butter or so many guns, and the more of one, the less of the

other—they must functionally fit with what is physically possible (whereas, in intersubjective meaning, the more
meaning I have does not mean the less meaning available to you: these are qualities, not quantities, so they don’t
have to physically add or subtract from each other, as quantities in functional fit must).

Functional fit (“What does it do?”) is, of course, the major validity claim recognized by systems theory. And that is
part of its subtle reductionism. Interpretive depth (sincerity and truthfulness) and cultural meaning (justness and
moral appropriateness) are all reduced to functional fit in exterior surfaces: all are reduced to flatland holism.

(Even propositional truth, or subject and object corresponding fit, is reduced to functional fit, or interobjective fit,
and “truth” becomes anything that furthers the autopoietic regime of the self-organizing social system; such theories
dissolve their own truth value in the functional fit of that which they describe, so that their subjective theories
become merely one among other interobjects, a very neat trick indeed; we will return to this later.)

Now the point of this overall example is simply that my “single” thought, the original holon, is not really a single
thought as such, but rather a holon with four inseparable aspects (intentional, behavioral, cultural, and social), each
with its own validity claims (subjective truthfulness, objective truth, intersubjective justness, and interobjective
functional fit).28 As I said, no holon whatsoever simply exists in one or another quadrant; all holons possess these
four quadrants, and each quadrant is intimately correlated with, dependent upon, but not reducible to, the others.

But precisely because these quadrants are all so intimately correlated, I can indeed attempt an aggressive
reductionism, and it can actually seem to make a lot of sense. For example, since every thought does indeed register
some sort of change in brain physiology (even if I have an out-of-the-body experience!), I can always maintain that
thoughts are just brain states, even though I will probably maintain (as most brain theorists do) that the brain states
themselves are higher-order (or hierarchical) emergent patterns that cannot be reduced to their
atomistic
elements.29

This position is not yet gross reductionism. It is subtle reductionism. It has simply reduced interior depth, value,
meaning, and consciousness (the Left Hand) to functional parts of a mutually interlocking order of holistic and
empirical events (the Right Hand). It has reduced three-dimensional chess to flatland chess, the Kosmos to the
cosmos, the interrelated pyramid of life to the interrelated web of life, interrelated I and we to interrelated its.

In short, this subtle reductionism still recognizes holarchy (hierarchy), but only the hierarchies on the Right
Hand—only the hierarchies of size, extension, and surface. And therefore these hierarchies are all fundamentally
defined by physical inclusion (a cell physically includes molecules, which physically include atoms, and so on; but
these “depths” are all flatly monovalent: they are
not holarchies of value, beauty, meaning, motivation,
understanding, intention, consciousness, or anything else even vaguely Left Hand: all of those genuinely interior
depths have been scrubbed clean and empirically whitewashed in the monochrome tones of exterior physical span,
ex-span-sion, or extension/inclusion: no better or worse, only bigger or smaller).30

And this subtle reductionism is helped by the fact that all four strands of evolution, all four quadrants, follow the
twenty tenets. They are all holarchical. But whereas the Right Hand is preeminently involved in physical extension
(organisms are bigger than cells), the Left-Hand involves intentions (concepts per se are not bigger or smaller than
symbols, even though they “include” them and are more intentional; these are gradations of value and beauty, not
gradations of size).

Further, the deeper one proceeds, the less the twenty tenets tell us anything significant anyway (since they are
the lowest-common-denominator factors, the weakest-noodle laws). Nonetheless, the twenty tenets do capture
certain fundamentals in all four quadrants.

Thus, this subtle reductionism can still champion all the twenty tenets, the notion of development, the emergent
characteristic of evolution, the mutually interrelated nature of all holons, the holarchical nature of all holons, and so
on. All of that can still be heartily embraced by the subtle reductionist; it’s just that all holarchies of quality have
been lost entirely in holarchies of quantity, and all gradations of interior depth have been replaced by gradations of
meaningless exteriors (compassion is better than murder, but quarks are not better than photons, and thus to
explain the entire Kosmos in terms of exterior surfaces and empirical forms is to find only a cosmos with no value
whatsoever: guaranteed).

And since for every event in the Left-Hand dimension there is always something registered in the Right Hand, it
can appear that an exhaustive description of the Right-Hand path actually covers everything there is to be said. Put

differently, since every event in the Kosmos does indeed have a Right-Hand component, it can mistakenly appear
that the Right-Hand path alone exhausts the Kosmos, whereas it has merely registered and measured the footprints
of the giant.

It’s very subtle, this program of collapsing the Kosmos.

THE FUNDAMENTAL ENLIGHTENMENT PARADIGM

As we will see in chapter 12, this subtle reductionism was the fundamental Enlightenment paradigm.31 And within
this subtle reductionism, within the fundamental Enlightenment paradigm, there were two warring camps: flatland
atomists and flatland holists. And it is in an unbroken lineage that today’s systems theorists carry on the latter pole
of the Enlightenment paradigm: the task of both overcoming gross reductionism, which is altogether commendable,
and covertly propagating subtle reductionism, the reduction of all intention to extension, all quality to quantity, all
interpreted depths to unambiguously seen surfaces, all hierarchical values to monological mesh, all interiors to
holistic strands, all truth and meaning to functional fit, all interwoven I’s and we’s to interwoven its.32

This is why Morris Berman can point out that the “contemporary quest for holism is just as formal, abstract,
‘value-free,’ and disembodied as the mechanistic paradigm it seeks to replace.”33 This confuses and angers the
holists, because they sincerely think they are the good guys, since they managed to defeat gross reductionism. “But
we have shown that everything is connected to everything else!” The flatland web of life. Although the intentions are
often genuine, the gravitational pull of flatland makes it a planet very hard to escape.

Keep in mind that I am not saying systems theory and eco-holism is wrong; I would not have spent all of chapter 2
extolling it if I thought that. It is simply very partial—what Hegel called “a vanity of the understanding”—and that
vanity tends to become dangerous, because when half the Kosmos claims to have the whole, certain types of
aggression are about to ensue.

In chapter 1 we saw that, according to the holists themselves, we today suffer from a fractured worldview. That is
true; but despite their best intentions, the holists have not solved it, they have merely cloned it. Reducing everything
to functional fit destroys the integrity of each domain, and further renders true integration of each impossible. The
world is indeed fractured; the flatland holists are some of the prime promoters of the fracture. It is from this flat and
faded landscape, armed with good intentions and a weakest–noodle science, that they cry out to us as our saviors.

The holists, of course, tell the tale of the Enlightenment as being primarily an atomistic paradigm, which they
maintain is the real cause of the world’s fracture. This story allows the holists to hide the deeper crime of the
Enlightenment that the holists themselves are still perpetuating. As we will see throughout the remainder of this
volume, modernity’s worldview is indeed fractured, not because everything isn’t reduced to the Lower-Right
quadrant of functional fit (the eco-holistic “solution”), but because the four quadrants themselves have yet to be
integrated.

And it is in that integration that truth, truthfulness, meaning, and fit can be brought into a mutual harmony. That
harmony—and not a reductionism that tears into the fabric of each in the name of a pretend wholeness—is one of
the overall themes of this volume.

What we will find is that functional fit is indeed important, but it is only part of the harmony available. And it is not
even the most important quadrant for today’s world, because before we can even attempt an ecological healing, we
must first reach a mutual understanding and mutual agreement among ourselves as to the best way to collectively
proceed. In other words, the healing impulse comes not from championing functional fit (Lower Right) but mutual
understanding (Lower Left). And that depends first and foremost, we will see, on individual growth and
consciousness transformation (Upper Left). The Left-Hand path, not merely the Right-Hand path, must take the lead.
Anything short of that, no matter what the motives, perpetuates the fracture (or so I will try to demonstrate). In
understandably emphasizing the importance and the urgency of eco-holistic fit, many holists have absolutized the
Lower-Right quadrant, which, in thus sealing it off from any true integration, condemns it to the fate of all
fragments. Reducing all domains to the Lower Right, to functional fit, doesn’t just destroy the other domains, it
destroys the Lower Right as well.

This is just another way of pointing out that absolutizing the biosphere destroys the biosphere. At this point of

sorely needed integration, the flatland holists are ultimately no friends of Gaia. They might protect a patch of Gaia
here or there, which is wonderful; but without an overall integration of all four quadrants, Gaia continues to wither
in the winds of disregard. A genuinely Kosmic holism, not cosmic holism, is what is sorely needed.

THE BIG THREE

With reference to the four quadrants: because both of the Right-Hand quadrants are exteriors that can be described
in it-language, I will sometimes count them as one major domain, the other two being the I-language of the Upper
Left and the we-language of the Lower Left. And for simplicity’s sake I will refer to these as the Big Three (I, we, it).

Numerous comparisons with other researchers could be pointed out here, and we will eventually discuss them in
much detail. For the moment we might note that the Right half of the diagram is Karl Popper’s World I (the objective
world of it); the Upper Left, World II (the subjective world of I); and the Lower Left, World III (the cultural world of
we, which can also, as Popper points out, be embodied or embedded in material social institutions, or the Lower
Right).

Likewise, Habermas’s three validity claims, for truth (objects), truthfulness or sincerity (subjects), and rightness or
justice (intersubjectivity), refer respectively to the Right half, the Upper Left, and the Lower Left (I will return to
Habermas in a moment and emphasize the importance of his formulations in this regard).34 And in the broadest
sense this is Plato’s the True (or propositional truth referring to an objective state of affairs, it), the Good (or cultural
justice and appropriateness, we), and the Beautiful (or the individual-aesthetic dimension, I). The Big Three are
likewise Kant’s three critiques: the Critique of Pure Reason (theoretical
it-reason), of Practical Reason or
intersubjective morality (we), and of personal Aesthetic Judgment (I). Thus, although other items are included as
well, these three great domains—the Big Three—are especially the domains of empirical science, morality, and art.

But even when we move into a discussion of spirituality, we will see the Big Three appear in such all-important
formulations as the Three Jewels of Buddhism: Buddha, Dharma, Sangha. Buddha is the ultimate I, Dharma the
ultimate It, and Sangha the ultimate We. (I will be especially emphasizing this in subsequent chapters; it is absolutely
crucial in spiritual concerns.)

Charles Taylor points out that “radically different senses of what the [cultural] good is go along with quite
different conceptions of what a human agent is, different notions of the self. Our modern senses of the self not only
are linked to and made possible by new understandings of good but also are accompanied by new forms of
narrativity and new understandings of social bonds and relations. These all evolve together, in loose ‘packages,’ as it
were.”35 We are always situated in relation to the I, the we, and the it—and they evolve together.

And, to return to Habermas, this is the essence of the Habermasian revolution. We are inescapably situated in
relation to the Big Three, each of which has its own validity claim and its own standards, and none of which can be
reduced to the others. “With any speech act,” he says, “the speaker takes up a relation to something in the objective
world [it], something in a common social world [we], and something in his own subjective world [I].” And the claims
made with reference to each of those worlds have their own validity criteria, namely, propositional truth (referring
to an objective state of affairs, or it), normative rightness (cultural justness or appropriateness, we), and subjective
truthfulness (or sincerity, I). And this means that none of them can be reduced to the others:

The “world” to which subjects can relate with their representations or propositions [propositional truth] was
hitherto conceived of as the totality of objects or existing state of affairs [it]. The objective world is considered
the correlative of all true assertoric [propositional] sentences. But if normative rightness [we] and subjective
truthfulness [I] are introduced as validity claims analogous to truth, “worlds” [our “quadrants”] analogous to
the world of facts have to be postulated for legitimately regulated interpersonal relationships [we] and for
attributable subjective experiences [I]—a “world” [quadrant] not only for what is “objective,” which appears to
us in the attitude of the third person, but also one for what is normative, to which we feel obliged in the
attitude of addresses, as well as one for what is subjective, which we either disclose or conceal [sincerity] in
the attitude of the first person [the I].36

Likewise, each of these validity claims (for truth, truthfulness, and justness) can be exposed to its own different

kinds of evidence, and thus its own kind of truth claims can be exposed to evidence and checked for their actual
validity.

Correlative to the three fundamental functions of language [related to I, we, it], each elementary speech act
can be contested under three different aspects of validity. The hearer can reject the utterance of a speaker by
either disputing the truth of the proposition asserted in it (or of the existential presuppositions of its
propositional content), or the rightness of the speech act in view of the normative context of the utterance
(or the legitimacy of the presupposed context itself), or the truthfulness of the intention expressed by the
speaker (that is, the agreement of what is meant with what is stated).37

And so we can now return to (and better understand) the notion of

subtle reductionism, or the attempt to
collapse the Kosmos to the Right-Hand path (or reduce the Left Hand to the Right, or reduce “I” and “we” to “it,” or
reduce interiors to exteriors, whether atomistic or functional):

Truth is reduced to mere representation (the “reflection paradigm”).38 That is, thoughts are no longer an integral
part of the Kosmos, they are merely disengaged and hovering propositions
the
cosmos, or simply “reflect accurately” a world of matter and facts out there (propositional thought as reflecting an
objective state of affairs, or “its”).39 Reason is reduced from a substantive vision of the Kosmic order to a
procedural process for mapping flatland.40 Truth no longer means attunement with the Kosmos, but merely how to
map the cosmos.

that are supposed to mirror

More subtly, truth comes to mean functional fit. Truth no longer refers to attunement with the Kosmic state of
affairs (interiorly and exteriorly, vertically and horizontally), nor even reflection on a state of affairs; it comes to
mean merely instrumental means in the autopoietic self-maintainance of the system of functional fit (at which
point it bizarrely dissolves its own status; functional fitness can claim to be a true theory only by negating the
meaning of truth: the theory, if it is true, must itself actually be an instrumental production of the system, at which
point it can no longer be said to be true, only useful).41

Similarly, personal integrity and intentions (UL) are reduced to healthy brain functioning (UR), to the now rampant
model of biological psychiatry (one is depressed, not if one’s life becomes meaningless or lacks values, but if one’s
neurotransmitters lack serotonin). Or, likewise, one’s personal
integrity and meaning is reduced to behavioral
modification (also UR). Not “Where am I situated in the Kosmos?” but “How can I function better in the cosmos?”
Not “What does my existence mean?” but “How can I get it to work better?”

Personal meaning is thus reduced to behavioral fitness, and this is unconsciously judged by the prevailing
conventional cultural reality (without acknowledging the implicit judgment involved). “Adaptation to society” is thus
the standard yardstick against which behavioral (and brain chemistry) modifications are judged (explicitly or
implicitly): not whether adaptation to a given society is a good idea or not, but how to function better in that society
regardless (and if you can’t adapt to being a good Serb while you rape and murder, then a little Prozac will help us
over those rough spots).42 Self-understanding is replaced by behavioral functioning, where one reinforces the
desired response without a clue as to what responses are actually desirable and worth reinforcing in the first place.

Cultural meaning (LL) is reduced to social integration (LR), yet another version of functional fit. The whole
validity of a cultural set of values is converted into a question of whether they promote social cohesion, functional
fitness, and the integration of the social action system. By this criterion, the Nazis were altogether valid, because
they certainly had one of the most coherent social orders ever devised: holism in action. Nothing beats fascism for a
sturdy autopoietic regime. And nothing shows more clearly how limited social integration is as a criterion of the true
and the good.

Put differently, since “What does it mean?” (the Left Hand) has been collapsed to “What does it do?” (the Right

Hand), then the only criterion is “How well does it do it?” and not also “Is it worthy to pursue in the first place?”

Likewise, with subtle reductionism, morals no longer embody a statement of the good life, or what it means to
lead a decent and worthy and noble life—a life worth being emulated, a life that empowers, a life plugged into moral
sources that inspire worth and worship, awe and admiration—but rather what is merely required of us as a part, as a
fraction, of a social action system. Intersubjective understanding is reduced to systems steering problems and
technical tinkering. Morals and meanings become anemic markers of what procedures are required for systems

maintenance and systems expansion. The True, and the Good, and the Beautiful are reduced to place settings at the
dinner table of monological mesh.

And we are all reduced to whatever promotes the functional capacity of the autocratic system, reduced to what
works, reduced to fitting in. Reduced to leading life by looking at a representational map of a flat and faded
landscape, trying to fit into that landscape, and to trying to persuade others to embrace the same cheerful
ontological suicide.

We will see that the great task of modernity and postmodernity, as theorists from Schelling to Hegel to Habermas
to Taylor have pointed out, is not to replace gross reductionism with subtle reductionism (or atomism with flatland
holism), but to integrate the Big Three (integrate I, we, and it; or art, morals, and science; or self, culture, and
nature), not by reducing one to the others, but by finding a richly encompassing conception of the Kosmos that
allows each to flourish in its own right.

In other words,

differentiation of the Big Three, the great task of “postmodernity” is their
called “a monster of arrested development” (both of these points will be discussed in later chapters).43

if the great achievement of the Enlightenment (and “modernity”) was the necessary
integration, overcoming what Taylor

What we need to do, then, is look now to the evolution of the Left-Hand dimensions (I and we) as they appear in
humans, so that these can be “added” to the accounts of the Right-Hand path for a more balanced overview, an
overview that more hopefully might contribute to the integration of the Big Three domains.

We can start with Habermas.

MICRO AND MACRO, PHYLO AND ONTO

Habermas begins with the observation that the same structures of consciousness (his phrase) can be found in the
individual self (UL) and its cultural setting (LL), that is, in the micro and macro branch of the evolution of human
consciousness.44 Habermas often uses “social” in the broad sense, but here we are centering mostly on what I have
called cultural, as the context will make clear:

If one examines social
institutions and the action competences of socialized individuals for general
characteristics, one encounters the same structures of consciousness. This can be shown in connection with
[to give only one example] law and morality. One can see here the identity of the conscious structures that
are, on the one hand, embodied in the institutions of law and morality and that are, on the other hand,
expressed in the moral judgements and actions of individuals. Cognitive developmental psychology has shown
that in ontogenesis there are different stages of moral consciousness, stages that can be described in
particular as preconventional, conventional, and postconventional patterns of problem-solving [which we will
explain later]. The same patterns turn up again in the social evolution of moral and legal representations.45

As Habermas indicates, the individual and the cultural holon evidence the same basic structures of consciousness,
and these same basic structures of consciousness show up in the development or evolution of both the individual
and the species:

The ontogenetic models are certainly better analyzed and better corroborated than their social-evolutionary
counterparts. But it should not surprise us that there are homologous structures of consciousness in the
history of the species, if we consider that linguistically established intersubjectivity of understanding marks
that innovation in the history of the species which first made possible the level of sociocultural [noospheric]
learning. At this level the reproduction of society and the socialization of its members are two aspects of the
same process; they are dependent on the same structures.46

Let me repeat that Habermas is saying two things here: an individual human being and its sociocultural
environment evidence the same basic structures of consciousness (correlation of micro and macro), and further,
these same basic structures can be found in the evolution of the individual and the species (ontogenetic and
phylogenetic parallels).

The homologous structures of consciousness in the histories of the individual and the species [are not
restricted to the domain of law and morality. They can also be found] in the domain of ego development and
the evolution of worldviews on the one hand, and in the domain of ego and collective identities on the other
[correlations between UL and LL].47

Here are a few of the correlations according to Habermas (and using only his terms): an individual at the level of
preoperational thought participates in a natural or bodily identity, a shared worldview that is magic-animistic, and a
preconventional morality; an individual at the level of concrete operational thought is open to a role identity,
participates in a shared worldview of mythological thought, and in a conventional morality; and an individual at the
level of formal operational thought possesses an ego identity, participates in a shared worldview that is rational, and
evidences a postconventional morality (all of which we will be explaining).

Habermas’s point is that, just as an infant of today develops from preconventional (magic) to conventional
(mythic) to postconventional (rational)—which we will investigate in chapter 6—so the species itself evolved from
magic to mythic to rational (in other words, quite similar to Gebser). It is the same basic structures of consciousness
underlying both the micro and macro branch in both their ontogenetic and phylogenetic evolution, and it is the
same developmental logic (holoarchic in nature, I would add) that governs their evolution.

I had taken virtually the identical approach in Up from Eden and Eye to Eye, and a few critics have objected to
Habermas’s and my use of phylogenetic and ontogenetic parallels, claiming that this is an old and outmoded way of
thinking that nobody subscribes to anymore. And, indeed, the notion of onto/phylo parallels—first introduced by
Ernst von Haeckel (1834–1919)—was originally used in such a rigid and simplistic way that the entire notion itself fell
into disrepute. But in its modern versions it simply outlines a series of abstract patterns that indeed show
similarities, and in this version it is even accepted by orthodox science itself, as witness that bastion of orthodoxy,
Isaac Asimov, in his widely respected New Guide to Science:

It is almost impossible to run down the roster of living things, as I have just done, without ending with a strong
impression that there has been a slow development of life from the very simple to the complex [tenet 12a].
The phyla can be arranged so that each seems to add something to the one before [tenet 5]. Within each
phylum, the various classes can be arranged likewise; and within each class, the orders.

We can trace practically a re-enactment of the passage through the phyla, even in the development of a
human being from the fertilized egg. In the course of this development, the egg starts as a single cell (a kind of
protozoon), then becomes a small colony of cells (as in a sponge), each of which at first is capable of
separating and starting life on its own, as happens when identical twins develop. The developing embryo
passes through a two-layered stage (like a coelenterate), then adds a third layer (like an echinoderm), and so
continues to add complexities in roughly the order the progressively higher species do.48

As for cognitive development, the empirical conclusion of developmentalists from Silvano Arieti to Piaget is that
there are indeed certain onto/phylo parallels in the evolution of deep structures (not surface structures), as Arieti
explains: “What is of fundamental importance is that the [ontogenetic and phylogenetic] processes to a large extent
follow similar developmental plans. This does not mean literally that in the psyche ontogeny recapitulates
phylogeny, but that there are certain similarities in the [two] fields of development and that we are able to
individualize schemes of highest forms of generality which involve all levels of the psyche in its [two] types of
development. We also recognize concrete variants of the same overall structural plans in the types of
development.”49

That version of onto/phylo parallels is explicitly accepted by researchers and theorists from Erich Jantsch
(“recapitulation does not act in a rigid and structurally oriented way, but in the sense of the flexible modification of a
space-time structure”)50
to Karl Popper and John Eccles (see The Self and Its Brain). Massive evidence has been
accumulated in this regard by the Jungians and given its most powerful statement in Erich Neumann’s book The
Origins and History of Consciousness.

But perhaps the most intriguing use of this notion is to be found in Rupert Sheldrake, who sees general
recapitulation as a form of morphic resonance (or Kosmic memory) from all previous stages of evolution. It is as if, he

says, nature develops habits—morphic units with morphic fields, which he also calls holons—and once these holons
are developed or become set as habits of nature, then nature simply keeps reusing them in succeeding
stages—another version of compound individuality.

Nobody is more aware than Habermas of the misuses and fallacies to which this notion has been put, and indeed
he outlines eight ways that the notion has been erroneously used, objections which I strongly share (the critics of
this approach might wish to consult Habermas, because he seems to be much clearer about its problems than they
are).51 Habermas nonetheless concludes, “All provisos notwithstanding, certain homologies can be found”—certain
parallels between the development of individuals and the development of the species.52

We can now look directly to these homologies, remembering always that these are not just some archaeological
digs from a distant past, interesting but irrelevant. On the contrary, this is also an archaeology of our own souls.
These “digs” exist now in the present, enfolded in us as part of our own compound individuality, past interiors
taken into our own present interiors, living on in the depths of our own being today, enriching us or destroying us,
depending entirely on our own capacity to embrace and to transcend.

5

The Emergence of Human Nature

Today, makes yesterday mean.

—EMILY DICKINSON

I think that there is a widespread and facile tendency, which one should combat, to designate that which
has just occurred as the primary enemy, as if this were always the principal form of oppression from which
one had to liberate oneself. Now this simple attitude entails a number of dangerous consequences: first, an
inclination to seek out some cheap form of archaism or some imaginary past forms of happiness that
people did not, in fact, have at all. There is in this hatred of the present a dangerous tendency to invoke a
completely mythical past.

—MICHEL FOUCAULT

AT THIS POINT

in our discussion, we have sketched the evolution of the exterior of individual holons up to the

complex triune-brained organisms (hominids) with an interior space of symbols and concepts. They lived in a social
holon of a group/family (tribe) possessing a cultural archaic worldview. (Those are the four quadrants up to this
point in our story.) But then something happened that transformed hominids (or “proto-humans”) into true humans
(Homo sapiens).
What was it?

THE EMERGENCE OFHOMO SAPIENS

Habermas begins with the Marxist idea that what separates humans—Homo sapiens—from hominids and other
primates is social labor or the existence of an economy. But Habermas finds that it is very likely that hominids also
possessed an economy, and thus the mere existence of economic exchange does not mark the specifically human
form of life, does not separate hominids from Homo sapiens.1

If we examine the concept of social labor [economy] in the light of more recent anthropological findings, it
becomes evident that it cuts too deeply into the evolutionary scale; not only humans but hominids too were
distinguished from the anthropoid apes in that they converted to reproduction through social labor and
developed an economy. The [hominid] adult males formed hunting bands, which (a) made use of weapons and
tools (technology), (b) cooperated through a division of labor, and (c) distributed the prey within the collective
(rules of distribution). The making of the means of production and the social organization of labor, as well as of
the distribution of its products, fulfilled the conditions for an economic form of reproducing life.2

Since part of my aim in this series is to follow the course of the male and female value spheres, it is instructive to
note that, even in archaic hominid societies, these two spheres were already beginning to differentiate, and often
sharply. Habermas:

The society of hominids is more difficult to reconstruct than their mode of production. It is not clear how far
beyond interactions mediated by gestures—already found among primates—their system of communication
progressed. The conjecture is that they possessed a language of gestures and a system of signal calls. In any
event, cooperative big-game hunting requires reaching understanding about experiences, so that we have to
assume a protolanguage, which at least paved the way for the systematic connection of cognitive
accomplishments, affective expressions, and interpersonal relations that was so important for hominization.

The division of labor in the hominid groups presumably led to a development of two subsystems: on the one
hand, the adult males, who were together in egalitarian hunting bands and occupied, on the whole, a
dominant position; on the other hand, the females, who gathered fruit and lived together with their young, for
whom they cared.
the strategic forms of cooperation and the rules of
distribution were new [my italics; Habermas is searching for emergents]; both innovations were directly
connected with the establishment of the first mode of production, the cooperative hunt.3

In comparison to primate societies,

Thus, Habermas concludes, the emergence of an economy “is suitable for delimiting the mode of life of the
hominids from that of the primates; but it does not capture the specifically human reproduction of life.”4 Rather, it
“appears now that the evolutionary novelty that distinguishes Homo sapiens is not the economy but the family.”5

Up to this point we have been using the term “family” in Jantsch’s very loose sense, meaning any genetic-relative
group of animals. But the specifically human family, according to Habermas, is marked by an emergent characteristic
that is found nowhere else in evolution.

Not hominids, but humans were the first to break up the social structure that arose with the vertebrates—the
one-dimensional rank ordering in which every animal was transitively assigned one and only one status.
Among chimpanzees and baboons this status system controlled the rather aggressive relations between adult
males, sexual relations between male and female, and social relations between the old and the young. A
familylike relationship existed only between the mother and her young, and between siblings. Incest between
mothers and growing sons was not permitted; there was no corresponding incest barrier between fathers and
daughters, because the father role did not exist. Even hominid societies converted to the basis of social labor
did not yet know a family structure.6

The novel emergence of the human family, according to Habermas, occurred only as the male was also assigned
the role of father, for it was only in this way that the two value spheres of the male and female could be linked. In
ways (and for reasons) that we will examine in exhaustive detail in volume 2 of this series, the male and female value
spheres had already been differentiated into social labor (hunting) and nurturance of the young. Lenski reports, for
example, that of the known societies at this stage, an astonishing 97 percent show that pattern of male/female
differentiation.7
If evolution were to continue, a new integration was also needed. Since presumably the female
could not be pregnant and simultaneously hunt, the integrating link was established by the novel emergence of the
role of the father, with one foot in both spheres.

The mode of production of the socially organized hunt created a system problem that was resolved by the
familialization of the male, that is, by the introduction of a kinship system based on exogamy. The male society
of the hunting band became independent of the plant-gathering females and the young, both of whom
remained behind during the hunting expeditions. With this differentiation, linked to the division of labor, there
arose a new need for integration, namely, the need for a controlled exchange between the two subsystems
[what we called relational exchange with same-level holons]. But the hominids apparently had at their disposal
only the pattern of status-dependent sexual relations. This pattern was not equal to the new need for
integration, the less so, the more the status order of the primates was further undermined by forces pushing
in the direction of egalitarian relations within the hunting band. Only a family system based on marriage and
regulated descent permitted the adult male member to link—via the father role—a status in the male system
of the hunting band with a status in the female and child system, and thus (1) integrate functions of social
labor with functions of nurture of the young, and, moreover, (2) coordinate functions of male hunting with

those of female gathering.8

The familialization of the male. Thus began the one, single, enduring, and nightmarish task of all subsequent

civilization: the taming of testosterone.

MALE ADVANTAGE AND FEMALE ADVANTAGE

Notice that, unlike the role of the father, the role of the mother was not sufficient to link the two value spheres,
because the mother could not, or at any rate did not, participate in the social
labor of the hunt (with rare
exceptions). And so we see that here, right at the very defining transformation from hominids to humans, a sexual
differentiation emerged, a differentiation that could, as we will see, dissociate into extreme sexual polarization.

At this early point, this differentiation or asymmetry does not appear to have been strongly evaluative—that is,
one sphere was not particularly more important or more valued than the other. It appears to have been mostly a
simple differentiation of function, not a massive differentiation of status. There is no evidence that it was intensely
ideological or exploitative, but rather seems to have been based largely on such simple biological factors as physical
strength and mobility (male advantage) and procreation and biological nursing (female advantage).

These are intricate and emotionally charged issues, especially for the various schools of feminism, which is why
the second volume of this series is devoted to an extensive review of just such issues.9 Some liberal feminists feel
that any sexual differentiation or asymmetry is due exclusively to male domination. Many radical feminists, on the
other hand, strongly accept and embrace the differentiation between the male and female value spheres (which, we
will see, they equate with agency and communion, respectively), and they urge society to embrace more of the
latter and less of the former. Social feminists tend to see sexual differences arising from different modes of
production and technology, and see these unfair differences “evening out” as capitalistic modes become more
human and humanizing.

I will be examining all of those positions carefully in volume 2. But until then we need an agreed-upon truce in the
gender wars. My claim is that the structures of human consciousness that I will be presenting in the rest of this
volume are in fact gender neutral, that there is no fundamental gender bias in the deep structures themselves.
However, in the course of historical development, these gender-neutral structures, for numerous reasons we will
examine, became loaded with various factors (technological, economic, cultural, social, and intentional) that biased
some of these structures in an often specifically subjugating and certainly polarizing (or dissociating) fashion.

Thus, in volume 2, I will be looking at each of the cultural stages or worldviews (archaic, magic, mythic, mental,
centauric) and correlating them with their historical modes of material production and technology (foraging,
horticultural, agrarian, industrial, informational)—as shown in Figure 5-1. Further, I will then specifically examine the
status of men and women in each of those stages. My claim is that a consensus of liberal, radical, and social feminist
views already exists on many of these important issues, and I will present those at that point.

In the meantime, when we reach, for example, the mythic-agrarian structure in the present discussion, I will have
little to say about the status of women in those societies, even though the strong consensus of orthodox and
feminist researchers alike is that sexual polarization and male domination of the public sphere were at their
historical peak (and almost reversed from some of the previous horticultural societies, where many feminists feel
women were at their greatest power). I would just like to point out that the fact that I don’t discuss that issue now
does not mean I am ignoring it.

But I will indicate just a few of the ways that I believe this approach is novel. In studying gender and possible
is a set of constants that acknowledge certain unambiguous
gender differences, what is required initially
differences in function (women give birth and lactate, and men have on average a moderate advantage in physical
strength and mobility—these specific differences, for example, are emphasized by feminist researchers from Janet
Chafetz to Joyce Nielsen, as we will see). These simple differences might not seem all that important today, but
historically and prehistorically they were often some of the most important and determining factors in all of culture.
For example, when the animal-drawn plow was developed and eventually replaced the handheld hoe for farming
(this is referred to as a shift from horticultural to agrarian modes), there was a massive shift from a largely female

work force to a largely male work force, due almost entirely to the fact that the plow, unlike the hoe or digging stick,
is a heavy piece of equipment. In horticultural societies, women produced about 80 percent of the foodstuffs (and
consequently shared considerable public power with men); a pregnant woman could still easily use a handheld hoe,
but not a plow. When the plow was invented, men took up virtually all of the productive work, the matrifocal modes
of production gave way to patrifocal modes, and the reigning deity figures switched from Great Mother to Great
Father focus.

(Peggy Sanday has demonstrated that predominant female deity figures appear almost exclusively in horticultural
societies—about a third of them have female-only deities, and another third have male and female deities; whereas
virtually all agrarian societies have male-only deities. Thus, one of the conclusions of volume 2 is that where
women work the fields with a hoe, God is a Woman; where men work the fields with a plow, God is a Man. Exactly
how that fits with any enduring masculine and feminine faces of Spirit is a major topic of volume 2. Are these deity
figures just economic byproducts, or is something more enduring being reflected here?)

Feminist researchers such as Janet Chafetz have pointed out that women who participated in heavy plowing had a
much higher rate of miscarriage, and thus it was not to their genetic advantage to do so. This aspect of the shift
from matrifocal to patrifocal, in other words, cannot reasonably be ascribed to oppression or male domination, but
to a joint decision on the part of men and women in the face of a set of natural givens.

That initial differentiation of

function, however, could be (and in many cases was) parlayed into a difference in
status, with males dominating the public/productive sphere and women relegated to the private/reproductive
sphere. And what we will want to examine are these natural differentiations as they moved into dissociations (and
extreme sexual polarizations) that disadvantaged one or the other sex (and usually both)—at each of the six or so
major epochs/stages/structures we will be examining.

In other words, we will find that a set of constants (a handful of factors that, according to most feminist
researchers, have not changed much from culture to culture, such as birthing/nursing), when applied to the various
gender-neutral structures of consciousness and stages of technological unfolding, will together generate the specific
gender differences in the status of men and women at each stage (and this will help us to decide what is, and what is
not, oppression). These constants (such as physical strength/mobility and birthing/nursing) are presented in volume
2 (“Strong and Weak Universals in the Sexual Scheme”), and how they play out and unfold, for better and for worse,
is examined in five or six chapters following.

What we are discussing now, however, is simply the gender-neutral structures of consciousness within which

these sexual and gender polarizations would occur.

MALE AND FEMALE LIBERATION

Before we pick up the story of the evolution of these consciousness structures, let me give a final example of the
ground we will be covering later in this chapter (and extensively in volume 2). Some of what I am going to say now
will not make total sense until the end of this chapter (after I have introduced some much-needed evidence), but it
would be useful to introduce the general topics at this point, because of both their importance and their intricacy.
(We will return to these topics at the end of the chapter and review them in light of the material presented.)

feminism (men and women represent

two quite different value spheres,

individualistic, a bit power-crazed, but generally

Part of the disagreement between liberal feminism (men and women are fundamentally equivalent in capacities)
the former being
and radical
hyperautonomous,
agency-oriented, the latter being more
relational, nurturing, permeable, and communion-oriented) is that these two approaches are almost impossible to
reconcile, and this has caused much dissension, sometimes quite bitter, within the ranks of the women’s movement.
But what if the radical feminists are right when it comes to the biospheric component of human beings, and the
liberal feminists are right when it comes to the noospheric component? If this integration could be effected in a
genuine fashion, and not merely as a verbal flourish, we could simultaneously honor some of the important
differences in sexual being—so emphasized by the radical feminists—and yet also insist on, and maintain, equality
before the law (which means, in the noosphere)—the important demand of liberal feminists.

But it would mean something else as well, something even more important. In this chapter we will see the

evidence (presented by numerous researchers) that the noosphere and the biosphere did not finally differentiate in
the West until around the sixteenth-seventeenth century.
into
dissociation—that is one of our central topics, but for the moment, it is a separate issue.) The point now is that, with
the differentiation of the noosphere and the biosphere, the roles of men and women were no longer necessarily or
automatically determined (or largely influenced) by biological factors (such as physical strength/mobility and
birthing/nursing), factors that, one way or another, had largely dominated not only the relation of men to women
but also of men to men, up to that point in history.

this differentiation went

(That

too far

In other words, with the differentiation of the noosphere and the biosphere, biology was no longer destiny. That
is, no longer necessarily destiny: the relationships between men and women (and men and men) were no longer
necessarily dominated by the heavy hand of biological differences and determinants, physical strength and
reproduction.

Thus, as evolution continued to move into the noosphere and transcend its exclusive grounding in the biosphere,
those two universals that we briefly mentioned—bodily strength and bodily reproduction—which have value only in
the biosphere, could be transcended as well
(i.e., preserved and negated). This, of course, is a matter of degree;
biology is still preserved and its inclinations still taken up and reworked by culture; but the greater the
differentiation, the greater the possible negation and reworking.

If, for the moment, we simply agree with the radical feminists that the “female value sphere” tends to emphasize
communion, then this value sphere could be decoupled from exclusive biological reproduction and could begin to
enter the world of agency or production or “male culture,” while still retaining its roots in the richness of the
reproductive sphere. The more evolution transcended the biosphere, the more women could participate in both
worlds (noospheric-mental and biospheric-familial), because in the world of the mind, physical strength, for
example, is irrelevant.

In other words, with the differentiation of the noosphere and the biosphere, women could also become agents in
the noosphere (historical agents), as well as being grounded in the biosphere. And this precisely reverses the roles
that men and women had played up to this point in history. Previously, the male and female spheres were integrated
by placing the male in the family via the role of the father (as biological agent); now the two spheres could be
integrated—demanded to be integrated—by placing the female in the public sphere (as noospheric agent).

Thus, at this present time in history—in today’s world—it is especially the role of the female as historical agent
that can bridge the two value spheres, whereas in all previous history that role rather necessarily fell to the male as
father (this “familialization of the male” is the point that Habermas has just introduced in our narrative).10

In this way, and this way only, I believe, can we maintain the otherwise paradoxical and confusing truth—a
paradoxical truth that has often crippled feminism vis-à-vis “female liberation”—in this way only can we maintain
both that women now stand open to and in need of liberation yet previously were not acting in an unliberated
(or duped) fashion. The widespread emergence of the women’s movement in the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries occurred precisely because the noosphere and the biosphere were finally differentiated.11 And this
inescapably means that the widespread emergence of the women’s movement was not primarily the undoing of a
nasty state of affairs that easily could have been different, but rather it marked the emergence of an altogether
new state of affairs that was in significant ways unprecedented.

What had grounded both men and women in narrowly based biological roles was an evolutionary process that
was itself, until fairly recently, grounded in the biosphere, and that only recently is now in the process of liberating
both men and women from confinement to those particular roles, which were necessary at the time but are now
outmoded; and the lead in this evolutionary transformation can most easily come (as Ynestra King has pointed out)
primarily in the form of women assuming cultural agency and not just family communion (just as in the previous
integration, the familialization of the male, men were placed in family communion and not just cultural agency).

That is the new integration now demanded on a societal level. And viewing it in this evolutionary light allows us to
bypass much of the standard and useless rhetoric that men have been oppressive pigs from day one, with the
unavoidable implication that women have been herded sheep. It’s not so much that that view is demeaning to men,
although it is meant to be, but rather that one cannot claim women have been oppressed for five thousand years
(some say for five hundred thousand years) without simultaneously implying that women are stupider and/or

weaker than men—there are no other explanations.

If we see the biologically differentiated roles of men and women as something imposed by men on women, then
we have to simultaneously assume the complete pigification of men and the total sheepification of women. To
automatically assume that differentiation of roles is the result of domination is to automatically define a particular
group as victim, which automatically and irrevocably disempowers that group in the very attempt to liberate it.12

But if men and women were largely operating in the face of certain biological givens, and if these givens are no
longer primarily determinate,
then both men and women stand in need of liberation from those previously
confining roles. The “patriarchy” was not something that could have simply and easily been avoided or bypassed
(wherever evolution moved beyond the hoe, the patriarchy accompanied it).13
If it could have been easily bypassed
but wasn’t, then men indeed are pigs and women dolts. The patriarchy, however, is not something that needs to be
reversed but rather something that needs to be outgrown: and that releases the male from blame and the female
from sheepdom.

And it further allows us to see the real cause of the unfortunate resistance to today’s feminism. It is not a
resistance to undoing thousands of years of male obnoxiousness and female dupedom, but a resistance to the
emergence of an entirely novel structure of consciousness, a structure that, having for the first time in history
differentiated the noosphere and the biosphere (which, among many other things, created feminism), is now in the
process of trying desperately to integrate both women and men into that utterly new worldspace. That is what is
feared and resisted (by many men and many women). And that is the new integration of which I will speak at length
(under the names “centaur” and “vision-logic,” the stage beyond egoic-rational).

We will see that there have indeed been forms of oppression and subjugation, but these have to be judged, not
against today’s structures of consciousness, but against what could have been otherwise at a given previous
structure. Within the possibilities of a given structure, we judge its degree of nastiness: the judgment needs to be
stage-specific and stage-appropriate. And this means we have to carefully reconstruct the notion of oppression in
this regard, because if something could not occur under any given circumstances at a particular time, then the “not
occurring” cannot simply be ascribed to oppression without further ado. If, for example, widespread feminism could
not have emerged until the differentiation of the noosphere and biosphere, then its nonexistence in earlier cultures
was not the result of oppression, but the result of not-yet-enough evolution, an entirely different story: women
were not being weak and ignorant and men were not being insensitive slobs (nothing, that is to say, out of the
ordinary).

When the noosphere and the biosphere were finally differentiated, biology was no longer destiny. Women could
begin to move out of the biosphere and into the noosphere, albeit against much resistance to this new emergence.
(And indeed, every male today starts his own development as a biospheric beast, and he won’t “get it” until he, too,
differentiates noosphere and biosphere, and acts from the former, not the latter. The battle has to be fought anew
with every birth, and the resistance, in different forms, is present in both women and men. Polls consistently
showed, for example, that in the United States a majority of men favored the Equal Rights Amendment but a
majority of women rejected it. The new emergence is difficult for all, precisely because it in many ways means
leaving the predeterminatedness and comfort of biological givens.)

In the course of history and prehistory, it would take three or four major and profound cultural transformations to
climb up and out of this biological destiny. (And each step would have its own and very new forms of pathology and
possible dissociation, all of which would have to be negotiated—sometimes not very successfully.)

At this point in our narrative, we are still at the very first transformation. The first sexual-functional differentiation
has just
taken place, based largely on simple biospheric differences (physical strength/mobility versus
birthing/nursing). And the first major integration of these two spheres has also occurred: placing the male in both
worlds via the altogether novel emergence of the role of the father.

MAGICAL-ANIMISTIC

With the familialization of the male, and the emergence of human sociocultural evolution, we move from the archaic
to the magic. The archaic is for both Gebser and myself a loose “catchall” epoch that simply and globally represents

all the structures of consciousness up to and including the first hominids. We could just as easily have broken the
archaic down into its dozens of components and individual stages, such as the more detailed breakdown given in
figure 4-1 (where everything up to concepts is “the archaic fund”). The archaic is simply a symbol of the totality of
our rich evolutionary history, but it is not just a symbol, because this history lives on in each of us as part of our
present compound individuality.

As for the magical structure itself, according to the extensive research of Habermas and his associates:

Apparently the magical-animistic representational world of paleolithic societies was very particularistic and
not very coherent. The ordering representations of mythology [i.e., early mythology, and not the complex
mythology that is the next stage, the mythological stage proper] first made possible the construction of a
complex of analogies in which all natural and social phenomena were interwoven and could be transformed
into one another [“magical displacement”].
In the egocentric world conception of the child at the
preoperational level of thought, these phenomena are made relative to the center of the child’s ego; similarly,
in sociomorphic worldviews they are made relative to the center of the tribal group. This does not mean that
the members of the group have formed a distinct consciousness of the normative reality of a society standing
apart from objectivated nature—these two regions have not yet been clearly separated [i.e., the biosphere
and the noosphere have not yet been clearly differentiated/integrated]. This magical-animistic stage is
characterized by a conventional kinship organization, a preconventional stage of law, and an egocentric
interpretive system. . . .14

Preoperational thinking, for cognitive anthropologists, is thinking that works with images, symbols, and concepts
(but not yet complex rules and formal operations). It is also called “representational” because symbols and concepts
essentially present and represent (make and match) sensory objects in the external world. For this reason, cognitive
psychologists and anthropologists refer to representational thought as being “close to the body.” That is, the
noosphere is just emerging, the mind is just emerging, and as such it is still relatively undifferentiated from the
biosphere, from the body and sensorimotor intelligence.15

This is why Habermas refers to the self-identity of this stage as a natural

identity or a body-based identity (as
Freud put it, “the ego is first and foremost a bodyego”). It is not yet an identity based upon extensive mental rules
and roles—which develop only with the next stage, the concrete operational—and so the law and morality of this
stage is likewise body-based, dependent upon physical pragmatic concerns and “naive instrumental hedonism.” As
McCarthy summarizes it, the individual at this preconventional moral stage “is responsive to cultural rules and
labels of good and bad, right and wrong, but interprets these labels in terms of either the physical or the hedonistic
consequences of action (punishment, reward, exchange of favor), or in terms of the physical power of those who
enunciate the rules and labels.”16

It is also called “magical” (by Habermas, Gebser, Piaget) because the mind and body are still relatively
undifferentiated, and thus mental images and symbols are often confused or even identified with the physical events
they represent, and consequently mental intentions are believed to be able to “magically” alter the physical world,
as in voodoo, exoteric mantra, the fetish, magical ritual, “sympathetic magic,” or magic in general (we will return to
this topic in the next chapter).17 Likewise, and from the other side of the indissociation, physical objects are “alive,”
possessing not just prehension but explicitly personal intentions (animism).

In other words, because the biosphere and the noosphere are not yet clearly differentiated/integrated, the
subject has special power over the object (magic) and the object has special subjective qualities (animism). Whether
that was or was not “spiritual” in any genuine sense we will investigate later.

Cognitive anthropologists often refer to this as “global syncretism” or “indissociation.” Habermas explains:

[In these societies] collective identity was secured through the fact that individuals traced their descent to the
figure of a common ancestor [kinship] and thus, in the framework of their worldview, assured themselves of a
common cosmogonic origin. On the other hand, the personal identity of the individual developed through
identification with a tribal group, which was in turn perceived as part of a nature interpreted in interaction
[magical] categories. As social reality was not yet clearly distinguished from natural reality, the boundaries of

the social world merged into those of the world in general. Without clearly defined boundaries of the social
system there was no natural or social environment in the strict sense; contacts with alien tribes were
interpreted in accord with the familiar kinship connection.18

It is that indissociation that is so often eulogized by Romantics, because, I believe, they mistake indissociation for
integration. The magical-animistic structure, as lovely as it might appear to us jaded moderns, was not an integration
of the biosphere and the noosphere, because these had not yet been differentiated in the first place.

At the same time—and for precisely the same reason—that “lack of separation” might have embodied a type of
ecological wisdom, a wisdom that many moderns are understandably trying to recapture. Namely, the tribal kinship
consciousness, still lying “close to the body,” close to the biosphere, was for just that reason sometimes more
“ecologically sound,” more in tune with natural wisdom, with the Earth and its many moods. And thus it is small
wonder that, in these ecologically disastrous times, many moderns are attempting to resurrect the natural wisdom
of tribal awareness more attuned with the biosphere.

I am in complete sympathy with that approach; I am not in sympathy with the attempt to turn back the clock and
elevate this structure to a privileged status of integrative power that it simply did not possess. Further, whether
“close to nature” automatically translates into “ecologically sound” is hotly debated. Lack of capacity to devastate
the environment on a large scale does not automatically mean presence of wisdom, let alone reverence for the
environment. And, in fact, many tribes, as Lenski points out, simply remained at one location until they had
ecologically depleted the area, and then were forced to move on. Tribal awareness was in all cases close to nature, in
the sense of indissociated; ecologically sound is another matter.

Riane Eisler is specific: “If we carefully examine both our past and present, we see that many peoples past and
present living close to nature have all too often been blindly destructive of their environment. While many
indigenous societies have a great reverence for nature, there are also both non-Western and Western peasant and
nomadic cultures that have overgrazed and overcultivated land, decimated forests, and, where population pressures
have been severe, killed off animals needlessly and indifferently. And while there is much we can learn today from
tribal cultures, it is important not to indiscriminately idealize all non-Western cultures and/or blame all our troubles
on our secular-scientific age. For clearly such tribal practices as cannibalism, torture, and female genital mutilation
antedate modern times. And some indigenous . . . societies have been as barbarous as the most ‘civilized’ Roman
emperors or the most ‘spiritual’ Christian inquisitors.”19

As René Dubos summarizes the available evidence, “All over the globe and at all times in the past, men have
pillaged nature and disturbed the ecological equilibrium, usually out of ignorance, but also because they have always
been more concerned with immediate advantages than with long-range goals. Moreover, they could not foresee that
they were preparing for ecological disasters, nor did they have a real choice of alternatives.”20

Theodore Roszak, himself a staunch advocate of a certain type of “primal/tribal wisdom,” nonetheless points out
that in many instances “tribal societies have abused and even ruined their habitat. In prehistoric times, the tribal and
nomadic people of the Mediterranean basin overcut and overgrazed the land so severely that the scars of the
resulting erosion can still be seen. Their sacramental sense of nature did not offset their ignorance of the long-range
damage they were doing to their habitat.”

Likewise, he says, other indigenous or primal societies have, “in their ignorance, blighted portions of their habitat
sufficiently to endanger their own survival. River valleys have been devastated, forests denuded, the topsoil worn
away; but the damage was limited and temporary.”21

The correct conclusion, in other words, is that the primal/tribal structure in itself did not necessarily possess

ecological wisdom, it simply lacked the means to inflict its ignorance on larger portions of the global commons.

The main difference between tribal and modern eco-devastation is not presence or lack of wisdom, but presence
of more dangerous means, where the same ignorance can now be played out on a devastating scale. As we will see,
our massively increased means have led, for the first time in history, to an equally massive dissociation of the
noosphere and the biosphere, and thus the cure is not to reactivate the tribal form of ecological ignorance (take
away our means), nor to continue the modern form of that ignorance (the free market will save us), but rather to
evolve and develop into an integrative mode of awareness that will—also for the first time in history—integrate the

biosphere and noosphere in a higher and deeper union (all of which we will investigate later in this chapter).

Evolution moved beyond tribalism, and its limited capacity for social-planetary integration, for many reasons, it
seems. Tribes may or may not have known how to remain reverential of nature; it was other tribes they could not
integrate, and this because they lacked recourse to a binding conventional
level of law and morality that very soon
would start to build unified societies out of separate and conflicting tribal desires. The problem wasn’t getting along
with nature in the biosphere; it was getting along with other and conflicting interests in the noosphere that brought
tribalism to its limits for evolutionary integrative power.

Habermas and his collaborators (particularly Klaus Eder and Rainer Dobert), who have been carefully studying the
anthropological data, have mapped out some of the inherent limitations that brought tribal kinship systems to an
evolutionary dead end.

In the evolutionarily promising neolithic societies, system problems arose which could not be managed with an
adaptive capacity limited by the kinship principle of organization. For example, ecologically conditioned
problems of land scarcity and population density or problems having to do with an unequal distribution of
irresolvable within the given framework, became more and more visible the
social wealth. These problems,
more frequently they led to conflicts that overloaded the archaic [magic] legal
institutions (courts of
arbitration, feuding law).

A few societies under the pressure of evolutionary challenges from such problems made use of the cognitive
potential in their worldviews [cognitive capacities of higher moral-pragmatic stages not yet socially embedded]
and institutionalized—at first on a trial basis—an administration of justice at a conventional level [mythic-
membership, concrete operational]. Thus, for example, the war chief was empowered to adjudicate cases of
conflict, no longer only according to the distribution of power, but according to socially recognized norms
grounded in tradition. Law was no longer only that on which the parties could agree.22

It was at this point that complex systems of mythology, whatever other functions they might have performed,
began to serve first and foremost as a way to unify peoples beyond mere blood lineage. The human race was not
only self-adapting, it was self-transcending.

The phenomenon to be explained is the emergence of a political order that organized a society so that its
members could belong to different lineages. The function of social integration passed from kinship relations to
political relations. Collective identity was no longer represented in the figure of a common ancestor but in
that of a common ruler
[or leader or governor, who sometimes, but not always, would abuse this newly
emergent power; we will return to Habermas’s thoughts on this later; he is at present focusing on the
necessary and new integrative power brought by this transformation, and not on any of its particular abuses,
which are legion and which he also discusses in great detail].

A ruling position gave the right to exercise legitimate [or agreed-upon] power. The legitimacy of power
could not be based solely on authorization through kinship status; for claims based on family position, or on
legitimate kinship relations in general, were limited precisely by the political power of the ruler. Legitimate
power crystallized around the function of administering justice and around the position of the judge after the
law was recognized in such a way that it possessed the characteristics of conventional morality. This was the
case when the judge, instead of being bound as a mere referee to the contingent constellations of power of
the involved parties, could judge according to intersubjectively recognized legal norms sanctified by tradition,
when he took the intention of the agent into account as well as the concrete consequences of action, and
when he was no longer guided by the ideas of reprisal for damages caused and restoration of a status quo ante
[characteristic of preconventional morality], but punished the guilty party’s violation of a rule. Legitimate
power had in [this] instance the form of a power to dispose of the means of sanction in a conventional
administration of justice. At the same time, mythological worldviews also took on—in addition to their
explanatory function—justificatory functions. . . .23

In short, what was needed was not tribal but transtribal awareness, negating but preserving heretofore isolated

interests in a higher and wider communion; and mythology, not magic, provided the key for this new

tribal
transcendence.

And so: some people today eulogize the primal tribal societies because of their “ecological wisdom” or their
“reverence for nature” or their “nonaggressive ways.” I don’t think the evidence supports any of those views in a
sweeping and general fashion. Rather, I eulogize the primal tribal societies for an entirely different reason: we are all
the sons and daughters of tribes. The primal tribes are literally our roots, our foundations, the basis of all that was to
follow, the structure upon which all subsequent human evolution would be built, the crucial ground floor upon
which so much history would have to rest.

Today’s existent tribes, and today’s nations, and today’s cultures, and today’s accomplishments—all would trace
their lineage in an unbroken fashion to the primal tribal holons upon which a human family tree was about to be
built. And looking back on our ancestors in that light, I am struck with awe and admiration for the astonishing
creativity—the original breakthrough creativity—that allowed humans to rise above a given nature and begin
building a noosphere, the very process of which would bring Heaven down to Earth and exalt the Earth to Heaven,
the very process of which would eventually bind all peoples of the world together in, if you will, one global tribe.

But in order for that to occur, the original, primal tribes had to find a way to transcend their isolated tribal kinship
lineages: they had to find a way to go transtribal, and mythology, not magic, provided the key for this new
transcendence.

MYTHOLOGICAL

The transition to societies organized through a state required the relativization of tribal identities and the
construction of a more abstract [meaning less body-bound] identity that no longer based the membership of
individuals on common descent but on belonging in common to a territorial organization. This took place first
through identification with the figure of a ruler who could claim close connection and privileged access to the
mythological originary powers. In the framework of mythological worldviews the integration of different tribal
traditions was accomplished through a large-scale, syncretic expansion of the world of the gods—a solution
that proved to be rather unstable [and precipitated the next major transformation, which we will examine in a
moment].24

It wasn’t that magical-animistic societies had no mythologies, for they did. It was simply that, as Joseph Campbell
explained, the rise of the first early states was marked by an explosion of codified mythologies—an enormous
differentiation/integration of mythic motifs—and Habermas’s point is that these mythologies became a large part of
the integrating structures for society (i.e., providing both cultural meaning and social integration).

As we saw, in the previous or magical structure, personal identity was natural or body-based, and collective
identity was likewise kinship or blood-bound, particularly through a common ancestor. Without a common ancestor
(or kinship lineage), there was no way to socially integrate various interests. With the rise of the mythological
structure, however, personal identity switched to a role identity in a society of a common political (not genetically
related) ruler, and this ruler was given legitimacy not because of blood ties but because of his (or sometimes her)
special relation to mythological gods/goddesses—“mythic-membership.”

Under this arrangement, an enormous number of not-genetically-related tribes could be unified and integrated,
something the preconventional magical structure—lying close to the body and close to nature—could never
accomplish.

Only with the transition to societies organized around a state do mythological worldviews also take on the
legitimation of structures of [governance], which already presuppose the conventional stage of moralized law.
Thus the naive attitude to myth [characteristic of the magical] must have changed by that time. Within a more
strongly differentiated temporal horizon, myth is distantiated to a tradition that stands out from the
normative reality of society and from a partially objectivated nature. With persisting sociomorphic traits, these
developed myths establish a unity in the manifold of appearances; in formal respects, this unity resembles the
sociocentric-objectivistic world conception of the stage of concrete operations [and conventional-stage

morality].25

We will
later address in more detail the topic of whether these myths actually contained any genuinely
transcendental, mystical, or transformative spiritual capacities (as maintained by, e.g., Carl Jung and Joseph
Campbell).

For the moment let us only note that these various “epochs,” such as the magical or mythical, refer only to the
average mode of consciousness achieved at that particular time in evolution—a certain “center of gravity” around
which the society as a whole orbited. In any given epoch, some individuals will fall below the norm in their own
development, and others will reach quite beyond it.

Habermas strongly believes, for example, that even in preoperational magical times, some individuals clearly
developed cognitive capacities all the way up to formal operational cognition, not as fully formed structures but as
potentials for understanding. This is an example of what I referred to in Up from Eden as the leading edge or most
advanced form of consciousness evolution, in contrast to the average mode of the time. And I believe that the
evidence clearly suggests that, to stay with the magical structure as an example, the most advanced mode of that
time was not just formal operational, although I believe that was clearly present, but beyond that to the psychic level
(evidenced, e.g., in shamans), as a potential for a certain type of understanding and awareness (which we will
examine in chapter 8).

My point is that in each epoch, the most advanced mode of the time—in a very small number of individuals
existing in relational exchange in microcommunities (lodges, academies, sanghas) of the similarly depthed—began
to penetrate not only into higher modes of ordinary cognition (the Aristotles of the time) but also into genuinely
transcendental, transpersonal, mystical realms of awareness (the Buddhas of the time).

Thus, in the magical, as I just mentioned, the most advanced mode seems to have been the psychic (embodied in a
few genuine shamans or pioneers of yogic awareness); in mythological times the most advanced mode seems to
have reached into what is known as the subtle realm (embodied in a few genuine saints); and in mental-egoic times
the most advanced modes reached into the causal realm (embodied in a few genuine sages), all of which we will
discuss in chapter 8.26

But the average mode of the mythological epoch did not reach into these subtler and transpersonal dimensions,
but remained grounded in a concrete-literal interpretation of myth (e.g., Moses actually did part the Red Sea, as an
empirical fact). There is precious little that is transperson-ally inspired about such literal myths; rather, as Habermas
suggests, they clearly represent the sociocentric integration offered by concrete operations and conventional
morality, and for that reason were extremely important in moving social integration beyond the tribal and the
preconventional—and with that their transcendental status, exceptionally important but limited, seems most
definitely to end.

MYTHIC-RATIONAL

The word rational
is an impossible label; it means a million things to a million people, and not all of the meanings
are kind. Moreover, even if we decide what it means, there are still several different types of “it.” Weber, for
example, differentiated between purposive-rationality (such as scientific-technological knowledge),
formal
rationality (such as mathematics), and intersubjective or practical rationality (as displayed in morality and
communication).

Cognitive psychologists and anthropologists tend to use rationality to mean “formal operational cognition,”
which simply means the capacity not just to think, but to think about thinking (and thus “operate upon” thinking:
“formal operational”). Since you can operate upon or reflect upon your own thought processes, you are to some
degree free of them; you can to some degree transcend them; you can take perspectives different from your own;
you can entertain hypothetical possibilities; and you can become highly introspective. As we will see in the next
chapter, all of these come into existence with the emergence of formal operational cognition, or “rationality.”

Moreover, since you can now reflect on your own thoughts and patterns of behavior, you will now seek to justify
your thoughts and actions, based not simply on what you were taught, or on what your society tells you (that is the

rule-bound or conformist or conventional or sociocentric mode of the previous concrete operational cognition), but
rather on a review of the reasons and the actual evidence for such beliefs. Did Moses really part the Red Sea?

Rationality, in this sense, means that you seek “reasonable reasons” for your beliefs. What is the evidence? Why

should I believe this? Who says so? Where did you get that idea?

And finally, because we can reflect on our own thought processes, and thus to some degree remove ourselves
from them, we become capable of imagining all sorts of other possibilities; we become dreamers in the true sense
of the word. Other perspectives, other beliefs, other horizons open before the mind’s eye, and the soul can take
flight in the worlds of the not-yet-seen. Rationality is the great doorway to the invisible, through which, and then
beyond which, lie so many secrets not given to the senses or to conventions (which is why all true mysticism is
transrational and never antirational; “right thought” always precedes “right meditation”).

Thus, the idea that rationality is somehow “dry and abstract,” or that it has “no feelings,” is way off the mark.
Rationality creates a deeper space of possibilities through which deeper and wider feelings can run, feelings not
bound to one’s isolated desires or the narrow confines of official conventional reality. The fact that rationality is a
relatively high level of development means, as always, that it can repress its lower holons, particularly emotions of
sex and aggression, and that, as always, leads to pathology. And it is the pathological expression of rationality that
has given rationality a bad name (“dry and abstract”), but that is definitely not characteristic of the structure as a
whole. However, since rational
is something of a loaded word, we might better use the word reasonable—they
mean the same thing: what are your reasons, why are you doing that?
And this is why rationality or reasonableness tends to be universal

in character, and is highly integrative. If my
reasons are going to be valid, I want to know that they make sense, or that they hold true, not just for me or my
tribe or my isolated culture (however important those might also be). If science, for example, is going to be true,
then we are not going to have a Hindu chemistry that is different from a German chemistry that is different from a
Greek chemistry. There is simply chemistry, and its truth is not forced or coerced or ideologically imposed, but is
freely open to any who wish to look into its reasons.

This doesn’t mean that we can’t have special cultural differences that make each society unique and special; it
means that only rationality will allow these differences to exist side by side by seeing them as different perspectives
in a more universal space, something that cultural differences, left to their own conventional or sociocentric or
ethnocentric devices, could never do. It is only rationality, in other words, that allows the beginning emergence of a
truly global or planetary network, which, freed from any particular society, can allow all societies their own unique
and special place.

But you can imagine what happened historically when the mythological structure (Moses parted the Red Sea) ran
into the newly emerging rational structure (What does that mean, parted the Red Sea? Where is your evidence for
that?). Was it really right for the gods to lie and rape, as Homer had maintained? Or could the myths simply be
wrong? Plutarch records his father saying to him: “You seem to me to be handling a very large and dangerous
question—or rather you are disturbing subjects which ought to be left alone, when you question the opinion we hold
about the gods, and ask reason and proof for everything.”

The indictment handed down by the city of Athens began, “Socrates is guilty of refusing to recognize the gods of
the State.” It ended with, “The penalty demanded is death.” When asked, as was customary, if Socrates could
suggest an alternative punishment, he suggested free meals for life.

But he refused a prison escape that had been arranged for him, and freely drank the hemlock. In choosing death

instead of state mythology, Socrates died for the cause of emergent reason.

The rest of humanity, however, did not move quite as fast in that particular transformation. Rather, in this clash
between myth and newly emerging reason, the traditional mythological structures were at first rationalized. That is,
the old myths were propped up with rational reasons. And this structure, in general, I call mythic-rational.27
Habermas does not specifically use the term mythic-rational; he speaks of the rationalization of mythological
organization, an essentially similar notion.

Habermas makes several interesting observations about this mythic-rational space. First of all, we are dealing with
the universalizing tendency in rationality—the desire of rationality to embrace, make room for, and integrate a
global or planetary consciousness. But this planetary or global tendency first expressed itself in an attempt to

extend a particular mythology to world-embracing dimensions. In other words, a military attempt to conquer as
many peoples as possible.

Thus, according to Habermas, at this point historically we see the emergence, around the world, of the great
Empires. From the Incas to the Aryans, from the Aztecs to the Alexanders, from the Khans to the Romans: the
coming of the Empires was the first brutal step in a planetary expansion struggling to reach beyond isolated cultures
by simple conquest.

Once conquered, the peoples were then usually given a genuinely equal access to citizenship (in many cases this
included citizenship for women, slaves, and children). But these citizens could only be global citizens if the empire
itself conquered the globe—that is, if everybody embraced the mythology that rationality was trying to prop up—if
everybody became “true believers” in the chosen mythic god or goddess (we still see this type of mythic-imperialism
operative in the world today), a rather twisted version of planetary citizenship.

Likewise, the old mythological structures had contained implicitly another type of partial move toward global or
planetary citizenship, namely, equal citizens of the faith. Although this was also a faltering step in the right direction,
it too suffered from the fact that the various mythologies themselves still differed from each other. All Christians
anywhere, of whatever color or race or sex, were equally saved; but all Hindus would go to hell. The great
mythologies, and the great empires that carried them to various corners of the globe, ran up against their own
inherent limitations for integrative power, simply because they ran into each other; and the only way to overcome
those differences was to shed particularistic and divisive mythologies and transform to a more global reasonableness
(the next stage, the mental-rational).

But we are now at the point where the old mythologies, carried now by empires, are trying to be propped up and
rationalized. But that means that there was already a profound break with pure mythological thought, which
previously was simply accepted on its own terms. Habermas:

For this reason, imperially developed civilizations [empires] had to secure their collective identity in a way that
presupposed a break with mythological thought. The universalistic world interpretations of the great founders
of religions and of the great philosophers grounded a commonality of conviction mediated through a teaching
tradition and permitting only abstract objects of identification. As members of universal communities of faith,
citizens could recognize their ruler and the order represented by him so long as it was possible to render
political domination plausible in some sense as the legacy of an order of the world and of salvation that was
believed in and posited absolutely [mythic dogma].

The great empires had to demarcate themselves from a desocialized outer nature [biosphere] as well as
from the social environment of those alien to the empire. But since collective identity could now be secured
only by way of doctrines with a universal claim, the political order also had to be in accord with this claim—the
empires were not universal in name alone [but in attempted global conquest as well]. . . .

But the reality of other empires was incompatible with this definition of the boundaries and social
environment of an empire. Despite the existence of trade relations, and despite the diffusion of innovations,
the empires shielded themselves from this danger; between themselves they maintained no diplomatic
relations in the sense of an institutionalized foreign policy. Their political existence was not dependent on a
system of reciprocal recognition [they were not truly rational-planetary].28

Even though it was a mythological worldview that was trying to be propped up, the propping up was nevertheless
being done with formal operational thought, and thus central parts of the mythic-rational world were centered
around formal rationality and its universalizing or global outreach:

There arise cosmological worldviews, philosophies, and the higher religions [so-called “rational religions”],
which replace the narrative explanations of mythological accounts with argumentative foundations [they give
reasons]. The traditions going back to the great founders are an explicitly teachable knowledge that can be
dogmatized, that is, professionally rationalized. In their articulated forms rationalized worldviews are an
expression of formal operational thought and of a moral consciousness guided by [postconventional]
principles.29

But a propping-up is still a propping-up. And in one of the most difficult of all historical transformations, a
universal or global reasonableness began slowly to supplement local and divisive mythologies, mythologies that,
precisely because they could not be universally argued and supported by shared evidence, could only be supported
militarily and imperialistically.

But slowly, in both the East and West, began to emerge rational philosophies, rational sciences, rational policies,
rational religions—some of which indeed pointed beyond reason, but all of which depended on reason as a
platform that could secure a common and mutual understanding for anyone, of any color, race, or creed, who cared
to talk about it, share their evidence, discuss their reasons, and not simply shout dogmatisms and claim divine
support.

RATIONAL

As the planetary reach of reasonableness began to shake off the divisive mythologies, empires gave way to modern
states—which at least formally and mutually recognized one another, thus making room for each on the planet. The
modern state thus separated from its embeddedness in particular mythologies—the all-important separation of
church and state—and further removed itself from the economic sphere by allowing the emergence of a global
market economy, all of which had to be grounded in universalistic reasons (but still tinged, initially, by remnants of
imperialism, which indicated not an excess of reason but a lack of it).

The highest principles lost their unquestionable character; religious faith and the theoretical attitude became
reflective. The advance of the modern sciences and the development of moral-practical will-formation were no
longer prejudiced by an order that—although grounded—was posited absolutely [mythology]. For the first
time, the universalistic [global] potential already contained in the rationalized worldviews could be set free.
The unity of the world could no longer be secured objectively, through hypostasizing unifying principles (God,
Being, or Nature); henceforth it could be asserted only reflectively, through the unity of reason. The unity of
theoretical and practical reason then became the key problem for modern world interpretations. . . .30

In other words, it was no longer simply the case of a subject trying to look at and understand and operate on a
world of objects (concrete operational); it was the subject looking at and trying to understand and operate on itself;
it was the subject trying to understand the subject
(formal operational). Suddenly, very suddenly, humanity had
taken a new turn, a new transcendence, had discovered a new and deeper interior, with a new and higher
consciousness, and that consciousness was to be found by looking within.

As we will see, Habermas, Gebser, and I (and many others) place the rough beginning of this new emergence
(egoic-rational) in the middle of the first millennium BCE, but it reaches its fruition with the rise of the modern state,
roughly the sixteenth century in Europe. We will be concentrating on this fruition, but let us at least note that what
many of the central endeavors of this entire period have in common is a new type of looking within. In philosophy,
for the first time, the theme is not “What is there to know?” but “How can I know it?” Not “What objects are out
there?” but “What is the structure of the subject that wants to know?” From Socrates’ Delphic “Know thyself” to the
exhaustive introspections of Hume and Locke and Descartes and Kant (and Nagarjuna and Garab Dorje and Chih-i
and Fa-tsang), the common theme heard over and over and over again: Look within.

We see precisely the same thing with the rise of the “rational religions,” which does not mean that these religions
were only rational—indeed, their aim was to go even beyond rationality in all cases. But these were the first great
religions that took their stand, not in a mythological pantheon of gods and goddesses out there that had to be
appeased through magic or mythic ritual, but rather took as their
starting point: “The Kingdom of Heaven is
within,” as Jesus of Nazareth would put it.

Likewise, the essential message of Gautama the Buddha could be summarized in the statement “Don’t worry
about gods, goddesses, spirits, the afterlife, any of that—rather, look very carefully at the nature of your own
subject, your own self, and try to penetrate to the bottom of that, for if enlightenment exists, it lies through an
understanding of (and going beyond) the subject itself.” All of that was radically, radically new.

For precisely the same reasons, individuals were no longer identified by the simple and unreflexive roles that

they played in society, as was the case with ethnocentric and mythic-membership societies. Rather,
in a
postconventional society, individuals were identified in many ways by their own free choices, as free subjects, within
the broad constraints of civil law. In other words, as Habermas puts it, an ego identity replaced a role identity.

This domain of decentralized individual decisions was organized on universalistic principles in the framework
of bourgeois civil law. It was thereby supposed that the private, autonomous, legal subjects pursued their
interests in the morally neutralized domain of intercourse in a purposive-rational manner, in accord with
general
[universal] maxims. From this conversion of the productive sphere to universalistic [global]
orientations there proceeded a strong structural compulsion for the development of personality structures
that replaced conventional role identity with ego identity. [As I said, Habermas and I both place the beginning
of this change to ego identity in the middle of the first millennium BCE, but it reaches its fruition here, with the
rise of the modern state, beginning roughly in the sixteenth century in Europe]. In fact, emancipated members
of bourgeois society, whose conventional [sociocentric] identity had been shattered, could know themselves
as one with their fellow citizens in their character as (a) free and equal subjects of civil law, (b) morally free
subjects, and (c) politically free subjects (the citizen as democratic citizen of the state).31

This is an extraordinary development, for many reasons (so much so that the third volume in this series is devoted
to it). But, at this point, let us briefly return to the themes raised earlier in this chapter and at least note how this
new egoic-rational emergence (with, among many other things,
its differentiation of the noosphere and the
biosphere) would affect the sexes, for it is here that we find some of the most surprising developments.

LIBERATION IN THE NOOSPHERE

According to most radical feminists, one of the special strengths of women is their ages-old connection with the
Earth, with nature, with embodiment
(in fact, a good summary of the female value sphere according to radical
feminism would be “embodiment in communion”). The radical feminists maintain that woman’s special association
with embodied nature needs to be honored and cherished and celebrated. The connection of woman and nature is
the source of female power and freedom and liberation.

According to most liberal feminists, it is precisely the opposite. The equation of woman and nature, they maintain,
is the primary and overwhelming source of female oppression. The woman/nature “identity,” they believe, has
been the primary identification that men have, throughout the ages (literally from day one), used to keep women
locked out of the noosphere (out of the public, productive, legal, cultural, power-wielding sphere). “Woman =
nature” translates directly into “barefoot, pregnant, and in the kitchen,” and the liberal feminists are alarmed that
the radical feminists are even thinking such thoughts, let alone championing them.

But my point is that, once the noosphere and the biosphere had differentiated, it was—it is—an entirely different
world, where all the old equations suddenly take on entirely new meanings. And although some of those meanings
might indeed have been oppressive in the past, they are not necessarily so in the new world (in the new worldspace,
literally).

First, even if the radical feminists are right, and woman’s special power is her rootedness in nature and body (the
biosphere), nonetheless the differentiation of the noosphere and the biosphere meant that women were no longer
just that, or only that, or exclusively that. Since the noosphere and the biosphere had at this point been clearly
differentiated on a collective scale, this is the first time that the exclusive identity “woman/nature” was no longer
needed, or appropriate, or even relevant (as an exclusive identity, which does not deny the radical feminist claim
that women have special connections with Earth and body and nature; it means only that that is not all they are or
have).

It was here, in the clearly differentiated noosphere, that there was then no conceivable reason that women could
not enter the world of public agency (bringing with them their own forms of communion). Biological roles were no
longer primary; physical strength was no longer the major determinate of public power; the parameters of
biospheric evolution were shading into those of noospheric evolution, such that right began to replace might. And
it was
for the female to assume cultural agency in the newly differentiated world, a right that wasn’t

right

prevented before but was simply meaningless before (on any collective scale).

And indeed, it is precisely here, and never before, that we first start to see the beginning of a widespread and
organized women’s movement, a movement not just discontent about this or that particular mistreatment (which
had happened since day one), but about women’s place in society on the whole.

This was radically new—a new emergence, a new transcendence, and a new differentiation that demanded a new
integration—woman as public and historical agent (where heretofore, as we saw, that role largely fell to the male
as father).

Thus, we do not find the emergence of a widespread women’s movement prior to this time, not because women
were duped or brainwashed or submissive chattel, but because liberation in the feminist sense (woman as free
agent) was virtually meaningless as long as the biosphere and the noosphere were not clearly differentiated, first,
and as long as the state and the economic sphere were not clearly differentiated, second (both of which came to
fruition, we have said, around the sixteenth century).32 At that point, and not before, the rights of women as free
agents would have profound meaning and profound desirability.

And indeed, the first great feminist treatise anywhere in history was Mary Wollstonecraft’s Vindication of the
Rights of Woman, written in 1792.33 Women did not then suddenly become strong and intelligent and responsible
after a million years of dupedom; but rather, using the same intelligence and strength and insight with which they
had mined the natural wisdom of the biosphere for a million years, they now saw the first structural opening in the
noosphere and they acted immediately on it. It would be a mere two hundred years later—a blink in evolutionary
time—that women would secure access to the public and political sphere of agency in the form of the right to vote
and the right to own possessions. This was blazingly fast action on the part of women once the structural conditions
of social life had switched its center of gravity from the biosphere to the noosphere.

And so henceforth, the role of the father (the “familialization of the male”) would no longer suffice to link the two
value spheres, but would have to be joined by the role of female as historical agent, equal noospheric agent (not
just embodied in communion, but enculturated in agency). And here is where the liberal feminist argument surely
finds its strongest voice and its unshakable moral authority.

But since the noosphere transcends and includes the biosphere, there is no reason that the liberal cannot
embrace the radical and then add its own extra demands. It’s not like we’re on a flatland playing field, where more
of the one means less of the other. On a multidimensional field, in the real Kosmos, the more of both, the better.

In other words, special rootedness in the biosphere can indeed be reasonably claimed—there is literally a million
years of rich tradition of the wise woman who feels the currents of embodiment in nature and communion, and
celebrates it with healing rituals and knowing ways of connecting wisdom, a wisdom that does not worship merely
the agentic sun and its glaring brightness, but finds in the depths and the organic dark the ways of being linked in
relationship, that puts care above power and nurturance above self-righteousness, that reweaves the fragments with
concern, and midwifes the communions and the unsung connections that sustain us each and all. And finds, above
all, that being a self is always being a self-in-relationship.

The liberal position ought to be able gladly to embrace all that, as rootedness, and then add its own special and
emergent ideas and demands—which are precisely those demands made possible for the first time in history by this
extraordinary new emergence, by this differentiation of the noosphere and the biosphere, by the emergence of
global rationality—and those demands are exactly the possibilities we just saw Habermas elaborate, applied now to
women as well: to be (a) free and equal subjects of civil law, (b) morally free subjects, and (c) politically free subjects.
And that is the enduring truth and strength of liberal feminism, which arose at this time, and not before this time,
precisely to announce that emergent truth.

There is one final twist in the story. If the differentiation of the biosphere and noosphere (and the differentiation
of the Big Three) began in earnest only with modernity, it is nonetheless the case, as we will see, that this
differentiation has tended in many respects to slide into dissociation. And that gives the radical feminist component
of the integration an important and urgent weight. We have somehow forgotten our embodiment.

And further: Since “woman, body, nature” have often been different aspects of the same dissociated fabric, this
gives a certain cogency to the concerns of the ecofeminists as well (though we don’t necessarily have to embrace
their theoretical and historical explanations, which tend to the ideological).

This is all part of the new integration (“centauric,” “vision-logic”) that I have been referring to, and which involves,
among other things, the integration of mind and body, the integration of noosphere and biosphere (after
their
differentiation). And since, for whatever reasons, throughout history and prehistory there was a special connection
between woman, nature, and body,34
then the integration of mind and body means virtually the same as the
integration of male and female—in each of us.

At that point, both the male and the female would have one foot in the biosphere and one foot in the
noosphere—an emergent integration utterly unprecedented, and the exact meaning of which we are all still trying to
figure out.

Which is why the past is of no real help here. Calling on inherited archetypes and old mythological motifs is of little
help in this new, emergent, and unprecedented endeavor. Likewise, many ecofeminists feel they have to be able to
point to a past society (almost always horticultural) where women were “equal” in order to show that such equality
is at least a possibility of human nature and human societies. But my point is that the possibility itself is an
emergent—it never was, but is now coming to be—and so we don’t need to wildly reinterpret the past in order to
find hope for the future.

We are looking at an emergence, not an exhumation; at a birth, not a disinterment.
So I suppose it is all somehow deeply symbolic that Mary Wollstonecraft died giving birth to Mary Shelley, who

wrote Frankenstein. A death, a birth, a monster.

The image of “that monster!” seems to fit how both men and women view each other as their new and
unprecedented roles in the noosphere continue to be worked out, and why, I suppose, a certain kindness on both
sides is so necessary. Throughout this new and difficult integration—this death and this new birth—each sex is the
monster of the other’s creation.

VISION-LOGIC/PLANETARY

Which brings us up to the present, and the new integration that is struggling to emerge, in all four quadrants. . . .

We are concerned no longer with cultural inflections, but with a passage from one culture stage to another. In
all previous ages, only restricted portions of the surface of the earth were known. Men looked out from the
narrowest, upon a somewhat larger neighborhood, and beyond that, a great unknown. They were all, so to
say, insular: bound in. Whereas our view is confined no longer to a spot of space on the surface of this earth. It
surveys the whole of the planet. And this fact, this lack of horizon, is something new.

Those words, by the great Leo Frobenius in his Monumenta Terrarum, were written in 1929. The previous age, that
of the early emergence of the rational and its first extraordinary discoveries, Frobenius called the Monumental Age,
and the opening of the new, just now under way, he called the Global or World Culture.

As rationality continues its quest for a truly universal or global or planetary outlook, noncoercive in nature, it
eventually gives way to a type of cognition I call vision-logic or network-logic. Where rationality gives all possible
perspectives, vision-logic adds them up into a totality, which is simply the new and higher interior holon. Aurobindo
gave the classic description of vision-logic, which “can freely express itself in single ideas, but its most characteristic
movement is a mass ideation, a system or totality of truth-seeing at a single view; the relations of idea with idea, of
truth with truth, self-seen in the integral whole.”

What I am trying to do in this book, and what you are trying to do as you read it (or other similar books), is use
vision-logic: not just reasonably decide the individual issues, but hold them together at once in mind, and judge how
they all fit together as a truth-vision. In other words, vision-logic is a higher holon that operates upon (and thus
transcends) its junior holons, such as simple rationality itself. As such, vision-logic can hold in mind contradictions, it
can unify opposites, it is dialectical and nonlinear, and it weaves together what otherwise appear to be incompatible
notions, as long as they relate together in the new and higher holon, negated in their partiality but preserved in
their positive contributions.

This is, for example, what Hegel called “Reason” as opposed to “the understanding” (or the simpler, empiric-
analytic rationality of propositions, or Aristotelian logic). And this is why Hegel maintained that the central defining

characteristic of Reason (vision-logic) was its capacity to unify opposites and see identity-in-difference. (As such,
Hegel was one of the first great philosophers of vision-logic, as were Schelling, Whitehead, and a few others we will
explore later; and not just because of their systematic wholeness—that had been attempted before—but because of
their explicit grasp of identity-in-difference or “nonbifurcated Reason” or vision-logic, beyond which lies the
transrational altogether.)

And it is vision-logic that drives and underlies the possibility of a truly planetary culture (or, rather, the first true
forms of planetary organization, which themselves will most likely evolve according to yet higher categories, as we
will see).

Recall that we left off Habermas’s account with the emergence (beginning on a collective scale around sixteenth-
century Europe) of an ego identity (first secured by men, relatively swiftly followed by women) wherein all people
were considered (1) free and equal subjects of civil law, (2) morally free subjects, and (3) politically free subjects as
citizens of the democratic state (which also, of course, for the first time in history, would put a final end to slavery
and back that emancipation by law).

But, Habermas continues, “these abstract determinations are best suited to the identity of world citizens, not to
that of citizens of a particular state that has to maintain [and defend] itself against other states.”35
In other words,
legally, morally, and politically free subjects: this is a state of affairs that actually applies to world citizens, not just to
citizens of this or that state. The free subject, created by rationality, could not easily or for long be confined to the
state, but belonged rather to what Habermas calls “global forms of intercourse” and “permanent variation of all
reference systems”—that is, vision-logic.

Thus, true world citizenship belongs not to national organizations but to planetary organizations (as Habermas
puts it, “The need for coordination at a supra-national level cannot easily be satisfied as long as governments have to
legitimate themselves exclusively in terms of national decisions”).36 The modern nation-state, founded upon initial
rationality, has run into its own internal contradictions or limitations, and can only be released by a vision-
logic/planetary transformation.

THE CENTAUR IN VISION-LOGIC

The worldview or worldspace of vision-logic I also refer to as “existential” and “centauric.” “Existential” we will
examine in a moment. “Centaur” is the mythic beast, half human and half horse, which I (and others such as Hubert
Benoit and Erik Erikson) have taken as a symbol of the integration of body and mind, or biosphere and noosphere.
For if it is true that, a few hundred years ago, we finally succeeded in clearly differentiating these two great domains,
it is equally true that we have not yet found a way to integrate them. On the contrary: the necessary differentiation
of the biosphere and the noosphere has now moved clearly into the beginning stages of dissociation, and, indeed,
some ecologists feel that the dissociation is fast becoming irreversible. Be that as it may, that some sort of
dissociation is under way is all but undeniable.

It is the integrative power of vision-logic, I believe, and not the indissociation of tribal magic or the imperialism of
mythic involvement that is desperately needed on a global scale. For it is vision-logic with its centauric/planetary
worldview that, in my opinion, holds the only hope for the integration of the biosphere and noosphere, the
supranational organization of planetary consciousness,
the genuine recognition of ecological balance, the
unrestrained and unforced forms of global discourse, the nondominating and noncoercive forms of federated states,
the unrestrained flow of worldwide communicative exchange, the production of genuine world citizens, and the
enculturation of female agency (i.e., the integration of male and female in both the noosphere and the
biosphere)—all of which, in my opinion, is nevertheless simply the platform for the truly interesting forms of higher
and transpersonal states of consciousness lying yet in our collective future—if there is one.

Jean Gebser refers to the emerging vision-logic as the “integral-aperspectival” mind, which is a particularly apt
phrase. The previous structure (the egoic-rational), Gebser refers to as the “rational-perspectival,” because
rationality can indeed take different perspectives, as we saw. But vision-logic, or the integral-aperspectival mind,
adds up all the perspectives tout ensemble, and therefore privileges no perspective as final: it is aperspectival.

The aperspectival mind, in other words, is holonic through and through: contexts within contexts within contexts

forever. Of course, every structure of consciousness is actually holonic (there are only holons), but vision-logic
consciously grasps this fact for the first time, and thus finds its own operation increasingly transparent to itself (this
“transparency,” according to Gebser, is a primary characteristic of the integral-aperspectival mind.) “Aperspectivity
expresses itself in a structure of consciousness which is in process of emerging and is, therefore, new,” he says. “We
would like to designate this new structure the ‘integral structure’ of consciousness, and the modality of the world in
the process of emerging the ‘aperspective world.’”

Gebser’s masterpiece, The Ever-Present Origin, was completed in 1953, the culmination of several decades of
thought and research. He died in 1973 and thus he did not live to see the full extent of the explosion of
aperspectivism in today’s postmodern world. Not only has the aperspectival vision-logic defined postmodernity (in
its best aspects), it has also defined many of postmodernity’s self-conscious problems: individuals are not only aware
of holonic and aperspectival space, but are often totally lost in it. The postmodern poststructuralists, for example,
have gone from saying that no context, no perspective, is final, to saying that no perspective has any advantage over
any other, at which point they careen uncontrollably in their own labyrinth of ever-receding holons,
lost in
aperspectival space.

That all perspectives interrelate, or that no perpsective is final (aperspectivism), does not mean that there are no
relative merits among them. The postmodern poststructuralists go from saying “there is no final perspective” (or
“perspectives are boundless”) to saying “therefore there is no advantage in any perspective over another.” This
leveling of perspectives is not an interrelation of all perspectives but is itself merely one particular and covertly
privileged perspective (and thus ends up, as we have seen, being perfectly self-contradictory: there is no advantaged
perspective except mine, which maintains that all other perspectives are not so privileged). The postmodern
poststructuralists confuse their own aperspectival madness with literary and political critique, following, I presume,
the pioneering insanity of Bataille.

Nonetheless I believe, and I think Gebser would agree, that recent events have, if anything, strengthened his
thesis: for better or for worse, the world is in the midst of the torturous birth throes of a collective emergence of an
entirely new structure of consciousness, the centaur in vision-logic, the integral-aperspectival mind.

Gebser refers to such transformations as “mutations in consciousness,” emphasizing their radically emergent
nature. Nonetheless, each structure unfolds holarchically, transcending and including its predecessor(s). “None of
these mutations of consciousness is responsible for the loss of previous possibilities and properties, but suddenly
incorporates them into a new structure. Within the mutations of consciousness there takes place a process of re-
arrangement beyond the reach of mere space-time-bound events, an [emergent] process, which manifests itself
discontinuously, or by leaps and bounds. With every new mutation of awareness, consciousness unfolds more
powerfully. . . .”37

This new integral-aperspectival structure is, of course,

integrative. But integral vision-logic is not merely a sum of
previous parts—that, again, would be mere horizontal expansionism, not vertical and creative emergence (and
transcendence). As Gebser says, “The part is to a certain degree always a betrayal of the whole, for which reason the
sum of the parts also only yields a fictitious but not an efficacious whole.” Likewise, the dialectical nature of vision-
logic—that is, the unity-of-opposites conceived mentally (as “mutual interpenetration”)—is a hallmark of the integral
structure, is “intrinsic to the emergent aperspectival consciousness.”

But the emphasis, indeed, is on integration. As Georg Feuerstein, Gebser’s ablest interpreter, says of the integral-
aperspectival structure: “This nascent structure of consciousness, for the first time in human history, permits the
conscious integration of all previous (but co-present) structures, and through this act of integration the human
personality becomes, as it were, transparent to itself. . . .”38

Likewise, centauric-integral awareness integrates the body and mind in a new transparency; the biosphere and the
noosphere, once finally differentiated, can now be integrated in a new embrace. Feuerstein therefore refers to this
newly emerging structure as “psychosomatic,” involving “the resurrection of the body,” evidenced in such
movements as holistic medicine and ecological sensitivity. “It is a whole-bodily event,” he says, “feeling through the
lived body. It does not take flight from bodily existence in any form. Rather it is grounded in one’s unmitigated
acceptance of, or primal trust in, corporeality. It is the transparent body-mind.”

Precisely because this centauric awareness transcends (but includes) so much of the verbal-mental-egoic

dimension, that entire dimension itself becomes
increasingly objective, increasingly transparent, to centauric
consciousness. Where previously the verbal-mental-egoic self used those structures as something with which to
view (and co-create) the world, now those structures themselves increasingly become an object of awareness and
investigation by centauric consciousness (it is not just the mind looking objectively and “representationally” at
external objects—the “reflection paradigm”—but the mind looking at the mind intersubjectively).

This is behind Gebser’s claim that integral-aperspectival consciousness is especially a consciousness of language.
As he puts it, “Language itself is treated as a primordial phenomenon by recognizing its originating-creative nature.
Structurally, a new estimation of grammatical aspects and a novel use of syntactical freedom are evident” (and here
we are on the trail of Foucault and Derrida, and the whole “linguistic turn” dating especially to de Saussure).

Likewise, Gebser relates the integral-aperspectival structure to the emergence of most forms of phenomenology,
with their emphasis on a “postrational paradigm” that is also “embodied.” He particularly focuses on Bergson,
Husserl, and Heidegger, although he had some sharp criticisms of them as well (the last-named is also a “pioneer” of
poststructuralism, and his notion of the Destruktion of rationalist ontology appears in Derrida as deconstruction).

Gebser’s full genius comes to the fore in his brilliant descriptions, across virtually all disciplines, of the mutation,
now globally in progress, from rational-perspectivism to integral-aperspectivism, and I cannot hope to do any sort of
justice to his exhilarating presentation. (Readers are urged to consult The Ever-Present Origin—it is by far the
pioneering book in “emergent worldviews”—and an excellent introduction, Georg Feuerstein’s
Structures of
Consciousness.)

Gebser knows this aperspectival structure so intimately that he can spot even the most telltale signs of its
emergence in virtually any endeavor. Here are just a few of the areas he covers in enormous detail (and remember,
The Ever-Present Origin was published in 1953; the following list therefore includes only some of the very earliest
signs of the emergence of vision-logic, of those movements that would be “postrational” or “post-structural” or
“postmodern” in the best sense, those movements attempting to overcome the “self-defining subject” and the “Age
of Man,” those movements that would point not just to a differentiation of the Big Three, but to their integration as
well): biology (e.g., Hans Driesch, Hugo de Vries), mathematics (Hilbert’s axiomatics), psychology (both Freud and
Jung in their own ways with an emphasis on depth psychology),
(linguistics, phenomenology),
jurisprudence (where care and “responsibility have entered the language of law in juxtaposition to justice and rights
. . . this leads to ‘open justice,’ a hitherto impossible flexibility”—notice the integration of agency-rights and
communion-responsibility, which we postulated as one of the centauric hallmarks), economics (Feuerstein takes E.
F. Schumacher to be most recently representative), history (e.g., Arnold Toynbee and Swiss historian J. R. von Salis),
music (Schoenberg, Stravinsky—“the new music is aperspectival inasmuch as it seeks to overcome the earlier fixities
of meter or tonality as aspects of aesthetics”), architecture (Frank Lloyd Wright, Le Corbusier, Alvar Aalto), painting
(Delacroix “revolted against the tyranny of the straight line, and Cézanne first seriously challenged the reign of
perspectivity”), and, of course, the new physics, associated especially with Einstein and Planck (although this is not,
as popularizers such as Fred Alan Wolf would have it, a “proof of mysticism”; as Feuerstein comments, “it would be
imprudent to ignore the mythologizing trend within the new physics, which Gebser would readily have recognized as
regressive rather than integrative”).

philosophy

As for the centauric-integral dimension being a fully worldcentric vision, Gebser refers to it as “universal-integral”
and “world open,” “world transparent”—which Feuerstein, correctly I believe, equates with the rising Global or
Planetary Culture. In Gebser’s words, the perspectives of the egoic-rational world are “replaced by the open expanse
of the open world,” the “aperspectival world”—the culmination of the worldcentric vision started by rationality and
completed by vision-logic.

Neither Gebser nor I (nor Murphy nor Habermas, nor any of the evolutionary-oriented theorists) see the
emergence of the “aperspectival worldcentric” structure as being a sure thing, as being somehow guaranteed. Not
only does evolution, as Michael Murphy put it, meander more than progress; not only, when it does progress, is
there always the “dialectic of progress”; there is also the ever-lurking possibility that the whole thing might simply
blow up, that evolution will take a wrong turn (in the short run), but a wrong turn that includes us; that the stresses
induced by the differentiation of the noosphere and the biosphere will make the whole system unsustainable.
Evolution, we have amply seen, is not predictable, only reconstructable.

Nor does the fact that the integral structure is integral guarantee that the necessary integration will in fact occur.
The claim is simply, to put it in the terms we have been using, that the integral structure can integrate the
physiosphere, the biosphere, and the noosphere—it has the potential for that integration. Whether that potential
becomes actual is up to you and me; it depends on the concrete actions that each of us takes.

As always, we have to make the future that is given to us.

THE FOUR QUADRANTS

Figure 5-1 is a summary of the four quadrants as we have followed them in the evolutionary curve thus far. Like all
diagrams, it is very schematic and leaves out more than it includes. But it will serve to indicate the four quadrants
and a handful of their milestones up to the present.

A few points about the diagram: in the Lower-Right quadrant, where evolution enters the human domain, I have
only indicated the most concrete forms of geopolitical structures. But this quadrant includes the exterior of any of
the social aspects of human interaction, including forces of production and techno-economic modes (bow and
arrow, horticultural tools, agrarian implements,
industrial machinery, computers, and so on), architectural
structures, transportation systems, physical infrastructure, even written (material) forms of books, legal codes,
linguistic structures, verbal signifiers, and so forth. Likewise, in the Lower Left, the cultural, I have included only
worldviews; but this quadrant also includes interpretive understandings, cultural meanings in general, collective and
group identities, intersubjective moral and ethical understanding, and so on.39

In the Upper-Right quadrant, as evolution moves into the human domain, I have indicated states marked by SF1,
SF2, and SF3. These are the structure-functions of the human brain that correspond with concrete operational,
formal operational, and vision-logic. These are currently being mapped using PET and other sophisticated
instruments, and I am simply indicating the correlation, whatever it turns out to be, with these symbols. Everybody
agrees that mental states and structures have some sort of correlates in brain physiology, and this is all I mean by
the symbols SF1, etc.40

Figure 5-1. Some Details of the Four Quadrants

Of course, we can also draw this diagram as a series of interfolding or nested pyramids, so that several of the
multidimensional relationships within each quadrant could be better indicated. But then it would begin to lose the
advantage of a certain type of simplicity. As long as its schematic and simplifying nature is kept firmly in mind, this
figure will suffice. We will continue to draw on the implications of this diagram—and the four quadrants—as we
continue to unfold our narrative.

THE WORLD IN TRANSFORMATION

About the centauric/planetary transformation, now haltingly but unmistakably in progress, I will make only a few
passing comments now (all of volume 3 is devoted to this topic).

The previous, mythic-imperial empires (East and West, North and South), with their inherent dominator
hierarchies, were deconstructed by the rise of egoic-rationality (wherever it did arise) and the switch from a role
identity to an ego identity, and the correlative rise of the democratic state, where dominator hierarchies were
replaced, in law, by (1) free and equal subjects of civil law, (2) morally free subjects, and (3) politically free subjects
as citizens of the democratic state.

There still exist, of course, mythic-imperialisms that wish to dominate the world—that is, imperialisms that will
accord you the status of equal world citizen if you embrace the particular mythology (with its particular dominator
hierarchy). If you don’t want to embrace the mythology, they will be glad to help you do so. We still hear the rumble
of mythological fundamentalism arise from all corners of the globe, in secular and religious guises, none of which
conceal their inherent drive to salvation via domination (and the women in these societies support the domination

every bit as much as the men do).

But the rise of rationality—although it generated the worldspace in which all peoples could be recognized as free
and equal subjects of the law and politically free subjects as citizens—did not produce, or has not yet produced,
transformations of a global
(and not just national) nature that would seek to socially empower the world in a
noncoercive and nondominating fashion, that would be driven by a recognition of what we all have in common as
human beings and not what we have in common merely as believers in a particular and divisive mythology or as
members of a particular ethnocentric tribe (however much those differences would also be cherished and honored
in a worldcentric context).

With one major exception. The only serious global social movement, in all of history to date, has been the
international
labor movement (Marxism), which had one great, enduring, and legitimate strength—and one
altogether fatal weakness. The strength was that it discovered a common trait that all humans possess, regardless of
race, creed, nationality, mythology, or gender: we all have to secure our bodily survival through social labor of one
sort or another. We all have to eat. And thus social labor puts us all in the same boat, makes us all world citizens.
This movement was genuine enough, and serious enough, and made such immediate good sense to so many people
that it set off the first modern globally intent revolutions from Russia to China to South America.

Such for its genuinely noble strengths. Its fatal weakness was that it did not just ground higher cultural endeavors
in the economic or material realm (the physiosphere), it did not just ground them in social labor and material
exchange—it reduced them to that exchange, reduced them to their lowest common denominator, reduced them
to material productions and material values and material means, with all higher productions, especially spirituality,
serving only as the opiate of the masses.41

In a nutshell, that movement did not just ground the noosphere in the physiosphere (which is vitally important
because of compound individuality); it reduced the noosphere to the physiosphere, such an egregious reduction that
it took evolution less than a mere century to begin to erase that mistake in earnest. This reductionistic thrust of
Marxism, because it could find no support in the real Kosmos, had to be converted into a religious mythology, and
thus had to press its vision in an imperialistic fashion.

The other major movement that has shown, or has claimed, some possibilities for underpinning a global
citizenship is the Greens movement. While I have enormous sympathy for that movement as a particular endeavor,
I believe it comes nowhere close to having the integrative potential for a planetary federation of world citizens freely
embracing its tenets (forced to embrace its tenets, yes; but that is not unrestrained global discourse but a new
coercion).

For the Greens are in essentially the same predicament as the Marxists—both of them are reducing higher levels
to lower levels simply because of the undisputed fact that the lower is indeed more fundamental
(and therefore
necessary but not sufficient for the life of the higher and deeper). Where the Marxists tended to reduce all concerns
to the material exchanges of the physiosphere, the Greens tend to reduce all concerns to the ecological exchanges of
the biosphere. This is definitely a step up from the Marxists, but it does not escape the fact that it is still a type of
lowest common denominator approach, which is true and important as far as it goes (as is Marxism), but
catastrophic beyond that particular point, and utterly incapable of mobilizing world citizens beyond that particular
point.

The Greens use, as their philosophical platform, two central notions: (1) the cultural noosphere is a part of the
larger whole of the biosphere, and (2) the web-of-life systems theory. The first notion is incorrect, as we have seen,
and the second notion is a form of subtle reductionism, as we have also seen. As such, any movement based on
those tenets is unlikely to secure global integration and sustainable balance.

What is needed, rather, is a more integrative approach that works with our present historical actualities. A
planetary culture will in effect have to deal with equitable material-economic distribution in the physiosphere (the
enduring concern of Marx, even if we reject his particular solutions), and it will have to deal with sustainable
ecological distribution in the biosphere (the enduring contribution of the Greens). But it will have to go much further
and deal specifically and nonreductionistically with the noosphere and its distributions and distortions, and it will
if it is to freely engage the motivation
have to do so with something other than reductionistic web-of-life theories,
of an entire globe. It will have to work toward specific theories of free noospheric exchange,
including but

transcending ecological concerns.42

Social labor could unite world citizens to the extent, but only to the extent, that we all share matter in common.
The Greens can unite world citizens to the extent, but only to the extent, that we all share bodies in common. But it
will take a vision-logic movement of tremendous integrative power (integral-aperspectival as universal-integral) in
order to unite world citizens on the centauric basis that we all share matter and bodies and minds in common
(not to mention a Spirit and a Self prior to all that). The Greens have produced a promising platform, but if it isn’t
any more than that (and it isn’t so far, neglecting noospheric exchange), then it will be merely snapped up by egoic-
rationality structures of capital production, and we will simply have McDonald’s selling burgers in recyclable bags,
which is nowhere near anything deserving to be called a Planetary Transformation.

In the meantime, the platform for an emerging world culture is being built by international markets of material-
economic exchange, and by the increasingly free exchange of rationality structures, particularly empiric-analytic
science and computer-transmitted information (the “Age of Information” is simply the “Age of Noosphere”), all of
which are supranational in essential character (we will return to this in a moment).

As for the coming transformation itself, it is being built, as all past transformations have been, in the hearts and
minds of those individuals who themselves evolve to centauric planetary vision. For these individuals create a
“cognitive potential” in the form of new worldviews (in this case, centauric-planetary) that in turn feed back into
the ongoing mainstream of social institutions, until the previously “marginalized” worldview becomes anchored in
institutional forms which then catapult a collective consciousness to a new and higher order.43 The revolution, as
always, will come from the within and be embedded in the without.

And, at this point,44 aside from the inner work that each of us individually can do, I personally see no obvious

collective bearers of the new and deeper within.

THE DIALECTIC OF PROGRESS

Recall that one of the defining aspects of evolution is that it brings new and emergent possibilities and therefore
new and potential pathologies. Habermas, working from a different angle, arrives at the same conclusion, and he
refers to it as the “dialectic of progress”:

Evolutionarily important innovations mean not only a new level of learning but a new problem situation as
well, that is, a new category of burdens that accompany the new social formation. The dialectic of progress
can be seen in the fact that with the acquisition of problem-solving abilities new problem situations come to
consciousness. A higher stage of development of productive forces and of social integration does bring relief
from problems of the superseded [previous] social formation. But the problems that arise at the new stage of
development can—insofar as they are at all comparable with the old ones—increase in intensity.

Thus we can make an attempt to interpret social evolution taking as our guide those problems and needs
that are first brought about by evolutionary advances. At every stage of development the social-evolutionary
learning process itself generates new resources, which mean new dimensions of scarcity and thus new
historical needs.45

Habermas’s critique of Romantic regression is along the same lines as mine: of course there are new problems and
new pathologies at each stage of development, but to take only the pathologies of the higher stage and compare
them with only the achievements of the previous stage is perverse in the extreme. What is required, rather, is a
balanced view that takes into account the limitations and failures of the previous stage that necessitated and
propelled a new evolutionary transformation beyond them.

Habermas gives one very long paragraph where he outlines his view of what amounts to a phylogenetic needs
hierarchy, including the achievements and the burdens of each of the major stages we have examined so far. It is
worth studying (all italics are his):

With the transition to the sociocultural form of life, that is, with the introduction of the family structure
[during preoperational/magic], there arose the problem of demarcating [beginning to differentiate] society

from external nature. In neolithic societies, at the latest, harmonizing society with the natural environment
became thematic [problematic]. Power over nature came into consciousness as a scarce resource [which
conflicts sharply with the eulogized accounts of this stage]. The experience of powerlessness in relation to the
contingencies of external nature had to be interpreted away in myth and magic. With the introduction of a
collective political order [mythic and mythic-rational], there arose the problem of the self-regulation of the
social system. In developed civilizations, at the latest, the achievement of order by the state became a central
need. Legal security came to consciousness as a scarce resource. The experience of social repression and
arbitrariness had to be balanced with legitimations of domination. This was accomplished in the framework of
rationalized world views [mythic-rational] (through which, moreover, the central problem of the previous
stage—powerlessness—could be defused). In the modern age [egoic-rational], with the autonomization of the
economy (and complementarization of the state), there arose the problem of a self-regulated exchange of the
social system with external nature [biomaterial economic exchange]. In industrial capitalism, at the latest,
society consciously placed itself under the imperatives of economic growth and increasing wealth. Value came
into consciousness as a scarce resource. The experience of social inequality called into being social movements
and corresponding strategies of appeasement. These seemed to lead to their goal in social welfare state mass
democracies (in which, moreover, the central problem of the preceding stage—legal insecurity—could be
defused). Finally, if postmodern societies, as they are today envisioned from different angles [planetary/vision-
logic], should be characterized by a primacy of the scientific and educational systems, one can speculate about
the emergence of
the problem of a self-regulated exchange of society with internal nature [by which he
means, essentially, self-esteem and self-actualization and its pathologies; he specifically mentions existential
anomie]. Again a scarce resource would become thematic—not the supply of power, security, or value, but the
supply of motivation and meaning.46

The emergence of a new level solves or “defuses” some of the central problems and limitations of the previous
stage (or else it wouldn’t emerge), but it also introduces its own new problems and new scarce resources. One can’t
help but notice that this hierarchy of “deficiency needs” or “scarce resources” bears striking resemblance to
Abraham Maslow’s (and Jane Loevinger’s and others’) present-day ontogenetic needs hierarchy—from safety/power
to conventional security/belonging to personal/egoic value to existential meaning. I believe it is no accident that I
have long referred to the centauric level as the existential level of meaning, and I believe it is no accident that there
would be Habermas/Maslow/Loevinger parallels (all of which we will return to in chapters 6 and 7).

But any way we slice the evolutionary pie, there is where we stand today: on the verge of a planetary
transformation, struggling to be secured by rationality and completed by vision-logic, and embedded in global-
planetary social institutions.

TRANSNATIONALISM

The global nature of this transformation is now being driven, particularly in its technological-economic base, by
three interrelated factors: (1) the necessity to protect the “global commons,” the common biosphere that belongs to
no nation, no tribe, no creed, no race; (2) the necessity to regulate the world financial system, which no longer
responds to national borders; (3) the necessity to maintain a modicum of international peace and security, which is
now not so much a matter of major war between any two nations, but between a “new order” of loosely federated
nations and renegade regimes threatening world peace.47

The point is that all three of those concerns no longer respond to actions taken merely on the part of individual
nations. Not one of those problems can be solved on a national
level. They are literally transnational crises
demanding transnational, worldcentric responses. And exactly how to negotiate this difficult transition, with nations
voluntarily surrendering some of their sovereignty for the global betterment—therein precisely is the extremely
difficult nature of this “postnational” global transition.

But the situation is clear enough: these are transnational crises that have rendered national responses obsolete.
As I said, I will not at this time enter into a discussion of the intricacies of these crises and the requisite global

transformation, except to indicate one factor crucial to our discussion at this point. Although each of those three
factors have important material-economic components (the relational exchange of monetary-financial systems, the
protection of the bio-material global commons, the physical security of nonaggression between nations)—none of
those physical and material and economic components can be secured in the long run without a corresponding
change in consciousness among the citizens of the nations
surrendering some of their sovereignty for the
transnational good.

Thus, solutions to the various global crises certainly demand efforts on the ecological-economic-financial front,
which is where most efforts are now being concentrated. But it’s a losing proposition without a corresponding shift
in worldviews that will allow citizens and their governments to perceive the greater advantage in the lesser death
(the surrender of some sovereignty for the greater good).

Tribal consciousness will not do; mythic-imperialism will surrender nothing; ethnocentric cleansing could care less
about a worldcentric consensus. Mythic-membership is and always has been perfectly willing to sacrifice the lives of
its true believers (and thus even more so the lives of nonbelievers) in order to advance the cause of the One True
God, and if that means global suicide in exchange for life eternal, well, that’s a small price, no? And magical blood
cleansing would rather take its ethnic tribal self, and the world, into oblivion than mix with unpure tribes.

Thus, without in any way denying the crucial importance of the ecological and economic and financial factors in
the world-demanding transformation, let us not forget that they all rest ultimately on a correlative transformation in
human consciousness: the global embrace, and its pluralistic world-federation, can only be seen, and understood,
and implemented, by individuals with a universal and global vision-logic, where the new scarce resources involve
not only material-economic shortages, but the resources of a meaning-in-life that can no longer be found in self or
tribe or race or nation, but will find its context, its therapia, its omega, and its release, in a worldcentric embrace
through which runs the blood of a common humanity and beats the single heart of a very small planet struggling for
its own survival, and yearning for its own release into a deeper and a truer tomorrow.

MULTICULTURALISM

In the meantime, it seems to be the case that the vast majority of the world’s population does not now need ways to
get beyond rationality, but ways to get up to it. The great mass of the world’s social holons are still caught in magic
and warring tribalisms based on blood and ethnic lineage, or in mythological empire-building: remnants of Marxism
as a mythic-rational “world religion”; Christian and Muslim fundamentalists who would “convert” (coerce) the world;
mythic-religious missionaries with a global and proselytizing fury; a type of national-economic imperialism bordering
on a mythology of the leading developed countries; and—strangest of all—a dissolution of some of the great modern
mythic-imperialist States into their tribal subholons, bathed in blood and kinship lineage and tribal warfare on a
vicious scale: the retribalization of large portions of the world.48

Thus, the single greatest world transformation would simply be the embrace of global reasonableness and

pluralistic tolerance—the global embrace of egoic-rationality (on the way to centauric vision-logic).

The “multicultural movement,” which claims a universal tolerance of all cultures freed from the “logocentric,
rational-centric, Eurocentric” dominance and hegemony, is a step in the right direction, with all good intentions, but
ends up being self-contradictory and finally hypocritical. It may claim to be “not rational-centric,” but in fact cultural
tolerance is secured only by rationality as universal pluralism, by a capacity to mentally put yourself into the other
person’s shoes and then decide to honor or at least tolerate that viewpoint even if you don’t agree with it. You,
operating from the pluralism of rational worldspace, might decide to tolerate the ideas of a mythic-believer; the
problem is, they will not tolerate you—and, in fact, historically they would burn your tolerant tail at the stake in
order to save your soul (whether your saviors be Christian, Marxist, Muslim, or Shinto).

In other words, multiculturalism is a noble, logocentric, and rational endeavor that simply misidentifies its own
stance and claims to be not rational because some of the things it tolerates are not rational. But its own tolerance
is rational through and through, and rightly so. Rationality is the only structure that will tolerate structures other
than itself.

Nor can a genuine multiculturalism be established by “feelings” or by “coming from the heart,” because my

feelings are merely mine, not necessarily yours or
theirs. Only in the space of rational pluralism can different
feelings and thoughts and desires be given a fair play and an equal voice. It is from the platform of rational pluralism
that the next stage, the truly aperspectival-integral (and universal-integral), can be reached.

Put differently, multiculturalism is a noble attempt to move to the integral-aperspectival structure, but, like many
postmodern poststructuralists, it thoroughly confuses the fact that no perspective is final with the notion that all
perspectives are therefore simply equal. It thus fails to notice that that stance itself actually (and appropriately)
rejects all narrower perspectives (which clearly shows that all perspectives are not equal).

In other words, the “multicults” regress from “no stance is ultimate” to “every stance is equally acceptable,” thus
burying (and denying) their own otherwise accurate judgment that lesser stances and smaller perspectives are
unacceptable. They correctly glimpse aperspectival space, but then get thoroughly disoriented in the dizzifyingly
holonic nature of ever-sliding contexts, failing to notice that sliding contexts do not in any way prevent some
contexts from still being relatively better than less encompassing contexts.

Thus, that everything is relative does not mean nothing is better; it means some things are, indeed, relatively
better than others, all the time. Neither atoms nor molecules are final or ultimate constituents of the universe;
nonetheless, wherever they appear, molecules always contain atoms in a deeper embrace. (Indeed, the whole
point of Einstein’s somewhat mislabeled “relativity theory” was to find invariant
transforms across relative
spacetime.) The system is relative and sliding, for sure, but it slides in stable ways, and this stability-in-relativity
allows the types of correct judgments that the multiculturalists do in fact make (namely, that pluralistic tolerance is
better than narrow-minded intolerance)—even though their own theory (mistaken to be “we have no judgments
since all judgments are relative”)—even though their own theory cannot account for their actual stance (even
though their own theory, in fact, denies their actual stance).

By failing to see the definiteness of

judgments—and thus being totally disoriented and lost in
aperspectival space—they miss the integral part, the universal-integral part, of their own stance, and thus they all
too often regress into a riot of idiosyncratic differences that destroys the integrity of their own position. In a recent
U.S. court case, a Chinese man found his wife, also Chinese, having an affair. He took a claw hammer and savagely
beat her to death. He was acquitted on the “multicult defense”: that’s what they do in China, and we have to honor
cultural differences, since no perspective is “better” than another. Aperspectival madness.

relative

As for “Eurocentrism” being somehow despicable, the dividing line is not and should not be

between
cultures—some cultures are “good,” some are “bad,” some are “higher,” some are “lower.” Rather, the dividing line
is within cultures—it is between those who, in any culture, wish to develop from egocentric to sociocentric to
worldcentric, from magic to mythic to reason-planetary (first as formal rationality, then completed as centauric
vision-logic).

For the most part, these rationality structures are already available for those individuals and social systems who
can endure the transformation beyond their own provincial dogmatisms and embrace international recognition and
mutual respect for each other’s particular existence. This transformation—from the submergence of the individual in
collective mythic-membership totalities to the emergence of the individual person or ego-subject, legally and morally
and politically free within rational space secured by law—has already been embraced by Russia and the Eastern Bloc
(which has temporarily thrown some of its junior holons back into vicious tribalistic warring simply because these
tribal subholons were once held together by Marxism as a military mythic-rational empire: in holonic dissolution, the
path of regression follows the reverse line of buildup, which now means: rampant retribalization).

Further, the transformation from mythic-membership to egoic-rationality (and its perils) is already open to China,
Cuba, Libya, Iraq, North Korea, Serbia, and any other social holon that wishes to surrender its mythic “superiority”
and join the community of nations governed by international law and mutual recognition, that wishes to cease
dissociating and splitting off from the free exchange of planetary consciousness, that wishes to reintegrate into a
common world spirit and collective sharing of reason and communication and vision. (This does not excuse those
nation-states, particularly the United States, Japan, and an ominously emerging “fortress Europe”—which are still
distorting supranational exchanges
interests and remnants of mythic-imperial
hegemony—does not prevent or relieve them from continuing to search for more reasonable and equitable
exchanges with the world community at large, and particularly with regard to the common biosphere).

their own particular

for

But for those individuals who have already done so; for those who have begun to emerge as centauric vision-logic;
for those who take their stand in a planetary awareness beyond this or that narrow parochialism; for those
attempting to secure a centauric identity that integrates physiosphere and biosphere and noosphere (in male and
female alike), and looking for that sense of meaning, existential meaning, global meaning—for those small few, the
simple living of a planetary perspectivism (that is, an integral-aperspectivism) creates small pockets of leading-edge
consciousness, creates small pockets of “cognitive potential” that slowly but surely feed back into collective
worldviews and then into social
institutions themselves (UL to LL to LR), and once materially embedded and
institutionalized, those institutional structures automatically, as it were, act as pacers of transformation for all who
follow.

And transformation into what, exactly? Is the centaur the end of the line? Put it another way: is there any
conceivable reason that evolution, which has labored so mightily for fifteen billion years and produced so much
undeniable wonderment, would just up and abruptly cease? Are there not higher spirals lying yet ahead? If we have
discerned even the vaguest features of time’s arrow, can we not stand on tiptoe and foresee dimly the arrow’s arc
into tomorrow?

6

Magic, Mythic, and Beyond

That little prigs and three-quarter-mad men may have the conceit that the laws of nature are constantly
broken for their sakes—such an intensification of every kind of selfishness into the infinite, into the
impertinent, cannot be branded with too much contempt. And yet Christianity [any form of mythic-
literalism] owes its triumph to this miserable flattery of personal vanity: it was precisely all the failures, all
the rebellious-minded, all the less favored, the whole scum and refuse of humanity who were thus won over
to it: The “salvation of the soul”—in plain language: “the world revolves around me.”

—FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE

IN THE LAST chapter we looked at the formative stages in the collective evolution of the human species, up to the

present—archaic to magic to mythic to mental (or egoic-rational on the verge of centauric vision-logic). In this
chapter we will examine those same stages, those basic holons, as they appear in an individual’s development today.
And this will set the stage for a discussion of any future—and possibly higher—developments, in the individual and
the species as a whole. And straining to see the arc of time’s arrow into tomorrow, brings some surprises indeed.

THE PRE/TRANS FALLACY

Ever since I began writing on the distinctions between prerational (or prepersonal) states of awareness and
transrational (or transpersonal) states—what I called the pre/trans fallacy—I have become more convinced than
ever that this understanding is absolutely crucial for grasping the nature of higher (or deeper) or truly spiritual states
of consciousness.

The essence of the pre/trans fallacy is itself fairly simple: since both prerational states and transrational states are,
in their own ways, nonrational, they appear similar or even identical to the untutored eye. And once pre and trans
are confused, then one of two fallacies occurs:

In the first, all higher and transrational states are reduced to lower and prerational states. Genuine mystical or
contemplative experiences, for example, are seen as a regression or throwback to infantile states of narcissism,
oceanic adualism, indissociation, and even primitive autism. This is, for example, precisely the route taken by Freud
in The Future of an Illusion.

In these reductionistic accounts, rationality is the great and final omega point of individual and collective
development, the high-water mark of all evolution. No deeper or wider or higher context is thought to exist. Thus,
life is to be lived either rationally, or neurotically (Freud’s concept of neurosis is basically anything that derails the
emergence of rational perception—true enough as far as it goes, which is just not all that far). Since no higher
context is thought to be real, or to actually exist, then whenever any genuinely transrational occasion occurs, it is
immediately explained as a regression to prerational structures (since they are the only nonrational structures
allowed, and thus the only ones to accept an explanatory hypothesis). The superconscious is reduced to the
subconscious, the transpersonal is collapsed to the prepersonal, the emergence of the higher is reinterpreted as an
irruption from the lower. All breathe a sigh of relief, and the rational worldspace is not fundamentally shaken (by
“the black tide of the mud of occultism!” as Freud so quaintly explained it to Jung).

On the other hand, if one is sympathetic with higher or mystical states, but one still confuses pre and trans, then
one will elevate all prerational states to some sort of transrational glory (the infantile primary narcissism, for
example, is seen as an unconscious slumbering in the mystico unio). Jung and his followers, of course, often take this
route, and are forced to read a deeply transpersonal and spiritual status into states that are merely indissociated and
undifferentiated and actually lacking any sort of integration at all.

In the elevationist position, the transpersonal and transrational mystical union is seen as the ultimate omega
point, and since egoic-rationality does indeed tend to deny this higher state, then egoic-rationality is pictured as the
low point of human possibilities, as a debasement, as the cause of sin and separation and alienation. When
rationality is seen as the anti-omega point, so to speak, as the great Anti-Christ, then anything nonrational gets
swept up and indiscriminately glorified as a direct route to the Divine, including much that is infantile and regressive
and prerational: anything to get rid of that nasty and skeptical rationality. “I believe because it is absurd”
(Tertullian)—there is the battle cry of the elevationist (a strand that runs deeply through Romanticism of any sort).

Freud was a reductionist, Jung an elevationist—the two sides of the pre/trans fallacy. And the point is that they
are both half right and half wrong. A good deal of neurosis is indeed a fixation/regression to prerational states,
states that are not to be glorified. On the other hand, mystical states do indeed exist, beyond (not beneath)
rationality, and those states are not to be reduced.

For most of the recent modern era, and certainly since Freud (and Marx and Ludwig Feuerbach), the reductionist
stance toward spirituality has prevailed—all spiritual experiences, no matter how highly developed they might in
fact be, were simply interpreted as regressions to primitive and infantile modes of thought. However, as if in
overreaction to all that, we are now, and have been since the sixties, in the throes of various forms of elevationism
(exemplified by, but by no means confined to, the New Age movement). All sorts of endeavors, of no matter what
origin or of what authenticity, are simply elevated to transrational and spiritual glory, and the only qualification for
this wonderful promotion is that the endeavor be nonrational. Anything rational is wrong; anything nonrational is
spiritual.

Spirit is indeed nonrational; but it is trans, not pre. It transcends but includes reason; it does not regress and
exclude it. Reason, like any particular stage of evolution, has its own (and often devastating) limitations, repressions,
and distortions. But as we have seen, the inherent problems of one level are solved (or “defused”) only at the next
level of development; they are not solved by regressing to a previous level where the problem can be merely
ignored. And so it is with the wonders and the terrors of reason: it brings enormous new capacities and new
solutions, while introducing its own specific problems, problems solved only by a transcendence to the higher and
transrational realms.1

Many of the elevationist movements, alas, are not beyond reason but beneath it. They think they are, and they
announce themselves to be, climbing the Mountain of Truth; whereas, it seems to me, they have merely slipped and
fallen and are sliding rapidly down it, and the exhilarating rush of skidding uncontrollably down evolution’s slope
they call “following your bliss.” As the earth comes rushing up at them at terminal velocity, they are bold enough to
offer this collision course with ground zero as a new paradigm for the coming world transformation, and they feel
oh-so-sorry for those who watch their coming crash with the same fascination as one watches a twenty-car pileup on
the highway, and they sadly nod as we decline to join in that particular adventure. True spiritual bliss, in infinite
measure, lies up that hill, not down it.

We will want to look at the deeper, higher structures of awareness, the transrational structures. But in order to
fully understand them, we need first to look carefully at the prerational structures, so we will know, if nothing else
than by a process of subtraction, what the transpersonal states are like.

So as we pick up the story of ontogeny at the archaic and magic structures, and follow it into the realms of the

superconscious, it is these two distortions—reductionism and elevationism—that we will most want to try to avoid.

COGNITIVE EVOLUTION

We are now following the development of the interior of an individual human holon in today’s world, a
recapitulation, in broad stroke, of the same basic holons we saw, in the last chapter, emerge over historical and

prehistorical epochs in the various cultural worldspaces (worldspaces still available today owing to compound
individuality, and spaces that unfold in the same sequence in individual development). As Sheldrake says, it is as if
nature, once it has produced a basic holon and made sure it functions adequately, keeps using the same holon in
subsequent development as building blocks (preserving the basic holon but negating its partialness or exclusivity
by transcending it in a higher, deeper pattern).

Each interior development that we will be following is, of course, governed by the twenty tenets (though not by
those alone), and thus each development involves a new and creative emergence, a new transcendence, a new
depth, a new interiority, a new differentiation/integration, a greater degree of relative autonomy (greater capacity
for both agency and for communion), a greater degree of consciousness, a greater total embrace—with new fears,
new anxieties, new needs, new scarcities, new desires, new moral engagements in new shared worldviews, and the
ever-present possibility of new and higher pathologies and distortions.

Nowhere have the vicissitudes of the mind’s developmental emergence been chartered in greater detail than in
the works of Jean Piaget; and although nobody imagines that Piaget’s system is without its own inadequacies,
nonetheless the wealth of research and data that he and his colleagues generated over a four-decade period stands
as one of a handful of the truly great contributions to psychology (and philosophy and religion).

Without, therefore, endorsing all of the Piagetian system, I would like to draw on his data (and some of his
conclusions) to point out very carefully the nature of the mind’s development from archaic to magic to mythic to
mental, as it appears in today’s ontogeny. For if there can be legitimate questions about, for example, the “magical-
animistic” times in the phylogenetic past, there can be much less doubt about that structure (and about the mythic
structure) as it appears in development today.

Further, and just as important for our concern, a simple study of Piaget is the quickest cure for elevationism. For
what we find as we carefully study Piaget is that the productions of, say, the preoperational mind initially look very
holistic, very interconnected, very “religious” in a sense, until we even barely scratch the surface and find the whole
production supported by egocentrism, artificialism, finalism, anthropocentrism, and indissociation. We then have
two very clear choices: try to prop up those productions as being “really religious,” or look elsewhere for a genuine
God.

WAVES AND STREAMS

Before outlining Piaget’s findings on cognitive development, a brief word about my overall psychological model, of
which cognitive development is only a part. This model consists essentially of waves, streams, states, and self.
Waves are the basic levels of consciousness (about a dozen major levels that range from subconscious to self-
conscious to superconscious). I call them “waves” to indicate the fluid nature of these levels of consciousness, the
fact that they interpenetrate and overlap (like colors in a rainbow) and are not rigid rungs in a ladder. Streams are
the various developmental lines (such as cognitive, moral, psychosexual, affective, interpersonal, spiritual, and so on)
that develop relatively independently through the basic levels or waves (so that a person can, for example, be at a
fairly high level of development cognitively, a medium level emotionally, and a low level morally; development, in
other words, is anything but a linear, step-by-step affair). States refers to altered states of consciousness (such as
peak experiences), which are brief, temporary, but often powerful experiences, especially of the transpersonal
realms (however, if development into the transpersonal is to become permanent and not merely passing, these
states must be converted to traits: altered states must become permanent structures or levels of consciousness).
And the self refers to the self-system that navigates the waves, streams, and states as it makes its way through the
great River of Life.

Waves and streams—or levels and lines—are operative in all four quadrants. They are simply the grades and
clades of evolution—the levels of holons and the lines of holons. That is, they are the levels of structural complexity,
and the lines of development that move through those levels. In figure 5-1, the levels, waves, or grades are given as
thirteen in number (a highly simplified summary). Each quadrant, although it shares the same basic levels or waves,
has its own types of lines or streams. For example, UL: affective development, ego development, cognitive
development
(e.g., preop to conop to formop to postformal); UR: biological growth, neuro-physiological

development, behavioral evolution; LL: cultural worldviews, values, mutual understanding, group identities; LR:
techno-economic forms, geopolitical structures, evolution of social systems, and so on. In each of the quadrants, the
various lines can unfold in a relatively independent fashion, but the point is that any holon in any line has correlates
at the same level in all the other quadrants (“same-level relationship”). And, of course, each line of development, in
any quadrant, follows the twenty tenets.

What we have covered so far (in very general outline) is the phylogenetic evolution of all four quadrants up to
today (as indicated in figure 5-1), using “phylogenetic” in the broad sense as the evolutionary history of any class of
holons. Focusing on human holons, we also examined the phylogenetic evolution of cultural worldviews (archaic to
magic to mythic to rational to vision-logic), which is only one line of development (but a very important line) in the
Lower-Left quadrant (we also touched on a few developmental
lines in the Lower Right, such as the techno-
economic stream from foraging to horticultural to agrarian to industrial to informational). In this chapter, we will
examine the development, in today’s individual, of the cognitive line of development, which is only one line of
development (but a very important line) in the Upper-Left quadrant. We have already seen that these lines are
related (similar holons are “reused” ontogenetically and phylogenetically in both micro and macro), and now we will
see ample evidence of this in today’s ontogenetic development.

Finally, a word about Piaget’s research itself. It has lately become fashionable and politically correct to dismiss
Piaget’s work entirely (it is “hierarchical,” it is “rigidly linear,” it is “patriarchal,” etc.). Piaget’s overall system, it is
quite true, has several inadequacies, but these are rarely why it is criticized; while the reasons that it is commonly
dismissed do not themselves hold up. The major inadequacy of Piaget’s system, most scholars now agree, is that
Piaget suggested that cognitive development (conceived as logico-mathematical competence) is the major axis of
development, and that all other domains are subservient to the cognitive. In other words, Piaget made the cognitive
stream the only major stream, and the implication was that all other streams fall within that one, whereas there is
now abundant evidence that the various developmental streams can unfold in a relatively independent manner (so
that a person can be at a high level of cognitive development while remaining at a medium level in other lines and at
a low level
In my model, for example, the cognitive line is merely one of some two-dozen
developmental lines, none of which, as lines, can claim preeminence. (It should be remembered that in this chapter
we are examining only the cognitive line—as a graphic example of evolutionary holons—and thus we are not
presenting an overall or integral psychology [for which, see Integral Psychology, Volume Four of the Collected
Works]).

in still others).

But as for the cognitive line itself, Piaget’s work is still very impressive; moreover, after almost three decades of
intense cross-cultural research, the evidence is virtually unanimous: Piaget’s stages up to formal operational are
universal and cross-cultural. As only one example, Lives Across Cultures—Cross-Cultural Human Development is a
highly respected textbook written from an openly liberal perspective (which is often suspicious of “universal”
stages). The authors (H. Gardiner, J. Mutter, and Corinne Kosmitzki) carefully review the evidence for Piaget’s stages
of sensorimotor, preoperational, concrete operational, and formal operational. They found that cultural settings
sometimes alter the rate of development, or an emphasis on certain aspects of the stages—but not the stages
themselves or their cross-cultural validity.

in all

Thus, for sensorimotor: “In fact, the qualitative characteristics of sensorimotor development remain nearly
infants studied so far, despite vast differences in their cultural environments” (p. 88). For
identical
preoperational and concrete operational, based on an enormous number of studies that include Nigerians,
Zambians, Iranians, Algerians, Nepalese, Asians, Senegalese, Amazon Indians, and Australian Aborigines: “What can
we conclude from this vast amount of cross-cultural data? First, support for the universality of the structures or
operations underlying the preoperational period is highly convincing. Second, . . . the qualitative characteristics of
concrete operational development (e.g., stage sequences and reasoning styles) appear to be universal [although] the
rate of cognitive development . . . is not uniform but depends on ecocultural factors.” Although the authors do not
use exactly these terms, they conclude that the deep structures of the stages are universal but the surface structures
depend strongly on cultural, environmental, and ecological factors—in other words, all four quadrants are
profoundly involved in individual development. “Finally, it appears that although the rate and level of performance
at which children move through Piaget’s concrete operational period depend on cultural experience [actually, on all

four quadrants], children in diverse societies still proceed in the same sequence he predicted” (pp. 91–92).

Fewer individuals in any cultures (American, Asian, African, or otherwise) reach formal operational cognition, and
the reasons given for this vary. It might be that formal operational is a genuinely higher stage that fewer therefore
reach (greater depth, less span), as I believe. It might be that formal operational is a genuine capacity but not a
genuine stage, as the authors believe (i.e., only some cultures emphasize formal operational and therefore teach it).
Evidence for the existence of Piaget’s formal stage is therefore strong but not conclusive. Yet the politically correct
have used this one item to dismiss all of Piaget’s stages, whereas the correct conclusion, backed by enormous
evidence, is that all of the stages up to formal operational have now been adequately demonstrated to be universal
and crosscultural.

We can now look at the contours of these universal stages. Although I believe the stages at and beyond formop
are also universal (including vision-logic and the general transrational stages), in a sense the most disputed and
controversial ground involves stages leading up to formal operational, for these are the stages—archaic, magic, and
mythic—that are so intensively debated as to their “spiritual” merit. Realizing that these are exactly the stages of
Piaget’s studies that have consistently held up to cross-cultural evidence allows us to see them in a more accurate
light, I believe.

As suggested, Piaget divided cognitive development

into four broad stages—sensorimotor (0–2 years),
preoperational or “preop” (2–7 years), concrete operational or “conop” (7–11 years), and formal operational or
“formop” (11 years onward).2 Each of these broad stages he divided into several substages. We will take them one at
a time, with a few brief correlations with other major researchers.

Watching these many correlations between onto and phylo, micro and macro, one can’t help but marvel at the
fact that once nature creates a holon, nature uses it time and time again. The Kosmos creatively brings forth a holon
(tenet 2c: self-transcendence), whereupon it is subjected to intense selection pressures (i.e.,
it must fit with all four
quadrants). For as long as it is selected (fits all four quadrants), it continues to exist, either on its own, and/or taken
up and included in a higher superholon, where it lives on as a relatively independent subholon.

There is a Kosmic economy in all this that is genuinely awe-inspiring. Who would have thought that the first atoms
existing in the first far-flung galaxies, stretching across billions of miles and existing billions of years ago, would now
be the ingredients, the actual subholons, in your very own body, as you now sit here reading all this?

SENSORIMOTOR (ARCHAIC AND ARCHAIC-MAGIC)

The human being at conception is a single-celled holon, embracing in itself, as junior holons, organelles, molecules,
atoms, and subatomic particles, reaching all the way back into those dark shadows that fade into the evolutionary
night.

By the time of birth, the human being has developed from protoplasmic irritability to sensation to perception to
impulse to proto-emotion, embracing each as a successive holon in its own compound individuality. But none of
these functions is yet clearly differentiated (or integrated), and the first years of life are a quick coming-to-terms
with the physiosphere and the biosphere both within and without, in preparation for the emergence of the
noosphere, which begins in earnest around age two with the emergence of language.

Thus Piaget, for example, in speaking of the first year of life, says that “the self is here material, so to speak.” It is
still, that is, embedded primarily in the physiosphere. In the first place, the infant cannot easily distinguish between
subject and object or self and material environment, but instead lives in a state of “primary narcissism” (Freud) or
“oceanic adualism” (Arieti) or “pleromatic fusion” (Jung) or primary “indissociation” (Piaget). The infant’s self and the
material environment (and especially the mother) are in a state of primitive nondifferentiation or indissociation. On
the psychosexual side, this is the “oral phase” because the infant is coming to terms with food, physical
nourishment, life in this physiosphere.

Sometime between the fourth and the ninth month, this archaic indissociation gives way to a physical bodyself
differentiated from the physical environment—the “real birth” of the individual physical self. Margaret Mahler
actually refers to it as “hatching.” The infant bites its thumb and it hurts, bites the blanket and it doesn’t. There is a
difference, it learns, between the physical self and the physical other.

Another way to put this is to say that, with this first major differentiation (or first major “fulcrum of development,”
as researchers call it),3 consciousness seats itself in the physical body, grounds itself in the physiosphere of the
individual holon and not in the physiosphere of the social holon (its environment). Many researchers, from Kernberg
to Mahler, have concluded that if, due to physiological/genetic factors or repeated trauma, consciousness fails to
seat itself in the physical self, the result is psychosis of one sort or another.4 Psychosis is many things (including,
perhaps, an influx from higher dimensions), but it certainly includes a failure to establish a grounded physical self
clearly differentiated from the environment. The psychotic, as R. D. Laing put it, is constantly “jumping out of the
body”; he or she cannot easily differentiate where the body stops and the chair begins; subject and object collapse in
a state of fusion and confusion, with hallucinatory blurring of boundaries, and so forth. Psychosis, we may say, is a
failure to differentiate and integrate the physiosphere.

If all goes relatively well, then the infant

transcends

this archaic fusion state and emerges or hatches as a

grounded physical self.

The sensorimotor period (0–2 years) is thus predominantly concerned with differentiating the physical self from
the physical environment, and results, toward the end of the second year, in what Piaget calls physical “object
permanence,” the capacity of the infant to understand that physical objects exist independently of him or her (i.e.,
the physical world exists independently of one’s egocentric wishes about it).

Thus, out of an initial state of primary indissociation (“protoplasmic,” Piaget also calls it), the physical self and the

physical other emerge:

It is through a progressive differentiation that the internal world comes into being and is contrasted with the
external. Neither of these two terms is given at the start. . . .

Consequently, during the gradual and slow differentiation of the initial protoplasmic reality into objective
and subjective reality, it is clear that each of the two terms [interior and exterior, Left Hand and Right Hand] in
process of differentiation will evolve in accordance with its own structure. . . .

This phenomenon is very general. During the early stages the [physical] world and the self are one; neither
term is distinguished from the other. But when they become distinct, these two terms begin by remaining very
close to each other: the world is still conscious and full of intentions, the self is still material, so to speak, and
only slightly interiorized. At every stage there remain in the conception of nature what we might call
“adherences,” fragments of internal experience which still cling to the external world.5

At the end of the sensorimotor period, the physical self and physical other are clearly differentiated, but as the
mind begins to emerge with preop, the mental images and symbols themselves are initially fused and confused with
the external world, leading to what Piaget calls “adherences,” which children themselves will eventually reject as
being inadequate and misleading.

We have distinguished [several] varieties of adherences defined in this way. There are, to begin with, during a
very early stage, feelings of participation accompanied sometimes by magical beliefs; the sun and moon follow
us, and if we walk, it is enough to make them move along; things notice us and obey us, like the wind, the
clouds, the night, etc.; the moon, the street lamps, etc., send us dreams “to annoy us,” etc., etc. In short, the
world is filled with tendencies and intentions which are [centered on] our own.

A second form of adherence, closely allied to the preceding, is that constituted by animism, which makes
the child endow things with consciousness and life [oriented solely toward the child]. . . . In this magico-
animistic order: on the one hand, we issue commands to things (the sun and the moon, the clouds and the sky
follow us), on the other hand, these things acquiesce in our desires because they themselves wish to do so.6

A third form is artificialism [anthropocentrism]. The child begins by thinking of things in terms of his own “I”:
the things around him take notice of man and are made for man; everything about them is willed and
intentional, everything is organized for the good of men. If we ask the child, or the child asks himself, how
things began, he has recourse to man to explain them. Thus artificialism is based on feelings of participation
which constitute a very special and very important class of adherences.7

As we will see, Piaget believes that the major and in many ways defining characteristic of all adherences is
egocentrism, or an early and initial inability to transcend one’s own perspective and understand that reality is not
self-centered. Development thus proceeds slowly from egocentrism to perspectivism, from realism to reciprocity and
mutuality, and from absolutism to relativity:

This formula means that the child, after having regarded his own point of view as absolute, comes to discover
the possibility of other points of view and to conceive of reality as constituted, no longer by what is
immediately given, but by what is common to all points of view taken together.

One of the first aspects of this process is the passage from realism of perception to interpretation properly
so called. All the younger children take their immediate perceptions as true, and then proceed to interpret
them according to their own egocentric relations. The most striking example is that of the clouds and the
heavenly bodies, of which children believe that they follow us. The sun and moon are small globes traveling a
little way above the level of the roofs of houses and following us about on our walks. Even the child of 6–8
years does not hesitate to take this perception as the expression of truth, and, curiously enough, he never
thinks of asking himself whether these heavenly bodies do not also follow other people. When we ask the
captious question as to which of two people walking in opposite directions the sun would prefer to follow, the
child is taken aback and shows how new the question is to him. [Older children,] on the other hand, have
discovered that the sun follows everybody. From this they conclude that the truth lies in the reciprocity of the
points of view: that the sun is very high up, that it follows no one. . . .8

Piaget is at pains to indicate that the process of differentiation/integration between internal and external world is
a long and slow one. It is not, for example, that magico-animistic beliefs are present at one stage and then
completely disappear at the next, but rather that cognitions referred to as “magical” become progressively less and
less as development proceeds, moving from a “pure magical autism” to mental egocentricity to reciprocal and
mutual sharing. In a very important passage Piaget gets to the heart of the matter:

For the construction of the objective world and the elaboration of strict reasoning both consist in a gradual
reduction of egocentricity in favor of . . . reciprocity of viewpoints. In both cases, the initial state is marked by
the fact that the self is confused with the external world and with other people; the vision of the world is
falsified by subjective adherences, and the vision of other people is falsified by the fact that the personal point
of view predominates, almost to the exclusion of all others. Thus in both cases, truth is obscured by the ego.

Then, as the child discovers that others do not think as he does, he makes efforts to adapt himself to them,
he bows to exigencies of control and verification which are implied by discussion and argument, and thus
comes to replace egocentric logic by the logic created by social life. We saw that exactly the same process took
place with regard to the idea of reality.

There is therefore an egocentric logic [LH] and an egocentric ontology [RH], of which the consequences are
parallel: they both falsify the perspective of relations and of things, because they both start from the
assumption that other people understand us and agree with us from the first, and that things revolve around
us with the sole purpose of serving us and resembling us.9

A note on terminology: Piaget divides each of the major cognitive stages into at least two substages (early and late
preop, early and late conop, early and late formop), and I have generally followed Piaget in this regard. Since we
have also been using Gebser’s general worldview terminology of archaic, magic, mythic, and mental (with the clear
implication that they are referring to essentially similar stages), I will often hybridize Gebser’s terminology to match
Piaget’s substages, so that we have a continuum of archaic, archaic-magic, magic, magic-mythic, mythic, mythic-
rational, rational, rational-existential (and into vision-logic, psychic, etc.). These particular names are, of course,
arbitrary; but the actual stages they refer to are based on extensive empirical/phenomenological research. I also
believe these names (such as magic, mythic-rational, etc.) help to capture the essential “flavor” of each stage and
sub-stage.

The preponderance of indissociations and “adherences” at the sensorimotor and early preoperational (the archaic

and the archaic-magic—roughly 0–3 years) have led Piaget himself to often refer to this general early period as one
of “magical cognitions” or “magic proper.” As he explains:

The first [general stage] is that which precedes any clear consciousness of the self, and may be arbitrarily set
down as lasting until the age of 2–3, that is, till the appearance of the first “whys,” which symbolize in a way
the first awareness of resistance in the external world.

As far as we can conjecture, two phenomena characterize this first stage [the overall archaic-magic]. From
the [internal] point of view, it is pure autism, or thought akin to dreams or daydreams, thought in which truth
is confused with desire. To every desire corresponds immediately an image or illusion which transforms this
desire into reality, thanks to a sort of pseudo-hallucination or play. No objective observation or reasoning is
possible: there is only a perpetual play which transforms perceptions and creates situations in accordance with
the subject’s pleasure [this is a stage that is often eulogized and “elevated” by the Romantics, such as Norman
O. Brown, to a “spiritual non-dual” state, whereas it is actually, as we have seen, a very egocentric, narcissistic
state: prerational, not transrational]. From the ontological viewpoint, what corresponds to this manner of
thinking is primitive psychological causality, probably in a form that implies magic proper [his italics; I refer
to it as archaic-magic]: the belief that any desire whatsoever can influence objects, the belief in the obedience
of external
things. Magic and autism are therefore two different sides of one and the same
phenomenon—that confusion between the self and the world. . . .10

PREOPERATIONAL (MAGIC AND MAGIC-MYTHIC)

If all goes relatively well, the infant transcends the early archaic fusion state and emerges or hatches as a grounded
physical self. But if the infant’s physical body is now separated from the environment, its emotional body is not. The
infant’s emotional self
still exists in a state of indissociation from other emotional objects, in particular the
mothering one. But then, around eighteen months or so, the infant learns to differentiate its feelings from the
feelings of others (this is the second major differentiation, or “second fulcrum”). Its own biosphere is differentiated
from the biosphere of those around it—in other words, it transcends its embeddedness in the undifferentiated
biosphere. Once again, as with every holon, it manifests not just a capacity for self-preservation and self-adaptation,
but also for self-transcendence.

Mahler refers to this crucial transformation (the second fulcrum) as the “separation-individuation phase,” or the
differentiation-and-integration of a stable emotional
self (whereas the previous fulcrum, as we saw, was the
differentiation/integration of the physical self). Mahler actually calls this fulcrum “the psychological birth of the
infant,” because the infant emerges from its emotional fusion with the (m)other.

A developmental miscarriage at this critical fulcrum (according to Mahler, Kernberg, and others) results in the
narcissistic and borderline pathologies, because if the infant does not differentiate-separate its feelings from the
feelings of those around it, then it is open to being “flooded” and “swept away” by its emotional environment, on
the one hand (the borderline syndromes), or it can treat the entire world as a mere extension of its own feelings (the
narcissistic condition)—both of which result from a failure to transcend an embeddedness in the undifferentiated
biosphere. One remains in indissociation with, or “merged” with, the biosphere, stuck in the biosphere, just as with
the previous psychoses one remains merged with or stuck in the physiosphere.

By around age three, if all has gone relatively well, the young child has a stable and coherent physical self and
emotional self; it has differentiated and integrated, transcended and preserved, its own physiosphere and biosphere.
By this time language has begun to emerge, and development in the noosphere begins in earnest.

Thus, the intensity of the early archaic-magic declines with the differentiation of emotional self and emotional
continue to dominate the entire early

other (24–36 months)—but, according to Piaget, magical cognitions
preoperational period (2–4 years), the period I simply call “magic.”

In other words, the first major layer of the noosphere is magical. During this period, the newly emerging images
and symbols do not merely represent objects; they are thought to be concretely part of the things they represent,
and thus “word magic” abounds:

Up to the age of 4–5, [the child] thinks that he is “forcing” or compelling the moon to move; the relation takes
on an aspect of dynamic participation or of magic. From 4 to 5 he is more inclined to think that the moon is
trying to follow him: the relation is animistic.

Closely akin to this participation is magical causality, magic being in many respects simply participation: the
subject regards his gestures, his thoughts, or the objects he handles, as charged with efficacy, thanks to the
very participations which he establishes between those gestures, etc., and the things around him
[“adherences”]. Thus a certain word acts upon a certain thing; a certain gesture will protect one from a certain
danger; a certain white pebble will bring about the growth of water lilies, and so on. . . .11

Piaget refers to such magical cognitions as a form of “participation”—that is, the subject and the object, and
various objects themselves, are “linked” by certain types of adherences, or felt connections, connections that
nonetheless violate the rich fabric of relations actually constituting the object.

This is very much what Freud referred to as the primary process, which is governed by two general laws, that of
displacement and that of condensation. In displacement, two different objects are equated or “linked” because they
share similar parts or predicates (a relation of similarity: if one Asian person is bad, all Asians must be bad). In
condensation, different objects are related because they exist in the same space (a relation of contiguity: a lock of
hair of a great warrior “contains” in condensed form the power of the warrior).

(There is another way to categorize this. Each holon is an agency-in-communion. Displacement confuses different
holons because they share similar agency. Condensation confuses different holons because they share similar
communions. The former is metaphor, the latter is metonym. This leads to a host of interesting correlations, which I
will reserve for a note).12

Put simply, such primary process or magical cognition is not yet capable of grasping the notion of a holon. It does
not set whole and part in a rich network of mutual relationships, but short-circuits the process by merely collapsing
or confusing various wholes and parts—what Piaget calls syncretism and juxtaposition (again, similarity and
contiguity). Magical cognition, then, is of fused and confused wholes and parts, and not mutually related wholes and
parts. These “fused networks” of “sycretic wholes” appear very holistic (or “holographic”), but are actually not very
coherent and do not even match the already available sensorimotor evidence.

[This] type of relation is participation. This type is more frequent than would at first appear to be the case, but
it disappears after the age of 5–6. Its principle is the following: two things between which there subsist
relations either of resemblance [similarity; metaphor] or of general affinity [contiguity; metonym], are
conceived as having something in common which enables them to act upon one another at a distance, or more
precisely, to be regarded one as a source of emanations, the other as the emanation of the first. Thus air or
shadows in a room emanate from the air and shadows out of doors. Thus also dreams, which are sent to us by
birds “who like the wind.”

[The child] begins, indeed, as we do, by feeling the analogy of the shadow cast by the book with the
shadows of trees, houses, etc. But this analogy does not lead him to any [mutual] relation: it simply leads him
to identify the particular cases with one another. So that we have here, not analogy proper, but syncretism.
The child argues as follows: “This book makes a shadow; trees, houses, etc., make shadows. The book’s
shadow (therefore) comes from the trees and the houses.” Thus, from the point of view of the cause or of the
structure of the object, there is participation, syncretistic schemas resulting from the fusion of singular terms. .
. .13

THE SHIFT FROM MAGIC TO MYTHIC

As we move from early preoperational (2–4 years; “magic”) to late preoperational (4–7 years; “magic-mythic”),
similar types of adherences continue to dominate awareness. But one crucial difference comes to the fore: magic
proper—the belief that the subject can magically alter the object—diminishes rapidly. Continued interaction with the
world eventually leads the subject to realize that his or her thoughts do not egocentrically control, create, or govern
the world. The “hidden linkages” don’t hold up in reality.

Magic proper thus diminishes, or rather, the omnipotent magic of the individual subject—a magic that no longer
“works”—is simply transferred to other subjects. Maybe I can’t order the world around, but Daddy (or God or the
volcano spirit) can.

And thus onto the scene come crashing a hundred gods and goddesses, all capable of doing what I can no longer
do: miraculously alter the patterns of nature in order to cater to my wants. Whereas in the earlier magical stages
proper, the secret of the universe was to learn the right type of word magic that would directly alter the world, the
focus now is to learn the right rituals and prayers that will make the gods and goddesses intervene and alter the
world for me. Piaget:

The possibility of miracles is, of course, admitted, or rather, miracles form part of the child’s conception of the
world, since law [at this stage] is a moral thing with the possibility of numerous exceptions [“suspended by
God” or a powerful other]. Children have been quoted who asked their parents to stop the rain, to turn
spinach into potatoes, etc.14

Thus the shift from magic to magic-mythic. Piaget: “The first stage is magical: we make the clouds move by
walking. The clouds obey us at a distance. The average age of this stage is 5. The second stage [magic-mythic] is both
artificialist and animistic. Clouds move because God or [other] men make them move. The average age of this stage
is 6.”15

It is from this magic-mythic structure that so many of the world’s classical mythologies seem in large part to issue.
As Philip Cowan points out, “During the [late preop or magic-mythic] stage, there is still a confusion between
physical and personal causality; the physical world appears to operate much the way people do. All of these
examples [show that late preop] children have already developed elaborate mythologies about cosmic questions
such as the nature of life (and death) and the cause of wind [and so forth]. Further, these mythologies show many
similarities from child to child across cultures and do not seem to have been directly taught by adults.”16

MYTH AND ARCHETYPE

This directly brings us, of course, to the work of Carl Jung and his conclusion that the essential forms and motifs of
the world’s great mythologies—the “archaic forms” or “archetypes”—are collectively inherited in the individual
psyche of each of us.

It is not often realized that Freud was in complete agreement with Jung about the existence of this archaic
heritage. Freud was struck by the fact that individuals in therapy kept reproducing essentially similar “phantasies,”
phantasies that seemed therefore somehow to be collectively inherited. “Whence comes the necessity for these
phantasies and the material for them?” he asks. “How is it to be explained that the same phantasies are always
formed with the same content? I have an answer to this which I know will seem to you very daring. I believe that
these primal phantasies are a phylogenetic possession. In them the individual stretches out to the experiences of
past ages.”17

This phylogenetic or “archaic heritage” includes, according to Freud, “abbreviated repetitions of the evolution
undergone by the whole human race through long-drawn-out periods and from pre-historic ages.” Although, as we
will see, Freud and Jung differed profoundly over the actual nature of this archaic heritage, Freud nevertheless made
it very clear that “I fully agree with Jung in recognizing the existence of this phylogenetic heritage.”18

Piaget has also written extensively on his essential agreement with and appreciation of Jung’s work. But he differs
slightly with Jung in that he does not see the archetypes themselves as being directly inherited from past ages, but
rather as being the secondary byproducts of cognitive structures which themselves are similar wherever they
develop and which, in interpreting a common physical world, generate common motifs.

But whether we follow Freud, Jung, or Piaget, the conclusion is essentially the same: all the world’s great
mythologies exist today in each of us, in me and in you. They are produced, and can at any time be produced, by the
archaic, the magic, and the mythic structures of our own compound individuality (and classically by the magic-mythic
structure).

The question then centers—and here Freud and Jung bitterly parted ways—on the nature and function of these

mythic motifs, these archetypes. Are they merely infantile and regressive (Freud), or do they also contain a rich
source of spiritual wisdom (Jung)? Piaget, needless to say, sided with Freud on this particular issue. I have already
suggested that I do not see these particular “archetypes” as being quite the high source of transpersonal wisdom
that Jung believed; but the situation is very subtle and complex, and we will return to it later in this chapter, in
connection with Joseph Campbell, and discuss it more fully.

Campbell, we will see, believes that in certain circumstances (which we will explore), the early mythic archetypes
can carry profound religious and spiritual meaning and power. But even Campbell clearly acknowledges (and indeed
stresses) that the early and late preoperational stages themselves are both marked by a great deal of egocentrism,
anthropocentrism, and geocentrism.

Put differently, still lying “close to the body,” preoperational cognition does not easily take the role of other, nor
does it still clearly differentiate the noosphere and the biosphere. Even in late preoperational thinking, the child
firmly believes that names are a part of, or actually exist in, the objects that are named. “What are names for?” a
child of five was asked. “They are what you see when you look at things.” “Where is the name of the sun?” “Inside
the sun.” As one child summarized it: “If there weren’t any words it would be very bad. You couldn’t make anything.
How could things have been made?” Joseph Campbell comments:

In the cosmologies of archaic man, as in those of infancy, the main concern of the creator was in the weal and
woe of man. Light was made so that we should see; night so that we might sleep; stars to foretell the weather;
clouds to warn of rain. The child’s view of the world is not only geocentric, but egocentric. And if we add to
this simple structure the tendency recognized by Freud, to experience all things in association with the
subjective formula of the family romance [Oedipus/Electra], we have a rather tight and very slight vocabulary
of elementary ideas, which we may expect to see variously inflected and applied in the mythologies of the
world.19

REPRESSION

The emergence of the noosphere: First images (at around 7 months), then symbols (the first full-fledged symbol
probably being the word “no!”), then concepts (around 3–4 years), all aided immeasurably by the emergence of
language.20

I mentioned the word “no!” as being the first symbol, and that word summarizes all the strengths—and all the

weaknesses—of the newly emerging noosphere.

“No” is the first form of specifically mental transcendence. Images begin this mental transcendence, but images
are tied to their sensory referents. With “no” I can for the first time decline to act on my bodily impulses or on your
desires (which every parent discovers in the child during the “terrible twos”). For the first time in development, the
child can begin to transcend its merely biological or biocentric or ecocentric embeddedness, begin to exert control
over bodily desires and bodily discharges and bodily instincts, while also “separating-individuating” itself from the
will of others. The Freudian fuss over “toilet training” and the “anal phase” simply refers to the fact that a mental-
linguistic self is beginning to emerge and beginning to exert some type of conscious will and conscious control over
its spontaneous biospheric productions, and over its being “controlled” by others as well.

In short, it is only with language that the child can differentiate its mind and body, differentiate its mental will and
its bodily impulses, and then begin to integrate its mind and body. This is the third major differentiation, or the
third fulcrum. The failure to differentiate mind and body—the failure to transcend at this stage—is another way to
say “remains stuck in the body or the biosphere,” which, we saw, is the primary developmental lesion underlying the
narcissistic/borderline pathologies.

But “no!” can go too far, and therein lies all the horrors of the noosphere. For if it is indeed with language that the
child can differentiate mind and body, differentiate the noosphere and the biosphere, that differentiation (as
always) can go too far and result in dissociation. The mind does not just transcend and include the body, it represses
the body, represses its sensuality, represses its sexuality, represses its rich roots in the biosphere. Repression, in the
Freudian (and Jungian) sense, comes into existence only with the “language barrier,” with a “no!” carried to

extremes. And the result of this extreme “no!” is technically called “neurosis” or “psychoneurosis.”

Every neurosis, in other words, is a miniature ecological crisis. It is a refusal to include in the compound individual
some aspect of organic life, emotional-sexual life, reproductive life, sensuous life, libidinal life, biospheric life. It is a
denial of our roots and our foundation. Neurosis, in this sense, is an assault on the biosphere by the noosphere, an
attempt to render extinct some aspects of our own organic holons. But these biospheric holons do not thereby
merely disappear (nor could they without killing the individual). Rather, the repressed holons return in disguised
forms known as “neurotic symptoms”—anxieties and depressions and obsessions—painful symptoms of a biosphere
ignored, a biosphere now forcing itself into consciousness in hidden forms, attempts to throw the noosphere off its
back.21

And the neurotic symptoms disappear, or are healed, only as consciousness relaxes its repression, recontacts and
befriends the biosphere that exists in its own being, and then integrates that biosphere with the newly emergent
noosphere in its own case. This is called “uncovering the shadow,” and the shadow is . . . the biosphere.

Thus, if remaining stuck in the biosphere results in the borderline/narcissistic conditions, going to the other
extreme and alienating the biosphere results directly in the psychoneuroses. It follows that our present-day
worldwide ecological crisis is, in the very strictest sense of the term, a worldwide collective neurosis—and is about to
result in a worldwide nervous breakdown.

This crisis, I repeat, is in no way going to “destroy the biosphere”—the biosphere will survive, in some form or
another (even if just viral and bacterial), no matter what we do to it. What we are doing, rather, is altering the
biosphere in a way that will not support higher life forms and especially will not support the noosphere. That
“alteration” is in fact a repression, an alienation, a denial of our common ancestry, a denial of our relational
existence with all of life. It is not a destruction of the biosphere but a denial of the biosphere, and that is the
precise definition of psychoneurosis.

What Freud found his patients doing on a couch in Vienna, we have now collectively managed to do to the world

at large. And who shall be our doctor?

CONCRETE OPERATIONAL (MYTHIC AND MYTHIC-RATIONAL)

Assuming development goes relatively smoothly, then with the first significant differentiation of the mind and body
(the third fulcrum), the mind can transcend its embeddedness in a merely bodily orientation—absorbed in itself
(egocentric)—and begin to enter the world of other minds. But to do so it must learn to take the role of other—a
new, emergent, and very difficult task.

In other words, the self has gone from a physiocentric identity (first fulcrum) to a biocentric identity (second
fulcrum) to an early
and
anthropocentric (magic and magic-mythic all centered on the self and oriented exclusively to the self, however
“otherworldly” or “sacred” it might all appear).

identity (third fulcrum), all of which are thoroughly

noospheric

egocentric

If the sensorimotor and preoperational world is egocentric, the concrete operational world is

sociocentric
(centered not so much on a bodily identity as on a role identity, as we will see). It still contains “mythic” and
“anthropocentric” elements because, as Cowan puts it, “there are still various colorings of the previous stages”22
(which is why I call early and late conop, respectively, mythic and mythic-rational). A more differentiated causation
by “five elements” (water, wind, earth, fire, ether) tends to replace more syncretic explanations, and there often
emerges a belief in causation by “preformation” (the acorn contains a fully formed but miniature oak tree).

But by far the most significant transformation or transcendence occurs in the capacity to take the role of
other—not just to realize that others have a different perspective, but to be able to mentally reconstruct that
perspective, to put oneself in the other’s shoes.

In what became known as the Three Mountains Task, Piaget and Bärbel Inhelder exposed children from four to
twelve years old to a play set that contained three clay mountains, each of a different color, and a toy doll. The
questions were simple: what do you see, and what does the doll see?

The typical response of the preoperational child is that the doll sees the same thing that the child is looking at,
even if the doll is facing only, say, the green mountain. The child does not understand that there are different

perspectives involved. At a later stage of preop, the child will correctly indicate that the doll has a different
perspective, but the child cannot say exactly what that is.

But with the emergence of concrete operational, the child will easily and readily describe the true perspective of

the doll (e.g., “I am looking at all three mountains, but the doll is only looking at the green mountain”).

Investigation of these and similar tasks (by Robert Selman, John Flavell, and others) has confirmed the general
conclusion: only with the emergence of concrete operational thought can the child transcend his or her egocentric
perspective and take the role of other. As Habermas would put it, a role identity supplements a natural (or bodily)
identity (the body cannot take the role of other). The child learns his or her role in a society of other roles, and
must now learn to differentiate that role from the role of others and then integrate that role in the newly
emergent worldspace (this is the fourth major fulcrum, the fourth major differentiation/integration of self-
development). The fundamental locus of self-identity thus switches from egocentric to sociocentric.

Initially the child is indissociated from his or her role, is embedded or “stuck” in it (just as he or she was initially
stuck in the physiosphere and then stuck in the biosphere). This unavoidable (and initially necessary) “sociocentric
embeddedness” leads to what is variously known as the conventional stages of morality (Kohlberg/Gilligan), the
belongingness needs (Maslow), the conformist mode (Loevinger).

Which is why pathology at this stage is known generally as “script pathology.” One is having trouble, not with the
physiosphere (psychoses), not with the biosphere (borderline and neuroses)—rather, one is stuck in the early roles
and scripts given by one’s parents, one’s society, one’s peer group: scripts that are not, and initially cannot be,
checked against further evidence, and therefore scripts that are often outmoded, wrong, even cruel (“I’m no good,
I’m rotten to the core, I can’t do anything right,” etc.; these do not so much concern bodily impulses, as in the
psychoneuroses, but rather social judgments about one’s social standing, one’s role).

Therapy here involves digging up these scripts and exposing these myths to the light of more mature reason and
more accurate information, thus “rewriting the script.” (This is, for example, the primary approach of cognitive
therapy and interpersonal therapy; not so much the digging up of buried and alienated bodily impulses, as important
as that may be, but replacing false and distorting cognitive maps with more reasonable judgments).23

Equally important to the taking of roles is the capacity of conop to work with mental rules. We saw that preop
works with images (pictorial representation), symbols (nonpictorial representation), and concepts (which represent
an entire class of things). Rules go one step further and operate upon concrete classes, and thus these rules (like
multiplication, class inclusion, hierarchization) begin to grasp the incredibly rich relationships between various
wholes and parts.

That is, concrete operational is the first structure that can clearly grasp the nature of a holon, of that which in one
relationship is a whole and at the same time in another relationship is merely a part (which is why value holarchies
start to emerge spontaneously in children at this point; they switch from the rather strong “either-or” desires of
preop to a continuum of preferences). All of this, of course, depends upon the capacity of conop to begin to take
different perspectives and relate those perspectives to each other.

Because of its capacity to operate with both rules and roles, I also call this structure the rule/role mind. In relation
to the previous stage(s), it represents a greater transcendence, a greater autonomy, a greater interiority, a higher
and wider identity, a greater consciousness, but one that, as in all previous stages, is initially “captured” by the self
and the objects—now a social self and now social objects (roles)—that dominate this stage.

And thus a self now open to new and higher pathologies, which demand new and different therapies. No longer
stuck in the physiosphere, stuck in the biosphere, or stuck in the early “egosphere,” the pathological self is here
stuck in the sociosphere, embedded in a particular society’s rules and myths and dogmas, with no way to transcend
that mythic-membership, and thus destined to play out the roles and rules of a particular and isolated society.

Mythic-membership is sociocentric and thus ethnocentric: one is in the culture (a member of the culture) if one
accepts the prevailing mythology, and one is excommunicated from the culture if the belief system is not embraced.
In this structure, there is no way a global or planetary culture can even be conceived unless it involves the imposing
of one’s particular mythology on all peoples: which is just what we saw with the mythic-imperialism of the great
empires, from the Greek and Roman to the Khans and Sargons to the Incas and Aztecs. These great empires all
overcame the egocentrism of local and warring tribes by subsuming their regimes into that of the empire (thus

negating and preserving them in a larger reach or communion), and this was accomplished in part, as we saw, by the
umbrella of a mythology that unified different tribes, not by blood or kinship (for that is impossible, since each tribe
has a different lineage), but rather by a common mythological origin that could unite the various roles (as the twelve
Tribes of Israel were united by a common Yahweh).

But as mature egoic-rationality begins to emerge, ethnocentric gives way to worldcentric.

THE EGO

We saw that Habermas referred to the transcendence from conop to formop as a transformation from a role
identity to an ego identity. “Ego” here doesn’t mean “egocentric”; on the contrary, it means moving from a
sociocentric to a worldcentric capacity, a capacity to distance oneself from one’s egocentric and ethnocentric
embeddedness and consider what would be fair for all peoples and not merely one’s own.

It would be helpful, then, to discuss the meaning of the word ego. Particularly in transpersonal circles, no word
has caused more confusion. Ego, along with rationality, is generally the dirty word in mystical, transpersonal, and
New Age circles, but few researchers seem even to define it, and those who do, do so differently.

We can, of course, define ego any way we like as long as we are consistent. Most New Age writers use the term
very loosely to mean a separate-self sense, isolated from others and from a spiritual Ground. Unfortunately, these
writers do not clearly distinguish states that are pre-egoic from those that are transegoic, and thus half of their
recommendations for salvation are often recommendations for various ways to regress, and this rightly sends alarms
through orthodox researchers. Nonetheless, their general conclusion is that all truly spiritual states are “beyond
ego,” which is true enough as far as it goes, but which terribly confuses the picture unless it is carefully qualified.

In most psychoanalytically oriented writers, the ego has come to mean “the process of organizing the psyche,” and
in this regard many researchers, such as Heinz Kohut, now prefer the more general term self. The ego (or self), as
the principle that gives unity to the mind, is thus a crucial and fundamental organizing pattern, and to try to go
“beyond ego” would mean not transcendence but disaster, and so these orthodox theorists are utterly perplexed by
what “beyond ego” could possibly mean, and who could possibly desire it—and, as far as that definition goes, they
too are quite right. (We’ll return to this in a moment.)

In philosophy a general distinction is made between the empirical ego, which is the self insofar as it can be an
object of awareness and introspection, and the Pure Ego or transcendental Ego (Kant, Fichte, Husserl), which is pure
subjectivity (or the observing Self), which can never be seen as an object of any sort. In this regard, the pure Ego or
pure Self is virtually identical with what the Hindus call Atman (or the pure Witness that itself is never witnessed—is
never an object—but contains all objects in itself).

Furthermore, according to such philosophers as Fichte, this pure Ego is one with absolute Spirit, which is precisely
the Hindu formula Atman = Brahman. To hear Spirit described as pure Ego often confuses New Agers, who generally
want ego to mean only “the devil” (even though they heartily embrace the identical notion Atman = Brahman).

They are equally confused when someone like Jack Engler, a theorist studying the interface of psychiatry and
meditation, states that “meditation increases ego strength,” which it most certainly does, because “ego strength” in
the psychiatric sense means “capacity for disinterested witnessing.” But the New Agers think that meditation means
“beyond ego,” and thus anything that strengthens the ego is simply more of the devil. And so the confusions go.

Ego is simply Latin for “I.” Freud, for example, never used the term ego; he used the German pronoun das Ich, or
“the I,” which Strachey unfortunately translated as the “ego.” And contrasted to “the I” was what Freud called the
Es, which is German for “it,” and which, also unfortunately, was translated as the “id” (Latin for “it”), a term Freud
never used. Thus Freud’s great book The Ego and the Id was really called “The I and the It.” Freud’s point was that
people have a sense of I-ness or selfness, but sometimes part of their own self appears foreign, alien, separate from
them—appears, that is, as an “it” (we say, “The anxiety, it makes me uncomfortable,” or “The desire to eat, it’s
stronger than me!” and so forth, thus relinquishing responsibility for our own states). When parts of the I are split off
or repressed, they appear as symptoms or “its” over which we have no control.

Freud’s basic aim in therapy was therefore to reunite the I and the it and thus heal the split between them. His
most famous statement of the goal of therapy—“Where id was, there ego shall be”—actually reads, “Where it was,

there I shall be.” Whether one is a Freudian or not, this is still the most accurate and succinct summary of all forms of
uncovering psychotherapy, and it simply points to an expansion of ego, an expansion of I-ness, into a higher and
wider identity that integrates previously alienated processes.

The term ego can obviously be used in a large number of quite different ways, from the very broad to the very
narrow, and it is altogether necessary to specify which usage one intends, or else interminable arguments arise that
are generated only by an arbitrary semantic choice.

In the broadest sense, ego means “self” or “subject,” and thus when Piaget speaks of the earliest stages being
“egocentric,” he does not mean that there is a clearly differentiated self or ego set apart from the world. He means
just the opposite: the self is not differentiated from the world, there is no strong ego, and thus the world is treated
as an extension of the self, “egocentrically.” Only with the emergence of a strong and differentiated ego (which
occurs from the third to the fifth fulcrums, culminating in formop, or rational perspectivism)—only with the
emergence of the mature ego does egocentrism die down! The “pre-egoic” stages are the most egocentric!

Thus, it is only at the level of formal operational thought (as we will see in a moment) that a truly strong and
differentiated self or ego emerges from its embeddedness in bodily impulses and pre-given social roles; and that,
indeed, is what Habermas refers to as an ego identity, a fully separated-individuated sense of self.

To repeat: the “ego,” as used by psychoanalysis, Piaget, and Habermas (and others), is thus less egocentric than its

pre-egoic predecessors!24

I will most often use the term ego in that specific sense, similar to Freud, Piaget, Habermas, and others—a
rational, individuated sense of self, differentiated from the external world, from its social roles (and the superego),
and from its internal nature (id).

In this usage, there are pre-egoic

realms (particularly the archaic and the magic), where the self is poorly
differentiated from the internal and external world (there are only “ego nuclei,” as psychoanalysis puts it). These
pre-egoic realms are, to repeat, the most egocentric (since the infant or child doesn’t have a strong ego, it thinks
that the world feels what it feels, wants what it wants, caters to its every desire: it does not clearly separate self and
other, and thus treats the other as an extension of the self).

The ego begins more stably to emerge in the mythic stage (as a persona or role) and finally emerges, in the
formal operational stage, as a self clearly differentiated from the external world and from its various roles
(personae), which is the culmination of the overall egoic realms. Higher developments into more spiritual realms
are then referred to as being transegoic, with the clear understanding that the ego is being negated but also
preserved (as a functional self in conventional reality). The self in these higher stages I will refer to as the Self (and
not the pure Ego, unless otherwise indicated, because this confuses everybody), and I will explain all of that in more
detail as we proceed.25

These three large realms are also referred to, in very general terms, as the subconscious (pre-egoic), the self-
conscious (egoic), and the superconscious (transegoic); or as the prepersonal, the personal, and the transpersonal;
or as the prerational, the rational, and the transrational.

The point is that each of those stages is a lessening of egocentrism as one moves closer to the pure Self.26 The
maximum of egocentrism, as Piaget demonstrated, occurs in the primary or physical indissociation (the first fulcrum,
where self-identity is physiocentric), because the entire material world is absorbed in the self-sense and cannot even
be considered apart from the self-sense. This archaic-autistic stage is not “one with the entire world in bliss and joy,”
as many Romantics think, but a swallowing of the material world into the self: the child is all mouth, and everything
else is merely food.

As identity switches from physiocentric to biocentric or ecocentric (fulcrum-2), there is a lessening of “pure
autism” (“self-only!”) but a blossoming of emotional narcissism or emotional egocentrism (fulcrum-2), which
Mahler summarized as “narcissism at its peak!” (She also summarized it as “the world is the infant’s oyster”:
grandiose-omnipotent fantasies). The emergence of the preop mind (fulcrum-3) is a lessening of that emotional
egocentrism, but a blossoming of egocentric (and geocentric) magic—less primitive than the previous stage, but still
shot through with egocentric adherences: the world exists centered on humans.

The emergence of the conop mind (fulcrum-4) is a lessening of that egocentric magic (where the self is central to
the cosmos), but it is replaced with an ethnocentrism, where one’s particular group, culture, or race is supreme.

Nonetheless, at the same time this allows the beginning of what Piaget calls a decentering, where one can decenter
or stand aside from the egocentrism of the early mind and instead take the role of other, and this comes to a fruition
with a further decentering, a further lessening of egocentrism, in formal operational (where one can take the
perspective, not just of others in one’s group, but of others in other groups: worldcentric or non-ethnocentric).

In other words, each stage transcends

therefore less egocentric, less caught in the
narrower and shallower perspective, but instead reaches out more and more to embrace deeper and wider
occasions. The self becomes less and less egocentric, and thus embraces more and more holons as worthy of equal
respect.

its predecessor and is

As we will see when we follow evolution into the transpersonal domain, these developments converge on an
intuition of the very Divine as one’s very Self, common in and to all peoples (in fact, all sentient beings), a Self that is
the great omega point of this entire series of decreasing egocentrism, of decentering from the small self in order to
find the big Self—a Self common in and to all beings and thus escaping the egocentrism (and ethnocentrism) of each.
The completely decentered self is the all-embracing Self (as Zen would say, the Self that is no-self).

What else could evolution as decreasing egocentrism possibly mean? Embracing identities that include more
and more beings, both deeper and wider—what is the chaotic Attractor here? Where else does it look like this series
is going? Where else could it possibly go?

FORMAL OPERATIONAL

At this point, we are tracing the emergence of a strong rational ego out of its embeddedness in mythic-membership,
and this brings us to Piaget’s formal operational stage.

Formal operational awareness transcends but includes concrete operational thought, and thus formop can
operate upon the holons that constitute conop—and that, in fact, is the primary definition of
formal operational.
Where concrete operational uses rules of thought to transcend and operate on the concrete world, formal
operational uses a new interiority to transcend and operate on the rules of thought themselves. It is a new
differentiation allowing a new integration (and a deeper and wider identity).

Again this sounds terribly dry and abstract, but the results are not. First and foremost, formal operational
awareness brings with it a new world of feelings, of dreams, of wild passions and idealistic strivings. It is true that
rationality introduces a new and more abstract understanding of mathematics, logic, and philosophy, but those are
all quite secondary to the primary and defining mark of reason: reason is a space of possibilities, possibilities not tied
to the obvious, the given, the mundane, the profane. Reason, we said earlier, is the great gateway to the unseen, the
beginning of the invisible worlds, which is usually the last way people think of rationality.

But think of the great mystics such as Plato and Pythagoras, who saw rational Forms or Ideas as the grand patterns
upon which all of manifestation was based, patterns that were utterly invisible to the eye of flesh and could only be
seen interiorly, with the eye of mind. Or think of the great physicists such as Heisenberg and Jeans, who maintained
that the ultimate building blocks of the universe are mathematical Forms, also seen only with the mind’s eye. Or of
the great Vedantin and Mahayana sages, who maintained that the entire visible world is just a precipitate of the
mind’s interior Forms or “seed-syllables.” For all of these theorists (and many more like them), Reason was not an
abstraction from the concrete physical world; rather, the concrete world was a reduction or condensation of the
great mental Forms lying beyond the grasp of the senses, Forms which contained en potentia all possible manifest
worlds.

Piaget approaches this whole topic by showing that, whereas the concrete operational child can indeed operate
upon the concrete world, the child at that stage ultimately remains tied to the obvious and the given and the
phenomenal, whereas the formal operational adolescent will mentally see
various and different possible
arrangements of the given. Again, a typical Piagetian experiment sounds very dry and abstract and far removed from
ordinary events, but what it actually indicates is the power of the creative imagination. I’ll simplify considerably:

A child is presented with five glasses which contain colorless liquids. Three of the glasses contain liquids that, if

mixed together, will produce a yellow color. The child is asked to produce a yellow color.

The preop child will randomly combine a few glasses, then give up. If she accidentally hits upon the right solution,

she will give a magical explanation (“The sun made it happen”; “It came from the clouds”).

The conop child will eagerly begin by combining the various glasses, three at a time. She does this concretely; she

will simply continue the concrete mixing until she hits upon the right solution or eventually gets tired and quits.

The formop adolescent will begin by telling you that you have to try all the possible combinations of three
all possible
glasses. She has a mental plan or formal operation that lets her see, however vaguely, that
combinations have to be tried. She doesn’t have to stumble through the actual concrete operations to understand
this. Rather, she sees, with the mind’s eye, that all possibilities must be taken into account.

In other words, this is a very relational type of awareness: all the possible relations that things can have with
each other need to be held in awareness—and this is radically new. This is not the “wholeness” of syncretic fusion,
where the integrity of wholes and parts is violated in a magical fusion, but rather a relationship of mutual interaction
and mutual interpenetration, where wholes and parts, while remaining perfectly discrete and intact, are also seen to
be what they are by virtue of their relationships to each other. The preop child, and to a lesser extent the conop
child, thinks that the color yellow is a simple property of the liquids; the formop adolescent understands that the
color is a relationship of various liquids.

Formal operational awareness, then, is the first truly ecological mode of awareness, in the sense of grasping
mutual interrelationships. It is not embedded in ecology (that would be fulcrum-2); it transcends ecology (without
denying it), and thus can reflect on the web of relationships constituting it. As various researchers have pointed out,
to use Cowan’s particular phrasing: “Again the emphasis in formal [operational] schemes is on the coordination of
[various] systems. Not only can adolescents [at this stage] observe and reason about changes in the interior of [an
individual], they can also be concerned with reciprocal changes in the surrounding environment. Only then, for
example, will they be able to conceptualize an ecological system in which changes in one aspect may lead to a whole
system of changes in the balance between other aspects of nature.”27

So the first equation we need is: formal operational = ecological.
The fact that formop is also strong enough, as we have seen, to potentially repress the biosphere, resulting in
ecological catastrophe, indicates merely that ecological catastrophe is an unfortunate possibility, but not an inherent
component, of rationality. As always, we want to tease apart the pathological manifestations of any stage from its
authentic achievements, and celebrate the latter even as we try to redress the former. The fact that ecological
awareness becomes even greater at the next stage, the centauric, should not detract from the fact that it begins
here, with the formal operational understanding of mutual relationships, and it does not begin prior to this stage at
all (prior to this are syncretic wholes, which sound “ecological” but actually constitute a certain violence to the
integrity of whole/parts).

The second equation we need is: formal operational = understanding of relativity.
The capacity to take different perspectives, we saw, begins in earnest with conop. But with the emergence of
formop, all the various perspectives can be held in mind, however loosely, and thus all of them become relative to
each other. “In a set of experiments, a snail moves along a board, which itself is moving along a table. Only children
at the formal operations stage can understand the distance which the snail travels relative to the board and to the
table. Here we find the intellectual equipment necessary for conceptions of relativity—that time taken or space
travelled cannot be absolute, but must be measured relative to some arbitrary point.”28

The third equation that we need is: formal operational = nonanthropocentric.
The egocentric, geocentric, anthropocentric notions of reality, so prevalent in the earlier magic and mythic stages,
and so defining of those stages, finally begin to wind down and lose their grip on awareness, and humans take their
rightful place in the great holarchy of being as one set of wholes that are parts in all sorts of other wholes, with no
whole and no part being finally privileged.

And not merely egocentrism but sociocentrism or ethnocentrism begins to wind down. With the coming of
formop, the rules and norms of any given society can themselves be reflected upon and judged by more universal
principles, principles that apply not just to this or that culture, or this or that tribe, but to the multiculturalism of
universal perspectivism. Not “My country right or wrong,” but “Is my country actually right?” Not concrete moral
rules such as the Ten Commandments (“Thou shalt have no other gods before me”—intertribal squabbling), but
more universal statements, principles of justice and mercy and compassion, of reciprocity and equality, based on

mutual respect for individuals and the dictates of conscience based on rights (as an autonomous whole) and
responsibilities (as a part of a larger whole—agency and communion, rights and responsibilities).

Thus Kohlberg, Gilligan, and Habermas (to name a few) all refer to this general stage as postconventional (which
doesn’t mean postcultural or postsocial, but simply postconformist in some significant ways). Socrates versus
Athens. Martin Luther King, Jr., versus segregation. Gandhi versus cultural imperialism.

Thus, we have seen moral development move from a preconventional orientation, which is strongly egocentric,
geocentric, biocentric, narcissistic, bound to the body’s separate feelings and nature’s impulses (the first three
fulcrums), to a conventional or sociocentric or ethnocentric orientation, bound to one’s society, culture, tribe, or
race, to a postconventional or worldcentric orientation, operating in the space of universal pluralism and global
grasp (these stages have been elaborated by Piaget, Baldwin, Kohlberg, Gilligan, Habermas, Loevinger, Broughton,
Selman, etc.).29

For all these reasons, the individual at this stage, who can no longer rely on society’s given roles in order to
establish an identity, is thus thrown back on his or her own inner resources. “Who am I?” becomes, for the first time,
a burning question, and the self-esteem needs emerge from the belongingness needs (Maslow), or a “conscientious”
self emerges from a “conformist” mode (Loevinger).

A failure to negotiate this painfully self-conscious phase (“fulcrum 5”)—a differentiation from ethnocentrism and
sociocentrism—results in the characteristic pathology of this stage, which Erikson called an “identity crisis.” This is
not a problem of merely finding an appropriate role in society (that would be script pathology); it is one of finding a
self that may or may not fit with society at all (Thoreau on civil disobedience comes to mind).

In addition to formal operational awareness being ecological, relational, and nonanthropocentric, we have already
mentioned several of its other properties: it is the first structure that is highly reflexive and highly introspective; it is
experimental (or hypothetico-deductive) and relies on evidence to settle issues; it is universal as pluralism or
perspectivism; and it is propositional (can understand “what if” and “as if” statements; the fact that formop is the
first structure that can grasp “as if” statements turns out to be extremely important when it comes to interpreting
mythology, as we will see in the following section on Joseph Campbell). But all of these are just variations on the
central theme: reason is a space of possibilities.

No wonder adolescence and the emergence of formop is a time of wild passions and explosive idealisms, of
fantastic dreaming and heroic urges, of utopian yells and revolutionary upsurge, of desires to change the entire
world and idealistically straighten it all out, of feelings and emotions unleashed from the merely given and offered
instead the space of all possibilities, a space through which they roam and rampage with love and passion and
wildest terror. And all of this, all of it, comes from being able to see the possibilities of what might be, possibilities
seen only with the mind’s eye, possibilities that point toward worlds not yet in existence and worlds not yet really
seen, the great, great doorway to the invisible and the beyond, as Plato, and Pythagoras, and Shankara, and every
mystic worth his or her salt has always, always known.

The higher developments do indeed lie beyond reason, but never, never, beneath it.

JOSEPH CAMPBELL

There is no greater friend of mythology than Joseph Campbell, and I mean that in a good sense. In a series of
articulate and extremely well-researched books, Campbell has done more than any other person, with the possible
exceptions of Mircea Eliade and Carl Jung, to champion the position that mythological thought is the primary carrier
of spiritual and mystical awareness. I and countless researchers have drawn on his works time and again, and his
meticulous scholarship and detailed analyses never fail to inspire. And, among many other things, it is Joseph
Campbell, via Robert Bly, who is responsible for much of the “men’s movement” and the “mythopoetic” movement
in general.

And yet his position, I believe, is finally untenable, and can be demonstrated to be so using his own assumptions
and his own conclusions. For his position is, in the last analysis, a form of elevationism, and it is necessary to face this
directly if we are ever to make sense of the truly deeper or higher developments of genuine spiritual and mystical
experience. For, as we said earlier, one of the best ways to know what authentic mystical experience is, is to know

what it is not.

To begin with, Campbell openly accepts the essentials of the Piagetian system. That is, he accepts the fact that the
basic motifs of mythological thought are produced by the infantile and childhood structures of preop and early
conop, and he explicitly says so using Piagetian terms. As just one of hundreds of instances:

The two orders—the infantile and the religious—are at least analogous, and it may well be that the latter is
simply a translation of the former to a sphere out of range of critical observation [reason]. Piaget has pointed
out that although the little myths of genesis invented by children to explain the origins of themselves and of
things may differ, the basic assumption underlying all is the same: namely, that things have been made by
someone, and that they are alive and responsive to the commands of their creators. The origin myths of the
world’s mythological systems differ too; but in all [of them] the conviction is held (as in childhood), without
proof, that the living universe is the handiwork .
. of some father-mother or mother-father God
[artificialism/anthropocentrism].

.

These three principles [magical participation, animism, and anthropocentrism] may be said to constitute the
axiomatic, spontaneously supposed frame of reference of all childhood experience, no matter what the local
details of this experience happen to be. And these three principles, it is no less apparent, are precisely those
most generally represented in the mythologies and religious systems of the whole world.30

Campbell cheerfully and even enthusiastically acknowledges all of this, and he does so because he has a plan. He has
a plan, that is, to salvage mythology, to prove that mythology is “really” religious and genuinely spiritual, and is not,
in fact, merely a device of childhood.

The plan is this: The mythological productions of preop and conop, he says, are always taken very literally and
concretely, a point I have also been at pains to emphasize. But, Campbell says, in a very few individuals, the myths
are not taken literally, but are rather taken in an “as if” fashion (his terms), in a playful fashion that releases one
from the concrete myth and ushers one into more transcendental realms.

And this, he says, is the real

function of myth, and therefore this is how all myths have to be judged. For the
masses it remains true that myth is an illusion, a distortion, an infantile and childish approach to reality (all his
phrases), but for the very few who can see through them, myths become the gateway to the genuinely mystical. And
he belabors the point that myths, not reason, alone can do this, and this is their wonderful function. And here he
starts running into grave difficulties.

When myths are taken concretely and literally, Campbell says, they serve the mundane function of integrating
individuals into the society and worldview of a given culture, and in that ordinary function, he says, they serve no
spiritually transcendental or mystical purpose at all, which is true enough. I myself see that mundane integration as
the central, enduring, and extremely important function of myths at that stage of development—simple cultural
meaning and correlative social integration (at a preop and conop level).

Campbell acknowledges that function, but since he is looking for a way to elevate myths to a transpersonal status,
those functions become quite secondary to him. In fact, he says, when people take myths literally—which, he says,
99.9 percent of mythic believers do—then those myths become distorted. He is very emphatic about this: “It must
be conceded, as a basic principle of our natural history of the gods and heroes, that whenever a myth has been taken
literally its sense has been perverted.”31

Let us ignore, for the moment, that this implies that 99.9 percent of mythic believers are perverted (instead of
stage-specifically quite adequate), and look instead to those very, very few individuals who do not take myth literally
but rather in an “as if” fashion. By “as if” Campbell explicitly means the use given to it by Kant in his Prolegomena to
Every Future System of Metaphysics, where Kant says that we can only hold our knowledge of the world in an “as if”
or “possible realities” fashion. Campbell then drives to the heart of his argument:

I am willing to accept the word of Kant, as representing the view of a considerable metaphysician. And
applying it to the range of festival games and attitudes just reviewed [by which he means the attitude that
does not take myth seriously or literally]—from the mask of the consecrated host and temple image,
transubstantiated worshiper and transubstantiated world—I can see, or believe I can see, that a principle of

release operates throughout the series by way of an “as if”; and that, through this, the impact of all so-called
“reality” upon the psyche is transubstantiated.32

In other words, a myth is being a “real myth” when it is not being taken as true, when it is being held in an “as if”
fashion. And Campbell knows perfectly well that an “as if” stance is possible only with formal operational awareness.
Thus, according to his own conclusions, a myth offers its “release” only when it is transcended by, and held firmly
in, the space of possibilities and as-ifs offered by rationality. It is reason, and reason alone, that can release myth
from its concrete literalness and hold it in a playful, as-if, what-if fashion, using it as an analogy of what higher
states might be like, which is something that myth, by itself, could never do (as Campbell bizarrely concedes).33

It is people such as Campbell and Jung and Eliade, operating from a widespread access to rationality—something
the originators of myth did not have—who then read deeply symbolic “as ifs” into them, and who like to play with
myths and use them as analogies and have great good fun with them, whereas the actual mythic-believers do not
play with the myths at all, but take them deadly seriously and refuse in the least to open them to reasonable
discourse or any sort of “as if” at all.

In short, a myth serves Campbell’s main function only when it ceases to be a myth and is released into the space
of reason, into the space of alternatives and possibilities and as-ifs. What structure does he think Kant is operating
from?

Thus, in all of Campbell’s presentations, he takes two tacks: he first lays out the concrete and literal way that 99.9
percent of believers take the myth. And here he is not often kind. He clearly despises concrete mythic-beliefs (“On
the popular side, in their popular cults, the Indians [i.e., from India] are, of course, as positivistic in their readings of
their myths as any farmer in Tennessee, rabbi in the Bronx, or pope in Rome. Krishna actually danced in manifold
rapture with the gopis, and the Buddha walked on water”).34

Instead of seeing the concrete myth as the only way that myth can be believed at that stage of development,
and thus as being perfectly adequate and noble (if partial and limited) for that stage, he takes the concrete belief in
magic and myth as a “perversion,” as if this structure actually had a choice for which it could be condemned. He is in
fact denigrating an entire series of developmental stages that represented extraordinary advances in their own ways,
and were no more a perversion of spiritual development than an acorn is a perversion of an oak. But he must
condemn these stages per se because he judges them against his elevated version of “real mythology,” whereas I
am not condemning these stages per se because they were themselves the real McCoy, the genuine item: they were
doing exactly what is appropriate and definitive and stage-specific for mythology.

Second, Campbell then suggests the ways that those very few (who do not take the myth literally) have used to
transcend the myth (and are therefore, I would like to point out, no longer doing anything that could remotely be
called mythology). This involves first and foremost, for Campbell, holding the myth in the space of “as if”; that is,
holding it in the space of reason (with the possibility of then going further and transcending reason as well).

And here Campbell commits the classic pre/trans fallacy. Since the prerational realms are definitely mythological,
then Campbell wants to call the transrational realms “mythological” as well, since they too are nonrational (and
since he wants to salvage mythology with a field promotion). So on the one side he lumps together all nonrational
endeavors (from primitive mythology to highly developed contemplative encounters), and on the other side—the
“bad” side—he dumps poor reason, even as he himself is in fact (and rather hypocritically) using the space of reason
to salvage his myths. “Mythological symbols touch and exhilarate centers of life beyond the reach of vocabularies of
reason.”35 There is indeed a “beyond reason,” but how much more so is it “beyond mythology.”

And, in fact, it is not “in praise of mythology,” but rather “beyond mythology,” to which the entire corpus of
Campbell’s work inexorably points. In surveying his truly magnificent, four-volume masterpiece, The Masks of God,
Campbell leaves us with one final message:

As any ethnologist, archaeologist, or historian would observe, the myths of the differing civilizations have
sensibly varied throughout the centuries and broad reaches of mankind’s residence in the world, indeed to
such a degree that the “virtue” of one mythology has often been the “vice” of another, and the heaven of the
one the other’s hell. Moreover, with the old horizons now gone that formerly separated and protected the
various culture worlds and their pantheons, a veritable Götterdämmerung has flung its flames across the

universe. Communities that were once comfortable in the consciousness of their own mythologically
guaranteed godliness find, abruptly, that they are devils in the eyes of their neighbors.36

The ethnocentric and divisive nature of mythology is fully conceded. Lamenting this state of affairs (even though it
is inherent in mythology as mythic-imperialism), Campbell concludes that some more global understanding “of a
broader, deeper kind than anything envisioned anywhere in the past is now required.” The hope, indeed, lies beyond
parochial and provincial mythology. And beyond mythology is global and universal reason (and then beyond reason
. . .).

Nowhere is Campbell’s pre/trans confusion more painfully obvious than in his attempt to displace or deconstruct
rational science (and thus simultaneously elevate mythology). And again, the embarrassment is established by his
own premises and his own logical conclusions, which a mind as fine as Campbell’s can ignore only by prejudice.

Since Campbell’s aim is to prove that reason and science are in no sense “higher” than “real” mythology, he begins
first by pointing out that even the worldview of science is actually a mythology. If he can do this successfully, he will
have put science and mythology on the same level. He proceeds to outline four factors (or four functions) that all
mythologies have in common.37
The first he calls “metaphysical,” whose function is “to reconcile waking
consciousness to . . . this universe as it is.” The second function is to provide “an interpretative total image of the
same,” an interpretive cosmology. The third is sociocultural, “the validation and maintenance of a social order.” And
the fourth is psychological, or individual orientation and integration (in other words, his four functions are the Big
Three with an integrating overview).

And, of course, defined in that way, science (or the scientific worldview) does indeed perform all four functions of
mythology. But then, adds Campbell, science of course does some other things that mythology per se does not, such
as its spectacular discoveries in evolution, medicine, engineering, and so forth.

is

In other words, rationality/science does everything myth does, plus something extra.
That, of course,

the definition of a higher stage. Campbell recognizes that mythology originates from a
particular stage of human development (which he happily concedes is the childhood of men and women), and then
he also defines it as what all stages have in common (namely, his four functions, which are simply a variation on
the four quadrants and thus are present at all stages of human development). By this sneaky dual definition he
hopes to be able both to concede mythology’s childishness and run it through all higher stages, thus allowing him
not only to salvage mythology (since it is now what all stages have in common) but also to push it all the way to
infinity, all the way to transpersonal Spirit.

But the four functions (the four quadrants) are not a definition of mythology’s functions; they are a definition of
evolution’s functions. They are a definition of human holons functioning at each and every stage of development, no
more (and no less) present in mythology than in magic or in science or in centauric unfoldings. Mythology has no
special claim whatsoever on the four quadrants; mythology is simply one particular instance of the four quadrants
(mythology is the four quadrants as conceived by conop, just as science is the four quadrants as conceived by
formop). Which only leaves Campbell’s other definition: mythology can rightly lay claim only to the childhood of men
and women.

And running that definition to infinity simply results in the infantilization of Spirit. Campbell’s dual definitions
actually undo each other, and point instead to the inexorable conclusion: beyond mythology is reason, and beyond
both is Spirit.

THE ROMANTIC VIEW OF MYTHIC-MEMBERSHIP

Mythic-membership does indeed provide, or can provide, an intensely cohesive social order, principally because it
can export disorder and excommunicate unbelievers. Nothing so wonderfully concentrates a community as the
prospect of being burned at the stake for disagreeing with its worldview.

And, on the other hand, reason can be disruptive of societies, can lack the “social glue” of some mythic-
membership cultures, precisely because the omega point of rationality is not sociocentric or ethnocentric but
worldcentric (or global or universal): short of that it stops unhappily (as in a Gandhi or a Socrates or a Thoreau or a

Martin Luther King, Jr.).

New integrations are being sought by evolution on a

And if the ethnocentrically disruptive capacity of universal reason is, without further ado, compared with the
happy ethnocentrism of mythology, it will appear that the emergence of rationality was somehow a massive loss of
cultural meaning and social integration, whereas this is only true from an ethnocentric (or mythic-membership) bias.
level, and this requires, as in all past
transformations, the deconstruction of more limited and provincial perspectives. Mythology has tried to go global for
the past ten thousand years and failed in every single attempt (attempts which, as we have seen, because they
lacked the depth of genuinely universal reason, had to be pressed always in a military-imperialistic fashion). Reason
has the global capacity and global
intent, but is still developing and evolving the means, and in this endeavor it is
resisted by every mythology which feels its god and goddess threatened.

now-global

Further, even within nation-states, reason provides a

form of integration (even if occasionally
shaky)—namely, through the relational exchange of self-esteem, and not the relational exchange of conformist roles
in the preestablished dominator hierarchy. Mythic members are happy if they fit snugly into the mythological
hierarchy, for all are then sharing a similar depth.

deeper

But rational citizens are happy only if they coexist in relational exchange with other citizens at that new depth,
that is, with other equally free citizens—legally, morally, and politically free subjects (as a worldcentric standard,
regardless of race, color, creed, or gender). For somebody genuinely at the egoic-rational level, the very thought of
other humans not having access to these freedoms is very painful (whereas for those at the mythic-membership
level, the painful thought is the idea of other human beings not embracing their particular God and thus not being
“saved”: that others would not embrace their God sends agonies of proselytizing fury through their souls; infidels are
intolerable, and can actually be killed in order to save them).

The rational structure can tolerate mythic-believers because it is a deeper and wider embrace (whereas mythic-
believers cannot and will not tolerate rational attacks). And that rational transformation is more culturally
meaningful and socially integrating on a deeper
(and therefore wider) level, even if it appears less head-
knockingly solid than that of the shallower and narrower engagement of mythic-membership.

That reason then introduces its own inherent problems and runs up against its own inherent limitations (and can
be released only in the transrational domains)—that is no cause to board the Regress Express and set the Way Back
Machine to medieval or horticultural or foraging or what-not: they all had their chance. They all failed—each in their
own special and wonderful and spectacular fashion.

THE BATTLE OF WORLDVIEWS

We have seen that each stage of development transcends and includes, negates and preserves, its predecessor(s),
and this shows up in a particularly interesting fashion when it comes to the various worldviews themselves.

When we only have access to preoperational awareness, then the Kosmos appears as magical. When we have
access to concrete operational awareness, then the Kosmos appears as mythical. When we have access to formal
operational, the Kosmos appears rational-scientific (and it can, as a secondary issue, then be reduced to the flatland
cosmos; this flatland then makes the previous magic and mythic structures look all that more appealing, a fact
exploited by the Romantics—but that’s another part of our story). With even higher structures, we will see, the
Kosmos appears in other and quite different forms.

In each of these transformations or supersessions, notice what is preserved and what is negated. As magic gives
way to mythic, the preoperational structures themselves are preserved. That is, the capacity to form images,
symbols, and concepts (the components or holons of preop) are all taken up and enfolded in the concrete
operational mind (as subholons or necessary components). None of these capacities are lost, but are now simply
operated upon by the higher mind.

But the magical worldview is lost, or negated, or dropped altogether (at least as a dominant focus of
awareness).38 That is, the preop cognitive structures are taken up and preserved in the new cognitive structures of
conop (in a very “friendly” manner as components or subholons of its own being), but the magical worldview is
negated and replaced by the mythic worldview. Indeed, since they are now mutually exclusive, they become

steadfast enemies (they are mutually exclusive because each was constituted by being the exclusive structure; I will
return to this in a moment with some examples).

Thus, the mythic worldviews—which always situate miraculous power

in a great Other (gods or goddesses),
around which social cohesion can then be built beyond mere blood and kinship ties—these mythic worldviews are
constantly at war with magic, because magic situates miraculous power in a human individual (sorcerer, witch,
wizard), and this regression from sociocentric to egocentric power rightly alarms the mythic worldviews: it is taken,
not altogether incorrectly, as a moral regression, for which mythic worldviews have historically devised many
ingenious and unpleasant solutions.

Likewise, when formal operational awareness emerges, it incorporates and includes the cognitive structures of
conop (its capacity to form rules, take roles, and so on), but it actively negates
the mythic worldview that is
generated when you only have concrete operations. Rationality preserves, as part of its own being, in a “friendly”
way, the conop structures (as subholons of its new and higher regime), but it replaces the mythic worldview with
the rational worldview, and once again, the two become steadfast enemies. This is why the Church, beginning
around the sixteenth century, was involved in a war on two fronts: fighting regression to magic, and fighting
supersession by science. The Galileos and the sorcerers were both introduced to the Inquisitor.

And this is why, conversely, science is not only always attempting to further its research, but also constantly
battling myths, with their inherent tendencies to dominator-hierarchies, and always under the battle cry of Voltaire:
“Remember the cruelties!”

(There are few or no dominator hierarchies in the magical structure or in magical cultures, because preop cannot
construct a hierarchy in the first place, let alone a dominator hierarchy. With the emergence of conop, hierarchies
are indeed created—not only mentally, but socially, politically, and religiously—a mania for caste systems and
dominator hierarchies spring up wherever magic gives way to myth; and precisely because conop cannot reach into
postconventional modes, these hierarchies are always rigidly and concretely set, as are the literal myths that prop
them up: to change the social hierarchy is to damage the god/goddess/ruler and thus bring catastrophic retribution
to the society itself. With rationality, these dominator hierarchies are deconstructed because they are not based on
worldcentric or postconventional standards, and rationality is not happy short of that omega point. This is one of the
main topics of volume 2, and I mention it now as simply another instance of the tensions inherent between the
various worldviews.)

In each case, the basic structures of the previous stage are taken up and preserved in the new and wider holon,
but the worldview, which was generated when there was only or exclusively the previous and lower stage—that is
negated and replaced by a new worldview (which will in turn fade if development continues).39

Thus, in the same fashion, if development does proceed into the higher or transpersonal domains, the basic
structures of rationality are all embraced and incorporated, in a friendly way, as subholons in the new awareness,
but the merely scientific worldview, built by exclusive rationality—built when all you have is rationality—that
worldview is replaced with a spiritual orientation (as we will see).

This is an example of what in chapter 2 was called basic structures and exclusivity structures, since development
“includes the being but negates the partiality,” and I gave Hawaii’s statehood as an example. I want to give another
example here, because a general grasp of this fundamental developmental process is crucial,
I believe, to
understanding any of the genuinely deeper or higher stages of growth and development.

If we use a crude ladder analogy the relationship can more easily be seen. The actual rungs in the ladder are the
basic structures or levels in any developmental line (such as the cognitive). Each higher rung rests on the lower
rungs, and no matter how high up the ladder you climb, all the rungs are necessary. Pull out a lower rung and the
whole ladder collapses. Each rung is a basic structure (or basic holon—such as images, symbols, concepts, rules),
and each is preserved in the overall ladder.

But as you climb the ladder, you get a different perspective on the world around you: each rung has a different
worldview, and the higher rungs can see more of the world (they have a higher worldview). And although each of the
rungs
remains in existence as you climb (your climb actually depends upon them), the various worldviews are
replaced. You cannot be at, say, rung 7 and simultaneously see the world from the shallower rung 1, even though
you are still standing in part on rung 1 itself. The being, the rungs, are preserved, but the partiality or exclusivity, the

partial worldviews, are negated and replaced. (Until, of course, you stop climbing, at which point you have “the”
worldview that will attempt to subsume all else.)

Thus, each transformation upward is a “paradigm war”—a battle royale over how to exclusively view the world.
And we will see, as we continue our account of the higher stages of growth, that as myth historically defeated magic,
and reason defeated myth, the future paradigm wars will be fought around reason itself and its potential successors.

And if history is any guide, the new paradigm wars will be equally unpleasant.

THE VALUE OF THE MYTHOLOGICAL APPROACH

The value of including a properly interpreted mythological approach is that it can help us, of today’s rational
worldview, get in touch with aspects of our roots, our foundations, some of the archaeological layers of our own
present awareness. From Freud to Jung to Piaget to Gebser, these roots are recognized. And that “getting in touch,”
that befriending of our roots, is empowering and enriching and energizing. There is a rush of energy released in
reading Jung or Campbell or Eliade—we are watering our roots, and they help send forth new branches.

But all of that happens precisely because they are lower holons in a now-higher awareness—they are more
fundamental (and less significant)—and the real power comes precisely from touching their basic structures
(“archetypal”) while simultaneously robbing them of their exclusive worldview. If we were simply, merely, actually
reactivating the lower worldview itself, this would be wholesale regression to
structures
(borderline and psychotic, which indeed sometimes occurs). And this, I believe, is behind Jung’s dual stance toward
the archetypes: it is altogether necessary to contact and befriend them, but it is finally necessary to differentiate
and individuate from them, break them of their power over us. In other words, befriend the images, rob them of
their worldview.

de-differentiated

But as for the images and symbols and early concepts themselves, as for these “archetypes,” they lie in the
direction of downward, not upward (shallower, not deeper). This is why, I believe, however Jung variously defined
the archetypes, he always maintained they were “next to the instincts,” or the “instincts’ image of themselves.” That
is, as Liliane Frey-Rohn explains, “The connection between instinct and archetypal image appeared to [Jung] so close
that he drew the conclusion that the two were coupled. He saw the primordial image [‘archetype’] as the self-
portrait of the instinct—in other words, the instinct’s perception of itself.”40

Instincts—the drives of the reptilian brain stem and paleomammalian limbic system—these are the structures
“next to” the archetypes, which situates them perfectly on the spectrum of consciousness. Sensation, perception,
impulse (instinct), image, symbol, concept, rule . . . the archetypes are, for the most part, collective, fundamental
images lying next to impulse/instinct.41 And proceeding in the direction of the archetypes we therefore eventually
run into, not Spirit, but atoms. Jung: “The deeper layers of the psyche lose their individual uniqueness as they retreat
farther and farther into darkness. ‘Lower down’ they become increasingly extinguished in the body’s materiality, i.e.,
in chemical substances.”42

In other words, the Jungian archetypes are not the transcendental archetypes or Forms found in Plato, Hegel,
Shankara, or Asanga and Vasubandhu. These latter Forms—the true archetypes, the ideal Forms—are the creative
patterns said to underlie all manifestation and give pattern to chaos and form to Kosmos (which we will investigate
in chapter 9).

The Jungian archetypes, on the other hand, are for the most part the magico-mythic motifs and “archaic
images”—they should really be called “prototypes”—collectively inherited by you and by me from past stages of
development, archaic holons now forming part of our own compound individuality (they come from below up, not
from above down). And coming to terms with these archaic holons—befriending and making conscious and
differentiating/integrating these prototypes—is a useful endeavor, not because they are our transrational future, but
because they are our prerational past. I agree entirely with Jung on the necessity of differentiating and integrating
this archaic heritage; I do not believe that this has much to do with genuine mystical spirituality.43

Keep in mind also that for Jung, the archetypes are collectively inherited archaic images; they arise from the
common, day-to-day, normal and typical experiences of men and women everywhere, so that there is an archetype
of the Mother, the Father, the trickster, the shadow, the uroboros (serpent), and so on. These situations are

encountered by virtually everybody everywhere, and so the “imprints” of these encounters over the millennia
became engraved in the brain, so to speak (or, less Lamarckianly, those who were born with the guiding imprint,
which helps a person orient toward typical situations, would be more likely to survive and reproduce and pass the
image along).

But in any given past era (and today as well), the number of individuals who actually transcended into profoundly
mystical occasions was very, very small (as we saw Campbell point out). In other words, even under the best of
circumstances, there simply weren’t enough mystics to imprint the entire or collective human race: profound
mystical experience is not a common, typical, everyday occurrence that could be swept up and included in past
collective evolutionary imprints.44 And in no way is today’s profound mystical awareness an experience of
yesterday’s ordinary, collective, typical experiences. Excellence in any era is not an experience of yesterday’s
collective normality, made to sound “spiritual” by calling it “collective,” as if a whole bunch more of average could
equal extraordinary, as if multiplying mediocrity would equal excellence.

Thus, to give only one example, in Jean Bolen’s books, such as Goddesses in Everywoman and Gods in Everyman,
there is a wonderful presentation of all the “archetypal” gods and goddesses that are collectively inherited by men
and women (from the steadiness and patience of Hestia to the sexuality and sensuality of Aphrodite to the strength
and independence of Artemis). But these gods and goddesses are not transpersonal modes of awareness, or
genuinely mystical luminosities, but simply a collection of typical and everyday self-images (and personae) available
to men and women. Collective typical is not transpersonal.45

Now I believe that there are indeed mystical “archetypes” (in the transcendental sense I mentioned above, and to
which we will return), but these archetypes cannot be explained as an inheritance from the past; they are strange
Attractors lying in our future, omega points that have not been collectively manifested anywhere in the past, but
are nonetheless available to each and every individual as structural potentials, as future structures attempting to
come down, not past structures struggling to come up.

THE MEN’S MOVEMENT

In retreating to the wilderness, and banging drums, and contacting the archaic images of man as warrior, hunter,
king, wild man, and so forth, many modern men are helped to recontact these archaic holons and be thereby
enriched and energized and given roots. Our modern culture has too often negated these holons while failing to also
preserve them in an integrated and acceptable fashion, and thus a “return to roots” is altogether appropriate and
benign.

But the point, notice, is that these are men who, in the plentiful space of reason, play out these myths in an as-if
fashion, thus transcending them in the very process of playing with them (and those who don’t transcend them,
those who take these myths seriously, get into a great deal of emotional trouble—the “wild man” as a myth is one
thing, as a literal role model, quite another).

But I have been struck by the fact that virtually every woman I know, and every woman who has written about the
men’s movement, is completely alarmed by it. They think it is either disgusting, or preposterous, or silly, or
obscene. The liberal feminists are outraged by it, because they maintain that men, being essentially oppressors, have
no right to complain about anything; and they see a “gathering of men” as nothing but a chance for jailors to fine-
tune the art of oppression. The radical feminists, who otherwise so straightforwardly champion the differences
between the sexes, appear never to have had exactly this difference in mind, and react with a very uneasy
queasiness to the whole affair.

But under all these reactions there seems to be a pervasive fear. A gathering of wild men is frightening to most
women, of whatever ideological persuasion, and I think with good reason. The archaic images, still lying “close to the
body,” close to the instincts, close to the biosphere, are under sway of those biological universals, strong universals,
in which and by which biospheric men have always dominated women (whether or not intentionally). Only in the
noosphere can equality be conceived and found and enforced. The wild man is the merely biospheric male, the
instinctual male, where the physical body rules, where intersexual mutuality is suspended, where communication is
a grunt and a groan and a “Ho!”

And in the sound of the drums pounding from the forest, today’s woman hears, I believe, a million years of

physical dominance rumbling from the depths, and not one of them likes what she hears.

REASON RELEASES MYTH

We already saw that in Campbell’s opinion the “really real” (or most important) function of a myth occurs when it is
taken in an as-if fashion. In other words, the “hidden power” of myth is released when it is taken up in the open
space created by rationality. And now we can see why: when reason takes up myth, it befriends the being but
negates its partialness, and thus frees the mythic structure from its imprisonment in a shallower occasion. It is
reason, and reason alone, that frees the luminosity trapped in myth.

Thus reason frees whatever spirit manages to reside in myth—a spirit struggling from within, to get out. Whether
rationality appears “spiritual” or not is utterly beside the point. It certainly does not appear “mythological,” and if
that is what one means by “spiritual,” then reason is not that.

But genuine spirituality, we will see, is primarily a measure of depth and a disclosure of depth. There is more
spirituality in reason’s denial of God than there is in myth’s affirmation of God, precisely because there is more
depth. (And the transrational, in turn, discloses yet more depth, yet more Spirit, than either myth or reason).

its

insistence on universal benevolence and compassion:

But the very depth of reason, its capacity for universal-pluralism, its insistence on universal tolerance, its grasp of
these are the
global-planetary perspectivism,
revealed to reason from
manifestations of its genuine depth, its genuine spirituality. These capacities are not
without (by a mythic source); they issue from within its own structure, its own inherent depth (which is why it
does not need recourse to a mythic god to implement its agenda of universal benevolence, why even an “atheist”
acting from rational-universal compassion is more spiritual than a fundamentalist acting to convert the universe in
the name of a mythic-membership god). That the Spirit of reason does not fly through the sky hurling thunderbolts
and otherwise spend its time turning spinach into potatoes speaks more, not less, on its behalf.

MYTHOLOGY TODAY

So perhaps we can begin to see that the uses of mythology in today’s world are many and varied. For one thing,
literal-fundamental mythological motifs are the main social cement in many cultures (including a very large segment
of our own), and as divisive and imperialistic as those mythologies are, their particular ethnocentric and social-
integrative power has to be reckoned with carefully. One cannot simply challenge or deconstruct the myths of such
societies (or segments of societies) and expect them to survive (or expect them to acquiesce without a fight).

Moreover, even in societies organized around a rational-pluralistic worldview, each and every individual
nonetheless begins life at the archaic, then the magic, then the mythic, before (and if) arriving at the rational. One
of the great problems with the Enlightenment was that Reason was simply supposed to replace all of that right down
to the roots, so that every child would be born, more or less, an enlightened and tolerant rationalist. Since the
tabula was rasa, all we had to do was write R-E-A-S-O-N across the clean slate, and all would follow wonderfully.

Needless to say, it doesn’t work like that. Every child still has to negotiate the archaic worldview, then deconstruct
that with the magical worldview, then deconstruct that with the mythic, then deconstruct that with the rational (on
the way to the transrational). Each of these transformations is a series of painful deaths and rebirths, and the typical
individual attempts to stop the pain by stopping the transformation.

Gone is the time (in the developed East and West) when one could settle comfortably in the magic or even the
mythic mode. The center of gravity of the “world soul,” so to speak, has moved into rational modes of universal
pluralism, and thus the earliest that an individual can abort transformation (and “stop” the pain), without social
censure, is somewhere around the mythic-rational (that is, even if one clings to myth, it has to be propped up with
rationalizations, because everywhere rationality impinges on it). And, indeed, the majority of individuals in rational
societies still settle in somewhere around the mythic-rational, using all the formidable powers of rationality to prop
up a particular, divisive,
imperialistic mythology and an aggressively fundamentalistic program of systematic
intolerance. As such, they are constantly at war with magic, with other myths, and with reason, all of which they

view simply as the devil’s work.

The modern solution to this developmental nightmare is that the rationality structure of the democratic state
tolerates magic and mythic subholons, but it has, via the all-important separation of church and state, removed the
worldviews of those subholons from the organizing regime of the society, which itself is defined by a rational
tolerance of everything but intolerance. Because these subholons are robbed of their power to govern exclusively,
they are robbed of pushing their mythic-imperialistic expansionism via national-military means, though this doesn’t
prevent them from always agitating to tilt the state toward their own fundamentalistic values. (And, of course, for
those nations where the mythic holons are the governing regime, military expansionism is still the rule; and, in
these cases, as usual, it isn’t whether one can actually win and coerce others to the faith, but whether one can earn
the right to die trying.)

But even for those who have developed beyond a concrete mythological approach to the world, the mythological
structures themselves, as we just saw, are now junior holons in the person’s own compound individuality, and
should be honored as a rich source of one’s own being and one’s own roots. And therein, as I indicated, lies the real
value of the Jungian/Campbell/mythopoetic approach (divested of its elevationism).

But if genuine spirituality is not, as I maintain, a product of the past (or of past archetypes), then what about the
great spiritual figures, East and West, who definitely existed in the past? What about the Buddhas, the Christs, the
Krishnas? Are they not expressing some past capacity, some past archetypal wisdom that we have lost touch with?
And in contacting our own spirituality, aren’t we contacting some past potential that we have lost or denied or
forgotten?

Lost, perhaps; but not from the past. Let me repeat what I said above about the “true archetypes,” the
transcendental and transpersonal structures, as a reminder: they cannot be explained as an inheritance from the
past; they are strange Attractors lying in our future, omega points that have not been collectively manifested
anywhere in the past, but are nonetheless available to each and every individual as structural potentials, as future
structures attempting to come down, not past structures struggling to come up.

The great and rare mystics of the past (from Buddha to Christ, from al-Hallaj to Lady Tsogyal, from Hui-neng to
Hildegard) were, in fact, ahead of their time, and are still ahead of ours. In other words, they most definitely are not
figures of the past. They are figures of the future.

In their spirituality, they did not tap into yesterday, they tapped into tomorrow. In their profound awareness, we

do not see the setting sun, but the new dawn. They absolutely did not inherit the past, they inherited the future.

It is to that future we can now turn.

7

The Farther Reaches of Human Nature

This one being and consciousness is involved here in matter. Evolution is the process by which it liberates
itself; consciousness appears in what seems to be inconscient [i.e., matter, the physiosphere], and once
having appeared is self-impelled [“self-organizing”] to grow higher and higher and at the same time to
enlarge and develop toward a greater and greater perfection. Life is the first step of this release of
consciousness; mind is the second. But the evolution does not finish with mind; it awaits release into
something greater, a consciousness which is spiritual and supramental. There is therefore no reason to put
a limit to evolutionary possibility by taking our present organization or status of existence as final.

—SRI AUROBINDO

WE ARE YET

the bastard sons and daughters of an evolution not yet done with us, caught always between the

fragments of yesterday and the unions of tomorrow, unions apparently destined to carry us far beyond anything we
can possibly recognize today, and unions that, like all such births, are exquisitely painful and unbearably ecstatic.
And with yet just the slightest look—once again, within—new marriages unfold, and the drama carries on.

THE INTERIOR CASTLE

I have been constantly emphasizing that each stage of evolution, in whatever domain, involves a new emergence
and therefore a new depth, or a new interiority, whether that applies to molecules or to birds or to dolphins; and
that each new within is also a going beyond, a transcendence, a higher and wider identity with a greater total
embrace. The formula is: going within = going beyond = greater embrace. And I want to make very clear exactly what
that means.

This is extremely important,

I think, because the higher stages of development, the transrational and
transpersonal and mystical stages, all involve a new going within, a new interiorness. And the charge has been
circulating, for quite some time now, that endeavors such as meditation are somehow narcissistic and withdrawn.
Environmentalists, in particular, often claim that meditation is somehow “escapist” or “egocentric,” and that this
“going within” simply ignores the “real” problems in the “real” world “out there.”

Precisely the opposite. Far from being some sort of narcissistic withdrawal or inward isolation, meditation (or
transpersonal development in general) is a simple and natural continuation of the evolutionary process, where every
going within is also a going beyond to a wider embrace.

Recall that two of our tenets (8 and 12d) stated that increasing evolution means increasing depth and increasing
relative autonomy. In the realm of human development, this particularly shows up in the fact that, according to
developmental psychology (as we will see),
increasing
internalization (or increasing interiorization). And as paradoxical as it initially sounds, the more interiorized a
person is, the less narcissistic his or her awareness becomes. So we need to understand why, for all schools of
developmental psychology, this equation is true: increasing development = increasing interiorization = decreasing
narcissism (or decreasing egocentrism).

increasing growth and development always involve

In short, we need to understand why the more interior a person is, the less egocentric he or she becomes.

Begin with interiorization. “Evolution, to Hartmann [founder of psychoanalytic developmental psychology], is a
process of progressive internalization, for, in the development of the species, the organism achieves increased
independence from its environment, the result of which is that ‘reactions which originally occurred in relation to the
external world are increasingly displaced into the interior of the organism.’ The more independent the organism
becomes, the greater its independence from the stimulation of the immediate environment.”1 This applies to the
infant, for example, when it no longer dissolves in tears if food is not immediately forthcoming. By interiorizing its
awareness,
its relative
autonomy—its capacity to remain stable in the midst of shifting circumstances—increases. This progressive
internalization is a cornerstone of psychoanalytic developmental psychology (from Hartmann to Blanck and Blanck to
Kernberg to Kohut). It is implicit in Jung’s notion of individuation. Likewise, Piaget described thought as “internalized
action,” the capacity to internally plan an action and anticipate its course without being merely a reactive
automaton—and so forth.

it is no longer merely buffeted by the immediate fluctuations in the environment:

In other words, for developmental psychology, increasing development = increasing interiorization = increasing

relative autonomy. This, of course, is simply tenet 12d as it shows up in humans.

The second link in the equation concerns narcissism, which is roughly synonymous with egocentrism, about which
we have already said much. We need only recall that increasing development involves precisely the capacity to
transcend one’s isolated and subjective point of view, and thus to find higher and wider perspectives and identities.
Piaget referred to the entire developmental process as one of decreasing egocentrism, or what he also called
“decentering.”

Putting these all together, we have: increasing development = increasing interiorization = increasing autonomy =

decreasing narcissism (decentering).

In other words, the more one can go within, or the more one can introspect and reflect on one’s self, then the
more detached from that self one can become, the more one can rise above that self’s limited perspective, and so
the less narcissistic or less egocentric one becomes (or the more decentered one becomes). This is why Piaget is
always saying things that sound paradoxical, such as: “Finally, as the child becomes conscious of his subjectivity, he
rids himself of his egocentricity.”2

The more he can subjectively reflect on his self, the more he can transcend it—his subjectivity, his interiority, rids
him of his egocentricity. Howard Gardner does a masterful job of summarizing development as being the two
processes of decreasing egocentrism and increasing interiority. “The first is the decline of egocentrism. The young
child is, in Piaget’s terms, totally egocentric—meaning not that he thinks selfishly only about himself, but to the
contrary, that he is incapable of thinking about himself. The egocentric child is unable to differentiate himself from
the rest of the world; he has not separated himself out from others or from objects. Thus he feels that others share
his pain or his pleasure, that his mumblings will inevitably be understood, that his perspective is shared by all
persons, that even animals and plants partake of his consciousness. In playing hide-and-seek he will ‘hide’ in broad
view of other persons, because his egocentrism prevents him from recognizing that others are aware of his location.
The whole course of human development can be viewed as a continuing decline in egocentrism. . . .”3

And this decreasing narcissism is directly connected with the “second trend in mental growth,” namely, “the
tendency toward internalization or interiorization. The infant either solves problems by his activity upon the world or
he does not solve them at all. The older child, on the other hand, can achieve many intellectual breakthroughs
without overt physical actions. He is able to realize these actions interiorly, through concrete and formal
operations.”4 By acting on the self interiorly, that self is decentered, and this allows, among many other things, the
continuing expansion (decentering) of moral response from egocentric to sociocentric to worldcentric (integral-
aperspectival).

In short, the more one goes within, the more one goes beyond, and the more one can thus embrace a deeper

identity with a wider perspective.

Meditation, then, as we will see in detail, involves yet a further going within, and thus a further going beyond,
the discovery of a new and higher awareness with a new and wider identity—and thus meditation is one of the
single strongest antidotes
to egocentrism and narcissism (and geocentrism and anthropocentrism and
sociocentrism).

And let us remember Piaget’s central point about egocentrism, namely, that “egocentrism obscures the truth.” It
follows that meditation, as an antidote to egocentrism, would involve a substantial increase in capacity for truth
disclosure, a clearing of the cobwebs of selfcentric perception and an opening in which the Kosmos could more
clearly manifest, and be seen, and be appreciated—for what it is and not for what it can do for me.

In short, every within turns us out into more of the Kosmos. This is what seems to so confuse the flatland holists
(and the ecological critics of contemplation), because in their flatland world of self and cosmos, the more attention
you place on one, the less attention you have for the other (and they want everyone’s eyes riveted on exterior
nature), whereas in the pluridimensional and holoarchic Kosmos, the more the depths of the self are disclosed, the
more the corresponding depths of the Kosmos reveal themselves. (We will see where all that leads in a moment.)

This general movement of within-and-beyond is nothing new with humans: it is a simple continuation of the
Kosmic evolutionary process, which is “self-development through self-transcendence,” the same process at work in
atoms and molecules and cells, a process that, in the human domains, continues naturally into the superconscious,
with precisely nothing occult or mysterious about it.

VISION-LOGIC

The capacity to go within and look at rationality results in a going beyond rationality, and the first stage of that
going-beyond is vision-logic. If you are aware of being rational, what is the nature of that awareness, since it is now
bigger than rationality? To be aware of rationality is no longer to have only rationality, yes?

Numerous psychologists (Bruner, Flavell, Arieti, Cowan, Kramer, Commons, Basseches, Arlin, etc.) have pointed
out that there is much evidence for a stage beyond Piaget’s formal operational. It has been called “dialectical,”
“integrative,” “creative synthetic,” “integral-aperspectival,” “postformal,” and so forth. I, of course, am using the
terms vision-logic or network-logic. But the conclusions are all essentially the same: “Piaget’s formal operational is
considered to be a problem-solving stage. But beyond this stage are the truly creative scientists and thinkers who
define important problems and ask important questions. While Piaget’s formal model is adequate to describe the
cognitive structures of adolescents and competent adults, it is not adequate to describe the towering intellect of
Nobel laureates, great statesmen and stateswomen, poets, and so on.”5

True enough. But I would like to give a different emphasis to this structure, for while very few people might
actually gain the “towering status of a Nobel laureate,” the space of vision-logic (its worldspace or worldview) is
available for any who wish to continue their growth and development. In other words, to progress through the
various stages of growth does not mean that one has to extraordinarily master each and every stage, and
demonstrate a genius comprehension at that stage before one can progress beyond it. This would be like saying that
no individuals can move beyond the oral stage until they become gourmet cooks.

It is not even necessary to be able to articulate the characteristics of a particular stage (children progress beyond
preop without ever being able to define it). It is merely necessary to develop an adequate competence at that stage,
in order for it to serve just fine as a platform for the transcendence to the next stage. In order to transcend the
verbal, it is not necessary to first become Shakespeare.

Likewise, in order to develop formal rationality, it is not necessary to learn calculus and propositional logic. Every
time you imagine different outcomes, every time you see a possible future different from today’s, every time you
dream the dream of what might be, you are using formal operational awareness. And from that platform you can
enter vision-logic, which means not that you have to become a Hegel or a Whitehead in order to advance, but only
that you have to think globally, which is not so hard at all. Those who will master this stage, or any stage for that
matter, will always be relatively few; but all are invited to pass through.

Because vision-logic transcends but includes formal operational, it completes and brings to fruition many of the
trends begun with universal rationality itself (which is why many writers refer to vision-logic as “mature reason” or
“dialectical reason” or “synthetic reason,” and so on). And some theorists simply subdivide formal operational
awareness into several substages, with the highest of those stages being what we are calling vision-logic. James
Fowler, for example, divides formop into early formop, dichotomizing formop, dialectical formop, and synthetic
formop (the first two being what I am calling rationality, and the last two being vision-logic, although all four are

“reason” in the very broadest sense). Incidentally, Fowler’s extremely important work on the “stages of faith”
(whose details I will reserve for a note)6
is yet another clear account of the evolution from magic to mythic-literal to
the universal “commonwealth of being.”

In other words, rationality is global, vision-logic is more global. Take Habermas, for example (in Communication
and the Evolution of Society). Formal operational rationality establishes the postconventional stages of, first, “civil
liberties” or “legal freedom” for “all those bound by law,” and then, in a more developed stage, it demands not just
legal freedom but also “moral freedom” for “all humans as private persons.” But even further, mature or
communicative reason (our vision-logic) demands both “moral and political freedom” for “all human beings as
members of a world society.” Thus, where rationality began the worldcentric orientation of universal pluralism,
vision-logic brings it to a mature fruition by demanding not just legal and moral freedom, but legal and moral and
political freedom (includes the previous stage and adds something crucial: transcends and includes).

In just the same way, ecological and relational awareness, which started to emerge with formal operational,
comes to a major fruition with vision-logic and the centauric worldview. For, in beginning to differentiate from
rationality (look at it, operate upon it), vision-logic can, for the first time,
integrate reason with its predecessors,
including life and matter, all as junior holons in its own compound individuality.

In other words, and I

intend to emphasize this heavily, centauric vision-logic can integrate physiosphere,
biosphere, and noosphere in its own compound individuality (and this is, as I suggested in chapter 5, the next major
stage of leading-edge global transformation, even though most of the “work yet to be done” is still getting the globe
up to decentered universal-rational pluralism in the first place).

This overall

integration (physiosphere, biosphere, and noosphere, or matter, body, mind) is borne out, for
example, by the researches of Broughton, Loevinger, Selman, Maslow, and others. As only one example, but an
important one, we can take the work of John Broughton.

As usual, this new centauric stage possesses not just a new cognitive capacity (vision-logic)—it also involves a new
sense of identity (centauric), with new desires, new drives, new needs, new perceptions, new terrors, and new
pathologies: it is a new and higher self in a new and wider world of others. And Broughton has very carefully mapped
out the developmental stages of self and knowing that lead up to this new centauric mode of being-in-the-world.7

To simplify considerably, Broughton asked individuals from preschool age to early adulthood: what or where is

your self?

Since this was a verbal study, Broughton began with the late preop child (magic-mythic), which he calls level zero.
At this stage, children uniformly reply that self is “inside” and reality is “outside.” Thoughts are not distinguished
from their objects (still magical adherences; the child has not completed fulcrum three).

At level one, still in the late preop stage, children believe that the self is identified with the physical body, but the
mind controls the self and can tell it what to do, so it is the mind that moves the body. The relation of mind to body
is one of authority: the mind is a big person and the body is a little person (i.e., mind and body are slowly
differentiating). Likewise, thoughts are distinguished from objects, but there is no distinction between reality and
appearance (“naive realism”).

Level two occurs at about ages seven to twelve years (conop). Mind and body are initially differentiated at this
level (completion of fulcrum three), and the child speaks of the self as being, not a body, but a person (a social role
or persona, fulcrum four), and the person includes both mind and body. Although thoughts and things are
distinguished, there is still a strong personalistic flavor to knowledge (remnants of egocentrism), so facts and
personal opinions are not easily differentiated.

At level three, occurring around eleven to seventeen years (early formop), “the social personality or role is seen
as a false outer appearance, different from the true inner self.” Here we see very clearly the differentiation of the
self (the rational ego) from its embeddedness in sociocentric roles—the emergence of a new interiority or relative
autonomy which is aware of, and thus transcends or disidentifies from, overt social roles. “The self is what the
person’s nature normally is; it is a kind of essence and remains itself over changes in mental contents.”

Likewise, and for precisely the same reasons, “reflective self-awareness appears at this level.” (This is fulcrum five,
the rational and reflexive ego differentiating from, and thus transcending, sociocentric or mythic-membership roles,
with the correlative possible pathology of “identity crisis.” Notice also that the new ego-self is beginning to remain

as witness to the stream of mental events, and is not merely carried away by any passing thoughts; the adolescent
at this stage reports that something “remains itself over changes in mental contents.”)

At level four, or late formop, the person becomes capable of hypothetico-deductive awareness (what if, as if), and
reality is conceived in terms of relativity and interrelationships (ecology and relativity, in the broadest sense, as we
have seen). The self is viewed as a postulate “lending unity and integrity to personality, experience, and behavior”
(this is the “mature ego”).

But, and this is very telling, development can take a cynical turn at this stage. Instead of being the principle lending
unity and integrity to experience and behavior, the self is simply identified with experience and behavior. In the
cynical behavioristic turn of this stage, “the person is a cybernetic system guided to fulfillment of its material wants.
At this level, radical emphasis on seeing everything within a relativistic or subjective frame of reference leaves the
person close to a solipsistic position.”

The world is seen as a great relativistic cybernetic system, so “holistic” that it leaves no room for the actual
subject in the objective network. The self therefore hovers above reality, disengaged, disenchanted, disembodied. It
is “close to a solipsistic position”: hyperagency cut off from all communions. And this, as we have seen, is essentially
the fundamental Enlightenment paradigm: a perfectly holistic world that leaves a perfectly atomistic self.8

A transcendental self can bond with other transcendental selves, whereas a merely empirical self disappears into
the empirical web and interlocking order, never to be heard from again. (No strand in the web is ever or can ever be
aware of the whole web; if it could, then it would cease to be merely a strand. This is not allowed by systems theory,
which is why, as Habermas demonstrated, systems theory always ends up isolationist and egocentric, or
“solipsistic.”)

But for a more transcendental self to emerge, it has first to differentiate from the merely empirical self, and thus
we find, with Broughton: “At level five the self as observer is distinguished from the self-concept as known.” In other
words, something resembling a pure observing Self (a transcendental Witness or Atman, which we will investigate in
a moment) is beginning to be clearly distinguished from the empirical ego or objective self—it is a new interiority, a
new going within that goes beyond, a new emergence that transcends but includes the empirical ego. This beginning
transcendence of the ego we are, of course, calling the centaur (the beginning of fulcrum six, or the sixth major
differentiation that we have seen so far in the development of consciousness).9 This is the realm of vision-logic
leading to centauric integration, which is why at this stage, Broughton found that “reality is defined by the
coherence of the interpretive framework.”

This integrative stage comes to fruition at Broughton’s last major level (late centauric), where “mind and body are
both experiences of an integrated self,” which is the phrase I have most often used to define the centauric or
bodymind-integrated self. Precisely because awareness has
from (or disidentified from, or
transcended) an exclusive identification with body, persona, ego, and mind, it can now integrate them in a unified
fashion,
them as junior partners. Physiosphere, biosphere,
noosphere—exclusively identified with none of them, therefore capable of integrating all of them.

in a new and higher holon with each of

differentiated

But everything is not sweetness and light with the centaur. As always, new and higher capacities bring with them
the potential for new and higher pathologies. As vision-logic adds up all the possibilities given to the mind’s eye, it
eventually reaches a dismal conclusion: personal life is a brief spark in the cosmic void. No matter how wonderful it
all might be now, we are still going to die: dread, as Heidegger said, is the authentic response of the existential
(centauric) being, a dread that calls us back from self-forgetting to self-presence, a dread that seizes not this or that
part of me (body or persona or ego or mind), but rather the totality of my being-in-the-world. When I authentically
see my life, I see its ending, I see its death; and I see that my “other selves,” my ego, my personas, were all sustained
by inauthenticity, by an avoidance of the awareness of lonely death.

A profound existential malaise can set in—the characteristic pathology of this stage (fulcrum six). No longer
protected by anthropocentric gods and goddesses, reason gone flat in its happy capacity to explain away the
Mystery, not yet delivered into the hands of the superconscious—we stare out blankly into that dark and gloomy
night, which will very shortly swallow us up as surely as it once spat us forth. Tolstoy:

The question, which in my fiftieth year had brought me to the notion of suicide, was the simplest of all

questions, lying in the soul of every man: “What will come from what I am doing now, and may do tomorrow?
What will come from my whole life?” Otherwise expressed—“Why should I live? Why should I wish for
anything?” Again, in other words, “Is there any meaning in my life which will not be destroyed by the
inevitable death awaiting me?”

That question would never arise to the magical structure; that structure has abundant, even exorbitant meaning
because the universe centers always on it, was made for it, caters to it daily: every raindrop soothes its soul because
every confirming drop reassures it of its cosmocentricity: the great spirit wraps it in the wind and whispers to it
always, I exist for you.

That question would never arise to a mythic-believer: this soul exists only for its God, a God that, by a happy
coincidence, will save this soul eternally if it professes belief in this God: a mutual admiration society destined for a
bad infinity. A crisis of faith and meaning is impossible from within this circle (a crisis occurs only when this soul
suspects this God).

That question would never beset the happy rationalist, who long ago became a happy rationalist by deciding never
to ask such questions again, and then forgetting, rendering unconscious, this question, and sustaining the
unconsciousness by ridiculing those who ask it.

No, that question arises from a self that knows too much, sees too much, feels too much. The consolations are
gone; the skull will grin in at the banquet; it can no longer tranquilize itself with the trivial. From the depths, it cries
out to gods no longer there, searches for a meaning not yet disclosed, still to be incarnated. Its very agony is worth a
million happy magics and a thousand believing myths, and yet its only consolation is its unrelenting pain—a pain, a
dread, an emptiness that feels beyond the comforts and distractions of the body, the persona, the ego, looks bravely
into the face of the Void, and can no longer explain away either the Mystery or the Terror. It is a soul that is much
too awake. It is a soul on the brink of the transpersonal.

THE TRANSPERSONAL DOMAINS

We have repeatedly seen that the problems of one stage are only “de-fused” at the next stage, and thus the only
cure for existential angst is the transcendence of the existential condition, that is, the transcendence of the centaur,
negating and preserving it in a yet higher and wider awareness. For we are here beginning to pass out of the
noosphere and into the theosphere, into the transpersonal domains, the domains not just of the self-conscious but
of the superconscious.

A great number of issues need to be clarified as we follow evolution (and the twenty tenets) into the higher or

deeper forms of transpersonal unfolding.

First and foremost, if this higher unfolding is to be called “religious” or “spiritual,” it is a very far cry from what is
ordinarily meant by those terms. We have spent several chapters painstakingly reviewing the earlier developments
of the archaic, magic, and mythic structures (which are usually associated with the world’s great religions), precisely
because those structures are what transpersonal and contemplative development is not. And here we can definitely
agree with Campbell: if 99.9 percent of people want to call magic and mythic “real religion,” then so be it for them
(that is a legitimate use);10 but that is not what the world’s greatest yogis, saints, and sages mean by mystical or
“really religious” development, and in any event is not what I have in mind.

Campbell, however, is quite right that a very, very few individuals, during the magic and mythic and rational eras,
were indeed able to go beyond magic, beyond mythic, and beyond rational—into the transrational and transpersonal
domains. And even if their teachings (such as those of Buddha, Christ, Patanjali, Padmasambhava, Rumi, and Chih-i)
were snapped up by the masses and translated downward into magic and mythic and egoic terms—“the salvation of
the individual soul”—that is not what their teachings clearly and even blatantly stated, nor did they intentionally
lend any support to such endeavors. Their teachings were about the release from individuality, and not about its
everlasting perpetuation, a grotesque notion that was equated flat-out with hell or samsara.

Their teachings, and their contemplative endeavors, were (and are) transrational through and through. That is,
although all of the contemplative traditions aim at going within and beyond reason, they all start with reason, start

with the notion that truth is to be established by evidence, that truth is the result of experimental methods, that
truth is to be tested in the laboratory of personal experience, that these truths are open to all those who wish to
try the experiment and thus disclose for themselves the truth or falsity of the spiritual claims—and that dogmas or
given beliefs are precisely what hinder the emergence of deeper truths and wider visions.

Thus, each of these spiritual or transpersonal endeavors (which we will carefully examine) claims that there exist
higher domains of awareness, embrace, love, identity, reality, self, and truth. But these claims are not dogmatic; they
are not believed in merely because an authority proclaimed them, or because sociocentric tradition hands them
down, or because salvation depends upon being a “true believer.” Rather, the claims about these higher domains are
a conclusion based on hundreds of years of experimental introspection and communal verification. False claims are
rejected on the basis of consensual evidence, and further evidence is used to adjust and fine-tune the experimental
conclusions.

These spiritual endeavors, in other words, are scientific in any meaningful sense of the word, and the systematic

presentations of these endeavors follow precisely those of any reconstructive science.

OBJECTIONS TO THE TRANSPERSONAL

The common objections to these contemplative sciences are not very compelling. The most typical objection is that
these mystical states are private and interior and cannot be publicly validated; they are “merely subjective.”

This is simply not true; or rather, if it is true, then it applies to any and all nonempirical endeavors, from
mathematics to literature to linguistics to psychoanalysis to historical interpretation. Nobody has ever seen, “out
there” in the “sensory world,” the square root of a negative one. That is a mathematical symbol seen only inwardly,
“privately,” with the mind’s eye. Yet a community of trained mathematicians know exactly what that symbol means,
and they can share that symbol easily in intersubjective awareness, and they can confirm or reject the proper and
consistent uses of that symbol. Just so, the “private” experiences of contemplative scientists can be shared with a
community of trained contemplatives, grounded in a common and shared experience, and open to confirmation or
rebuttal based on public evidence.

Recall that the Right-Hand path is open to empirical verification, which means that the Right-Hand dimension of
holons, their form or exteriors, can indeed be “seen” with the senses or their extensions. But the Left-Hand
dimension—the interior side—cannot be seen empirically “out there,” although it can be internally experienced
(and although it has empirical correlates: my interior thoughts register on an EEG but cannot be determined or
interpreted or known from that evidence). Everything on the Left Hand, from sensations to impulses to images and
concepts and so on, is an interior experience known to me directly by acquaintance (which can indeed be
“objectively described,” but only through an intersubjective community at the same depth, where it relies on
interpretation from the same depth). Direct spiritual experience is simply the higher reaches of the Upper-Left
quadrant, and those experiences are as real as any other direct experiences, and they can be as easily shared (or
distorted) as any other experiential knowledge.11

(The only way to deny the validity of direct interior experiential knowledge—whether it be mathematical
knowledge, introspective knowledge, or spiritual knowledge—is to take the behaviorist stance and identify interior
experience with exterior behavior. Should somebody mention that this is the cynical twist or pathological agency of
Broughton’s level four?)

There is, of course, one proviso: the experimenter must, in his or her own case, have developed the requisite
cognitive tools. If, for example, we want to investigate concrete operational thought, a community of those who
have only developed to the preoperational level will not do. If you take a preop child, and in front of the child pour
the water from a short fat glass into a tall thin glass, the child will tell you that the tall glass has more water. If you
say, no, there is the same amount of water in both glasses, because you just saw me pour the same water from one
glass to the other, the child will have no idea what you’re talking about. “No, the tall glass has more water.” No
matter how many times you pour the water back and forth between the two glasses, the child will deny they have
the same amount of water. (Interestingly, if you videotape the child at this stage, and then wait a few years until the
child has developed conop—at which point it will seem utterly obvious to him that the glasses have the same

amount of water—and then show the child the earlier videotape, he will deny that it’s him. He thinks you’ve
doctored the videotape; he cannot imagine anybody being that stupid.) The preop child is immersed in a world that
includes conop realities, is drenched in those realities, and yet cannot “see” them: they are all “otherworldly.”

At every stage of development, in fact, the next higher stage always appears to be a completely “other world,” an
“invisible world”—it has literally no existence for the individual, even though the individual is in fact saturated with
a reality that contains the “other” world. The individual’s “this-worldly” existence simply cannot comprehend the
“otherworldly” characteristics lying all around it.

At the same time, these higher or deeper worldspaces (whether of conop or formop or anything higher) are not
located elsewhere in physical space-time. They are located here, in deeper perceptions of
this world. Other
worlds become this world with increasing development and evolution. The worldspace of conop is a completely
other world to the preop child (even though he or she is often staring directly at it), another world that nonetheless
becomes perfectly obvious, present, seen, and “this-worldly” at the conop stage, and what was the fuss all about?
But prior to the increased development and evolution, there is nothing from the present this-world that will allow
the child to adequately grasp the other world (or else the other world would have already become a real this-world).
Just so with the higher or transpersonal developments. Explain them to someone at the rational level, and all you
get, at best, is that deer-caught-in-the-headlights blank stare (at worst, you get something like, “And did we forget to
take our Prozac today?”).

So the first thing I would like to emphasize is that the higher stages of transpersonal development are stages that
are taken from those who have actually developed into those stages and who display palpable, discernible, and
repeatable characteristics of that development. The stages themselves can be rationally reconstructed (explained in
a rational manner after the fact), but they cannot be rationally experienced. They can be experienced only by a
transrational contemplative development, whose stages unfold in the same manner as any other developmental
stages, and whose experiences are every bit as real as any others.

But one must be adequate to the experience, or it remains an invisible other world. When the yogis and sages and
contemplatives make a statement like, “The entire world is a manifestation of one Self,” that is not a merely
rational statement that we are to think about and see if it makes logical sense. It is rather a description, often poetic,
of a direct apprehension or a direct experience, and we are to test this direct experience, not by mulling it over
philosophically, but by taking up the experimental method of contemplative awareness, developing the requisite
cognitive tools, and then directly looking for ourselves.

As Emerson put it, “What we are, that only can we see.”

LANGUAGE AND MYSTICISM

In this regard, another common objection is that mystical or contemplative experiences, because they cannot be put
into plain language, or into any language for that matter, are therefore not epistemologically grounded, are not “real
knowledge.” But this simply bypasses the problem of what linguistically situated knowledge means in the first place.
Saussure, as I mentioned earlier, maintained that all linguistic signs have two components, the signifier and the
signified, often represented as S/S. The signifier is the written or spoken symbol or sound, the material component
of the sign (such as the physical ink forms written on this page, or the physical air vibrations as you speak). The
signified is what comes to your mind when you see or hear the signifier.

Thus, I physically write the word dog on this page—that is the signifier. You read the word, and you understand
that I mean something like a furry animal with four legs that goes wuff-wuff—that is the signified, that is what comes
to your mind. A sign is a combination of these two components, and these two components are, of course, the
Right-Hand dimension of the sign (the physical exterior) and the Left-Hand dimension of the sign (the interior
awareness or meaning).

And both of those are distinguished from the actual

referent, or whatever it is that the sign is “pointing” to,
whether interior or exterior. Thus, the signifier is the word dog, the referent is the real dog, and the signified is what
comes to your mind when you read or hear the signifier dog. Saussure’s genius was to point out that the signified is
not merely or simply the same as the referent, because “what comes to mind” depends on a whole host of factors

other than the real dog, and this is what makes linguistic reality so fascinating.

Saussure’s point—and this is what actually ignited the whole movement of structuralism—is that the sign cannot
be understood as an isolated entity, because in and by itself the sign is meaningless (which is why different words
can represent the same thing in different languages, and why “meaning” is never a simple matter of a word pointing
to a thing, because how could different words represent the same thing?). Rather, signs must be understood as part
of a holarchy of differences integrated into meaningful structures. Both the signifiers and the signifieds exist as
holons, or whole/parts in a chain of whole/parts, and, as Saussure made clear, it is their relational standing that
confers meaning on each (language is a meaningful system of meaningless elements: as always, the regime or
structure of the superholon confers meaning on the subholons, meaning which the subholons do not and cannot
possess on their own).

In other words, the signifiers and the signifieds exist as a structure of contexts within contexts within contexts, and
meaning itself is context-bound. Meaning is found not in the word but in the context: the bark of a dog is not the
same as the bark of a tree, and the difference is not in the word, because the word bark is the same in both
phrases—it is the relational context that determines its meaning: the entire structure of language is involved in the
meaning of each and every term—this was Saussure’s great insight.

And this, as usual, contributed to a split between Right- and Left-Hand theorists. The Right-Hand theorists, or the
pure structuralists, wanted to study only the exterior structure of the system of signifiers in language and in culture
(an approach which in turn gave way to the poststructuralists, who wanted to free the signifier from any grounding
at all—as in Foucault’s archaeology or Derrida’s grammatology—and see it as free-floating or sliding, and anchored
only by power or prejudice: meaning is indeed context-dependent, but contexts are boundless, and thus meaning is
arbitrarily imposed by power or prejudice—the so-called “poststructural revolution” of “free-floating signifiers”).

The Left-Hand theorists wanted to study the contexts within contexts of interior meaning, the signifieds that can
interpreted, not seen, and interpreted only in a context of background cultural practices (the

only be
hermeneuticists, from Heidegger to Kuhn and Taylor and aspects of Wittgenstein).

But both the hermeneutical Left-Hand path and the structuralist Right-Hand path agreed that signs can only be
understood contextually (whether in the context of shared cultural practices that provide the foreknowledge or
background or context for common interpretation, or in the context of shared nonindividual linguistic structures. I
argued in chapter 4 that both of these approaches are equally important—they represent the interior and the
exterior of the linguistic holon—and indeed even Foucault came to this understanding).12

All of which relates to mysticism in this way: the word dog has a shared meaning to you and to me because that
sign exists in a shared linguistic structure and a shared cultural background of social and interpretive practices. But
what if you had never seen a real dog? What then?

I could of course describe one to you, but the word will be meaningless unless there are some points of shared
experience that will allow you to “call up” in your mind the same signified that I mean with the signifier “dog.”
(Substitute the word Buddha-nature for dog and you can see the importance of this line of thought for mystical
experience, which we will explore in a minute.) The hermeneuticists are quite right in that regard: the same linguistic
structures that you and I share are not enough, in themselves, to give you the proper signified. You and I have to
share a common lived experience in order to assume identical signification.

Further, the actual experience of seeing a dog is not itself a merely linguistic experience. The signifier, the word
dog, is not the actual dog, not the actual referent. Obviously, the total experience of the real dog cannot itself be put
into words, put into signifiers. But the fact that the real dog can’t be fully captured in words does not mean that the
real dog doesn’t exist or isn’t real. It means only that the signifier has sense only if you and I have had a similar
experience, a common shared lifeworld experience, and then I will know what you mean when you say, “That dog
scared me.”

In short, no direct experience can be fully captured in words.13 Sex can’t be put into words; you’ve either had the
experience or you haven’t, and no amount of poetry will take its place. Sunsets, eating cake, listening to Bach, riding
a bike, getting drunk and throwing up—believe me, none of those are captured in words.

And thus, so what if spiritual experiences can’t be captured in words either? They are no more and no less
handicapped in this regard than any other experience. If I say “dog” and you’ve had the experience, you know

exactly what I mean. If a Zen master says “Emptiness,” and you’ve had that experience, you will know exactly what is
meant. If you haven’t had the experience “dog” or the experience “Emptiness,” merely adding more and more words
will never, under any circumstances, convey it.

Thus, if we are going to level that charge at mysticism, then we must level it at dogginess and sunsetness and
every other experience that happens to come our way. (This is really the cheapest of the cheap shots fired at
mysticism.)

Conversely, words do just fine as signifiers for experience, whether mundane or spiritual, if we both, you and I,
have had similar experiences in a context of shared background practices. Zen masters talk about Emptiness all the
time! And they know exactly what they mean by the words, and the words are perfectly adequate to convey what
they mean, if you have had the experience (for what they mean can only be disclosed in the shared praxis of zazen,
or meditation practice).

Go one step further. If I say to a conop child, “It is as if I were elsewhere,” the child might nod her head as if she
actually understood all the meanings of that statement. The conop child already possesses the shared linguistic
structure (and grammar) to decipher the words. But, as we have seen, since the conop child cannot fully grasp the
implications of as-if statements, she doesn’t really understand what is signified by my statement. Once the higher
structure of formop emerges, however, this will usher the child into a worldspace where “as-if” is not just a signifier
but a signified that has an existing referent in that formop worldspace: not just a word, but a direct understanding
that more or less spontaneously jumps to mind whenever we hear or see the word, and which refers to a genuinely
existing entity in the rational worldspace.

In other words, all signs exist in a continuum of developmental referents and developmental signifieds. The
referent of a sign is not just lying around in “the” world waiting for any and all to simply look at it; the referent exists
only in a worldspace that is itself only disclosed in the process of development, and the signified exists only in the
interior perception of those who have developed to that worldspace (which structures the background interpretive
meaning that allows the signified to emerge). No amount of experience by the conop child will ever show her the
meaning of an “as-if” dog, because the as-if dog does not exist anywhere in the conop worldspace; it exists only in
the formop worldspace, and thus it is a referent that demands a developmental signified to even be perceived in the
first place.

To take it a point at a time: the signifiers of signs (such as the words on this page) are always physical, they are
always material components, in which no meaning resides at all (Saussure’s point); and because the signifiers are
physical, even my dog can see them (and, of course, sees no meaning in them; or rather, sees them from a
sensorimotor level, as something to eat, perhaps). That is because the actual
referent of a sign exists only in a
worldspace (sensorimotor, magical, mythical, mental, etc.) that is itself disclosed only at a particular level of depth
(preop, conop, formop, etc.). And in the same way, the corresponding signified of the sign exists only in the interior
perception of those who have developed the requisite depth. (All of this occurs in a context of cultural and social
practices, or an intersubjective community of the same-depthed.)14

Both the conop child and my dog can see the physical words “as-if”; neither of them can understand the phrase.
The empirical markings are meaningless. The child and the dog do not possess the developmental signified, and thus
they cannot see the actual referent.

Several examples of referents and worldspaces: rocks exist in the sensorimotor worldspace; animistic clouds exist
in the magic worldspace; Santa Claus exists in the mythic worldspace; the square root of a negative one exists in the
rational worldspace; archetypes exist in the subtle worldspace, and so on—not as pregiven objects, but as the
product of all four quadrants. And thus, in order to understand the referents represented by those signifiers (from
“rocks” to “archetypes”) one must possess the requisite depth through one’s own interior development (so that
those signifiers can evoke the appropriate signified: when you read “the square root of a negative one,” you know
what that means, what that signifies, but only if you have developed to formop).

Just so, the words Buddha-nature and Godhead and Spirit and Dharmakaya are signifiers whose referents
exist only in the transpersonal or
spiritual worldspace, and they therefore require, for their understanding, a
developmental signified, an appropriately developed interior or Left-Hand dimension corresponding with the
exterior word, or else they remain only words,
like the unseen dog, this unseen Spirit. And without the

developmental signified, words will capture neither the dog nor the Spirit.

And note: I can run around until I find a dog and show you the dog, because we both exist in the sensorimotor
worldspace and there is no developmental reason why you can’t spot a dog. Or, in the other example, there is no
reason you can’t understand an as-if dog, whose referent exists in the rational worldspace. We already share that
worldspace. We have already transformed to that level of depth: an entire and shared world of referents are
therefore lying around for us to apprehend (because we have already created the worldspace or the opening in
which they can manifest).

But I can’t run around and find Buddha and show you that, unless you have developed the requisite cognitions
that will allow you to resonate with the signifier whose referent exists only in the spiritual worldspace and whose
signified exists only in the consciousness of those who have awakened to that space.

VALIDITY CLAIMS OF MYSTICISM

If I want to know whether it is raining or not, I go to the window and look out, and sure enough, rain. But perhaps I
am mistaken, or perhaps my eyesight is poor. Would you check? You go to the window and yes, rain.

That is a very simplified form of the three strands of any valid knowledge quest (whether of the Left- or Right-
Hand path).15 The first is injunction, which is always of the form, “If you want to know this, do this.” If you want to
know if a cell has a nucleus, then get a microscope, learn to take histological sections, stain the cell, put it under the
microscope, and look. If you want to know the meaning of Hamlet, then learn English, get the book, and read. If you
want to know whether 2 + 2 is really 4, then learn arithmetic theory, take the theorems, run them through your
mind, and check the results.

The various

injunctions, in other words, lead to or disclose or open up the possibility of an illumination, an
apprehension, an intuition, or a direct experiencing of the domain addressed by the injunction. You “see” the
meaning of Hamlet, or whether it is raining, or why 2 + 2 really is 4. This is the second strand, the illumination or
apprehension. You see or apprehend, via a direct experience, the disclosed data of the domain.16

But you could be mistaken, and thus you check your results, your data, with others who have completed the first
two strands, with others who have performed the injunctions and obtained the data. In this community of peers, you
compare and confirm—or reject—your original data. And this is the third strand,
communal confirmation (or
refutation).

These three strands—injunction, illumination, confirmation—are the major components in any valid knowledge
quest.17 One of the great values of Thomas Kuhn’s work (and that of the pragmatists before him, and in particular
Heidegger’s “analytic-pragmatic” side) was to draw attention to the importance of injunctions or actual practices in
generating knowledge, and further, in generating the type of knowledge that could be articulated in a given
worldspace.

That is, social practices, or social

injunctions (and I mean “social” in the broad sense as “sociocultural”), are
crucial in creating and disclosing the types of worldspace in which types of subjects and objects appear (and thus the
types of knowledge that
can unfold). The referents of knowledge, as we saw above, exist only in specific
worldspaces, and those worldspaces are not simply given empirically, lying around for all and sundry to perceive.18
Rather, these worldspaces are disclosed/created by cognitive transformations in the context of background
injunctions or social practices.19

Put simply, the first strand of knowledge accumulation is never simply “Look”; it is “Do this, then look.”
Kuhn, in one of the great misunderstood concepts of our era, pointed out that normal science proceeds by way of
exemplary injunctions—that is, shared practices and methods that scientists agree disclose and address the
important issues of their field. Kuhn called such an agreed-upon injunction an “exemplar” or a “paradigm”—an
exemplary practice or technique or methodology that all agreed was central to furthering the knowledge quest. And
it was the paradigm, the exemplary injunction, that disclosed a type of data, so that the paradigm itself was a matter
of consensus, not merely correspondence.

In the academic world of the two cultures, many theorists in the under-funded humanities (and virtually
everybody in the New Age movement) seized upon the notion of “paradigm” as a way to undercut the authority of

normal science, bolster their own departments, reduce empirical facts to arbitrary social conventions—and then
propose their own, new and improved “paradigm.” In all of these, “paradigm” was mistaken as some sort of overall
theory or concept or notion, the idea being that if you came up with a new and better theory, the factual evidence
could be ignored because that was just “old paradigm.”

Among other things, this meant that empirical science didn’t really show any “progress,” but was merely a shifting
of opinions (“paradigms”) that had no referent except in the arbitrary conventions of scientists (and these
conventions were always charged with some sort of “ism” that the new paradigm would overcome).

All of this ignored Kuhn’s repeated insistence that “later scientific theories are better than earlier ones for solving
puzzles in the quite often different environments to which they are applied. This is not a relativist’s position, and it
displays the sense in which I am a convinced believer in scientific progress.”20

But by collapsing “paradigm” into a mere theory (itself unanchored), the scientific enterprise could be collapsed
into various forms of literary chitchat (and the new masters of the universe were therefore . . . the literary critics).
And likewise, on the New Age front, a flurry of “new paradigms” could then step in and redress the ugliness of the
old paradigm.

But paradigms are first and foremost injunctions, actual practices (all of which have nondiscursive components
that never are entered in the theories they support)—they are methods for disclosing new data in an addressed
domain, and the paradigms work because they are true in any meaningful sense of the word. Science makes real
progress, as Kuhn said, because successive paradigms cumulatively disclose more and more interesting data. Even
Foucault acknowledged that the natural sciences, even if they had started as structures of power, had separated
from power (it was the pseudosciences of biopower that remained shot through with power masquerading as
knowledge).

Neither the New Agers nor the “new paradigmers” had anything resembling a new paradigm, because all they
offered was more talk-talk. They had no new techniques, no new methodologies, no new exemplars, no new
injunctions—and therefore no new data. All they possessed, through a misreading of Kuhn, was a pseudo-attempt to
trump normal science and replace it with their ideologically favorite reading of the Kosmos.

The contemplative traditions, on the other hand, have always come first and foremost with a set of injunctions in
hand. They are, above all else, a set of practices, practices that require years to master (much longer than the
training of the average scientist). These injunctions (zazen, shikan-taza, vipassana, contemplative introspection,
satsang, darshan—all of which we will discuss)—these are not things to think, they are things to do.

Once one masters the exemplar or the paradigmatic practice (strand one), then one is ushered into a worldspace
in which new data disclose themselves (strand two). These are direct apprehensions or illuminations—in a word,
direct spiritual experiences (unio mystica, satori, kensho, shaktipat, nada, shabd, etc.). These data are rigorously
checked (strand three) in the community of those who have also completed the first two strands (injunction and
illumination). Bad data are rebuffed by the community (the sangha) of those whose cognitive eyes are adequate to
the addressed domain.

Thus, as I covered in more detail in Eye to Eye, authentic knowledge has a component that is similar to Kuhn’s
paradigm (namely, the injunction), a component that is similar to the broad empirical demand for evidence or data
or experience (namely, the illumination or apprehension, whether that be from sensory experience, mental
experience, or spiritual experience), and a component similar to Sir Karl Popper’s fallibilistic criterion (namely, the
potential confirmation or refutation by a community of the adequate).

Accordingly, contemplative knowledge is, or can be, genuine knowledge, because it follows all three strands of

valid knowledge accumulation.

THE RECONSTRUCTION OF THE CONTEMPLATIVE PATH

Of course, this does not prevent the various contemplative traditions from possessing their own particular and
culture-bound trappings, contexts, and interpretations. But to the extent that the contemplative endeavor discloses
universal aspects of the Kosmos, then the deep structures of the contemplative traditions (but not their surface
structures) would be expected to show cross-cultural similarities at the various levels of depth created/disclosed by

the meditative injunctions and paradigms.

In other words, the deep structures of worldspaces (archaic, magic, mythic, rational, and transpersonal) show
cross-cultural and largely invariant features at a deep level of abstraction, whereas the surface structures (the actual
subjects and objects in the various worldspaces) are naturally and appropriately quite different from culture to
culture. Just as the human mind universally grows images and symbols and concepts (even though the actual
contents of those structures vary considerably), so the human spirit universally grows intuitions of the Divine, and
those developmental signifieds unfold in an evolutionary and reconstructible fashion, just like any other holon in
the Kosmos (and their referents are just as real as any other similarly disclosed data).

In the past few decades there has been a concerted effort on the part of many researchers (such as Stanislav Grof,
Roger Walsh, Frances Vaughan, Daniel Brown, Jack Engler, Daniel Goleman, Charles Tart, Donald Rothberg, Michael
Zimmerman, Seymour Boorstein, Mark Epstein, David Lukoff, Michael Washburn, Joel Funk, John Nelson, John
Chirban, Robert Forman, Francis Lu, Michael Murphy, Mark Waldman, James Fadiman, myself, and others)21
to
rationally reconstruct the higher stages of transpersonal or contemplative development—stages that continue
naturally or normally beyond the ego and centaur if arrest or fixation does not occur.

Much of this work has been summarized in Transformations of Consciousness: Conventional and Contemplative
Perspectives on Development (Wilber, Engler, and Brown), and I will not repeat its contents. But the conclusion is
straightforward. As Brown and Engler summarize it:

The major [contemplative] traditions we have studied in their original languages present an unfolding of
meditation experience in terms of a stage model: for example, the Mahamudra from the Tibetan Buddhist
tradition; the Visuddhimagga from the Pali Theravada tradition; and the Yoga Sutras from the Sanskrit Hindu
tradition. The models are sufficiently similar to suggest an underlying common invariant sequence of stages,
despite vast cultural and linguistic differences as well as styles of practice.

This developmental model has also been found to be consistent with the stages of mystical or interior prayer
found in the Jewish (Kabbalist), Islamic (Sufi), and Christian mystical traditions (see, for example, Chirban’s chapter in
Transformations), and Brown has also found it in the Chinese contemplative traditions. Theorists such as Da
Avabhasha have given extensive hermeneutic and developmental readings from what now appears to be at least a
representative sampling from every known and available contemplative tradition (see, for example, The Basket of
Tolerance), and they are in fundamental and extensive agreement with this overall developmental model.

The evidence, though still preliminary, strongly suggests that, at a minimum,

there are four general stages of
transpersonal development, each with at least two substages (and some with many more). These four stages I call
the psychic, the subtle, the causal, and the nondual.

Each of these stages follows the same patterns and shows the same developmental characteristics as all the other
stages of consciousness evolution: each is a holon following the twenty tenets (a new differentiation/integration, a
new emergence with a new depth, a new interiority, etc.); each possesses a new and higher sense of self existing in a
new and wider world of others, with new drives, new cognitions, new moral stances, and so forth; each possesses a
deep structure (basic defining pattern) that is culturally invariant but with surface structures (manifestations) that
are culturally conditioned and molded; and each has a new and higher form of possible pathology (with the
exception of the unmanifest “end” point, although even that is not without certain possible complications in its
manifestation).

I have elsewhere given preliminary descriptions of the deep structures (and pathologies) of each of these four
Instead of repeating myself, I have for this presentation simply chosen four individuals who are
major stages.22
especially representative of these stages, and will let them speak for us. They are (respectively) Ralph Waldo
Emerson, Saint Teresa of Ávila, Meister Eckhart, and Sri Ramana Maharshi. Each also represents the type of
mysticism typical at each stage: nature mysticism, deity mysticism, formless mysticism, and nondual mysticism (each
of which we will discuss).

And each represents a form of tomorrow, a shape of our destiny yet to come. Each rode time’s arrow ahead of us,

as geniuses always do, and thus, even though looming out of our past, they call to us from our future.

8

The Depths of the Divine

Holy breath divinely streams through the luminous form when the feast comes to life, and floods of love are
in motion, and, watered by heaven, the living stream roars when it resounds beneath, and the night renders
her treasures, and up out of brooks the buried gold gleams.—

And, friendly spirit, just as from your serenely contemplative brow your ray descends, securely blessing,

among mortals, so you witness to me, and tell me, that I might repeat it to others, for others too do not
believe it. . . .

—FRIEDRICH HÖLDERLIN

THE CONTINUING evolutionary process of within-and-beyond brings new withins . . . and new beyonds.

THE PSYCHIC LEVEL

We left off with the emergence of the centaur, which is, so to speak, on the border between the personal and the
transpersonal. If the first three general domains were those of matter, life, and mind, the next general domain (that
of the psychic and subtle) is the domain of the soul, as I will use the term. And the first rule of the soul is: it is
transpersonal.

The word transpersonal

is somewhat awkward and confuses many people. But the point is simply, as Emerson
put it, “The soul knows no persons.” He explains (and note: Emerson throughout these quotes uses the masculine, as
was the custom of the time; were he alive today he would use feminine and masculine, for the whole point of his
notion of the Over-Soul was that it was neither male nor female, which is why it could anchor a true liberation from
any and all restrictive roles: “The soul knows no persons”):

Persons are supplementary to the primary teaching of the soul. In youth we are mad for persons. Childhood
and youth see all the world in them. But the larger experience of man discovers the identical nature [the same
self or soul] appearing through them all. In all conversation between two persons tacit reference is made, as to
a third party, to a common nature. That third party or common nature is not social; it is impersonal; is God.1

The soul is without persons, and the soul is grounded in God. “Impersonal,” however, is not quite right, because it
tends to imply a complete negation of the personal, whereas in higher development the personal is negated and
preserved, or transcended and included: hence, “transpersonal.” So I think it’s very important, in all subsequent
discussion, for us to remember that transpersonal means “personal plus,” not “personal minus.”

But what could an actual “transpersonal” experience really mean? It’s not nearly as mysterious as it sounds. Recall
that at the centaur, according to the research of Broughton (and many others), the self is already beginning to
transcend the empirical ego or the empirical person (“the observer is distinguished from the self-concept as
known”). You yourself can, right now, be aware of your objective self, you can observe your individual ego or person,
you are aware of yourself generally.

But who, then, is doing the observing? What is it that is observing or witnessing your individual self? That

therefore transcends your individual self in some important ways? Who or what is that? The noble Emerson:

All goes to show that the soul in man is not an organ, but animates and exercises all the organs; is not a
function, like the power of memory, of calculation, of comparison, but uses these as hands and feet; is not a
faculty, but a light; is not the intellect or the will, but the master of the intellect and the will; is the background
of our being, in which they lie,—an immensity not possessed and that cannot be possessed. From within or
from behind, a light shines through us upon things and makes us aware that we are nothing, but the light is
all.2

The observer in you, the Witness in you, transcends the isolated person in you and opens instead—from within or
from behind, as Emerson said—onto a vast expanse of awareness no longer obsessed with the individual bodymind,
no longer a respecter or abuser of persons, no longer fascinated by the passing joys and set-apart sorrows of the
lonely self, but standing still in silence as an opening or clearing through which light shines, not from the world but
into it—“a light shines through us upon things.” That which observes or witnesses the self, the person, is precisely
to that degree free of the self, the person, and through that opening comes pouring the light and power of a Self, a
Soul, that, as Emerson puts it, “would make our knees bend.”

A man is the facade of a temple wherein all wisdom and all good abide. What we commonly call man [as an
“individual person” or ego], the eating, drinking, counting man, does not, as we know him, represent himself,
but misrepresents himself. Him we do not respect, but the soul, whose organ he is, if he would let it appear
through his action, would make our knees bend. When it breathes through his intellect, it is genius; when it
breathes through his will, it is virtue; when it flows through his affection, it is love. And the blindness of the
intellect begins when it would be something of itself [be its “own person”]. The weakness of the will begins
when the individual would be something of himself. All reform aims in some one particular to let the soul have
its way through us. . . .3

And those persons through whom the soul shines, through whom the “soul has its way,” are not therefore weak
characters, timid personalities, meek presences among us. They are personal plus, not personal minus. Precisely
because they are no longer exclusively identified with the individual personality, and yet because they still preserve
the personality, then through that personality flows the force and fire of the soul. They may be soft-spoken and
often remain in silence, but it is a thunderous silence that veritably drowns out the egos chattering loudly all around
them. Or they may be animated and very outgoing, but their dynamism is magnetic, and people are drawn somehow
to the presence, fascinated. Make no mistake: these are strong characters, these souls, sometimes wildly
exaggerated characters, sometimes world-historical, precisely because their personalities are plugged into a
universal source that rumbles through their veins and rudely rattles those around them.

I believe, for example, that it was precisely this fire and force that allowed Emerson, more than any other person
in American history, to actually define the intellectual character of America itself. One of his essays, “The American
Scholar,” had, as one historian put it, “an influence greater than that of any single work in the nineteenth century.”
Oliver Wendell Holmes called it “our intellectual Declaration of Independence.” James Russell Lowell explained: “The
Puritan revolt had made us ecclesiastically, and the Revolution politically independent, but we were still socially and
intellectually moored to English thought, till Emerson cut the cable and gave us a chance at the dangers and the
glories of blue water. . . .”

And the message, this ringing Declaration of Independence? The Soul is tied to no individual, no culture, no
tradition, but rises fresh in every person, beyond every person, and grounds itself in a truth and glory that bows to
nothing in the world of time and place and history. We all must be, and can only be, “a light unto ourselves.”4

And then in a phrase that, as Holmes indicated, rattled all of America, Emerson announced: “All that Adam had, all
that Caesar could, you have and can do”—because it is the same Self in each of us. Why bow to past heroes, he asks,
when all we are bowing to is our own Soul? “Suppose they were virtuous; did they wear out virtue?” The magnetism
of the great heroes is only the call from our own Self, he says. Why this groveling to the past when the same Soul
shines now and only now and always now? And then Emerson swiftly and irrevocably cut the cable and set us
all—not just Americans—afloat on the dangers and the glories of blue water:

Trust thyself: every heart vibrates to that iron string. . . . The magnetism which all original action exerts is
explained when we inquire the reason of self-trust. Who is the Trustee? What is the aboriginal Self, on which a
universal reliance may be grounded? . . . The inquiry leads us to that source, at once the essence of genius, of
virtue, and of life. . . . In that deep force, the last fact behind which analysis cannot go, all things find their
common origin.

For the sense of being which in calm hour arises, we know not how, in the Soul, is not diverse from things,
from space, from light, from time, from man, but one with them and proceeds obviously from the same source
whence their life and being also proceed. . . . Here is the fountain of action and of thought. Here are the lungs
of that inspiration which giveth man wisdom. . . . We lie in the lap of immense intelligence, which makes us
receivers of its truth and organs of its activity. When we discern justice, when we discern truth, we do nothing
of ourselves, but allow a passage to its beams. . . .

The relations of the Soul to the divine spirit are so pure that it is profane to seek to interpose helps. It must
be that when God speaketh he should communicate, not one thing, but all things; should fill the world with his
voice; should scatter forth light, nature, time, souls, from the center of the present thought; and new date and
new create the whole. Whenever a mind is simple and receives a divine wisdom, old things pass
away—means, teachers, texts, temples fall; it lives now and absorbs past and future into the present hour. All
things are made sacred by relation to it—one as much as another. All things are dissolved to their center by
their cause, and in the universal miracle petty and particular miracles disappear.

If therefore a man claims to know and speak of God and carries you backward to the phraseology of some
old mouldered nation in another country, in another world, believe him not. Is the acorn better than the oak
which is its fullness and completion? Whence then this worship of the past? The centuries are conspirators
against the sanity and authority of the Soul. Time and space are but physiological colors which the eye makes,
but the Soul is light: where it is, is day; where it was, is night; and history is an impertinence and an injury if it
be any thing more than a cheerful apologue or parable of my being and becoming.5

To emphasize that the Soul, the “aboriginal Self,” is common in and to all beings, Emerson often refers to it as the

“Over-Soul,” one and the same in all of us, in all beings as such. The overall number of Souls is but one:

The only prophet of that which must be, is that great nature in which we rest as the earth lies in the soft arms
of the atmosphere; that Unity, that Over-Soul, within which every man’s particular being is contained and
made one with all other; that common heart of which all sincere conversation is the worship, to which all right
action is submission; that over-powering reality which confutes our tricks and talents, and constrains every
one to pass for what he is, and to speak from his character [soul] and not from his tongue [ego], and which
evermore tends to pass into our thought and hand and become wisdom and virtue and power and beauty. . . .

And this because the heart in thee is the heart of all; not a valve, not a wall, not an intersection is there
anywhere in nature, but one blood rolls uninterruptedly an endless circulation through all men, as the water of
the globe is all one sea, and, truly seen, its tide is one. . . .

It is one light which beams out of a thousand stars. It is one soul which animates all men. . . .

We live in succession, in division, in parts, in particles. Meantime within man is the Soul of the whole; the

wise silence; the universal beauty, to which every part and particle is equally related; the eternal ONE.6

And so once again we see that a new and deeper within has brought us to a new and wider beyond, a beyond
that “is not diverse from things, from space, from light, from time, from man, but one with them and proceeds
obviously from the same source whence their life and being also proceed.” This new within-and-beyond is not just
beyond a sociocentric identity to a worldcentric identity with all human beings (which the rational-ego/centaur
assumes in its global or universal postconventional awareness), but to an identity, a conscious union, with all of

manifestation itself: not just with all humans, but with all nature, and with the physical cosmos, with all beings “great
and small”—a union or identity that Bucke famously called “cosmic consciousness.”

We could say: from the worldcentric centaur to direct cosmic consciousness. (When you consider the remarkable

achievement that decentered worldcentric awareness is, it’s not that far of a jump).7

Thus, the centaur could integrate the physiosphere and the biosphere and the noosphere, but the Over-Soul
becomes, or is directly one with, the physiosphere and biosphere and noosphere. It is simple continuation of the
deepening and widening of identity, grounded in an awareness very much within, and very much beyond, me.

And Emerson means this literally! According to Emerson, this cosmic consciousness is not poetry (though he often
expresses it with unmatched poetic beauty)—rather, it is a direct realization, a direct apprehension, and “in that
deep force, the last fact behind which analysis cannot go, all things find their common origin. It is one light which
beams out of a thousand stars. It is one soul which animates all.”

For the Over-Soul is also experienced as the World Soul, since self and world are here finding a “common fountain,
common source.”8 The Over-Soul (or World Soul) is an initial apprehension of the pure Witness or aboriginal Self,
which starts to emerge, however haltingly, as an experiential reality at this psychic stage.9 (We will see how Emerson
treats this Witness in a moment.)

With the Over-Soul, the World Soul, it is not that individuality disappears, but that—once again—it is negated and
preserved in a deeper and wider ground, a ground that conspicuously includes all of nature and its glories. This
cosmic consciousness is sometimes referred to as “nature mysticism,” but that is a somewhat misleading term. For
this psychic-level mysticism embraces not just nature but also culture, and calling it “nature mysticism” confuses it
with a merely biocentric regression, an ecocentric indissociation, and this is not at all what Emerson has in mind (as
we will see).

But since the Over-Soul is an experienced identity with all manifestation, it is an identity that most definitely and
exuberantly embraces nature; and, to that degree, it begins to undercut the subject/object dualism.10 Emerson
explains:

We see the world piece by piece, as the sun, the moon, the animal, the tree; but the whole, of which these are
the shining parts, is the soul [the Over-Soul, the World Soul]. . . . And this deep power in which we exist and
whose beatitude is all accessible to us, is not only self-sufficing and perfect in every hour, but the act of seeing
and the thing seen, the seer and the spectacle, the subject and the object, are one.11

In his famous “transparent eyeball” section from the essay Nature, Emerson speaks movingly of the union of the
Soul and nature, and of the capacity of nature, when rightly approached, to elicit this cosmic consciousness. The
“transparent eyeball” is, of course, an intimation of the pure Witness in the form of the Over-Soul, wherein “all mean
egotism vanishes; I am nothing; I see all”:

To speak truly, few adult persons can see nature. Most persons do not see the sun. At least they have a very
superficial seeing. . . . Crossing a bare common, in snow puddles, at twilight, under a clouded sky, without
having in my thoughts any occurrence of special good fortune, I have enjoyed a perfect exhilaration. I am glad
to the brink of fear. . . . Within these plantations of God, a decorum and sanctity reign, a perennial festival is
dressed, and the guest sees not how he should tire of them in a thousand years. In the woods, we return to
reason and faith. There I feel that nothing can befall me in life,—no disgrace, no calamity, which nature cannot
repair. Standing on the bare ground,—my head bathed by the blithe air, and uplifted into infinite space,—all
mean egotism vanishes. I become a transparent eyeball; I am nothing; I see all; the currents of Universal Being
circulate through me; I am part or parcel of God.12

What distinguishes this profound “nature mysticism” from a simple nature indissociation or ecocentric immersion
or biospheric regression (which would be egocentric and anthropocentric, as we have seen) is the realization that
nature is not Spirit but an expression of Spirit, radiant and glorious and perfect in its own way, but an expression
nonetheless. Emerson says nature is not spirit but a symbol of spirit. Emerson is not regressing to fulcrum-2
(biocentric immersion and nondifferentiation)! Emerson is very clear on this distinction between nature regression,

on the one hand, and a mysticism that also embraces nature, on the other—and this distinction rather upsets his
environmentalist fans, who seem to want to equate a finite and temporal nature with an infinite and eternal Spirit:

Beauty in nature is not ultimate. It is the herald of inward and eternal beauty, and is not alone a solid and
satisfactory good. . . .

Nature is a symbol of spirit. . . . Before the revelations of the Soul, time, space and nature shrink away. . . . In
the hour of vision there is nothing that can be called gratitude, nor properly joy. The Soul raised over passion
beholds identity and eternal causation, perceives the self-existence of Truth and Right, and calms itself with
knowing that all things go well. Vast spaces of nature, the Atlantic Ocean, the South Sea; long intervals of time,
years, centuries, are of no account. . . .

Let us stun and astonish the intruding rabble of men and books and institutions by a simple declaration of
the divine fact. Bid the intruders take the shoes from off their feet, for God is here within. Let our simplicity
judge them, and our docility to our own law demonstrate the poverty of Nature beside our native riches.13

It is, in fact, according to Emerson, an allegiance to the senses and nature, in itself, that blinds us to the interior

intuition of the Over-Soul and the God within and beyond:

To the senses and the unrenewed understanding, belongs a sort of instinctive belief in the absolute existence
of nature. In their view man and nature are indissolubly joined. Things are ultimates, and they never look
beyond their sphere [Piaget’s egocentric “realism”]. . . . His mind is imbruted, and he is a selfish savage. . . .

The presence of intuition14 mars this faith [in nature]. The first effort of thought tends to relax this
despotism of the senses which binds us to nature as if we were a part of it, and shows us nature aloof, and, as
it were, afloat. Until this higher agency intervened [intuition], the animal eye sees, with wonderful accuracy,
sharp outlines and colored surfaces. When the eye of intuition opens, to outline and surface are at once added
grace and expression. These proceed from imagination and affection, and abate somewhat of the angular
distinctions of objects. If the intuition be stimulated to more earnest vision, outlines of surfaces become
transparent, and are no longer seen; causes and spirits are seen through them. The best moments of life are
these delicious awakenings of the higher powers, and the reverential withdrawing of nature before its God.15

At the same time, as Emerson points out, this does not mean that nature is apart from Spirit or divorced from
Spirit or alien to Spirit—that is a common belief in the mythic structure (Campbell called it “mythic dissociation”),
but it finds no place in genuine psychic mysticism. All of nature, every nook and cranny, is in Spirit, bathed by Spirit,
awash in Spirit; there is no point in nature that is not totally permeated and enveloped by Spirit.

These distinctions are crucial, because they allow us to distinguish carefully and clearly between three quite

different worldviews on the relation between nature and spirit:

indissociation, where spirit is simply equated with nature (nature = spirit);

The first is magical
predifferentiated; very “this-worldly.”
The second is mythic dissociation, where nature and spirit are ontologically separate or divorced; very
“otherworldly.”
The third is psychic mysticism: nature is a perfect expression of spirit (or as Spinoza put it, nature is a subset
of spirit);16 “otherworldly” and “this-worldly” are united and conjoined.

With reference to the third: One of the major and defining characteristics of psychic-level mysticism is that it is a
conscious identity with physiosphere and biosphere and noosphere—it does not simply privilege the biosphere; it is
no mere geocentric/egocentric indissociation and regression. Even though this mysticism often takes its glorious
exultation in the wonders of nature, nonetheless, as Emerson constantly emphasizes, this is “the Self of nation and
of nature”—that is, the mystical union of matter, life, and culture, not merely a biospheric immersion. Were it only
the Self of nature and not also of nation (culture and morality), then it would be a perfectly regressive, dualistic, and

amoralist stance, glorifying merely an egocentric joy in finding oneself vitally reflected in the biosphere (and the rain
whispers in its ear, I am here for you).

Rather, it is the union of the human moral endeavor with the display of nature as given that so distinguishes
“nation-nature” mysticism from the narcissistic “nature worship” of mere sentimentalism (the technical points of
this argument are given in note 16). This is most definitely not an ecological self; it is an Eco-Noetic Self, “The Self of
nation and of nature,” the Over-Soul that is the World Soul.17

Indeed, if nature means the biosphere, and Nature (or Spirit) means the All, means the physiosphere and the
biosphere and the noosphere and their Ground, then Emerson’s point is very simple: the worshipers of nature are
the destroyers of Nature.

Emerson, then, is singing songs to Nature, not nature. And that is why he maintains that nature immersion and
nature worship prevent the realization of Nature, or the Spirit within and beyond, which transcends all, embraces
all. And this is what he means by “nature-nation” mysticism: the biosphere and the noosphere united in the
theosphere, or the Over-Soul that is simultaneously the World Soul.

And so he arrives at the very true conclusion: nature worshipers are the destroyers of Nature, the destroyers of
Spirit; they would, he says, never look within long enough to find the true beyond, the Over-Soul out of which both
culture and nature emerge (and which therefore lovingly embraces both); they would never look within for Nature,
they only stare without at nature, and thus, as he puts it, their minds are imbruted, they remain a selfish
savage—geocentric, egocentric.

Just as all of the lower is in the higher but not all the higher is in the lower (but rather “permeates” the lower), so
all of nature is in Spirit but not all of Spirit is to be found in nature. Rather, Spirit permeates nature through and
through, itself remaining behind nature, beyond nature, not confined to nature and not identified with nature, but
never, at any point, divorced from nature or set apart from nature. Emerson is precise:

But when, following the invisible steps of thought, we come to inquire, Whence is matter? and Whereto?
many truths arise to us out of the recesses of consciousness. We learn that the highest is present to the soul of
man; that the dread universal essence, which is not wisdom, or love, or beauty, or power, but all in one, and
each entirely, is that for which all things exist, and that by which they are; that spirit creates; that behind
nature, throughout nature, spirit is present; one and not compound it does not act upon us from without, that
is, in space and time, but spiritually, or through ourselves: therefore, that spirit . . . does not build up nature
around us, but puts it forth through us, as the life of the tree puts forth new branches and leaves through the
pores of the old.18

That Spirit does not build up nature around us, but puts forth nature through us: there is the profound difference
between nature/nation mysticism and mere biocentric immersion; there is the telling difference between the Eco-
Noetic Self and the merely ecological self; there is the difference between transcendence and regression.

Here, then, is a summary of the widely accepted interpretation of Emerson’s view: (1) nature is not Spirit but a
symbol of Spirit (or a manifestation of Spirit); (2) sensory awareness in itself does not reveal Spirit but obscures it; (3)
an ascending or transcendental current is required to disclose Spirit; (4) Spirit is understood only as nature is
transcended (i.e., Spirit is immanent in nature, but fully discloses itself only in a transcendence of nature—in short,
Spirit transcends but includes nature). Those points are largely uncontested by Emerson scholars [see the Eye of
Spirit, chapter 11, note 2].

In concluding this brief survey of the psychic level and the cosmic consciousness of nature-nation mysticism, there
are two points I would like to emphasize. The first is that, as I think is now obvious, this new going within has
resulted in a new going beyond: a new and higher interior identity (Over-Soul) accompanied by a new and wider
embrace of others (World Soul)—a single Soul embracing the physiosphere, biosphere, and noosphere in one loving
caress.19

Once again we go within and fall without to find this time . . . an actual cosmic consciousness. But this movement
itself is in no way any different from all the previous stages that we have examined, all of which were “self-
development through self-transcendence,” a new going within to a deeper and wider beyond.

And this Over-Soul recognition dawns precisely and only as the separate self, the ego or centaur, is transcended.

Schopenhauer would agree entirely with Emerson (and so many others) on that crucial point. In Schopenhauer’s
words:

When one is no longer concerned with the Where, the When, the Why and the What-for of things, but only
and alone with the What, and lets go even of all abstract thoughts about them, intellectual concepts and
consciousness, but instead of all that, gives over the whole force of one’s spirit to the act of perceiving,
becomes absorbed in it and lets every bit of one’s consciousness be filled in the quiet contemplation of the
natural object immediately present—be it a landscape, a tree, a rock, a building, or anything else at all;
actually and fully losing oneself
in the object: forgetting one’s individuality, one’s will, and remaining there
only as a pure subject, a clear mirror to the object—so that it is as though the object alone were there, without
anyone regarding it, and to such a degree that one might no longer distinguish the beholder from the act of
beholding, [then] the two have become one. . . .20

Schopenhauer’s “clear mirror to the object” is, of course, Emerson’s “transparent eyeball,” which is perfectly
transpersonal, or no longer merely individual. Schopenhauer: “The person absorbed in this mode of seeing is no
longer an individual—the individual has lost himself in the perception—but is a pure, will-less, painless, timeless,
Subject of Apprehension.” The Over-Soul as intimation of the pure and timeless Witness. . . .

The second thing I would like to emphasize is the relation of the global Self or Over-Soul to the whole notion of
morality and moral development itself. This is a connection, it seems to me, overlooked by most of today’s moral
theorists, but utterly obvious to Emerson and Schopenhauer (and not them alone).

We have seen the development of the moral sense evolve from physiocentric to biocentric to egocentric to
sociocentric to worldcentric (“worldcentric” being the global or planetary or universalizing reach of rationality and
then vision-logic). And here, at the psychic level, the worldcentric conception gives way to a direct worldcentric
experience, a direct experience of the global Self/World, the Eco-Noetic Self, where each individual is seen as an
expression of the same Self or Over-Soul.

And what has that to do with morality? Everything, according to Emerson and Schopenhauer, for in seeing that all
sentient beings are expressions of one Self, then all beings are treated as one’s Self. And that
realization—a
profound fruition of the decentering thrust of evolution—is the only source of true compassion, a compassion that
does not put self first (egocentric) or a particular society first (sociocentric) or humans first (anthropocentric), nor
does it try merely in thought to act as if we are all united (worldcentric), but directly and immediately breathes the
common air and beats the common blood of a Heart and Body that is one in all beings.

The whole point of the moral sequence, its very ground and its very goal, its omega point, its chaotic Attractor, is
the drive toward the Over-Soul, where treating others as one’s Self is not a moral imperative that has to be enforced
as an ought or a should or a difficult imposition, but comes as easily and as naturally as the rising of the sun or the
shining of the moon.21

This moral oneness intensifies in the subtle and causal (as we will see), but it first becomes directly obvious here,
in the psychic, and issues naturally in the spontaneous compassion inherent
in the Over-Soul, a compassion on
which all previous moral endeavors depended, but a compassion of which all previous endeavors were but mere and
partial glimmers.

In the light of the Over-Soul, it becomes perfectly obvious: all previous ethics were tried and found wanting, all
previous struggles for the life Good and True were too partial and too limited and much too narrow to satisfy—all
wanted to taste this, the universal compassion through universal identity with the commonwealth of all beings: that
I would see in an Other my own Self, with love driving the embrace, and compassion issuing in the tenderest of
mercies.

Schopenhauer:

The sort of act that I am here discussing is . . . compassion, which is to say: immediate participation, released
from all other considerations, first, in the pain of another, and then, in the alleviation or termination of that
pain, which alone is the true ground of all autonomous righteousness and of all true human love. An act can be
said to have genuine moral worth only in so far as it stems from this source [the common Self]; and conversely,

an act from any other source has none. The weal and woe of another comes to lie directly in my heart in
exactly the same way—though not always to the same degree—as otherwise only my own would lie, as soon
as this sentiment of compassion is aroused, and therewith, the difference between him and me is no longer
absolute. And this really is amazing—even mysterious.22

The mystery, of course, is the mystery of the Over-Soul allowing us to recognize ourselves in each other, beyond

the illusions of separation and duality. Schopenhauer:

For if plurality and distinction [“separate selves”] belong only to this world of appearances, and if one and the
same Being is what is beheld in all these living things, well then, the experience that dissolves the distinction
between the I and the Not-I cannot be false. On the contrary: its opposite must be false. The former
experience underlies the mystery of compassion, and stands, in fact, for the reality of which compassion is the
prime expression. That experience, therefore, must be the metaphysical ground of ethics and consist simply
in this: that one individual should recognize in another, himself in his own true being.23

THE SUBTLE LEVEL

At the psychic level, the universalizing and global tendencies of reason and vision-logic come to fruition in a direct
experience—initial, preliminary, but unmistakable—of a truly universal Self, common in and to all beings; in a direct
experience of the unity of the physiosphere, biosphere, and noosphere, as an expression and embrace of that Self or
Soul; so much so that this Self is understood to be prior to, within, and beyond matter, life, and mind, so that, for all
the glorious radiance of a Spirit embodied, nonetheless matter and nature and civilization all “withdraw before their
God.”

At the same time, this is no mere solipsism. It is a higher Self or I, most assuredly, but also a higher Truth (or It)
and a wider Community (or We)—the Over-Soul as the World Soul in the commonwealth of all beings as an objective
State of Affairs.24 The Big Three in yet deeper unfoldings, higher reaches, wider communities, stronger affirmations. .
. .

At the subtle level, this process of “interiorization” or “within-and-beyond” intensifies—a new transcendence with
a new depth, a new embrace, a higher consciousness, a wider identity—and the soul and God enter an even deeper
interior marriage, which discloses at its summit a divine union of Soul and Spirit, a union prior
to any of its
manifestations as matter or life or mind, a union that outshines any conceivable nature, here or anywhere else.
Nature-nation mysticism gives way to Deity mysticism, and the God within announces itself in terms undreamt of in
gross manifestation, with a Light that blinds the sun and a Song that thunders nature and culture into stunned and
awestruck silence.

Nature lovers here scream “Foul!,” as if beyond the glories of nature there should be no other glory, as if the
visible and tangible scene exhausted the wonders of the Kosmos, as if in all the worlds and possible worlds through
all eternity, their beloved nature alone should be allowed to shine.

But nature, dear sweet nature, is mortal and finite. It was born, it will remain a bit, and it will pass. It was created,
it will be undone. And in all cases, it is bounded, and limited, and doomed to the decay that marks all manifest
worlds. “I am somehow receptive of the great soul, and thereby I do overlook the sun and the stars and feel them to
be the fair accidents and effects which change and pass,” as Emerson said.

We are, of course, perfectly free to identify with nature, and to find a geocentric earth-religion that consoles us in
our passing miseries. We are free to identify with a finite, limited, mortal Earth; we are not free to call it infinite,
unlimited, immortal, eternal.

That Spirit which is within and beyond the Earth, which is prior to the Earth but not other to the Earth, that Spirit
which is source and support and goal of all—that Spirit is intuited at the psychic and comes to the fore in the subtle
stage of consciousness evolution, utterly including the previous stages, utterly outshining them. Let the Earth and
Cosmos and Worlds dissolve, and see Spirit still shining in the Emptiness, never arising, never dissolving, never
blinking once in the worlds of created time. “That joy,” says Teresa, “is greater than all the joys of earth, and greater
than all its delights, and all its satisfactions; and they are apprehended, too, very differently, as I have learned by

experience.”25

In the Interior Castle, one of the truly great texts of subtle-level development, Teresa describes very clearly the
stages of evolution of the “little butterfly,” as she calls her soul, to its union with the very Divine, and she does so in
terms of “seven mansions,” or seven stages of growth.

The first three stages deal with the ordinary mind or ego, “unregenerate” in the gross, manifest world of thought
and sense. In the first Mansion, that of Humility, the ego is still in love with the creatures and comforts outside the
Castle, and must begin a long and searching discipline in order to turn within. In the second Mansion (the Practice of
Prayer), intellectual study, edification, and good company strengthen the desire and capacity to interiorize and not
merely scatter and disperse the self in exterior distractions. In the Mansion of Exemplary Life, the third stage,
discipline and ethics are firmly set as a foundation of all that is to follow (very similar to the Buddhist notion that
sila, or moral discipline, is the foundation of dhyana, or meditation, and prajna, or spiritual insight). These are all
natural (or personal) developments.

In the fourth mansion, a supernatural (or transpersonal) grace enters the scene with the Prayer of Recollection
and the Prayer of Quiet (which Teresa differentiates by their bodily effects). In both, there is a calming and slowing
of gross-oriented faculties (memory, thoughts, senses) and a consequent opening to deeper, more interior spaces
with correlative “graces,” which Teresa calls, at this stage, “spiritual consolations” (because they are consoling to the
self, not yet transcending of the self). On the other hand, it is also as if the soul itself is actually beginning to emerge
at this stage: “The senses and all external things seem gradually to lose their hold, while the soul, on the other hand,
regains its lost control.” And this carries a glimmer of the truth to come, “namely, that God is within us.”26

In the fifth mansion, via the Prayer of Union, a Spiritual Betrothal occurs, where the soul first directly emerges and
intuits Spirit residing in the deepest interior of its own heart (the psychic). I say “emerge,” because even if the soul
was previously present in the depths, it now comes to the fore.

And this occurs in one particularly significant transformation, according to Teresa. The individual experiences, for
the first time, a complete cessation27 of all faculties, and in that pure absorption, the self tastes its primordial union
with God (or what Teresa also calls Uncreate Spirit). “For as long as such a soul is in this state, it can neither see nor
hear nor understand: the period is always short [at this early stage]. God implants Himself in the interior of that soul
in such a way that, when it returns to itself, it cannot possibly doubt that God has been in it and it has been in God.”28
And here Teresa uses perhaps her most famous metaphor. Prior to this transformative absorption, the
unregenerate self (or ego) is, says Teresa, like a silkworm. But one taste of union (literally, just a single experience of
this, she says, however brief), and the self is changed forever. One taste of absorption in Uncreate Spirit, and the
worm emerges a butterfly. As we might put it, the ego dies and the soul emerges. (“All mean egotism vanishes; the
currents of Universal Being circulate through me; I am part or parcel of God.”) Teresa:

And now let us see what becomes of this silkworm. When it is in this state of [cessation/absorption], and quite
dead to the world, it comes out a little white butterfly. Oh, greatness of God, that a soul should come out like
this after being closely united for so short a time—never, I think, for as long as half an hour [in cessation]. For
think of the difference between an ugly worm and a white butterfly; it is just the same here. The soul cannot
think how it can have merited such a blessing—whence such a blessing could have come to it, I meant to say,
for it knows quite well that it has not merited it at all.29

One taste, and the butterfly is born, the soul is born (or emerges from its slumber in ego, its lostness in the
exterior cocoon of form; and, of course, the butterfly is the omega point of the silkworm). The rest of Interior Castle
describes the extraordinary journey of this little butterfly toward that primordial Flame in which, at last, it will
happily die (to be, once again, reborn on yet a deeper level, that of union with Uncreate Spirit).

In the sixth mansion, Lover and Beloved, butterfly and God, soul and Uncreate Spirit, “see each other” for
extended periods of time. Whereas the absorption of the Fifth Mansion might last up to a half-hour, various types of
absorption here last a day or several days, she says (even if the cessation itself is still shortlived). The soul is “so
completely absorbed and the understanding so completely transported—for as long as a day, or even for several
days—that the soul seems incapable of grasping anything that does not awaken the will to love; to this it is fully
awake, while asleep as regards all attachment. . . .”30

But each new stage of growth, we have seen, introduces new types of possible pathology, and so it is with the
little butterfly. Many people think that the famous “Dark Night of the Soul,” a phrase introduced by Teresa’s friend
and collaborator Saint John of the Cross, is that terrible dark period before one finds Uncreate Spirit. But not so; the
Dark Night occurs in that period after one has tasted Universal Being but before one is established in it, for one has
now seen Paradise . . . and seen it fade.

The torment is now agonizing. The little butterfly suffers much, much more “torture” (Teresa’s term) than
anything the ego suffers or even could suffer. “This is a much greater trial,” the little butterfly reports, “especially if
the pains are severe; in some ways, when they are very acute, I think they are the greatest trial that exists. For they
affect the soul both outwardly and inwardly, till it becomes so much oppressed as not to know what to do with itself.
There are many things which assault her soul with an interior oppression so keenly felt and so intolerable that I do
not know to what it can be compared. . . .”31

She is conscious of a strange solitude, since there is not a creature on the whole earth who can be a
companion to her—in fact, I do not believe she would find any in Heaven, save Him Whom she loves: on the
contrary, all earthly companionship is torment to her. She thinks of herself as of a person suspended aloft,
unable either to come down and rest anywhere on earth or to ascend into Heaven. She is parched with thirst,
yet cannot reach the water; and the thirst is not a tolerable one but a kind that nothing can quench. . . .32

The dialectic of progress, here unleashed in its most subtle yet agonizing form.

On the more positive side, it is here in the Sixth Mansion that all sorts of subtle-level phenomena begin to emerge
in consciousness, and Teresa chronicles them with astonishing clarity: the interior illuminations, the raptures, the
subtle sounds and visions, the types of tranquillity and recollection, “ecstasy, rapture, or trance (for I think these are
all the same).” Most of these visions (late psychic and early subtle) are in themselves transverbal (“the revelations
are communicated to it without words,” “in a way that involves no clear utterance of speech”).33 But the central
event remains, in each of them, the possibility of the absorption in Uncreate Spirit. “When the soul is thus cleansed,
God unites it with Himself. The soul becomes one with God.”34

All of which culminates in the Seventh Mansion, where actual Spiritual Marriage occurs, and vision gives way to
direct apprehension or direct experience—“the union of the whole soul with God.”35 Once this union is
apprehended, it seems so obvious, says Teresa, that we can’t even find a “doorway” through which it occurred
(which is very reminiscent of Zen’s “gateless gate”), and, in trying to describe this secret yet perfectly obvious union,
words, of course, miserably fail her (but only because she cannot assume that we have had the experience):

This secret union takes place in the deepest center of the soul, which is where God dwells, and I do not think
there is any need of a door by which to enter it. I say there is no need of a door because all that has so far
been described [the earlier six stages or mansions] seems to have come through the medium of the senses and
[mental] faculties. But what passes in the union of the Spiritual Marriage, in the center of the soul, is very
different. This instantaneous [union] of God to the soul is so great a secret and sublime a favor, and such
delight is felt by the soul, that I do not know with what to compare it. . . .36

In the sixth mansion, Teresa says, this divine union is indeed apprehended, but only briefly and sporadically. She
likens this preliminary union to two candles joined at the ends: they then give one light, but the two candles can be
broken apart again. Not so the true Spiritual Marriage:

But here it is like rain falling from the heavens into a river or spring; there is nothing but water there and it is
impossible to divide or separate the water belonging to the river from that which fell from the heavens. Or it is
as if a tiny streamlet enters the sea, from which it will find no way of separating itself, or as if in a room there
were two large windows through which the light streamed in: it enters in different places but it all becomes
one.37

In this brief sketch, I have mentioned, but have not dwelled on the details of, the possible pathologies that beset

the transpersonal stages (four different stages, four very different types of possible pathologies). Suffice it to say that
they each involve (as always) problems of differentiation and integration at the new level, problems of agency and
communion—too much of one or the other, and a failure of balance: problems of inflating the self at that stage or
losing the self in the others of that stage (too much agency or too much communion).38

It is crucially important, then, to distinguish these new and higher pathologies—of fulcrums seven (psychic), eight
(subtle), and nine (causal)—from the lower and primitive pathologies (particularly fulcrums one, two, and three).
Teresa is positively brilliant in distinguishing the agonies of the soul in its higher mansions or stages from those
emotional problems that characterize the lower faculties. She clearly distinguishes, for example, three types of
“inner voices”—those of “the fancy” or “imagination,” which can be hallucinatory and “diseased,” she says; those
that are verbal, and may or may not represent true wisdom (for they may also be deceptive and “diseased”); and
those that are transverbal altogether, representing direct interior apprehension. She has an exquisite and precise
discriminating awareness between “fancies” and “hallucinations” and direct intuitive apprehensions, and she
explains the differences at length. She gives clear and classic phenomenological descriptions of so many of the
subtle-level apprehensions: interior illumination, sound, bliss, and understanding beyond ordinary time and place;
genuine archetypal Form as creative pattern (not mythic motif); and psychic vision giving way to pure nonverbal,
transverbal, subtle intuition; all summating in the “union of the whole soul with uncreated Spirit.”

As for the use of the term “supernatural” by certain contemplatives (both East and West), care should be taken to
differentiate what they mean by that term and what, for example, the mythic or religious literalist means by it.
Literal or mythic Christianity, for example, originating from the magic-mythic and mythic stages of development, and
beset by “mythic dissociation,” imagines God as a Cosmic Father set above and apart from nature (ontologically
divorced), and thus any action on God’s part is and must be “supernatural”—a “miraculous” suspension of the laws
of nature on behalf of “His children,” activities that are all nonetheless variations on turning spinach into potatoes.

This dissociation of “natural” and “supernatural,” and a praying, a begging, for the latter to miraculously

intervene in the former, Emerson calls “meanness and theft,” a vicious craving for commodities:

In what prayers do men allow themselves! Prayer looks abroad and asks for some foreign addition to come
through some foreign virtue, and loses itself in endless mazes of natural and supernatural, and mediatorial and
miraculous. Prayer that craves a particular commodity is vicious. [True] Prayer is the contemplation of the facts
of life from the highest point of view. It is the soliloquy of a beholding and jubilant soul. It is the spirit of God
pronouncing his works good. As soon as the man is at one with God, he will not beg. But prayer as a means to
effect a private end is meanness and theft. It supposes dualism and not a unity in nature and consciousness.39

God’s “supernatural” intervention in “nature”: this bears no relation to the contemplative view of the psychic and
subtle stages. God or Spirit is not set apart from nature, but rather is the Ground of nature, and indeed of all
manifestation—as Teresa puts it, “God is in all things by presence and power and essence.” “Supernatural,” in this
usage, simply means that the natural union of Spirit with all things becomes a conscious realization in some, and
that conscious realization is called supernatural, not because the union is present only in them and not in nature, but
because they are directly realizing it. Teresa’s spiritual friend and collaborator, the extraordinary John of the Cross,
explains it thus:

This union between God and creatures always exists. By it He conserves their being so that if the union would
end they would cease to exist [Spirit as Ground of Being]. Consequently, in discussing union with God, we are
not discussing the substantial union which is always existing, but the union and transformation of the soul in
God. This transformation is supernatural, the other natural.40

As for this inner transformation, this interior realization, Teresa speaks movingly to her sister nuns, and to us, from

the direct experience of the contemplative heart:

It becomes evident that there is “someone” in the interior of the soul who sends forth these arrows and thus
gives life to this life, and that there is a sun whence this great light proceeds, which is transmitted in the

interior part of the soul. The soul, as I said, neither moves from that center nor loses its peace; [it] leaves the
soul in a state of pure spirituality, so that it might be joined with Uncreated Spirit.

Oh, God help me! What a difference there is between hearing and believing these words and being led in
this way to realize how true they are! Each day this soul wonders more, for she feels that they have never left
her, and perceives quite clearly, in the way I have described, that They [the “true words”] are in the interior of
her heart—in the most interior place of all and in its greatest depths.41

This new depth, this new within, which is a new beyond, utterly transcends nature, utterly embraces nature, and

is thus embodied in nature, as perhaps Aurobindo explained most forcefully:

Its first effect has been the liberation of life and mind out of Matter; its last effect has been to assist the
emergence of a spiritual consciousness, a spiritual will and spiritual sense of existence in the terrestrial being
so that he is no longer solely preoccupied with his outermost life or with mental pursuits and interests, but has
learned to look within, to discover his inner being, his spiritual self, to aspire to overpass [negate and preserve]
earth and her limitations. As he grows more and more inward, his boundaries mental [noospheric], vital
[biospheric], and spiritual begin to broaden, the bonds that held life, mind, soul to their first limitations loosen
or snap, and man the mental being begins to have a glimpse of a larger kingdom of self and world closed to the
first earth-life.

If he makes the inward movement which his own highest vision has held up before him as his greatest
spiritual necessity, then he will find there in his inner being a larger consciousness, a larger life. An action from
within and an action from above can overcome the predominance of the material formula, diminish and finally
put an end to the power of the Inconscience, substitute Spirit for Matter as his conscious foundation of being
and liberate its higher powers to their complete and characteristic expression in the life of the soul embodied
in Nature.42

Which is why Teresa sings of embracing all creatures from the center of the love and joy that now overflows from
her innermost being: “These are very unskillful comparisons to represent so precious a thing, but I am not clever
enough to think out any more: the real truth is that this joy makes the soul so forgetful of itself, and of everything,
that it is conscious of nothing, and able to speak of nothing, save of that which proceeds from its joy. . . . Let us join
with this soul, my daughters all. Why should we want to be more sensible than she? What can give us greater
pleasure than to do as she does? And may all the creatures join with us for ever and ever. Amen, amen, amen.”43

And the little butterfly? What has become of her? As the ego (silkworm) died and was reborn as the soul
(butterfly), so now the soul, after traversing the psychic and subtle domains and serving its purpose well, enters
finally into its Spiritual Marriage, its own omega point, its deeper and greater context, and thus dies to its lesser
being, dies as a separate self. “For it is here,” she says softly, “that the little butterfly dies, and with the greatest joy,
because Christ is now its life.”

Which brings us to the causal.

THE CAUSAL

In the subtle level, the Soul and God unite; in the causal level, the Soul and God are both transcended in the prior
identity of Godhead, or pure formless awareness, pure consciousness as such, the pure Self as pure Spirit (Atman =
Brahman). No longer the “Supreme Union” of God and Soul, but the “Supreme Identity” of Godhead. As Meister
Eckhart put it, “I find in this breakthrough that God and I are one and the same.”

As we will see, this pure formless Spirit is said to be the Goal and Summit and Source of all manifestation. And that

is the causal.

Going within and beyond even this pure Source and pure Spirit—which is totally formless, boundless,
unmanifest—the Self/Spirit awakens to an identity with, and as, all Form, all manifestation (gross, subtle, and
causal), whether high or low, ascending or descending, sacred or profane, manifest or unmanifest, finite or infinite,
temporal or eternal. This is not a particular stage among other stages—not their Goal, not their Source, not their

Summit—but rather the Ground or Suchness or Isness of all stages, at all times, in all dimensions: the Being of all
beings, the Condition of all conditions, the Nature of all natures. And that is the Nondual.

I have chosen Meister Eckhart and Sri Ramana Maharshi to illustrate both of these “stages” (causal and nondual),
since we find in both of them not only a breakthrough to the causal, but also through the causal to the ultimate or
Nondual, and as inadequate and misleading as words here invariably are, at least an indication of these two
“movements” can be clearly and unmistakably discerned in both of these extraordinary sages.

Sri Ramana Maharshi (echoing Shankara) summarizes the “viewpoint” of the ultimate or Nondual realization:

The world is illusory;
Brahman alone is Real;
Brahman is the world.

The first two lines represent pure causal-level awareness, or unmanifest absorption in pure or formless Spirit; line
three represents the ultimate or nondual completion (the union of the Formless with the entire world of Form). The
Godhead completely transcends all worlds and thus completely includes all worlds. It is the final within, leading to a
final beyond—a beyond that, confined to absolutely nothing, embraces absolutely everything.

Eckhart begins by pointing to the need, first and foremost, for a transcendence or a “breakthrough” (a word he
coined in German) from the finite and created realm to the infinite and uncreated source or origin (the causal), a
direct and formless awareness that is without self, without other, and without God.

In the breakthrough, where I stand free of my own will and of the will of God and of all his works and of God
himself, there I am above all creatures and am neither God nor creature. Rather, I am what I was and what I
shall remain now and forever. Then I receive an impulse [awareness] which shall bring me above all the angels.
In this impulse I receive wealth so vast that God cannot be enough for me in all that makes him God, and with
all his divine works. For in this breakthrough I discover that I and God are one. There I am what I was, and I
grow neither smaller nor bigger, for I am an immovable cause that moves all things.

Therefore also I am unborn, and following the way of my unborn [unmanifest] being I can never die.

Following the way of my unborn being I have always been, I am now, and shall remain eternally.44

In order for God and the Soul to exist, there must be duality or separation between them, and this duality, says

Eckhart, obscures the primordial Godhead:

When I still stood in my first cause, there I had no God and was cause of myself. There I willed nothing, I
desired nothing, for I was a pure Being in delight of the truth. There I stood, free of God and of all things. But
when I took leave from this state and received my created being, then I had a God.45

This Godhead (or what Eckhart also calls “God beyond God”) is radically free of any finite or created thing,
whether of matter or nature or mind or visions or Soul or God. Eckhart refers to this completely transcendental, free,
or unmanifest state by words such as “Abyss,” “unborn,” “formless,” “primordial origin,” “emptiness,”
“nothingness.”

Empty yourself of everything. That is to say, empty yourself of your ego [or any sort of separate-self sense,
soul, or oversoul] and empty yourself of all things and of all that you are in yourself and consider yourself as
what you are in God. God is a being beyond being and a nothingness beyond being. Therefore, be still and do
not flinch from this emptiness.46

This “emptiness” is not a theory. Even less is it “poetry” (which I have often heard). Nor is it a philosophical
suggestion. It is a direct apprehension (direct “experience” is not quite right, since it is free of the duality of subject
and object, and since it never enters the stream of time and thus is never “experiential” in any typical sense)—free
of thoughts, free of dualities, free of time and temporal succession:

I speak therefore of a Godhead from which as yet nothing emanates and nothing moves or is thought about.
Even if the soul were to see God insofar as he is God or insofar as God can be imagined or insofar as he is a
thought, this same insufficiency would be there. But when all images of the soul are taken away and the soul
[is] only the single One, then the pure being of the soul finds resting in itself the pure, formless Being of the
divine. . . .

Neither space nor time touch this place. Nothing so much hinders the soul’s understanding of God as time
and space. Time and space are parts of the whole, but God is one. So if the soul is to recognize God, it must do
so beyond space and time. For God is neither this nor that [“neti, neti”] in the way of the manifold things of
earth, since God is one. If the soul wants to know God, it cannot do so in time. For so long as the soul is
conscious of time or space or any other [object], it cannot know God.

Know then that all our perfection and all our bliss depend on the fact that the individual goes through and
beyond all creation and all temporality and all being, and enters the foundation that is without foundation.
They must arrive at forgetfulness [of objects] and no-self consciousness—and there must be absolute silence
there and stillness.47

In this state of formless and silent awareness, one does not see the Godhead, for one is the Godhead, and
knows it from within, self-felt, and not from without, as an object. The pure Witness (which Eckhart calls “the
essence of the Subject”) cannot be seen, for the simple reason that it is the Seer (and the Seer itself is pure
Emptiness, the pure opening or clearing in which all objects, experiences, things and events arise, but which itself
merely abides). Anything seen is just more objects, more finite things, more creatures, more images or concepts or
visions, which is exactly what it is not.

It is free of all names and barren of all forms, totally free and void, just as God is void and free in himself. It is
totally one and simple, just as God is one and simple, so that we can in no manner gaze upon it [see it as an
object; it is the Seer, not anything seen; and the Seer is pure Emptiness, out of which seen objects emerge].

There the “means” is silent, for neither a creature nor an image can enter there. The soul knows in that
place neither action nor knowledge. It is not aware in that place of any kind of image, either from itself or from
any other creature.

You should love him as he is, a not-God, not-mind, not-person, not-image—even more, as he is a pure, clear
One, separate from all twoness. You should love God mindlessly, that is, so that your soul is without mind and
free from all mental activities, for as long as your soul is operating like a mind, so long does it have images and
representations. But as long as it has images, it has intermediaries, and as long as it has intermediaries, it has
neither oneness nor simplicity. And therefore your soul should be bare of all mind and should stay there
without mind.48

Following Saint Dionysius, Eckhart refers to this “mindless” or “unknowing presence,” or pure formless awareness

without mental intermediaries, as “Divine Ignorance.”

Whoever does not leave all external aspects of creatures can neither be received into this divine birth nor be
born. The more you are able to bring all your powers to a unity and a forgetfulness of all the objects and
images you have absorbed, and the more you depart from creatures and their images, the nearer and more
receptive you are. If you were able to become completely unaware of all things, attain a forgetfulness of things
and of self, the more [there is] the silent darkness where you will come to a recognition of the unknown,
transbegotten God. For this ignorance draws you away from all knowledge about things, and beyond this it
draws you away from yourself.49

Like Eckhart, Sri Ramana Maharshi, India’s greatest modern sage, begins by merely giving us some verbal pointers
and information about the Self and its relation to God (and Godhead). But he will soon, we will see, go beyond mere
chatter and point directly to the unknown and unknowing Source. So here he speaks in “positive” terms, before
drawing us into Divine Ignorance.

The Self is known to everyone but not clearly. The Being is the Self. “I am” is the name of God. Of all the
definitions of God, none is indeed so well put as the Biblical statement I AM THAT I AM. The Absolute Being is
what is—It is the Self. It is God. Knowing the Self, God is known. In fact, God is none other than the Self.50

And here Ramana clearly means “Godhead,” as he himself often pointed out: “Creation is by the entire Godhead
breaking into God and Nature.”51

As for the pure Self/Spirit or Godhead, Ramana constantly repeats, in words virtually identical to Eckhart’s (and to
the sages of this level the world over) that the Self is not body, not mind, not thought; it is not feelings, not
sensations, not perceptions; it is radically free of all objects, all subjects, all dualities; it cannot be seen, cannot be
known, cannot be thought. “In that state there is Being alone. There is no you, nor I, nor he; no present, nor past,
nor future. It is beyond time and space, beyond expression. It is ever there.”52

The Self is “not this, not that,” which in Sanskrit is the “neti, neti” I bracketed in Eckhart’s quotation. The Self is
not this, not that, precisely because it is the pure Witness of this or that, and thus in all cases transcends any this and
any that. The Self cannot even be said to be “One,” for that is just another quality, another object that is perceived
or witnessed. The Self is not “Spirit”; rather, it is that which, right now, is witnessing that concept. The Self is not the
“Witness”—that is just another word or concept, and the Self is that which is witnessing that concept. The Self is not
Emptiness, the Self is not a pure Self—and so on.

There are neither good nor bad qualities in the Self. The Self is free from all qualities. Qualities pertain to the
mind only. It is beyond quality. If there is unity, there will also be duality. The numerical one gives rise to other
numbers. The truth is neither one nor two. It is as it is.

People want to see the Self as something. They desire to see it as a blazing light, etc. But how could that be?
The Self is not light, not darkness, not any observed thing. The Self is ever the Witness. It is eternal and
remains the same all along.53

Ramana often refers to the Self by the name “I-I,” since the Self is the simple Witness of even the ordinary “I.” We
are all, says Ramana, perfectly aware of the I-I, for we are all aware of our capacity to witness in the present
moment. But we mistake the pure I-I or pure Seer with some sort of object that can be seen and is thus precisely
not the Seer or the true Self, but is merely some sort of memory or image or identity or self-concept, all of which are
objects, none of which is the Witness of objects. We identify the I-I with this or that I, and thus identified with a mere
finite and temporal object, we suffer the slings and arrows of all finite objects, whereas the Self remains ever as it is,
timeless, eternal, unborn, unwavering, undying, ever and always present.

The I-I is always there. There is no knowing it [as an object]. It is not a new knowledge acquired. The I-I is
always there.

There is no one who even for a trice fails to experience the Self. In deep sleep you exist; awake, you remain.
The same Self is in both states. The difference is only in the awareness and the non-awareness of the world.
The world rises with the mind and sets with the mind. That which rises and sets is not the Self.

The individual is miserable because he confounds the mind and body with the Self. It is the nature of the
mind to wander. But you are not the mind. The mind springs up and sinks down. It is impermanent, transitory,
whereas you are eternal. There is nothing but the Self. To abide as the Self is the thing. Never mind the mind. If
the mind’s source is sought, the mind will vanish leaving the Self unaffected.54

The “mind vanished” is, of course, Eckhart’s “mindless awareness” (and Zen’s “no-mind,” etc.). Ramana therefore
counsels us to seek the source of the mind, to look for that which is aware of the mental or personal “I,” for that is
the transpersonal “I-I,” unchanged by the fluctuations of any particular states, particular objects, particular
circumstances, particular births, particular deaths.

Tracing the source of “I,” the primal I-I alone remains over, and it is inexpressible. The seat of Realization is
within and the seeker cannot find it as an object outside him. That seat is bliss and is the core [the ultimate

depth] of all beings. Hence it is called the Heart. The mind now sees itself diversified as the universe. If the
diversity is not manifest it remains in its own essence, its original state, and that is the Heart. Entering the
Heart means remaining without distractions [objects]. The Heart is the only Reality. The mind is only a
transient phase. To remain as one’s Self is to enter the Heart.

The Self is not born nor does it die. The sages see everything in the Self. There is no diversity in it. If a man
thinks that he is born and cannot avoid the fear of death, let him find out if the Self has any birth. He will
discover that the Self always exists, that the body which is born resolves itself into thought and that the
emergence of thought is the root of all mischief. Find the source of thoughts. Then you will abide in the ever-
present inmost Self and be free from the idea of birth and the fear of death.55

As one pursues this “self-inquiry” into the source of thoughts, into the source of “I” and the “world,” one enters a
state of pure empty awareness, free of all objects whatsoever—precisely Eckhart’s “completely unaware of all
things”—which in Vedanta is known as nirvikalpa samadhi (nirvikalpa means “without any qualities or objects”). In
awareness, there is perfect clarity, perfect consciousness, but the entire manifest world (up to and including the
subtle) simply ceases to arise, and one is directly introduced to what Eckhart called “the naked existence of
Godhead.” Sri Ramana:

If you hold to the Self [remain as Witness in all circumstances], there is no second. When you see the world
you have lost hold of the Self. On the contrary, hold the Self and the world will not appear.

By unswerving vigilant constancy in the Self, ceaseless like the unbroken flow of water, is generated the
natural or changeless state of nirvikalpa samadhi, which readily and spontaneously yields that direct,
immediate, unobstructed and universal perception of Brahman, which transcends all time and space.56

For Ramana and Eckhart (and not them alone), the causal is a type of ultimate omega point (but it is not, as we will
see, the end of the story). As the Source of all manifestation, it the Goal of all development. Ramana: “This is Self-
Realization; and thereby is cut asunder the Knot of the Heart [the separate-self sense]; this is the limitless bliss of
liberation, beyond doubt and duality. To realize this state of freedom from duality is the summum bonum of life:
and he alone that has won it is a jivanmukta (the liberated one while yet alive), and not he who has merely a
theoretical understanding of the Self or the desired end and aim of all human behavior. The disciple is then enjoined
to remain in the beatitude of Aham-Brahman—‘I-I’ is the Absolute.”57

THE NONDUAL

Such is the formless causal. But the causal is not, as Eckhart put it, the “final Word.” When one breaks through the
causal absorption in pure unmanifest and unborn Spirit, the entire manifest world arises once again, but this time as
a perfect expression of Spirit and as Spirit. The Formless and the entire world of manifest Form—pure Emptiness and
the whole Kosmos—are seen to be not-two (or nondual). The Witness is seen to be everything that is witnessed, so
that, as Ramana puts it, “The object to be witnessed and the Witness finally merge together [and disappear as
separate entities] and Absolute consciousness alone reigns supreme.” But this nondual consciousness is not other
to the world: “Brahman is the World.”

This move from causal unmanifest to nondual embrace, Ramana refers to as the development from nirvikalpa to
sahaj samadhi, which means “unbroken and spontaneously so,” a “state” in which “the whole cosmos [Kosmos] is
contained in the Heart, with perfect equality of all, for grace is all-pervading and there is nothing that is not the Self.
All this world is Brahman.”58

Meister Eckhart explains both of these movements (utterly transcending the world, utterly embracing it):

First, “Be asleep to all things”: that means ignore time, creatures, images [causal]. And then you could perceive
what God works in you. That is why the soul says in the Song of Songs, “I sleep but my Heart watches.”
Therefore, if all creatures are asleep in you, you can perceive what God works in you [as Godhead].

Second: “Concern yourself with all things.” This has three meanings. That means, first, seize God in all

things, for God is in all things.

The second meaning is: “Love your neighbor as yourself.” If you love one human being more than another,
that is wrong. If you love your father and mother and yourself more than another human being, that is wrong.
And if you love your own happiness more than another’s, that is also wrong.

The third meaning is this: Love God in all things equally. For God is equally near to all creatures. And among
all these creatures God does not love any one more than any other. God is all and is one. All things become
nothing but God [Nondual].59

When all things are nothing but God, there are then no things, and no God, but only this.
No objects, no subjects, only this. No entering this state, no leaving it; it is absolutely and eternally and always
already the case: the simple feeling of being, the basic and simple immediacy of any and all states, prior to the four
quadrants, prior to the split between inside and outside, prior to seer and seen, prior to the rise of worlds, ever-
present as pure Presence, the simple feeling of being: empty awareness as the opening or clearing in which all
worlds arise, ceaselessly: I-I is the box the universe comes in.

Abiding as I-I, the world arises as before, but now there is no one to witness it. I-I is not “in here” looking “out
there”: there is no in here, no out there, only this. It is the radical end to all egocentrism, all geocentrism, all
biocentrism, all sociocentrism, all theocentrism, because it is the radical end of all centrisms, period. It is the final
decentering of all manifest realms, in all domains, at all times, in all places. As Dzogchen Buddhism would put it,
because all phenomena are primordially empty, all phenomena, just as they are, are self-liberated as they arise.

In that pure empty awareness, I-I am the rise and fall of all worlds, ceaselessly, endlessly. I-I swallow the Kosmos
and span the centuries, untouched by time or turmoil, embracing each with primordial purity, fierce compassion. It
has never started, this nightmare of evolution, and therefore it will never end.

It is as it is, self-liberated at the moment of its very arising. And it is only this.
The All is I-I. I-I is Emptiness. Emptiness is freely manifesting. Freely manifesting is self-liberating.
Zen, of course, would put it all much more simply, and point directly to just this.

Still pond
A frog jumps in
Plop!

THE END OF HISTORY

Does history, then, have a final omega point, the Omega of all previous and lesser omegas? Is there an actual End to
History as we know it? Where all beings unite in their conscious realization of Godhead? Are we all being drawn to
that “one, far-off Divine Event” that dissolves its own trail?

Many mystically inclined writers have made this assumption; it does make a certain amount of first-blush sense.
From the “Aquarian Conspiracy” to Teilhard’s “final Omega-point,” from the dawn of a “New Age” to “Timewave
Zero”—the millenarian End of History has been exuberantly announced. Such theorists as Terence McKenna and
José Arguelles have even been good enough to calculate the actual date of this final omega point, and it is December
2012—“Timewave Zero.”60

Nor, of course, is this the first time we have seen such “End of History” notions, and in chapter 2 we saw why such
notions actually make a certain amount of sense and have some degree of truth to them. To summarize that
discussion:

Every senior dimension acts as a transformative omega point for its junior dimension, exerting a palpable pull of
the deeper and wider on the shallower and narrower. A holon’s regime is the transformative omega-point for its
own growth and development, facilitated perhaps by morphic resonance from the sum total of similar forms acting
as omega. In self-transcendence, however, the emergent and senior level exerts omega pull on junior dimensions,
something that neither they themselves, nor their morphically resonating partners, could do alone.61 And short of
reaching its immediately senior omega, that lesser dimension suffers the slings and arrows of an outrageous fortune
of partialness, division, alienation. Each deeper and wider context condemns the lesser to suffering (or rather, the

narrower suffers from the boundaries of its own lacerating limitations). And evolution, in the broadest sense, is a
sensitive flight from the pain of partiality.

Each deeper and wider context in the Kosmos thus exerts an omega pull on the shallower and narrower contexts,
and when that particular wider depth is reached, that particular omega pull subsides, with the new depth finding
that it now exists in a yet-wider and yet-deeper context of its own, which now exerts an unrelenting omega force to
once again transcend, to once again embrace more of the Kosmos with care and consciousness.

In short, no holon rests happy short of finding its own immediately deeper context, its own omega point, which

means that each holon rushes to the End of its own History.

In the West, since the time of the Enlightenment, the great omega point or End of History has generally been
pictured as some form of
rationality (either formop, as in the classical Enlightenment, or vision-logic, as with
Hegel)—and modernity believed this to be the case because that was, indeed, its present state of development, to
which all
lesser occasions had pointed, and from which rationality had finally and triumphantly emerged.
“Remember the cruelties!”—Voltaire’s battle cry of the tortures that magic and mythic had inflicted on history, the
tortures of lesser omega points brutally cutting into each other in search of . . . reason.

This omega point of rationality can therefore be seen permeating the theories of virtually all developmentalists in
the wake of modernity. We see it in Freud: magical and mythic primary-process cognition gives way, after much
reluctance and turmoil, to the secondary (mature) process of rationality. We see it in Marx: rationality, as a
worldcentric mode of cognition, will, with its economic developments, overcome egocentric and ethnocentric class
divisions and usher in a true communion of equally free subjects. We see it in Piaget: preop to conop to formop, with
each previous stage suffering the limitations of its own incapacities. Kohlberg and Gilligan: egocentric to sociocentric
to worldcentric reason. Hegel: Self-positing Spirit returns to itself in the form of global Reason, the culmination of
History itself. And Habermas: mutual understanding in unrestrained communicative action unfolded by rationality is
the omega point of individual and social evolution itself.

The list is virtually endless. And, as we discussed earlier, they are all, as far as they go, essentially correct in many
important ways, and they each can teach us much about expanding the circle and the context of care. (Previously,
the mythic structure had said the same thing about itself in relation to archaic and magic: it had claimed that the
coming of the mythic God was an end to all tribal history—and that was also true enough.)

Francis Fukuyama recently caused an international sensation with the publication of The End of History, in which
he asks “whether, at the end of the twentieth century, it makes sense for us to speak of a coherent and directional
History of humankind? The answer I arrive at is yes, for two separate reasons. One has to do with economics, and
the other has to do with what is termed the ‘struggle for recognition.’”62

The “struggle for recognition” is simply the theme, developed from Hegel to Habermas to Taylor, that mutual
recognition—what we have also been calling the free exchange of mutual self-esteem among all peoples (the
emergence of the rational-egoic self-esteem needs)—is an omega point that pulls history and communication
forward toward the free emergence of that mutual recognition. Short of that emergence, history is a brutalization of
one self or group of selves trying to triumph over, dominate, or subjugate others.

When, on the other hand, human beings universally recognize each other “as beings with a certain worth or
dignity,” then history
in that sense “comes to an end because the longing that had driven the historical
process—the struggle for recognition—has been satisfied in a society characterized by universal and reciprocal
recognition. No other arrangement of human social institutions is better able to satisfy this longing, and hence no
further progressive historical change is possible.”63 The End of History.

Echoing Hegel, Fukuyama notes that “this does not mean that the natural cycle of birth, life, and death would end,
or that important events would no longer happen, or that newspapers reporting them would cease to be published.
It means, rather, that there would be no further progress in the development of underlying principles and
institutions, because all of the really big questions had been settled.”64

“The really big questions” would be settled in this sense: once we have arrived at the worldcentric rational
structures that both allow and demand (1) free and equal subjects of civil law, (2) morally free subjects, and (3)
politically free subjects as world citizens (worldcentric agents in worldcentric communions)—once we have arrived at
that, what more, specifically, could there be to do in that domain? In that domain, “the really big questions would

have been settled.” And I believe that is indeed true.

We would, of course, continue to fine-tune the ways to implement these freedoms, and help ensure their global
equity. And we might, indeed, find new freedoms, and new ways to extend the old freedoms. But these three
factors would surely form an important platform for any new developments. And to the extent that History up to
that point has been the clash of factions that refused those three factors, then this would indeed mark the End of
that History.

All of which, as I said, can be true (and is true, I think) and still leave open—and still demand—that further
historical changes are indeed possible, however much they will build upon the platform of mutual egoic self-esteem
and self-recognition—and for the simple reason that there are indeed structures of consciousness beyond the egoic,
structures that, in their own turn, exert new and subtler omega pulls on the already actualized self-esteem needs.
And these new omega pulls will most assuredly destabilize the apparently “secure” structure of universal egoic
recognition (which will be preserved, for sure . . . but also painfully negated, in the future paradigm wars set to rock
the globe).

In other words, there are indeed some more “really big questions” that would still need to be settled: History

would not have ended, only Egoic History.

Which brings us to the topic of the yet deeper or higher structures (beyond the ego), and whether the whole
developmental process will ever actually culminate in a genuine and utter End of all possible History. For that is what
is implied in the millenarian themes of Timewave Zero: the absolute Omega of all omegas, the End of all ends, the
evaporation of disunity, the disappearance of appearance into the utter Abyss, the restaurant at the end of the
universe, where the truly Last Supper will finally be served. . . .

that,

in

figure 5-1,

I

Recall

in the four quadrants up to vision-
logic/centauric/planetary, which is, as it were, the leading edge of the World Soul’s evolution at this point in time (or
so I would maintain). And thus, at this point, any higher developments, in all four quadrants, have to occur through
an individual’s own efforts (UL), evidenced in individual bodily transformations (UR), practiced in a micro-community
or sangha of the similarly depthed (LL), with its own microsocial structure (LR).

included the developments

As these higher potentials begin to emerge collectively—in the decades, centuries, millennia ahead65—we can only
guess at what the actual surface structures will be like, for none of that is predetermined. These higher structures
(psychic, subtle, causal, nondual) are simply potential worldspaces, pre-ontological worldspaces, that are given only
as potentials, not as fate.

But we do know that they are structural potentials of the human bodymind, because since its emergence in its
present form (around fifty thousand years ago), that bodymind has indeed supported realizations across the
spectrum (has supported the realizations of a Buddha, a Gaudapada, a Dame Julian, a Lady Tsogyal). In other words,
that bodymind has
supported psychic, subtle, causal, and nondual realizations; and thus, by a
reconstructive science, we know those potentials are already available. This is not an a priori Hegelian deduction; it
is an a posteriori conclusion.

already

The structural potentials are therefore available; but how they unfold will depend upon the mutual interaction
and interplay between all four quadrants—intentional, behavioral, cultural, and social—as all four continue to
evolve in history, and none of that is predetermined in any strong sense. Just as, for example, when the human
bodymind with its complex triune brain emerged in its present form (again, around fifty thousand years ago), that
brain already possessed the potential (or the hard-wiring) for symbolic logic, but that potential would have to await
cultural, social, and intentional developments before it could display its form and function, just so with the higher
potentials: how they will unfold remains to be seen. But the fact that they are there is demonstrated by the fact that
they have already unfolded in some individuals (Buddha to Krishna), and they are thus already available to any
individual, at any time, who chooses to continue his or her own evolution within and beyond.

And so the question remains: given all of that, is there still any sense in which a collective humanity would
eventually evolve into an Absolute Omega Point, a pure Christ Consciousness (or some such) for all beings? Are we
heading for the Ultimate End of History, the Omega of all omegas? Does It even exist?

And the answer is that It does exist, and we are not heading toward it. Or away from It. Or around It. Uncreate
Spirit, the causal unmanifest, is the nature and condition, the source and support, of this and every moment of

evolution. It does not enter the stream of time at a beginning or exit at the end. It upholds all times and supports all
places, with no partiality at all, and thus exerts neither push nor pull on history.

As the utterly Formless, it does not enter the stream of form at any point. And yet, as Ramana said, there is a
sense in which it is indeed the summum bonum, the ultimate Omega Point, in the sense that no finite thing will rest
short of release into this Infinity. The Formless, in other words, is indeed an ultimate Omega, an ultimate End, but an
End that is never reached in the world of form. Forms continue endlessly, ceaselessly, holarchically forever (unless
the universe collapses in on itself, retreating back along the path it came—to start anew, one presumes).

Forms continue endlessly, holarchically—holons all the way up, all the way down—the universe as a self-
reflexively infinite hall of mirrors. This is why the subtle level, which does indeed act as a manifest omega pull to its
lesser and junior dimensions, is said nonetheless to contain literally an infinite number of subtle levels within subtle
levels within subtle levels—in billions and billions of other universes!

Thus, in the world of Form, the ultimate Omega appears as an ever-receding horizon of fulfillment (the ever-
receding horizon of the totality of manifestation),66 forever pulling us forward, forever retreating itself, thus always
conferring wholeness and partialness in the same breath: the wholeness of this moment is part of the whole of the
next moment: the world is always complete and incomplete in any given moment, and thus condemned to a
fulfillment that is never fulfilled: the forms rush and run forward to a reward that retreats with the run itself.

But at any sufficiently developed point in an individual’s development, a radical leap (Eckhart’s “breakthrough”)
into the Formless can occur. The higher the development, the easier and more likely the jump will occur. Yet the
Formless itself is not the result of that jump, nor does it then come to be. It is there, from the start, as one’s own
Original Face, the Face one had before the Big Bang, the Face that looks out from each and every sentient being in
each and every universe, calling out to each and all for mutual Self-, and not just self-, recognition.

Abide as Emptiness, embrace all Form: the liberation is in the Emptiness, never finally in the Form (though never
apart from it). And thus even if I realize the summum bonum, even if I cut abruptly off the path of endless form and
find myself in the Formless, still, still, and still the world of form goes on—into the psychic, into the subtle, into the
billions and billions of universes of form available and available and available, endlessly, ceaselessly, dramatically.

Evolution seeks only this Formless summum bonum—it wants only this ultimate Omega—it rushes forward
always and solely in search of this—and it will never find it, because evolution unfolds in the world of form. The
Kosmos is driven forward endlessly, searching in the world of time for that which is altogether timeless. And since it
will never find it, it will never cease the search. Samsara circles endlessly, and that is always the brutal nightmare
hidden in its heart.

And the twenty tenets are the form and function, the structure and the pattern, of this endless dream.

BOOK TWO

Among the cultural inventions of mankind there is a treasury of devices, techniques, ideas, procedures, and
so on, that cannot exactly be reactivated, but at least constitute, or help constitute, a certain point of view
which can be very useful as a tool for analyzing what’s going on now—and to change it.

—MICHEL FOUCAULT

Some have declared that it lies within our choice to gaze upon a world of even greater wonder and beauty.
It is said by these that the experiments of the mystics are related to the transmutation of the entire
Universe. This method, or art, or science, or whatever we choose to call it (supposing it to exist, or to have
existed), is simply concerned to restore the delights of Paradise; to enable men and women, if they will, to
inhabit a world of joy and splendour. It is perhaps possible that there is such an experiment, and that there
are some who have made it.

—HAMPOLE

9

The Way Up Is the Way Down

The safest general characterization of the whole Western philosophic tradition is that it consists of a series
of footnotes to Plato.

—ALFRED NORTH WHITEHEAD

But this much at any rate I can affirm about any present or future writers who pretend to knowledge of the
matters with which I concern myself [mystical knowledge of the One]; in my judgement it is impossible that
they should have any understanding of the subject. It is not something that can be put into words like other
branches of learning; only after long partnership in a common life [contemplative community] devoted to
this very thing does truth flash upon the soul, like a flame kindled by a leaping spark. No treatise by me
concerning it exists or ever will exist.

—PLATO, Seventh Epistle

IT HAS ALWAYS struck me as odd that so much of our Western tradition is supposed to be a series of footnotes to Plato,

and yet the crucial book to which we are all footnotes . . . was never written. “No treatise by me concerning it exists
or ever will exist.”

Scholars generally agree that Plato was here referring to the mystical knowledge of the One, the Good “beyond
Being” (as Plato also calls it). There, apparently, was the heart of the Platonic message, and yet
that he never
committed to print (whereas he had no trouble writing volumes on ethics, on the archetypal Forms, epistemology,
politics, love, and so forth).

But on that central point, Plato was silent, as silent he could only be. That “knowledge” or “divine ignorance” is
not verbal but transverbal; it is not of the mind but of “no-mind”; it is not part of a “discursive philosophy” or merely
“talking religion” but a “contemplative flash of truth in the soul.” And while this truth or sudden illumination can be
directly and injunctively shown (by long contemplative practice in community, as Plato put it), it cannot be fully
said or verbally passed on (without the corresponding developmental signified in any individual). The true footnotes
on that knowledge would be merely a series of empty circles and fingers pointing to the moon.

I would like to pursue this legacy of Plato for several reasons. One is that, if Western civilization is a series of

footnotes to Plato, the footnotes are fractured.

Another is that we see in Plato one of the first clear descriptions of two movements related to the unspoken One,
or two “movements” related to Spirit itself (to the extent it can be verbalized at all). The first movement is a descent
of the One into the world of the Many, a movement that actually creates the world of the Many, blesses the Many
and confers Goodness on all of it: Spirit immanent in the world. The other is the movement of return or ascent
from the Many to the One, a process of remembering or recollecting the Good: Spirit transcendent to the world.

For, as we will see, while Plato emphasized both movements, Western civilization has been a battle royale
between these two movements, between those who wanted only to live in “this world” of Manyness and those who
wanted to live only in the “other world” of transcendent Oneness—both of them equally and catastrophically
forgetting the unifying Heart, the unspoken Word, that integrates both Ascent and Descent and finds Spirit both

transcending the Many and embracing the Many.

In Plato, as we will see in a moment, the two movements are given equal emphasis and equal importance,
because both were grounded in the unspoken One of sudden illumination. But when that unifying One is forgotten,
then the two movements fall apart into warring opposites, into ascetic and repressive Ascenders, on the one hand,
who seem willing to destroy “this world” (of nature, body, senses) in favor of anything they imagine as an “other
world”; and, on the other hand, the shadow-hugging Descenders, who fuss about in the world of time looking for the
Timeless, and who, in trying to turn the finite realm into an infinite value, end up distorting “this world” as horribly
as do the Ascenders, precisely because they want from “this world” something that it could never deliver: salvation.

These two strategies—denying creation, seeing only creation, the Ascenders and the Descenders—have been the
two main forms of fractured footnotes to Plato that have plagued Western civilization for two thousand years, and it
is with these fractured footnotes that the West (and not it alone) has deeply and cruelly carved its initials on the
innocent face of Heaven and of Earth.

And finally, I want to examine Plato’s legacy because it is in these two movements—the One descending into the
Many, the Many ascending back to the One—that we will find some of the last clues we need to understand the
masculine and feminine faces of God, if such indeed exist.

THE TWO LEGACIES OF PLATO

Arthur Lovejoy, in his highly acclaimed book The Great Chain of Being, has brilliantly traced out these two opposite
and conflicting legacies of Plato—the Descending and the Ascending—which we may also call the “manyness
strategy” and the “oneness strategy.” The former emphasizes the created world of manyness, the latter the
uncreated source or origin—and both, taken in and by themselves, are dualistic through and through, no matter how
much they might call themselves monistic, nondual, all-encompassing, holistic, and whatnot.

Drawing on Lovejoy,1 but not confined to his interpretations, I would like to trace out the history of this dualism,
the dualism of which all other Western dualisms are merely an incidental subset, and the dualism that, in just recent
times, is showing signs of being overcome.

Most people tend to remember “Plato the Ascender,” striving for the “other world” of eternal oneness, and
“ignoring” the temporal world of the created many, the mere shadows in the Cave. And, indeed, Plato clearly maps
out the Ascending path from the Many to the One. In treatises such as The Republic and The Symposium, Plato
traces the journey of the soul from its infatuation with the material realm of the immediate senses, through the
mental realm of higher Forms, to a spiritual immersion in the eternal and unspoken One.

In this Ascent, it certainly appears that Plato is describing—and it is quite certain that his Neoplatonic successors
were describing—the general movement that we have called the evolution or development from matter to body to
mind to soul to spirit, culminating in the Good “beyond Being” disclosed in “sudden illumination,” which is both the
summit and the goal of the soul’s journey in time. As Lovejoy puts it, “The Good is the universal object of desire,
that which draws all souls toward itself [ultimate Omega]; and the chief good for man even in this life is nothing but
the contemplation of this absolute or essential Good.”2

This Good transcends all possible manifestation—Plato even says “it actually transcends existence. . . . The whole
soul must be wheeled round from that which is subject to becoming [the entire world of time and manifestation]
until it is able to endure the contemplation of that which is . . .” (The Republic).

Plato refers to this “contemplation of that which is” as being “the Spectator of all time and existence”—a pure
Spectator (Witness) which is itself “not this, not that.” Whatever metaphoric or mythic or positive attributes Plato
occasionally assigned to the Absolute, there can be little doubt that what he finally had in mind was “neti, neti,” or
pure transcendental (formless) awareness, the summit and source of all being, and about which, strictly speaking,
not even that could be said, as Lovejoy makes very clear:

The interpreters of Plato in both ancient and modern times have endlessly disputed over the question whether
the absolute Good was for him identical with the conception of God.
ens
perfectissimum, the summit of the hierarchy of being, the ultimate and only completely satisfying object of

If [God] be taken for the

contemplation, there can be little doubt that the Idea of the Good was the God of Plato; and there can be
none that it became the God of Aristotle, and of most of the philosophic theologies of the Middle Ages, and of
nearly all the modern Platonizing poets and philosophers.

The attributes of God were, in strictness, expressible only in negations of the attributes of this world. You
could take, one after another, any quality or relation or kind of object presented in natural experience, and
say, with the Sage in the Upanishad: “The true reality is not this, it is not that. . . .”3

Lovejoy, to his great credit, states clearly that Plato’s unspoken One is not primarily a philosophical theory or
argument; it is not poetry or myth; and it is not, in the last analysis, a rational argument for Forms—it is a direct
mystical experience (Lovejoy calls it a “natural religious experience”), cultivated in contemplation among the like-
spirited and transmitted directly from teacher to student “like a flame kindled by a leaping spark,” as Plato said.

Taken in and by itself, this Ascending side of Plato deals, I have suggested, with a mystical or transcendent
awareness “beyond Being,” beyond manifestation, beyond all qualities (causal/formless), and next to which the
entire manifest world appears a shadow, a copy, an illusion. And, indeed, Plato saw the entire manifest world as a
pale image of a Reality and Light beyond the Cave of Shadows, the Cave in which the troglodytes are chained, the
Cave of fleeting sensory impressions and fluctuating mental opinions.

All Truth, all Goodness, all Beauty was to be found, finally and fully, only in the contemplative absorption in the
eternal and unspoken One. No other release is possible; no other release can be desired; and those without this
sudden illumination, Plato tells us, are forever lost in the suffering and turmoil of the fleeting and finite and temporal
world. No matter how much “beauty” or “joy” or “wonderment” we might find in the manifest realm, it remains only
a shadow (Emerson’s “symbol”) of the Beauty beyond, which is revealed in direct contemplative experience and
confirmed by all who have the eyes to see.

This Ascending aspect of Plato, in other words, can be fairly well indicated in the standard realization of causal-
level awareness wherever it is found: “The world is illusory (shadowy); Brahman alone is real.” Put otherwise: flee
the Many, find the One.

And thus was set the standard Ascending Goal of Western civilization. It would become the God of Aristotle and of
Augustine, and therefore of virtually all of Christianity, both in popular and esoteric forms (Eastern, Roman, and
Protestant). It would become the Goal of the Gnostics and Manichaeists, so much so that any trace of the finite and
shadowy world was equated flat-out with evil. And when religion itself became passé, the same Goal simply jumped
to the Age of Enlightenment, and continued in unabated and undented fashion its ever-ascending yearnings for the
light. And for those who found Reason obnoxious, it would nevertheless equally and just as intensely fire every
poetic and artistic imagination that found life as given unbearable and eternity a release.

We will return to this history in a moment, but such have been the Ascenders, in just a few of their many guises.
But the absolutely crucial point is that that was only half of what Plato set in motion. “Now if Plato had stopped
here,” says Lovejoy, “the subsequent history of Western thought would, it can hardly be doubted, have been
profoundly different from what it has been.” Indeed, most of Plato’s critics—or rather, those who see him merely as
an Ascender, and those who decry his “otherworldliness”—seem to think that he actually did stop here. “But,”
Lovejoy points out, “the most notable—and the less noted—fact about his historic influence is that he did not
merely give to European otherworldliness its characteristic form and phraseology and dialectic, but that he also gave
the characteristic form and phraseology and dialectic to precisely the contrary tendency—to a peculiarly exuberant
kind of this-worldliness.”4

This “exuberant this-worldliness” is what so many of Plato’s ecological critics have missed. They set up a straw
Plato and then triumphantly, boisterously knock it down, and all congratulate themselves on their this-worldly
victory. But Plato is not so easily manhandled.

For his own philosophy no sooner reaches its climax in what we may call the otherworldly direction
[Ascending] than it reverses course. Having arrived at the conception [the “natural religious experience”] of a
pure perfection alien to all the categories of ordinary thought and in need of nothing external to itself [causal
awareness], he forthwith finds in just this transcendent and absolute Being the necessitating ground of this
world; and he does not stop short of the assertion of the necessity and worth of the existence of all

conceivable kinds of finite, temporal, imperfect, and corporeal beings.5

The manifest realm, far from being a world of shadows in the Cave, is now seen as the realm and very
embodiment of the Radiance of Spirit itself, suffused with Goodness and with Love. “The world of sense could no
longer be adequately described as an idle flickering of insubstantial shadow-shapes, at two removes from both the
Good and the Real. Not only did the Sun itself [the causal One] produce cave, and fire, and moving shapes, and the
shadows, and their beholders, but in doing so it manifested a property of its own nature not less essential—and, as
might well appear, even more excellent—than that pure radiance upon which no earthly eye could steadfastly gaze.
The shadows were as needful to the Sun as the Sun to the shadows; their existence was the very consummation of
its perfection.”6

And thus their existence was cause for an exuberant this-worldly celebration and embrace!
And so, after establishing an ascending “return to the One,” Plato then sets forth a genuinely creation-centered
spirituality, an effulgence and embrace of the radiant splendor of the Many. The purely Ascended One, far from
being a complete Perfection in itself, is viewed as decidedly inferior to a One that also flows out of itself and into all
manifestation, into all creation. Indeed, for Plato, an Absolute that cannot create is no Absolute at all, and thus true
Perfection means a Perfection whose superabundance flows out and into all beings without exception.

In the Timaeus—the book that would have such a singular impact on all subsequent Western cosmologies—Plato
traces out the creative superabundance and overflowing of the One through a creator God and world of archetypal
Forms into humans (mind) and then other living creatures (body) and the world of physical existence (matter).

Thus, as the Neoplatonists would spell it out: from spirit to soul to mind to body to matter—each level is said to be
an outflowing of its senior dimension, so that the One Source and Ground of all is reflected in each, to its own
degree. The entire universe Plato therefore likens to a giant “superorganism,” with all parts interwoven with one
another and with their eternal Ground (Plato being an articulate spokesman for Gaia). The entire manifest
world—this world—Plato calls a “visible, sensible God.”

Thus, Plato’s Self-Sufficing Perfection is also, and at the same time, a Self-Emptying Fecundity. It is not only the
summit and goal of ascent, it is the source and origin and fundamental reality of all descent, of all manifestation,
of all creation. As Lovejoy puts it, “A timeless and incorporeal One became the ground as well as the dynamic source
of the existence of a temporal and material and extremely multiple and variegated universe.”7

And, Plato leaves no doubt whatsoever, this Spirit-in-Creation (or One-in-Many) is much more complete and full
and perfect, as it were, than unmanifest Spirit alone. He implies, and on occasion actually states, that the merely
unmanifest Spirit (causal) is in a type of tension or “envy” with manifestation, and that this tension is overcome only
as it is seen that all of manifestation, of every possible type and degree in every possible world—all of it is the
Radiance of Spirit.

So there is Plato’s final stance, and he means it in a very strong way: Spirit is more perfect in the world than out
of it. Thus the completion, the all-necessary third line of Nondual realization: “Brahman is the world” (or again,
“Nirvana and samsara are not two”).

And so it was that Plato at this point united or integrated the path of Ascent with the path of Descent, giving an
equal emphasis to the One and to the Many, to nirvana and to samsara. Or, as Lovejoy puts it, “the two originally
distinct strains in Plato’s thought are here fused.”8

We can therefore summarize Plato’s overall position in words that would apply to any Nondual stance wherever it
appears (as we have already seen it apply to Eckhart and Ramana): flee the Many, find the One; having found the
One, embrace the Many as the One.

Or, in short: Return to One, embrace Many. The exuberant and loving and unconditional embrace of the Many is
the fruition and consummation of the Perfection of the One, and without which the One remains dualistic,
fractured, “envious.”9

This integration may be thought of (very crudely and, as always, somewhat misleadingly) as a Great Circle. The
descending or manifesting or creative path moves from the top of the circle to the bottom, and the ascending or
returning path from the bottom to the top—both arcs traversing the same dimensions—which is why, as we will see,
“The way up is the way down.”

Thus, Descent is not bad, unless taken in and by itself; on the contrary, it is the Creative Source and Matrix of all
that is and the fruition of Perfection itself. Likewise, Ascent is not bad, unless taken in and by itself; on the contrary,
it is the realization of the Summit and Goal of all that is. The point, we might say, is that the circle of Ascending and
Descending energies must always be unbroken: “this world” and the “other world” united in one ongoing,
everlasting, exuberant embrace.

WISDOM AND COMPASSION

The Platonic and Neoplatonic traditions (and similar Nondual traditions in the East) therefore maintained that the
“Good” or Perfect One is expressed in and as the “Goodness” of all creation. Those two terms—the “Good” and
“Goodness”—are extremely important, because we will see these actual terms repeated again and again in
subsequent history: The path of Ascent is the path of the Good; the path of Descent is the path of Goodness.

Indeed, wherever the Nondual traditions would appear—traditions uniting and integrating the Ascending and
Descending paths, in the East and in the West—we find a similar set of themes expressed so constantly as to border
on mathematical precision. From Tantra to Zen, from the Neoplatonists to Sufism, from Shaivism to Kegon, stated in
a thousands different ways and in a hundred different contexts, nonetheless the same essential word would ring out
from the Nondual Heart: the Many returning to and embracing the One is Good, and is known as wisdom; the One
returning to and embracing the Many is Goodness, and is known as compassion.

Wisdom knows that behind the Many is the One. Wisdom sees through the confusion of shifting shapes and
passing forms to the groundless Ground of all being. Wisdom sees beyond the shadows to the timeless and formless
Light (in Tantra, the self-luminosity of Being). Wisdom, in short, sees that the Many is One. Or, as in Zen, wisdom or
prajna
sees that Form is Emptiness (the “solid” and “substantial” world of phenomena is really fleeting,
impermanent, insubstantial—“like a bubble, a dream, a shadow,” as The Diamond Sutra puts it). Wisdom sees that
“this world is illusory; Brahman alone is real.”

But if wisdom sees that the Many is One, compassion knows that the One is the Many; that the One is expressed
equally in each and every being, and so each is to be treated with compassion and care, not in any condescending
fashion, but rather because each being, exactly as it is, is a perfect manifestation of Spirit. Thus, compassion sees
that the One is the Many. Or, as in Zen, compassion or karuna sees that Emptiness is Form (the ultimate empty
Dharmakaya is not other to the entire world of Form, so that prajna or wisdom is the birth of the Bodhisattva and
karuna or compassion is the motivation of the Bodhisattva). Compassion sees that “Brahman is the world,” and that,
as Plato put it, the entire world is a “visible, sensible God.”

And it was further maintained, in East and West alike, that the integration of Ascent and Descent is the union of
wisdom (which sees that Many is One) and compassion (which sees that One is Many). The love we have for the One
is extended equally to the Many, since they are ultimately not-two, thus uniting wisdom and compassion in every
moment of perception. (This is the secret of all tantric spirituality, whether of the East or of the West, as we will see
in volume 2.)

We will be going over these details as we proceed; for now, the essential point is simply that either the Ascending
or Descending path, taken in and by itself, is catastrophic. Start with Descent or Outflow or Effulgence: creation is
not a sin, creation is not evil (as the Ascenders, the Gnostics, the Manichaeists, the Theravadins would all
maintain)—creation is not a sin, getting lost in creation is. For at that point, the creatures that express the final
perfection of Spirit now become merely the shadows in the Cave obscuring Spirit.

In Plato’s version: the soul, once having been grounded in the radiant glories of the unspoken One, “falls away”
from the One, through the mental Forms or archetypes and into the material and bodily realm of the senses, and
finds itself there, so to speak, lost and confused. In the Phaedrus, Socrates speaks of the soul (“uncreate and
immortal”) as a “winged charioteer” that “taken as a whole . . . traverses the entire universe [Kosmos]; when it is
winged and perfect it moves on high and governs all creation.” “The region of which I speak,” he says, “is the abode
of the reality with which true knowledge is concerned, a reality without color or shape, intangible but utterly real,
apprehensible only by the pilot of the soul.”10 Here souls can make the “circular revolution” through all of
manifestation and “back to the starting point” without being caught in it, lost in it, bound by it. And the “two horses”

of the chariot—vitality and appetite (representing the body)—are given “ambrosia” and “nectar” to drink—these
horses (the body) are no impediment to salvation at all.

But some souls get “carried away,” not by the body or the two horses, but by an imbalance or unruliness between
the horses and the charioteer (the soul), and the fault lies squarely with the charioteer. They begin to “see parts, but
not the whole,” Socrates says. “Great is the confusion and struggle and sweat, and many souls are lamed and many
have their wings all broken through the feebleness of their charioteers.” If the soul can retain its vision of eternal
Truth, then, Socrates says, “it can remain unscathed, and if it can continue thus for ever shall be for ever free from
hurt”—free, we might say, from the suffering of the round of birth and death, which Socrates speaks of at length
(“the great circuit of past lives”).

“But when a soul fails to follow and misses the vision, [it] sinks beneath the burden of forgetfulness. . . .” And it is
this forgetfulness of the Origin, and not the existence of manifestation, that constitutes the Fall. “Every human soul
by its very nature has beheld true Being. . . . Beauty was once ours to see in all its brightness. Whole were we who
celebrated that festival, and whole and unspotted and serene were the objects [creation itself] revealed to us in the
light of that mystic vision. Pure was the light and pure were we. . . .”11

The Fall is reversed, then, not by erasing creation, but by reversing our forgetfulness, of both the Good of the pure
One and the Goodness of the unstained Many. Recollection (or remembrance of Source) is thus the path of Return,
the path of Ascent. “But,” says Socrates, “it is not every soul that finds it easy to use its present experience [which is
a direct radiance of Spirit] as a means of recollecting the world of reality. It is only by the right use of such aids to
recollection, which form a continual initiation into the perfect mystic vision, that a man can become perfect in the
true sense of the word.” Not only is creation not the cause of the Fall, it is the continual
initiation into the perfect
Redemption.

In other words, this world is not a sin; forgetting that “this world” is the radiance and Goodness of Spirit—there

is the sin.

It is not my intention in these sections to give extensive cross-cultural references to the same themes, but perhaps
we should at least notice that, in the East “recollection” or smriti, “mindfulness,” is the beginning of virtually all
paths of contemplation, the aim of which is the remembering that one’s true nature is Buddha-nature, that Atman
is Brahman. And this is most definitely said to be a remembering or a recognition or a recollection of that which one
already is, but has simply forgotten or ignored (avidya = “ignorance,” “forgetting”). Enlightenment or awakening
(bodhi, moksha) is not a bringing into being of that which was not, but a realizing of that which always already is.
(“Do not pretend that by meditation you are going to become Buddha,” says Huang Po. “You have always been
Buddha but have forgotten that simple fact. Hard is the meaning of this saying!”) Likewise, Christ’s injunction, “Do
this in remembrance of me,” is a remembrance that “not I but Christ liveth in me” (yet another version of Atman =
Brahman).

As Philosophia said to Boethius in his distress, “You have forgotten who you are.”

EROS AND THANATOS

That which was dis-membered must be re-membered. This re-membering or re-collecting or re-uniting is the Path of
Ascent, which, Socrates says, is driven by Eros, by Love, by the finding of greater and greater union—a higher and
wider identity, as we have been putting it. By means of Eros, says Socrates, the lovers are taken out of themselves
and into a larger union with the beloved, and this Eros continues from the objects of the body to the mind to the
soul, until the final Union is re-collected and remembered.

Eros, as Socrates (Plato) uses the term, is essentially what we have been calling self-transcendence (tenet 2c), the
very motor of Ascent or development or evolution: the finding of ever-higher self-identity with ever-wider embrace
of others. And the opposite of that was regression or dissolution, a move downward to less unity, more
fragmentation (what we called the self-dissolution factor, tenet 2d).

And here I will give one last comparison: Freud, it is well known, finally came to see all psychic life governed by
two opposing “forces”—Eros and Thanatos, which are usually referred to as sex and aggression, although that is not
the final way that Freud defined them. In An Outline of Psychoanalysis Freud gives his final statement: “After long

hesitancies and vacillations, we have decided to assume the existence of only two basic instincts, Eros and the
destructive instinct. The aim of the first of these basic instincts is to establish ever greater unities—in short, to bind
together.” There is no mistaking the meaning of that: it is pure Eros. “The aim of the second is, on the contrary, to
undo connections and so to destroy things. In the case of the destructive instinct we may suppose that its final aim is
to lead what is living into an inorganic state [matter]. For this reason we also call it the death instinct.”

Freud, of course, was severely criticized by virtually everybody, including his own followers, for proposing the
death instinct (thanatos), but clearly it is exactly what we have in mind with the self-dissolution factor. It is simply
the impulse to move to a lower level in the holarchy, and its final aim is therefore insentient matter, exactly as Freud
said.

But the only point that I wish to emphasize is that even Freud—one of the West’s greatest psychologists, and
certainly its arch-antimystic—found that human misery could be reduced to a battle and disharmony between the
Path of Ascent and the Path of Descent, as it appears in each of us. As is well known, Freud found no solution to the
discontent, and remained profoundly pessimistic about the human condition.

Precisely because Freud did not, like Plato, carry Ascent to its conclusion in the One, he had no way whatsoever to
unite it with a radiant Descent into the Many. No way, that is, to unite Eros and Thanatos—to unite the way up and
the way down—to overcome their eternal strife.12 Freud clearly and accurately saw Eros; he clearly and accurately
saw Thanatos; and perhaps more clearly than anybody in history, he saw that so much human misery is and always
will be a battle between the two, and that the only solution to our suffering is a union of Eros and Thanatos—and yet
there is precisely nothing Freud could do about it. There he was stranded, and there he left us stranded.

Lacking the unifying Heart, the unspoken One, that joins Ascent and Descent in the everlasting Circle of
Redemption and Embrace, Freud simply remained as one of the many, and certainly one of the greatest, of the
fractured footnotes to Plato.

PLOTINUS

From Plato the torch of nonduality, the integrative vision, still intact, passed most notably to Plotinus (205–270 CE),
who gave it one of the most complete, most compelling, most powerful statements to be found anywhere, at any
time, in any form, ancient or modern, East or West. “No other mystical thinker,” says William Inge, “even approaches
Plotinus in power and insight and profound spiritual penetration.” Even Saint Augustine stood back in awe: “The
utterance of Plato, the most pure and bright in all philosophy, scattering the clouds of error, has shone forth most of
all in Plotinus, who has been deemed so like his master that one might think them contemporaries, if the length of
time between them did not compel us to say that in Plotinus Plato lived again.”

Whereas other Platonic teachers were often referred to as “divine,” the superlative “most divine” was always
reserved for Plotinus. And even if we are one of the many moderns to whom “divine” is meaningless, then we still
have to come to terms with the fact that, as Whittaker put it, Plotinus is “the greatest individual thinker between
Aristotle and Descartes,” and that, according to Benn, “no other thinker has ever accomplished a revolution so
immediate, so comprehensive, and of such prolonged duration.”13

Besides being a profoundly original philosopher and contemplative sage, Plotinus was a synthesizing genius of
unparalleled proportion, and therein lies much of his importance. Born in Egypt at the beginning of the third century
(nobody knows where, exactly, and he never said), he spent much of his formative years in Alexandria, studying with
his main teacher, the remarkable Ammonius Saccas (“This is the man I was looking for,” he exclaimed after hearing
his first lecture; he stayed with him for ten years). From there he went to Rome, where the emperor Gallienus and
his wife, Salonina, showed him great favor, and there he taught for the rest of life, attracting such disciples as
Amelius and Porphyry (the great Proclus would eventually carry on the lineage). “Simple in his habits,” says
Porphyry, “though without any harsh asceticism, he won all hearts by his gentle and affectionate nature [this
apparently is no exaggeration, for during his entire time in Rome, he made no known enemies, an almost impossible
feat], and his sympathy with all that is good and beautiful in the world. His countenance, naturally handsome,
seemed to radiate light and love when he discoursed with his friends.”14

Plotinus, by his own account, had numerous profound experiences of the “all-transcending, all-pervading

Godhead,”15 and this, of course, was the central pillar of his teaching, along with specific contemplative practices
(injunctions) to actualize this realization in one’s own case. In addition to recollection or contemplation (going within
and beyond), he describes what amounts to a type of karma yoga like that of the Bhagavad Gita: grounded in Unity,
do your duty, and do so in a thoroughly “this-worldly” fashion. Karl Jaspers writes that “he was called upon as an
arbiter in quarrels, but never had an enemy. Distinguished men and women on the point of death brought him their
children to educate and entrusted him with their fortunes to administer. Consequently, his house was full of boys
and girls.”

A house full of orphaned children? And this is the man about whom Jaspers says, very accurately and with much
admiration, “No philosopher has lived more in the One than Plotinus”! Clearly, when Plotinus said that the true One
embraces the Many, he meant it.

While Plotinus was visiting a country house in Campania, fatal symptoms appeared, and his friend and physician
Eustochius was sent for, which apparently took a bit of time, for when Eustochius finally arrived, Plotinus said only, “I
was waiting for you, before that which is divine in me departs to unite itself with the Divine in the universe,”
whereupon he closed his eyes and ceased breathing.

Alexandria of the third century was extraordinary for the cross-currents of intellectual, philosophical, and spiritual
teachings that poured in, literally, from all over the world—there has probably been nothing else quite like it in the
history of the West. Clement and Origen (arguably the two most important of the early Church Fathers) were fellow
townsmen of Plotinus. In Alexandria, one had direct access to at least the following teachers or their schools: the
Goddess cult of Isis, Mithra worship, Plutarch (eclectic Platonism), the Neo-Pythagoreans, the Orphic-Dionysian
mysteries, Apollonius of Tyana, the extraordinary Jewish mystic Philo, Manichaeanism, the all-important Stoics,
Numenius, the great African novelist Apuleius, much of the Hermetic writings, the Magi, Brahmanic Hinduism, early
Buddhism, and virtually every variety of Gnosticism (which had originated in Syria, and eventually found its greatest
proponent in Valentinus)—not to mention two of the most important founders of Christianity.

It is only a slight exaggeration to say that Plotinus took the best elements from each school and jettisoned the rest
(in fact, at age thirty-nine, he deliberately joined Emperor Gordianus’s Eastern campaign in order to familiarize
himself with whatever wisdom traditions he might find); and, based on his own profound contemplative
experiences, fashioned the whole thing into what can only be called an awesome vision, as coherent as it is
beautifully compelling.

(Even Bertrand Russell, fairly jaded in all things spiritual, maintained that we could judge a philosopher according
to the True, or the Good, or the Beautiful. The True belonged, presumably, to Bertrand; the Good belonged, he said,
to Spinoza. But the Beautiful . . . ah, the Beautiful, that belonged to Plotinus.)

It is with Plotinus that the Great Holarchy of Being receives its first comprehensive presentation, although the
notion itself, of course, goes back directly to Plato and Aristotle (and earlier). In this chapter I have been using the
simple matter-body-mind-soul-spirit, but figure 9-1 is a more complete version of the holarchy as given by Plotinus.
All of the words used in figure 9-1, including those in parentheses (but not in brackets), are taken directly from
William Inge. And let me repeat that although we have to write these “levels” down in a “linear” fashion, a better
representation might be a series of concentric spheres, expanding and enveloping, and that development through
the “expanding spheres” is not a linear or unidirectional affair, but may best be represented as, say, a spiral
staircase, with all sorts of ups and downs, but an overall and unmistakable direction: transcend and embrace. All of
these ideas, we will see, are strongly emphasized in Plotinus.

Absolute One (Godhead)
Nous (Intuitive Mind) [subtle]
Soul/World-Soul [psychic]
Creative Reason [vision-logic]
Logical Faculty [formop]
Concepts and Opinions
Images
Pleasure/pain (emotions)
Perception

Satchitananda/Supermind (Godhead)
Intuitive Mind/Overmind
Illumined World-Mind
Higher-mind/Network-mind
Logical mind
Concrete mind [conop]
Lower mind [preop]
Vital-emotional; impulse
Perception

Sensation
Vegetative life function
Matter
PLOTINUS

Sensation
Vegetative
Matter (physical)
AUROBINDO

Figure 9-1. The Great Holarchy according to Plotinus and Aurobindo16

For comparison, I have included the developmental holarchy as given by Sri Aurobindo, generally regarded as the
greatest synthesizer of the philosophies and psychologies of India (all of the words are Aurobindo’s, including those
in parentheses but not brackets). That the greatest synthesizers of the West and the East are in such fundamental
agreement is, I think, no real surprise.

The higher stages (psychic, subtle, and causal/ultimate) in both Plotinus and Aurobindo are essentially as I
described them in the previous chapter. We might simply note, for Plotinus, that in the subtle level (Nous or God),
“In knowing God, spirit knows itself” and we find “ourselves and the whole one with God.” But that union only finds
its ground in the causal Godhead “beyond existence and beyond knowledge.” To reach this formless state, says
Plotinus, “Strip thyself of everything. We must not be surprised that that which excites the keenest of longings is
without any form, even spiritual form.”17

This emptying of self and objects (and even of spiritual form) results, once again, in formless (nirvikalpa) samadhi,
as Inge words it, “the mystical experience of formless intuition.” “The Soul,” as Plotinus puts it, “will not allow itself
to be distracted by anything external [any object], but will ignore them all, as at first by not [getting lost in] them,
and then at last by not even seeing them [unmanifest absorption]; it will not even know itself; and so it will abide as
the One.”18

But this “divine darkness” or “unknowingness” is not a blank state or trance, not a loss of consciousness but an
intensification of it. “The One in Plotinus,” says Inge, “is not unconscious, but superconscious; not infra-rational but
supra-rational.” Plotinus himself seems to have clearly in mind (or in no-mind) that ever-wakeful awareness or
Witness that is present even in dream and deep sleep: he says that all objects, even spiritual Beauty, “parade by in
front of it,” but that it itself remains a “wakefulness beyond Being,” a “sleepless light” which “is inborn and present
to us even when we sleep,” and “directed not on the future but on the present, or rather, on the eternal Now and
the always present.” We cannot see it as an object because there is no duality here—“it is not an object but an
atmosphere.”19

The One is not a numerical one, as so many of Plotinus’s interpreters imagine. As he patiently but dryly puts it,
“the One is not one of the units that make up the number two.” To say that “the whole world is one and undivided”
would be to miss the point entirely, for that itself is merely a concept, and a dualistic concept at that. The “real” One
is the ever-present Wakefulness that is aware of any concept, including “One,” but is not itself that or any other
image, thought, or object, but embraces all, equally and fully, with ever-present Wakefulness.

And thus (to lapse back into language) this “One,” being Nothing in itself, can be, and is, the Ground of all that
arises. Plotinus speaks of it (metaphorically) as “the fountain of life and the fountain of God, the source of Being, the
cause of the Good, the root of Soul. These flow out of the One, but not in such a way as to diminish it.”20
Wakefulness is wakefulness, no matter what “parades by,” and so Wakefulness is never diminished by any object
that it witnesses, and yet is never apart from what it witnesses either, just as the reflections on an empty mirror are
never apart from it.

And thus Plotinus can easily make the nondual leap: “Spirit not only engenders all things; it is all things”21 (the all-
important third line of the Nondual realization: the Many are illusory; the One alone is Real; the One is the
Many—Brahman is the World). Which brings him right back to the unconditional embrace of this and any world, and
a houseful of wayward orphans.

Scholars usually take Plotinus’s system (and Aurobindo’s and all such similar transpersonal holarchies) to be
primarily a form of philosophy or “metaphysics”: the various levels, particularly the higher ones, are imagined to be
some sort of theoretical constructs that are deduced, logically, or postulated, speculatively, to account for existence
and manifestation.

But in fact these systems are, through and through, from top to bottom, the results of actual contemplative
apprehensions and direct developmental phenomenology. The higher levels of these systems cannot be experienced
or deduced rationally, and nobody from Plotinus to Aurobindo thinks they can. However, after the fact of direct
and repeated experiential disclosures, they can be rationally reconstructed and presented as a “system.” But the
“system,” so called, has been discovered, not deduced, and checked against direct experience in a community of the
like-minded and like-spirited (it is no accident that Inge refers to Plotinus’s spirituality as being based on
“experimental verification”—“faith begins as an experiment and ends as an experience”).22

Not a single component of these systems is hidden to experience or nestled safely away in a “metaphysical”
domain that cannot be checked cognitively with the appropriate tools. There is absolutely nothing “metaphysical”
about these systems: they are empirical-phenomenological developmental psychology at its most rigorous and most
comprehensive, carried straightforwardly and openly into the transpersonal domains via the experimental
instrument of contemplation.23
they follow all

three strands of valid knowledge accumulation—injunction, apprehension,
confirmation/refutation. And one can “dismiss” these higher levels of development only on the same grounds that
the Churchmen refused to look through Galileo’s telescope: dogmatic stubbornness tells me that there’s nothing to
see.

In short,

THE WAY UP IS THE WAY DOWN

For Plotinus (and Aurobindo), we find that on the Path of Ascent—or what Plotinus calls Reflux (return)—each
successive level goes beyond and yet subsumes or “envelops,” as Plotinus says, its predecessors—the familiar
concept of development as successive holons.24 All of the lower is in the higher, he says, but not all of the higher is in
the lower (for in essence it transcends the lower). But all of the higher “pervades” or “permeates” the lower (“there
is nothing transcendent that is not also immanent”). For Plotinus, all development is envelopment.

Thus, a typical Plotinian statement is (to use Inge’s phrasing), “The World-Soul is not in the world; rather, the
World is in it, embraced by it and moulded by it.” Or again, “The Soul is not in the Body, but the Body is [in the Soul,]
enveloped and penetrated by the Soul which created it.” Plotinus means this for each level, and this is, of course, the
standard asymmetry of emergence that we have seen at every stage of development. But the net result is that, as
Inge puts it:

Nature presents us with a living chain of being [holarchy], an unbroken series of ascending or descending
values. The whole constitutes a harmony, in which each grade is “in” the next above. Each existence is thus
vitally connected with all the others, a conception that asserts the right of [all] existences to be what and
where they are.25

The Path of Ascent or Reflux thus traces, in reverse order, the Path of Creation or Descent or Efflux, for, as
Heraclitus had pointed out, “The way up is the way down, the way down is the way up.” As we said earlier, both
paths traverse the same dimensions. But if that is so, then when did the Path of Descent occur?

Plotinus would answer, it is occurring right now. In this timeless moment, all things issue forth from the Absolute
One, ceaselessly. Each grade or dimension of being is a stepped-down version of its senior dimension; each has its
ground, its reality, and its explanation in the level above it (thus, in Efflux, destroy any higher dimension and all lower
dimensions would lose their ground, but not vice versa; the higher is “in” the lower as its ground, not as its
component).26

And yet men and women, according to Plotinus, are unconscious of any of the levels or potentials that are right
now available above their own level of development. All of those italicized words are given prominence in Plotinus.27
Indeed, historians have often traced the first clear conception of the unconscious to Plotinus. Although we have a
lower unconscious that contains mainly images and fantasies, says Plotinus, all of the higher levels of being are for
most people merely potentials waiting to be actualized in their own case and manifested in their own being.

Thus “sin,” for Plotinus, is not a “no” but a “not yet”—we have “not yet” realized our true potentials, and so we
are given to “sin.” Sin is thus overcome not by a new belief but a new growth. An acorn is not a sin; it is simply not

yet an oak. And this growth or actualization occurs precisely through a process of development, namely, the Path of
Ascent, because “the self is not given to start with.”28

A KOSMOS OF EROS AND AGAPE

Most significantly, at each stage of Ascent, according to Plotinus, the lower has to be “embraced” and “permeated,”
so that Descent and embrace should, if all goes well, occur with each stage of Ascent and development (up to one’s
present level). In Christian terms, Eros or transcendental wisdom (the lower reaching up to the higher) has to be
balanced with compassion or Agape (the higher reaching down and embracing the lower)—at each and every stage.
This general notion—of a multidimensional Kosmos interwoven by Ascending and Descending patterns of Love
(Eros and Agape)—would become a dominant theme of all Neoplatonic schools, and exert a profound influence on
virtually all currents of subsequent thought, up to (and beyond) the Enlightenment. Through Augustine and
Dionysius, it would permeate all of Christianity, in one form or another, from Boethius to Jakob Boehme, from the
great Victorine mystics (Hugh and Richard) to Saint Catherine and Dame Julian, from Saint Teresa and Saint John of
the Cross to Tauler and Eckhart. Through Nicholas Cusanus and Giordano Bruno it would help jolt the Middle Ages
into the Renaissance. Through Novalis and Schelling, it would be the roots of the Romantic and Idealist Rebellion
against the flatland aspects of the Enlightenment. It would find its way into Leibniz and Spinoza and Schopenhauer,
and make its way to Emerson and James and Jung. Even Locke would operate within its broad framework, though he
would collapse the frame considerably. Indeed, when Lovejoy traces the influence of the Great Chain, and refers to it
as “the dominant official philosophy of the greater part of civilized mankind through most of its history,” the hand of
Plotinus lurks, virtually without exception, there in the background.

Thus, to give only a quick example now, the Cambridge Platonists, who would have such an interesting hand in the
molding of modernity, had “their roots in the Platonism of the Renaissance, as developed in the fourteenth century
by Ficino and Pico. This was a Platonism very influenced by Plotinus. It was a doctrine in which love played a central
part; not only the ascending love of the lower for the higher, Plato’s Eros, but also a love of the higher which
expressed itself in care for the lower, which could easily be identified with Christian Agape. The two together make
a vast circle of love through the universe.”29 The Great Circle, that is, of refluxing Eros (the Many returning to the
One: wisdom and the Good) and effluxing Agape (the One becoming Many: Goodness and compassion).

In this general conception (which is how I will use the terms from now on), Eros is the love of the lower reaching
up to the higher (Ascent); Agape is the love of the higher reaching down to the lower (Descent). In individual
development, one ascends via Eros (or expanding to a higher and wider identity), and then integrates via Agape (or
reaching down to embrace with care all lower holons), so that balanced development transcends but includes—it is
negation and preservation, ascent and descent, Eros and Agape.

Likewise, the love of the Kosmos reaching down to us from a higher level than our present stage of development
is also Agape (compassion), helping us to respond with Eros until the
our own
developmental level, our own self. The Agape of a higher dimension is the omega pull for our own Eros, inviting us to
ascend, via wisdom, and thus expand the circle of our own compassion for more and more beings.

source of that Agape is

(And not just in the West is Agape stressed. Many tantric and yogic schools—Aurobindo’s for example—put prime
emphasis on “the descent of the supermind,” the agape of the supermind that “comes down” in order to pull us up
to an identity with it, so that we then express that agape or compassion for all beings now “in” us; as usual, Agape
and Eros are united only in the nondual Heart.)30

PHOBOS AND THANATOS

As we will eventually see in much detail, when Eros and Agape are not integrated in the individual, then Eros
appears as Phobos and Agape appears as Thanatos.

That is, unintegrated Eros does not just reach up to the higher levels and transcend the lower; it alienates the
lower, represses the lower—and does so out of fear (Phobos), fear that the lower will “drag it down”—always it is
the fear that the lower will “contaminate it,” “dirty it,” “pull it down.” Phobos is Eros in flight from the lower instead

of embracing the lower. Phobos is Ascent divorced from Descent. And Phobos, we can see, is the ultimate force of all
repression (a rancid transcendence).

Or, to say the same thing, Phobos is Eros without Agape (transcendence without embrace, negation without

preservation).

And Phobos drives the mere Ascenders.
In their frantic wish for an “other world,” their ascending Eros strivings, otherwise so appropriate, are shot
through with Phobos, with ascetic repression, with a denial and a fear and a hatred of anything “this-worldly,” a
denial of vital life, of sexuality, of sensuality, of nature, of body (and always of woman).

They are dangerous people, these Ascenders, for the violent hand of Phobos lurks always behind the “love” of the
higher that they profess to all and sundry. With tears streaming down the face and upward-turned eyes, these
Ascenders are ready to destroy this world—or at the very least, neglect it to death—in order to get to the Promised
Land, a land that, however vaguely it might actually be conceived, is clearly enough understood to be anything but
this land, definitely not this world, which is shadows to the core, deceptions in depth, illusions at best, demonic at
worse. The Ascenders are destroying this world, because it is the one world they are all certain that they thoroughly
despise.

Thanatos, on the other hand, is Descent divorced from Ascent. It is the lower in flight from the higher, compassion
gone mad: not just embracing the lower but regressing to the lower, not just caressing but remaining stuck in it
(fixation, arrest)—cosmic reductionism run amok. And the end game of that reductionistic drive is death and matter,
with no connection to Source. Thanatos is Agape in flight from the higher instead of expressing the higher. It
preserves the lower but refuses to negate it (and thus remains stuck in it). And as Phobos is the source of repression
and dissociation, Thanatos is the source of regression and reduction, fixation and arrest. It attempts to save the
lower by killing the higher.

In other words, Thanatos is Agape without Eros.
And Thanatos drives the mere Descenders.
“Away with all other worlds,” they joyously proclaim, as their downward-turned eyes rivet on the wonders of
multiplicity, and their infinite joy begins the gruesome task of fitting itself into a finite receptacle. “Away with all
other worlds,” as they match their joy to the shadows, kiss and hug the spokes in samsara’s grinding wheel, marry
the source of their misery. And their failure to find final release in the Cave, their rage at the finite cage, is turned
merely on any of their poor fellows who happen to disagree with them and their love of shadows.

The higher doesn’t embrace the lower; the higher is killed in the name of the lower: not Agape, but Thanatos, and
the hand of death touches every love that the Descenders profess for all and sundry, tears also streaming down the
face with “compassion” written all over it.

They are dangerous people, these Descenders, for in the name of Agape and compassion, otherwise so
appropriate, they mistakenly destroy all higher in a frantic attempt to embrace the lower. And more dangerous still:
in their attempt to make this poor finite world into a world of infinite value—and every Descender does exactly that
in a thousand different ways—they slowly, painfully, inevitably, destroy this very world, by placing on it a burden the
poor beast could never carry. The Descenders are destroying this world, because this world is the only world they
have.

PLOTINUS’S ATTACK ON THE GNOSTICS

The need to balance and unite Ascent and Descent, Eros and Agape, wisdom and compassion, transcendence and
immanence—this Nondual integration is the great and enduring contribution of Plotinus, and it will stand always, I
believe, as a luminous beacon to all those who tire of the violence and brutality of the merely Ascending or merely
Descending trails.

Plotinus was uncompromising with those who wanted to glorify either this world or the other world—they were
both missing the point entirely. Each expansion of the self, Plotinus says, brings more and more of the “external
world” into ourselves; it doesn’t shut more and more of it out. World denial—the denial of any existent, for that
matter—is for Plotinus the perfect sign of sickness.31

Nowhere is this more forcefully seen than in Plotinus’s extraordinary attack on the Gnostics, who were archetypal
Ascenders, viewing all of manifestation as nothing but shadows, and evil shadows at that. The Gnostics had indeed
achieved a causal-level intuition (“The world is illusory, Brahman alone is real”), but they had not broken through to
the Nondual (“Brahman is the world”). They thus taught that the world is evil, the body is a tomb, the senses are to
be despised. This apparently infuriated the usually even-tempered Plotinus, and he eloquently responded in a
passage that justly became world-famous:

Do not suppose that a man becomes good by despising the world and all the beauties that are in it. They [the
Gnostics] have no right to profess respect for the gods of the world above. When we love a person, we love all
that belongs to him; we extend to the children the affection we feel for the parent. Now every Soul is a
daughter of the [Godhead]. How can this world be separated from the spiritual world? Those who despise
what is so nearly akin to the spiritual world, prove that they know nothing of the spiritual world, except in
name. . . .

Let it [any individual soul] make itself worthy to contemplate the Great Soul by ridding itself, through quiet
recollection, of deceit and of all that bewitches vulgar souls. For it let all be quiet; let all its environment be at
peace. Let the earth be quiet and the sea and air, and the heaven itself waiting. Let it observe how the Soul
flows in from all sides into the resting world, pours itself into it, penetrates it and illumines it. Even as the
bright beams of the sun enlighten a dark cloud and give it a golden border, so the Soul when it enters into the
body of the heaven gives it life and timeless beauty and awakens it from sleep. So the world, grounded in a
timeless movement by the Soul which suffuses it with intelligence, becomes a living and blessed being. . . .

It [Spirit/Soul] gives itself to every point in this vast body, and vouchsafes its being to every part, great and
small, though these parts are divided in space and manner of disposition, and though some are opposed to
each other, others dependent on each other. But the Soul is not divided, nor does it split up in order to give
life to each individual. All things live by the Soul
in its entirety [i.e., ultimately there are no degrees, no levels,
but simply pure Presence]; it is all present everywhere. The heaven, vast and various as it is, is one by the
power of the Soul, and by it is this universe of ours Divine. The sun too is Divine, and so are the stars; and we
ourselves, if we are worth anything, are so on account of the Soul. Be persuaded that by it thou can attain to
God. And know that thou wilt not have to go far afield. . . .32

Plotinus goes on to point out that those who would find an “other world” apart from “this world” have missed the
whole point. There is no “this world” or “other world”—it is all a matter of one’s perception. There is not even any
“going up” or “coming down.” No movement in space takes place. “Spirit and Soul are everywhere and nowhere.”
We are in “Heaven” whenever “we in heart and mind remember God”; we are “immersed in Matter” whenever we
forget God. Same place, different perception. Plotinus explicitly and often states that we “will arrive at the All
without change of place.” Those who talk of “this world” or an “other world” have both missed the point—they are
the Descenders or the Ascenders, not the Whole-Hearted.

William Inge gives an altogether extraordinary summary of the worldview of Plotinus, and it is worth quoting at

length (all italics are mine):

Plotinus conceives the universe as a living chain of being, an unbroken series of ascending and descending
values and existences. The whole constitutes a harmony; each grade is “in” the next above; each existence is
vitally connected with all others. But those grades which are inferior in value are also imperfectly real, so long
as we look at them in disconnexion [the “imperfection” and the “inferior value” appear only when we
disconnect them from Spirit and thus fail to see that each is a perfect expression of the Divine—again, in a
nonanthropocentric or “decentered” fashion]. They are characterized by impermanence and inner discord,
until we see them in their true relations. Then we perceive them to be integral parts of the eternal systole and
diastole [efflux and reflux] in which the life of the universe consists, a life in which there is nothing arbitrary or
irregular, seeing that all . . . act in accord with their own nature.

The perfect and timeless life of the Divine Spirit overflows in an incessant stream of creative activity, which
spends itself only when it has reached the lowest confines of being [matter], so that every possible

manifestation of Divine energy, every hue of the Divine Radiance, every variety in degree as well as in kind, is
realized somewhere and somehow.

And by the side of this outward flow of creative energy [Agape and Efflux] there is another current which
carries all the creatures back toward the source of their being. It is this centripetal movement [Eros and Reflux]
that directs the active life of all creatures. This aspiration, which slumbers even in unconscious beings [is in all
holons as the self-transcending drive], is the mainspring [also] of the moral, intellectual, and esthetic life of
humankind.33

As we will see in chapter 11, this is the Kosmos of Eros and Agape that would meet the Enlightenment, where the
empirical/representational version of rationality (monological or Right-Hand reason) would collapse the Kosmos into
a flatland interlocking order of holistic elements, with the embarrassed subject dangling over the flatland holistic
world with absolutely no idea how it got there.

Because all of the Kosmos does indeed have some sort of correlates in the Right-Hand dimension, it thus
understandably appeared that scientific positivism and naturalism could and would cover all possible bases, because
science does indeed register so many significant alterations in the Right-Hand world. In this collapse of the Kosmos
(subtle reductionism), the rich vertical and horizontal Holarchy, driven by Eros and Agape, was reduced to a merely
horizontal holarchy, driven by surfaces and “its” alone.34

The necessary collective evolution from mythic to rational was the Enlightenment’s great achievement; the

unnecessary collapse of the Kosmos to the holistic flatland was its great and enduring crime.

For it was precisely this nondual Kosmos that broke in two, crippled and fallen, in the coming nightmare of
Western spirituality and philosophy and science. The fractured footnotes to Plato began to litter the landscape with
their partialities and favored dualisms, and it is now, just now, only now, that we have begun to pick up the pieces.

10

This-Worldly, Otherworldly

There is thus an incessant multiplication of the inexhaustible One and unification of the indefinitely Many.
Such are the beginnings and endings of worlds and of individual beings: expanded from a point without
position or dimensions and a now without date or duration.

—A . K . COOMARASWAMY, summarizing the essence of both Hinduism and Buddhism

THE GREAT DUALISM of all dualisms, I have suggested, is between “this world” and an “other world.” It has infected our

spirituality, our philosophy, our science; it runs as equally through the repressive Ascenders who wish only the
“other world” of eternal release, as through the shadow-hugging Descenders who want salvation solely in the
passing glories of “this world.” It slices through every Age of Enlightenment with its upward-yearning Reason and
every Romantic reaction that seeks instead to explore every downward-turning darkness and depth. It governs
where we seek our salvation, and which “world” we will ignore or destroy in order to get it.

It is the cause of bitter, bitter acrimony between the two camps, with each formally accusing the other of being
the epitome and essence of evil
(literally): The Ascenders accuse the Descenders of being lost in the Cave of
Shadows, of being materialists, hedonists, pantheists, reductionists, and “nothing-morists” (they believe in “nothing
more” than can be grasped with the senses). To the Ascenders, “this world” is, in form and function, illusory at best,
evil at worst—and the Descenders are the primary representatives of that evil.

The Descenders accuse the Ascenders of being repressive, puritanical, life-denying, sex-denying, earth-destroying,
and body-ignoring. In their attempts to rise above “this world,” the Ascenders have in fact done more to destroy this
world and introduce evil into this world than any other force, so it is precisely the “otherworldly” stance, according
to the Descenders, that spews evil into this world, and the Ascenders are the primary representatives of that evil.

And they are both right. Or, we might say, they are both half right and half wrong—the fractured footnotes to

Plato. I can make this clearer by restating the conclusions of the last chapter and introducing our new topics:

According to the Nondual schools (Plato/Plotinus, Eckhart, Vedanta, Mahayana Buddhism, Tantra, etc.),
reality—the “real world”—is neither this world nor the other world; although it cannot easily or accurately be
described, it can directly be shown, or directly apprehended in immediate awareness through contemplative
practice in community. And if we must speak about it, then we must include at the least the following three points,
not because these points actually describe Reality, but because they act as a curb and restraint to our always-
inadequate theorizing.

1. The One is the Good to which all things aspire. The Absolute is the Summit and Goal of all evolution, all ascent,
all manifestation. It provides the motive, the action, the “pull” of all things to actualize their own highest potential,
whatever that potential might be. According to Whitehead, this is the God that acts “through gentle persuasion” for
all creative emergence. As Aristotle would put it, the Good is the final cause toward which all beings, however
imperfect, are pulled. The One as the Good is the final omega point of all ascent and all wisdom. It is the return of
the Many to the One. (Taken in and by itself, this, of course, is the God of the Ascenders.)

2. The One is the Goodness from which all things flow. It is the Origin and the Source of all manifestation, at all
times, in all places. There is a timeless creativity or overflow of the One into the Many. All things, high or low, sacred
or profane, yesterday or tomorrow, issue forth from the divine Fountainhead, the Source of all, the Origin of all. The

One as Goodness is the first cause of all causes; it is the alpha point of all worlds; and as such, all worlds express
the Goodness, the compassion, the love and superabundance of the Divine. This creative superabundance of the
One (as alpha point) is an uncontainable outflowing that results in the Plenitude and variety and multiplicity of this
world, so that this world is itself a “visible God,” expressing compassion and Goodness through and through, and this
world is to be fully embraced as such. It is God as the Many. (Taken in and by itself, this is the God of the
Descenders.)

3. The Absolute is the Nondual Ground of both the One and the Many. It is equally and both Good and Goodness,
One and Many, Ascent and Descent, Alpha and Omega, Wisdom and Compassion. Both Ascending and Descending
Paths express profound truths—neither of their truths is denied (in fact, both are strongly asserted). But neither path
alone expresses the whole Truth, and neither path alone imbibes fully of Reality. Reality is not just Summit (omega)
and not just Source (alpha), but is Suchness—the timeless and ever-present Ground which is equally and fully
present in and as every single being, high or low, ascending or descending, effluxing or refluxing.1

In the Great Circle of Descent and Ascent, the Nondual can be represented as the paper on which the entire circle
is drawn; or again, it can be represented as the center of the circle itself, which is equidistant to all points on the
circumference (“the center which is everywhere, the circumference, nowhere”). Beings can be said to be closer to
or farther from the Summit or the Source (that is the meaning of the Great Chain of Being); but no being is closer to
or farther from Suchness; there is no “up” or “down.” Each individual being is, fully and completely, just as it is,
precisely just as it is, the One and the All.

This is why, in nondual Suchness, it is absolutely not that each being is a part of the One, or participates in the
One, or is an aspect of the One. In other words, it is not, as in pantheism, that each is merely a piece of the “One,” a
slice of the pie, or a strand in the Web. “As Plotinus tells us repeatedly, individual spirits are not part of the One
Spirit.”2 An individual holon is not part of the One Spirit because each individual holon is the One Spirit
in its
entirety—the Infinite, being radically dimensionless, is fully present at each and every point of spacetime (or, as Zen
would have it, Emptiness “in its entirety” is completely present in each and every Form: Emptiness is not the sum
total of Form, it is the essence of Form; it is therefore present in the sum total as well, but nothing has been added
by the totality that was not present in each individuality).

We remember Plotinus saying, “It [infinite Soul/Spirit] gives itself to every point in this vast body, and vouchsafes
its being to every part, great and small, though these parts are divided in space and manner of disposition, and
though some are opposed to each other, others dependent on each other. But the Soul is not divided, nor does it
split up in order to give life to each individual. All things live by the Soul
in its entirety; it is all present everywhere.”
The One is fully present in Each. We don’t have to add up each finite thing to get a “systems spirit”—each individual
thing, just as it is, is fully expressive of Spirit.

This is why the Nondual traditions are so radically noninstrumental in their value orientations: individual holons
do not have value merely because they are parts of a great web; they have value because, just as they are, they are
perfect manifestations of the primordial Purity of Spirit. In the systems web-of-life spirituality, all things derive their
value secondarily, derive their value extrinsically and instrumentally as strands in the extended web, which alone is
supposed to be finally “real.”

On the contrary, as Plotinus puts it, “Each part of the All is Infinite.” Notice three very different things here: the
One, the Each, and the All. Each finite thing exists as part of All finite things, but the “spirituality” is not found in the
All, but in the One that is fully present in both Each and All. (The web-of-life systems theorists get the All but miss the
One.) But because the One is indeed fully present in both Each and All, then additionally, as Plotinus says, “All is
each, and each is all, and infinite the glory”3—the web of life is there, it’s just very partial, and very secondary to the
infinite empty Ground that is the Source and Suchness of every part and every whole, regardless of how much we
add up the never-ending series of whole/parts (a series that in itself is just Hegel’s “bad infinity”).

To finish our summary: Reality is Summit (omega), and Source (alpha), and their common ground as Suchness
It is in the integration of the Ascending and Descending paths that the Nondual awareness flashes: “The

(Nondual).4
world is illusory; Brahman alone is real; Brahman is the world.”

Anything short of that realization degenerates into just the Ascenders (Brahman alone is real) or just the
Descenders (Brahman is the world). And I am suggesting that that is not just a theoretical nicety or an esoteric

contemplative concern. I am suggesting that that is precisely what happened in the ensuing series of fractured
footnotes to Plato that is called Western civilization.

EARTH IN THE BALANCE

It is often said that Plato was the otherworldly philosopher and Aristotle was the this-worldly philosopher. And yet
once again, as Lovejoy demonstrates, this is exactly backward.

It is true that Aristotle spent much of his time in this-worldly analysis and thought, but the God of Aristotle, unlike
Plato’s, is a purely Ascending God. Aristotle’s God was the summit and highest goal of all creation (omega), but
was not the source or origin or fountainhead of creation (alpha). In fact, Aristotle’s God was not in creation at all,
except as the final cause of all beings, which means as the goal which they would always strive toward and never
reach. Things did not
come from Aristotle’s God, they are only going toward it. In other words, Aristotle
understood very well and very accurately the Perfect One as the Good, but not at all the manifestation of that One
as Goodness or creative Plenitude. Lovejoy:

The reverse process [that of creative Efflux, described by Plato and extended by Plotinus] finds no place in the
system of Aristotle. His God generates nothing. Except for a few lapses into the common fashions of speech,
Aristotle adheres consistently to the notion of self-sufficiency as the essential attribute of Deity [causal]; and
he sees that it precludes any [relationship to finite beings that would be implied by its creating them]. It is true
that this Unmoved Perfection is for Aristotle the cause of all motion and of all the activity of imperfect beings;
but it is their final cause only. The bliss which God unchangingly enjoys in his never-ending self-contemplation
is the Good after which all other things yearn and, in their various measures and manners, strive.

But the Unmoved Mover is no world-ground; his nature and existence do not explain why the other things
exist, why there are so many of them, why the modes and degrees of their declension from the divine
perfection are so various. He therefore cannot provide a basis for the principle of Plenitude.5

Aristotle, then, quite apart from his extraordinary contributions to “this-worldly” understanding, was at root the
West’s archetypal Ascender. And thus the first great fractured footnote to Plato. Plato, we have seen, championed
both Ascent and Descent, Summit and Source. These two currents—Plato’s God both in the world and beyond it,
Aristotle’s God only beyond it—would enter the currents of Western civilization with two diametrically opposed
agendas: befriend the world, begrudge the world.

A fractured Plato could be called on to support either view; Aristotle could be called on only for the latter. The
the whole Plato was not

weight of opinion, then, was already precariously tipped in favor of the Ascenders.
evoked, there was precious little left to hold anybody on earth.

If

And such precisely was the platform—wobbling now between this world and the other world—upon which

Western culture was about to be built.

THE UNEARTHLY TRINITY

Plotinus had held the Ascending and Descending currents together admirably, expressing and polishing the original
Platonic nonduality.6 And the nondual school of Plato/Plotinus would have almost certainly carried the day—as the
essentially similar Nondual systems of Shankara and Nagarjuna would do for Hinduism and Buddhism,
respectively7—were it not for one overwhelming and utterly decisive factor: the entrance on the scene of mythic-
literal Christianity.

With its mythic-dissociated God ontologically divorced from nature and human nature—what Tillich called “the
strict dualism of a divine sphere in heaven and a human sphere on earth”—there was no way to finally ground God
in this world. And thus no way that a human being’s final destiny could be realized in this life,
in this body, on this
earth.8 Thus the other-worldly Ascenders, fractured through and through—and driven in part, as all exclusive
Ascenders are, by Phobos (fear of earth, body, nature, woman, sex, and sense)—could and would dominate
(although never exclusively rule) the Western scene for a millennium.

But the ironic point is that this mythically ascended God wasn’t even a truly ascendent or transcendent God—it
wasn’t even a Gnostic or causal-level One (except for a very few realizers). It was, through and through, a mythic-
level production: a geocentric, egocentric, anthropocentric local volcano god—Yahweh by name—whose true
structural colors were shown precisely in the fact that He touched human history only by interfering with it, either to
“reward” or “punish” His “chosen” peoples or, more often, to miraculously smite the enemies of His chosen people,
or to otherwise spend His time turning spinach into potatoes.

There is simply no mistaking the structure of consciousness that authors such productions, and it has led to some
very harsh judgments from the more profound thinkers of the Christian (and Judaic) tradition itself, starting with
Clement and Origen (and Philo), all of whom would concur with Paul Tillich: “Things like miraculous interventions of
God, special
inspirations and revelations are beneath the level of real religious experience. Religion itself is
immediacy [by which he means precisely the immediacy of basic Wakefulness or pure Presence, which is Spirit in
us, as Tillich himself makes very clear]. The supernaturalistic heritage about the suspension of the laws of nature for
the sake of miracles collapses completely.”9

But, as I have tried to make clear, it was not the simple existence of the Roman Christian mythic empire that was
problematic. That mythic-rational structure acted as the basic principle of cultural meaning and social integration for
virtually a thousand years; it was phase-specifically appropriate enough, bringing with it all the advances (and all the
disasters) that we discussed in the mythic-rational section of chapter 5, particularly new forms of sociocentric
morality and the beginning belief (postconventional) in the equal status of all citizens under the (Roman) law and
in the eyes of God—replete, of course, with all the empire-building and imperialism and military “globalizing”
attempts inherent in the mythic-rational structure.

When we discuss the systems of Plato or Plotinus (or Nagarjuna or Shankara), we are speaking of the most
advanced or leading edge of consciousness development for that period; I have no expectation that that would or
could have become the average-mode consciousness at that point in time, nor do I judge the average-mode
consciousness of that time with the standards of today’s average mode. It was not the arrival of the Roman Christian
mythic-military empire that was the particular problem;
it was what the worldview of that average-mode
development did to the leading-edge worldview: it pronounced it anathema, condemned it, and condemned it
thoroughly, rigorously, even viciously at times (particularly in the Counter-Reformation), and in ways that (with very
few exceptions) happened nowhere else in world history on quite that scale.

Every structure of consciousness is suspicious of all higher structures, structures lying within and beyond it,
structures that are in fact its own inherent potential, but structures that require a frightening death and rebirth to
unfold in each case. And societies, it seems, can be arranged along a continuum of tolerance for those structures
that exist higher than the structure of its own principles of social organization and cohesion. The very success, and
the constant threats, to the mythic-military Christian empire put tolerance—never a strong point in mythic
structures—virtually out of the question. Any outspoken person who evidenced a structure of consciousness higher
than the mythic-rational was, correctly enough, viewed as a political threat and condemned, in effect, for treason.10
The condemnation was often pandemic: the structures of Reason (and science) were condemned because they
demanded evidence (reason was therefore allowed only in service of Dogma). The psychic level of nature-nation
mysticism was condemned because it brought God “too much into” this world, it “dragged God down” from His
celestial throne and the Heavenly City above. Subtle-level mysticism was condemned, or at best barely tolerated,
because it brought the soul up too close to God. And the Church became absolutely apoplectic if anybody expressed
a causal-level intuition of supreme identity with Godhead—the Inquisition would burn Giordano Bruno at the stake
and condemn the theses of Meister Eckhart on such grounds.

But that was an old story for causal-level Realizers at the hands of mythic believers, starting with Jesus of
Nazareth, whose own causal-level realization (“I and the Father are One”) would not be treated kindly. “Why do you
stone me?” Jesus asks. “Is it for good works?” The pious reply: “No, it is not for good works; it is because you, being a
man, make yourself out God.” His reply that “we are all sons (and daughters) of God” was lost on the crowd, and
that realization led him, as it would al-Hallaj and Bruno and Origen and a long line of subsequent Realizers, to a grisly
death for both political and religious reasons—it was simultaneously a threat to the state and to the old religion.

Church dogma handled the case of the extraordinary Realizer from Nazareth in a very ingenious way, using all the

powers of rationality to prop up the myth. It was true, they granted, that Jesus was one with God (or, as they would
later put it, God is one substance with three Persons—Tertullian’s
trinitas—and the Person of Jesus has two
Natures: Divine and Human). But let the causal-level Ascension stop there. No other person shall be allowed this
Realization, even though, as everybody plainly knew at the time, Jesus never made a single remark suggesting that
he alone had or could have this Realization, and he explicitly forbade his followers to use the term “Messiah” in
reference to him.

But, as many commentators have pointed out, if the Nazarene had in fact realized a Godhead that belongs to all,
equally and fully, then there was no way he could be made the sole property of an exclusive mythology. Put bluntly,
there was no way to market him. So Jesus was made, not the suffering servant of all humankind, which is all he ever
claimed, but the Sole Son of Jehovah,
literally. In other words, he was tucked downward and seamlessly into the
prevailing mythology, and seen as yet another (but much greater) instance of a miraculous and supernatural
intervention in history to save a new group of chosen peoples: those who embraced the Church, the one true way
and only salvation for all souls (which meant: the only way for imperial-political cohesion of the mythic empire).

The realization of the Nazarene was thus placed on a pedestal and made an utterly unique property of the Church
(and not directly a property of the Soul).11 It should be remembered that at this stage in development, the moral and
political spheres (church and state) had not yet been fully differentiated (which is true for all mythological
structures—the head of state gains legitimacy, we saw, by claiming mythogenic status, by claiming to be specially
connected to, descended from, or one with the gods/goddesses: Cleopatra is Isis). As Tillich explains, “This meant
that the person who breaks the canonic law of doctrines is not only a heretic, one who disagrees with the
fundamental doctrines of the church, but he is also a criminal against the state. Since the heretic undermines not
only the church but also the state, he must be not only excommunicated but also delivered into the hands of the civil
authorities to be punished as a criminal.”12

The Church would produce many great philosophers (reason), and many great psychic and subtle mystics, but
no matter how much these realizers tried to downplay the myths, no matter how much they allegorized them or as-
iffed them or interpreted them away, there was always the one fundamental dogma that hung like a weight around
their attempts to transcend, that crashed down on their shoulders and pinned them to the ground and never but
never budged an inch: the utterly unique and nonreproducible realization of Jesus.13

The Ascension itself was immediately mythologized, following the very old mythic motif of the three-day-dead-
and-resurrected lunar consort of the Earth goddess (in the pagan rituals, as well as in the Christianized version, one
would “eat the flesh” and “drink the blood” of the consort, thus to participate in its resurrected powers).14 Individual
Christians who shared the proper mythic belief (or faith) would therefore also be resurrected, after death, on
Judgment Day, in another world, where their bodies would be reassembled (“Um, excuse me, isn’t that my fourth
metacarpal you’ve got there?”) to sit forever with Jehovah, His Son, and Company. There was no way for individuals
to find enlightenment or ascension in this life, on this earth. Any and all who claimed otherwise were thus
immediately both heretics and criminals.

Again,

I have no quarrel with that phase-specific mythic-rational structure and the interpretation that it
(necessarily) gave to the Realization of the Adept from Nazareth. It was a crucial component of social integration and
cultural meaning at that point in development, and it apparently served its purposes quite well. The problem, rather,
was the degree to which and the fury with which this Realization was so thoroughly reduced to mythic levels. Rarely
has a causal-level realization been translated so dramatically downward. Rarely has such a powerful realization been
allowed to produce so few same-level realizations in its followers.

Not Buddha, not Shankara, not Lao Tzu; not Valentinus, not Numenius, not Apollonius; not Dogen, not Fa-tsang,
not Chih-i; not Garab Dorje, not Tsongkapa, not Padmasambhava—none would be so thoroughly reduced. It is
simply astonishing. Myths would, of course, grow up around all of those realizers, precisely for those who relate to
reality in that degree; but their final teaching, causal/nondual, was available to all who embraced the practice,
engaged the injunctions, went beyond myth and reason and psychic and subtle, and discovered the Empty Ground in
their own case. And to any student who awakened to discover that he or she was actually One with the infinite
Ground, in formless identity, the reply came back, in all cases: “Congratulations! You finally discovered who you
are!”

The reply that came back from the Church was: you shall now be toast.
The peculiar and net effect of all this was that, although the God of the Church was primarily an Ascending
God—in this aspect, otherworldly to the core—there was no way to consummate the Ascension, not even for the
leading-edge few; only Jesus had done that.15 And while we might to varying degrees “participate” in Christ’s nature,
there could be no true and whole-bodied Realization and Ascension until after death, at some other time, and
certainly in some other world. This world is merely a runway for the real takeoff.

Precisely because there was no way to consummate the Ascension in this body, in this life, on this earth, there was
no way whatsoever for the Way Up to spill over into the Way Down. No way, that is, for causal-level Oneness with
the Good to issue forth in all-pervading, all-embracing Goodness, grounded thoroughly in this world, resplendent
as the entire world.16 That extraordinary reversal that Plato (and all nondual realizers) had made—transcend this
world, awaken as this world—could not be called upon as compass.

Precisely because the Ascension could not be consummated, the West was locked into a perpetually frustrated
Ascendent yearning—a yearning for a Goal that would never be officially allowed, and therefore a perpetual
yearning that could never be satisfied and let go of—the perpetual itch in the Western psyche that was never
allowed to be scratched and then forgotten—the ascendent carrot on a very long stick held above and in front of the
collective donkey that assured that the poor beast would always lurch forward and never be allowed to eat.

It was these frustrated Ascenders, these frozen Ascenders, who would call on (1) the other-worldly Aristotle, (2)
the other-worldly half of Plato, and (3) the mythic other world of the Only Begotten and Only Ascended Son of God.
And there was the true Holy Trinity, the unearthly Trinity, that carved out the next thousand years of Western
culture, a Trinity that, if it never totally ruled the scene, always officially dominated it.

THE TWO GODS

Without direct access to the unifying and unspoken One, the two paths, Ascending and Descending, became logically
incompatible and utterly irreconcilable. Since true and full Ascent was blocked (even theoretically), then true and full
Descent could be neither directly experienced nor correctly formulated (even theoretically). The One World of
Plato/Plotinus fractured into “this world” versus the “other world,” and this dualism produced two diametrically
opposed and absolutely incompatible World Stances, with two very different (and irreconcilable) views of the “good
life,” of men and women’s ultimate place in the universe, of the object and nature of human destiny, of where self-
fulfillment was to be found, of the very ideals that one ought to have in this life, and, most important, of the types of
practical goals that one ought to strive to fulfill in this life.

It produced, in fact, two utterly irreconcilable Gods.
It was agreed, by both sides, that the final good for a human being was the imitatio Dei—the imitation or
contemplation or absorption in God. But which God? The ascending God that takes all things back to the One, or the
descending God that delights in the diversity of the Many? Without the unifying Heart, they seem utterly
incompatible, and therefore do I shun the world and seek only the One, or do I follow the creative God and embrace
the Goodness of all creation and find my God fully expressed there?

The Nondual answer has always been: do one, then the other, embracing finally both. As only one example,
Aurobindo: “The spiritual transformation culminates in a permanent ascension from the lower consciousness to the
higher consciousness, followed by an effective permanent descent of the higher nature into the lower.” Likewise, in
the Zen oxherding pictures, which express the ten “stages” to enlightenment, the first seven pictures depict an
exclusive search for the One and a withdrawal from the world—the ascent to the Good. The eighth picture is an
empty circle—pure formless Emptiness (causal). The final picture shows the person entering the marketplace “with
open hands”—the embrace of the Many, the effulgent Path of Compassion and “creation-centered” spirituality.

The important point is that what perfectly unites the two paths—the way up and the way down—is the eighth
picture, the empty circle, which is not merely a theory of nonduality but the direct realization of formless Emptiness
(causal Spirit). Lacking access to that, the two paths have no direct experiential point of contact, and they therefore
fall merely into theoretically disjointed affairs, one versus the other, and there is no way whatsoever to unite them
in theory or in fact.

And that, we will see, is precisely what happened.

WESTERN VEDANTA

From Plotinus the One World vision, embracing fully both Ascent and Descent, had passed, virtually unscathed and
intact, to the remarkable Saint Dionysius (who, because he or she was mistakenly thought to be Paul’s first Athenian
convert, had a profound impact on all subsequent Christian mysticism; the actual author remains unknown; hence
the name “pseudo-Dionysius”). The mysticism of the pseudo-Dionysius is virtually identical to that of Plotinus, except
now it is fitted quite seamlessly into Christian theology and Christian terminology: the same wine, slightly new casks.
There is, of course, the perilous Ascent straight to the formless Godhead, and a perfect Descent to a loving embrace
of the entire world of the Many—the standard message of all Nondual schools: transcend absolutely every single
thing in the Kosmos, embrace absolutely every single thing in the Kosmos—with choiceless compassion or love.
Dionysius:

Love which works good to all things, pre-existing overflowingly in the Good, moved itself to creation, as befits
the superabundance by which all things are created. The Good by being extends its Goodness to all things
[without exception!]. For as our sun, not by choosing or taking thought but by merely being, enlightens all
things, so the Good by its mere existence sends forth upon all things the beams of its Goodness.17

Saint Augustine (354–430 CE) brilliantly carried on much of the Plotinian tradition, with a few subtle twists and
additions. There is much in Augustine’s teaching that is clearly nondual and profound in its implications, particularly
as concerns the union of Eros and Agape, the utter primacy of introspection for a knowledge of God, the creative
power of Amor (love), and the central importance of a transformation of consciousness (a transformation of will) in
order to awaken to the Divine.

Most important of all, I believe, is that with Augustine we see the first flowering of a Western form of Vedanta
that would, perhaps, have a more profound impact on subsequent Western philosophy (and civilization) than any
other single idea, bar none—and which I will try to summarize in a paragraph:

Plato’s “Spectator” and Plotinus’s “ever-present Wakefulness” are developed by Augustine into a full-fledged
conception of the interior Witness (Augustine would say the Soul) as that which cannot, under any circumstances, be
doubted. Start with general doubt, says Augustine, and doubt absolutely everything you can. You will find that you
can doubt the reliability of logic (it might be wrong), you can even doubt the reality of sense impressions (they might
be a hallucination). But even in the most intense doubt, you are aware of the doubt itself; in your
immediate
awareness there is certainty, even if it is only a certainty that you are doubting—and you can never shake that
certainty. Any truth in the
certainty of interior
immediateness or basic Wakefulness; and God, said Augustine, lies in and through that basic Wakefulness, whose
certainty is never, and can never be, actually doubted.

exterior world can be doubted, but always there is the

Thus the existence of God, as the immediacy of self-presence (or basic Wakefulness), is an unshakable certainty.
God is even the immediateness of the very presupposition, or actual ground, behind the doubt about God’s
existence. If you are aware of the thought “I don’t believe in God,” well, says Augustine, that is already God. Belief in
God, and doubt in God, both presuppose God.

Further, in the intimacy and immediateness of presence, there is no subject-object duality. I do not stand back
from this immediate presence and look at it; if I did, that would be merely another seen object, not the immediacy in
which this seeing occurs. God is the ultimate prius of self and of world. “God is seen in the soul. God is in the center
of humans, before the split into subjectivity and objectivity. God is not a strange being whose existence or
nonexistence one might discuss. Rather, God is our own a priori. In God the split between the subject and object,
and the desire of the subject to know the object, are overcome. There is no such gap. God is given to the subject as
nearer to itself than it is to itself.”18 God, for Augustine, is what you know before you know anything else, and
upon which everything else depends, and something that can never actually be doubted.

God as the ground, not just of all being, but of our own immediate and primordial awareness—this is the call of
Augustine. How similar to the Eastern traditions! “The ordinary mind, just that is the Tao.” In Zen, the ordinary mind

means the mind in its simple immediacy, before any effort or duality. In Tibetan Buddhism, the ultimate Dharmakaya
is rigpa, the clarity of the immediacy of present awareness, prior to subject and object. And we already saw Ramana
discourse on the impossibility of ever being without the Self: if you think you have not found or seen the primordial
Self, the awareness of that lack is itself the supposedly lacking Self. These traditions are not saying that you have
Buddha-nature but don’t know it: you know it but won’t admit it.

This Western Vedanta, as I have called it,19 passed, in its various forms, from Augustine to Descartes, Spinoza,
Berkeley, Kant, Fichte, Schelling, Hegel, Husserl, Heidegger, and Sartre, to mention a few. Basic Wakefulness,
immediate consciousness, is what we have and all we have; everything else is phenomenal (Kant), or deductive
(Descartes), or exterior (Spinoza), or twice-removed (Husserl, Sartre). Spirit, as basic Wakefulness, is not something
that needs to be proven, but something that even the existence of doubt always presupposes as its own ground.
And thus, Spirit (or consciousness or pure Ego or transcendental Self or basic openness) is not something hard to find
but rather impossible to avoid.

We have seen that each stage of development is a going within-and-beyond. This is clearly spotted by Augustine,
and he states it in such a profound and persuasive form that, according to Charles Taylor, this notion of “inwardness”
would literally color an entire civilization. Careful and sober scholars (such as Tillich and Taylor) are simply astonished
at what this man wrought. Tillich says Augustine is “the man who is more than anyone else the representative of the
West; he is the foundation of everything the West had to say.”20

In regard to this going within-and-beyond, Augustine picks up the argument from Plotinus that the interior
transcends and envelops the exterior, and the interior itself then dissolves in the One, so that, as Gilson summarizes
it, Augustine’s path is one “leading from the exterior to the interior and from the interior to the superior,” which
Taylor phrases as “Going within . . . takes me beyond.”

This had a profound historical impact because it took the notion of interiority present in Plotinus (and hinted at in
Plato) and put it fully center stage. The path to ultimate Reality is not outside; it is inside. Starting with reason, one
goes within reason, to the basic immediacy at its base, and that immediacy takes me beyond reason to the Ground
of the Kosmos itself. So that finally, and ultimately, the Truth is not in me or inside me or egoically locked up in me,
but is rather beyond me altogether: the ground of intimate presence opens up beyond me to the timeless and
eternal Being of all beings. Going within me, I am finally free of me: and that is a timeless liberation from the
fetters of being only me.

Taylor calls this new emphasis on the within “radical reflexivity.” And, he says, “it is hardly an exaggeration to say
that it was Augustine who introduced the inwardness of radical reflexivity and bequeathed it to the West.”21 Indeed,
Taylor traces three main aspects of the “inwardness” or “radical reflexivity” characteristic of Western civilization up
through modernity and postmodernity (namely, self-control, self-expression, and self-commitment), and finds all
three of those roads lead to . . . Augustine (with roots in Plotinus).

This radical reflexivity would play a profound role in the West (as it did in the East) because even in its distorted
forms it spoke a certain truth—the superior lies through the interior, the beyond lies through the within. The
Enlightenment would continue to take the “turn within” . . . and then forget the beyond. The disengaged ego of the
Enlightenment turned within . . . and got stuck there, dangling haplessly over a holistic flatland that had no room for
it: not within and beyond, but within and withdrawn. “Knowledge closed in on itself,” as Foucault put it, and there
was no way to actually reconnect the self with a “holistic cosmos,” since that cosmos of interlocking exteriors
excluded the interior on its own terms (collapse of the Kosmos to the cosmos, or subtle reductionism).

But this enclosing of knowledge, within and withdrawn—going within, getting stuck there, and then describing the
external world in interlocking system terms that left out the subject altogether—this is not truth for Augustine; this
is precisely evil. “Evil is when this reflexivity is enclosed on itself”22—within and withdrawn. There was no way to get
to the superior because the interior was excluded from the interlocking order of exteriors, and thus all that
remained was a system of harmonious shadows and a wonderful web that ground up all depth in interwoven
surfaces.

But Augustine’s immediate impact was in precisely the opposite direction. If the Enlightenment got lost in the
interior and was thus stuck with nothing but exteriors, the influence of Augustine up to the Renaissance was on
reaching the superior and downplaying, forgetting, ignoring the exteriors altogether. “Since truth is something which

we can find only in the interior of the human soul, physics is useless for ultimate truth.”23

Indeed so, in a sense, but here creeps in Augustine’s dualistic legacy. For Plotinus the Descended world of physics
and the Ascended world of the Soul were both integral components of the One World. True, we could never reach
the Soul or Spirit through a study of physics (in fact, that would blind us to the Soul), but nonetheless physics was
part of the visible, sensible God.

Augustine is no ontological dualist, but he does start to offer us a brutal choice: “Everyone becomes like what he

loves. Dost thou love the earth? Thou shalt be earth. Dost thou love God? Then I say, thou shalt be God.”

And is there no way to be both?
For the Bhagavad Gita, as for Plotinus, “Even on earth the world is transformed by those whose minds are
established in the vision of Oneness,” as the Gita has it. For Plotinus (and most of the nondual Eastern traditions),
one starts immersed in the Earth, immersed in Gaia, inter-locked in exteriors (egocentric, biocentric, geocentric);
one then finds the interior, transcends Gaia, and is immersed in Heaven (Soul, Spirit); which then dissolves the
separate self altogether and embraces equally both Heaven and Earth as the glorious radiance of the Divine (this
would be the tantric and Mahayana revolution that would overthrow the exclusively Ascending ideal of the yogic and
Theravadin gnostics).

But this road Augustine cannot take. The dogmatic belief in the future resurrection of the body put an effective
end to that vision. The future resurrection of
the body, and the radically unique (and nonrepeatable,
nonreproducible) realization of the Nazarene blocks the final liberation of the soul in this body, in this life, on this
earth. No longer can the Ascending and Descending Paths be held together in the immediacy of this moment. There
is a fracture in the face of Love, and a perplexed God now stares blankly in two diametrically opposed directions.

The net effect was: pick one—the way up or the way down. The two could no longer be united, and historically the

Ascenders and the Descenders went virtually their separate ways.

In short, with Augustine the tension between the “two Gods” is becoming unbearable. Partly because of his ten
years with the dualistic Manichaeans, partly because of his own Gnosticism, and overwhelmingly because of his
unflinching embrace of the Church dogma of the “one and only begotten,” Augustine feels that no true Ascent can
occur in this life, in this body, on this earth—the mystical awareness of God, yes; final liberation in this body, on this
earth, no.

For Plotinus, “Ascent” does not mean a change of place or a change in location or a change from “this world” to an
“other world.” It means a change in perception so that more and more of this world is perceived as the other
world—more and more of this world is perceived as Perfectly Divine, until there is only the Perfectly Divine in all
perception, “this world” and “that world” being utterly irrelevant, and the way up and the way down meeting in
every single act of loving and choiceless and non-dual awareness.

For all of Augustine’s undoubted brilliance—for all of that, he cannot shake his dualistic dogma that this world is
merely a preparation for the next world; he is locked into the myth of the future resurrection of the body, not its
present divinization by a change in perception; and thus even such an ardent devotee of Augustine as Paul Tillich can
summarize his view as: “On the one hand, there is the city of God, on the other the city of earth or the devil.”24 This
is no spiritual ontology; this is mythic dissociation.

I do not mean to pin this dualism solely on Augustine; it is a mythic dissociation inherent in the worldview which,
for other reasons, he felt compelled to embrace. Augustine, I am tempted to say, is actually the very best one can
possibly do with the Plotinian system if it must be strained into a mythic worldview. But both Augustine’s fans and
detractors have pointed to this unstable dualism in this system, and to his “otherworldly” bent, the stamp of
frustrated Ascent (and therefore crippled Descent).

And if “Augustine is the foundation of everything the West had to say,” well then, everything the West had to say
was: frustrated Ascent, spiritus interruptus. And thus no true Descent, no true divinization of this Earth, of this body,
or of this life.

THE SCHIZOID GOD

Lovejoy, who does not understand the contemplative and experiential nature of this split (between Descended this-

worldly and Ascended otherworldly), nonetheless is again the perfect reporter of what did in fact happen, which is
that the West was saddled with two absolutely incompatible Gods:

The one God was the goal of the “way up,” of that ascending process by which the finite soul, turning from all
created things, took its way back to the immutable Perfection in which alone it could find rest. The other God
was the source and the informing energy of that descending process by which Being flows through all levels of
possibility down to the very lowest. . . .

There was no way in which the flight from the Many to the One, the quest of a perfection defined wholly in
terms of contrast with the created world, could be effectively harmonized with the imitation of a Goodness
that delights in diversity and manifests itself in the emanation of the Many out of the One.25

Once true Ascent was denied, true Descent was likewise lost, and their secret marriage remained deeply a secret.
The pessimistic Ascenders dourly pursued an otherworldly Goal they were assured of never reaching, and the
optimistic Descenders giddily embraced a this-worldly creation whose Source they celebrated but never
experienced.

And this produced, as I said, two Gods and two World Stances that were different in every conceivable way. It was
not just a difference in “theoretical” orientations (although that was constantly debated); it was through and
through a difference in paradigmatic injunctions and exemplars, in practical lifestyles, in the very goal of what it
meant to be human and to lead “the good life.”

The Ascending program demanded a withdrawal from all “attachment to creatures.” It recommended ascetic,
sometimes harsh discipline, always oriented toward a withdrawal of attention from the senses, from the body, from
the earth, and above all from sexuality (and therefore woman)—all of which were looked upon as temptations or
much worse (even though all were “theoretically” creations of the Good). That is, they all became objects of Phobos,
not Eros.

This “oneness strategy” was introspective and highly

introverted; and wherever it appeared it brought a
thoroughgoing worldly pessimism (one of its key features, whether in religion or philosophy) and a contemptus
mundi. “My Kingdom is not of this world” and “Lay not your fortune upon this earth” were its earmarks. Worldly
pursuits were ultimately for the deluded, who could “participate” in the Good through the sacraments, but were
otherwise lost in the Cave of Shadows. The “cloistered life” was the only good life, and the only life that could lead to
a true imitatio Dei.

The Descending program led in precisely the opposite direction, following precisely the opposite God.

It
summoned men and women to participate,
in the creative passion of God, and to
collaborate consciously in the processes by which the diversity of things, the Plenitude and Fullness of the universe,
is achieved. It found its beatific vision in the joy of beholding the splendor of creation; or in excitedly tracing out the
detail of its infinite variety. It placed the active life above contemplation. It was altogether extroverted, and brought
always in its wake an optimism that would over and over again be codified in the phrase “This is the best of all
possible worlds” (meaning that it all comes straight from God and expresses Goodness).26

in some finite measure,

And as for its imitatio Dei, it often viewed the activity of the creative artist (in its many forms) as the mode of
human life most like the Divine, because the artist participates in the creative process, a process that is similar to, or
even one with, the Superabundance and Effulgence of Spirit that brings forth the glories of the Many from the One.
And yet, so driven was this path to go outward and outward that it fell constantly into the clutches of downward and
downward: not Agape, but Thanatos; not an embrace of the lower by the higher, but a simple embrace of the lower,
period—with all height and all depth reduced, flattened, leveled, extinguished.

These two Gods wrestled for the soul of Western humanity for the next thousand years (and, in fact, have done so
right up to today, as we will see). Since these Gods were, at this point, utterly incompatible, the Church officially had
to choose one. Under sway of the unearthly Trinity, it chose, of course, the former, the path of (frustrated) Ascent.

It was the Idea of the Good [Ascending], not the conception of a generative Goodness [Descending], that
determined the ethical teaching of the Church (at least in her counsels of perfection) and shaped the
assumptions concerning man’s chief end which dominated European thought down to the Renaissance, and in

orthodox theology, Protestant as well as Catholic, beyond it. The “way up” alone was the direction in which
man was to look for the good. . . .27

Such was the thousand-year reign of the mythically Ascended God, about which, in this short survey, we need say
not much more. I have wished only to suggest its origin and its internal structure, what it accomplished (which was
much to the good), and what it tore asunder (which was equally far-reaching).

Because then, most interesting of all: starting with the Renaissance and running through the Enlightenment, there
occurred what we might call “the great reversal.” Suddenly, very suddenly, the Ascenders were out, the Descenders
were in—and the transition was bloody, arguably the bloodiest cognitive transformation in European history.

THE GREAT PLENITUDE

In order to understand the coming dominance of the Descenders, it is necessary to understand how the nondual
system of Plato/Plotinus viewed the Descending Path of Efflux or Plenitude, which was only half of the equation,
but which may be summarized in the modern phrase “Biodiversity is good.”

And not just biodiversity. Diversity per se was the direct evidence of the extraordinary Superabundance and

Goodness of the One, and therefore the more diversity, the greater the Goodness.

I emphasize that phrase because it is, we will abundantly see, the key to the God of the Descenders (which itself

was “half” of the God of Plotinus, very crucial but very partial).

In the Timaeus (the intellectual West’s Bible of Effulgence), Plato had already maintained that we must not
suppose that “the world was made in the likeness of any Idea that is merely partial; for nothing incomplete is
beautiful. We must suppose rather that it is the perfect image of the whole of which all animals—both individuals
and species—are parts. For the pattern of the universe contains within itself the intelligible forms of all beings just as
this world comprehends us and all other visible creatures.” Thus, creative Effulgence resulted in “this world like the
most fairest and most perfect of intelligible beings—one visible living being containing within itself all other living
beings of like nature”—which is exactly why Plato referred to the entire manifest universe as “a visible, sensible
God” and a “superorganism.” In order, he says, “that the Whole may be really All, the universe was filled completely”
and thereby became “a visible God—the greatest, the best, the fairest, the most perfect.”28

Thus, in this view, the existence of all possible kinds of beings, no matter whether we judge them to be good or
bad, higher or lower, better or worse—all are an integral and necessary part of the Kosmos, and thus each has
intrinsic worth just as it is. Put bluntly, the world is better, the more things it contains.

Plotinus, carrying on this nondual vision, says that we are like people who do not understand art and would thus
like to eliminate certain colors from a painting simply because we judge them “the less beautiful,” not realizing that
that would destroy the whole painting at the same time. “To eliminate any characters,” says Plotinus, “would be to
spoil the beauty of the whole; and it is by means of them that it becomes complete.” Thus, he says, those who would
“eliminate from the universe” what they think of as “inferior beings” would simply “eliminate Providence itself,”
whose nature it is to “produce all things and to diversify all in the manner of their existence.”29

Lovejoy demonstrates that wherever the Descending current was acknowledged—under the general name of the
principle of Plenitude—it was always of the form: the Goodness of the One is reflected in the “variety of its parts”;
the greater the diversity, the greater the Goodness. Maximization of diversity is, so to speak, what Plenitude seeks.

We will see, in the next chapter, what an extraordinary influence this doctrine of Plenitude had in the rise of
modernity, from its sciences to its politics to its ethics (and, of course, it is still loudly echoed by theorists from
multiculturalists to ecophilosophers, most of whom evidence no idea of its original source).

Again, the easiest way to summarize Plenitude (or Efflux) is to say, not just that diversity is good for us
humans—a very geocentric, anthropocentric, egocentric stance—but that diversity is the very Goodness of the One
itself, quite apart from what it may or may not have to do with humans. This was part of Plotinus’s devastating
attack on the Gnostics, who, viewing humans as the top of the scale of being, in effect ignored and devalued the rest
of the scale itself, and thus could not see “that the sun is Divine, and the earth Divine, and all manner of beings
Divine.”

This realization came, as I said, directly from Plotinus’s radically decentered and nonanthropocentric stance. He
does not develop biodiversity because it is good for humans, or because human existence depends upon it (although
he recognizes that), or because it’s nice to go out and have a “wilderness experience”—all of those, for Plotinus, are
anthropocentric to the core, and serve only the ego in men and women, not the Divine in each and all.

On the Ascending side, according to Plotinus: as long as we are still Ascending and have not yet actually
discovered the formless One, which is equally present in all beings—then the world indeed appears as a great
hierarchy of beings, from the lowest to the highest, a scale kept in place by our own ignorance, but a scale or ladder
that must first be completely climbed before we can throw it away; those who throw it away without climbing it are
merely the Descenders, the troglodytes who worship the Shadows without seeing the Light.

And the central point of this Great Holarchy or Great Chain of (Apparent) Being was summarized in the phrase:
there are no gaps in nature. Although there were indeed (apparent) grades of existence, from the lowest to the
highest, each shaded into the other with “the least degree of possible difference” (Aristotle). No “links” in the Great
Chain could be left empty, or the universe would not be “Full,” would not express the plenum formarum that
delights in diversity.

And thus, precisely because the universe was a great holarchy, completely “Full” as an expression of the Goodness
of Spirit, each “level” or “grade” was perfectly continuous with both its senior and junior dimensions (Aristotle:
“Things are said to be continuous whenever there is one and the same limit of both wherein they overlap and which
they possess in common”)—there were no gaps, no holes, no missing links in the universe: the Kosmos was one
tightly woven fabric of Goodness.

“If there is between two given natural species a theoretically possible intermediate type, that type must be
realized—and so on ad indefinitum; otherwise, there would be gaps in the universe, the creation would not be as
‘full’ as it might be, and this would imply that its Source was not ‘good,’ in the sense of the Timaeus.”30 This was not
primarily a logical deduction, as Lovejoy supposes, but a contemplative experience of a superabundance that, like
water, would overflow into any and every nook and cranny, leaving nothing dry—hence, “there are no gaps in
nature.”

At the same time, this did not prevent Plotinus (and his nondual descendents) from also seeing that “nature
makes leaps everywhere.” A higher level, recall, was defined (by Aristotle) as one that had the essentials of the lower
plus an extra something (an emergent) that defined the new level and was not present in the junior dimension. But
the idea was that, at some point, they shared a common boundary, so that nothing was radically disjointed in the
universe, even though it was everywhere shaded or graded. Either point taken alone—“no gaps” versus “leaps
everywhere”—would lead to an unbalanced view.31

The upshot of all this was that the manifest universe was viewed as a huge organic Totality, graded in terms of
levels of diversity, but with each and all an integral link in the Kosmos, and “the perfection of the universe is attained
essentially in proportion to the diversity of natures in it” (Saint Thomas). Precisely because of the Great Holarchy, the
manifest world was one and unbroken. Nicholas Cusanus (one of the great representatives of the nondual during the
late Middle Ages):

All things, however different, are linked together. There is in the genera of things such a connection between
the higher and the lower that they meet in a common point; such an order obtains among species that the
highest species of one genus coincides with the lowest of the next higher genus, in order that the universe
may be one, perfect, continuous.32

Plenitude expresses itself in apparent gradation—everything can’t burst on the scene all at once!—but a gradation
that is “full” and continuous and unbroken, with humans occupying one slot among an infinite number of slots. Far
from placing men and women at the center of the Kosmos—as is obnoxiously supposed by many ecological
critics—this conception made them acutely aware of how insignificant their actual position was. Already Maimonides
in the twelfth century had written (in The Guide for the Perplexed, the same title that Schumacher deliberately used
in his book extolling the Great Holarchy):33

And if the earth is thus no bigger than a point relatively to the sphere of the fixed stars, what must be the ratio

of the human species to the created universe as a whole? And how then can any of us think that these things
exist for his sake, and that they are meant to serve his uses?

All of this radical nonanthropocentrism came, as we saw, precisely because of the radically decentered nature of
Nondual mysticism. Thus Giordano Bruno would state flat out, “Thou canst not more nearly approach to a likeness of
the Infinite by being a man than by being an ant; not more nearly by being a star than by being a man.”34 This would
likewise allow Bruno to realize that “because of the countless grades of perfection in which the incorporeal divine
Excellence must needs manifest itself in a corporeal manner, there must be countless individuals such as are those
great living beings of which our divine mother, the Earth, is one.”35

This did not sit well with the Church, which did not take kindly to a God who was equidistant from an ant and a
man, and who had already situated Motherhood quite elsewhere. But the crucial point, as Lovejoy expertly
summarizes it, was that:

No creature’s existence was merely instrumental to the well-being of those above it in the scale [the great
holarchy]. Each had its own independent reason for being; in the final account, none was more important
than any other [ultimately, as Plotinus said, each was fully the One; gradation is apparent]; and each,
therefore, had its own claim to respect and consideration, its own right to live its own life and to possess all
that might be needful to enable it to fulfill the functions and enjoy the “privileges and perquisites” of its
station. Each link in the Chain of Being exists, not merely and not primarily for the benefit of any other link, but
for its own sake; and therefore the true raison d’etre of one species of being was never to be sought in its
utility to any other.36

And thus, all of the following were present in the Descending Side of the Plato/Plotinus system (balanced and
integrated, of course, with its counterpart on the Ascending Side): a radically decentered vision, nonanthropocentric
to the core; an apparent gradation of being with no missing links, no gaps, but emergents at a common boundary; a
necessity for biodiversity and a delight in the manifold nature of the creative process; a desire to participate fully in
the passion of Spirit’s creative Goodness; an exuberant embrace of diversity as “the Goodness of the One”; and a
celebration of the earth and all its creatures as “a visible, sensible God” and our “divine Mother.”

That is the half of the equation that had been downplayed, even repressed, under the rule of the unearthly
Trinity—from the time, roughly, of Augustine to Copernicus. All of those ideas were thus present, simmering, hidden
under the weight of the rather exclusively Ascending Ideal of the age.

And whereas the Ascenders had dominated the scene up to the Renaissance, all it took was a decisive shift in
consciousness to unleash the Descending Path, a path which, bursting forth from its thousand-year confinement,
exploded on the scene with a creative fury that would, in the span of a mere few centuries, remake the entire
Western world—and in the process substitute, more or less permanently, one broken God for the other.

11

Brave New World

All fixed, fast-frozen relations, with their train of ancient and venerable prejudices and opinions, are swept
away, all new-formed ones become antiquated before they can ossify. All that is solid melts into air, all that
is holy is profaned, and man is at last compelled to face with sober senses his real conditions of life, and his
relations with his kind.

—KARL MARX, on modernity

“MODERNITY”: ALL THAT

is solid melts into air. We are still living in its shadow, still under the sway of powerful

currents unleashed three centuries ago, still trying to situate ourselves in a Kosmos profoundly shaken by the events
of the Enlightenment, still wondering exactly what it all meant.

But this much seems certain: from the Renaissance to the Enlightenment (to today): the Ascenders were out, the

Descenders were in.

And the catalyst was the widespread emergence of Reason (formal operational), not just in a few individuals
(which had often happened in the past), but as a basic organizing principle of society itself (which had never
happened in the past)—a Reason that was in fact an actual ascending or transcending of myth, but a Reason that,
fed up with a millennium of (frustrated) upward-looking, turned its eyes instead to the glories of this manifest world,
and followed that descending God who finds its passion and delight—and its perfect consummation—in the marvels
and the wonders of diversity.

MODERNITY: GOOD NEWS, BAD NEWS

The movement of modernity (from the Enlightenment to today) contained, and contains, two very different trends.
And in trying to situate ourselves in relation to modernity—and in trying to decide whether modernity was “good
news” or “bad news”—both of these trends, I believe, need to be kept firmly in mind.

The first trend that defined modernity was “No more myths!” (and the Enlightenment philosophers would use
exactly that phrase in describing their own endeavors). The Enlightenment mentality, with its rational demand for
evidence, burst asunder the closed circle of the mythological world and deconstructed its cultural worldspace in no
uncertain terms—and did so by asking, in each and every case, “How do you know Moses parted the Red Sea?”
“Because it says so in the Bible”—where for a thousand years that would have been an irrefutable and
unchallengeable answer, it now impressed no one (no one “in the know,” that is).

And so some two thousand years after a mythic-membership society had forced the first great proponent of
Reason to drink hemlock, the first Reason-oriented societies now turned on their mythic predecessors with a
vengeance.

The mythic dominator hierarchies (God and Pope and King on top, with shades and grades of servitude stretching
out beneath), and the politico-religious forms of social organization that went with them, were dismantled with
frightening and often bloody speed. “Remember the cruelties!” cried Voltaire—“Liberty or death!” the American
revolutionaries screamed—as the dominator hierarchies, often vicious and cruel, everywhere began to topple,
precisely because they were top-heavy with a depth they did not earn or deserve or in fact possess (however much

they did indeed serve their phase-specific task of social integration).

As we put it earlier, the relatively widespread emergence of an ego identity from a role identity (and the switch
from a conventional/sociocentric to a postconventional/worldcentric morality) was a major evolutionary
transformation and transcendence (driven by Eros, or the self-transcending drive of the Kosmos). This brought with
it an eventual demand for (1) free and equal subjects of civil law, (2) morally free subjects, and (3) politically free
subjects as citizens of the democratic state. And to say “free subjects” means only that the rational-ego possessed
more relative autonomy (tenet 12d) compared with the tightly bound mythic-membership roles in dominator
hierarchies (even if the rational-ego imagined its “autonomy” to be much more absolute). But all of that, with its
own ups and downs, was part of the overall “good news” of modernity: a genuine transformation in the average
mode of consciousness.

But “No more myths!” came also to mean—and here is the second major trend that defines modernity—“No
more Ascent!” Since the myths were all upward-yearning, “No more myths!” seemed to demand no more upward-
yearning of any sort (frustrated or genuine or anything in between). Understandably fed up with a millennium or two
of (frustrated) upward-yearning and “pie in the sky” aspirations, Reason threw out the transcendental baby with the
mythic bathwater.

This jettisoning of higher Ascent was allowed, even demanded, by the positivism of the evidence now recognized
by rationality. Since rational science could represent every event in the Kosmos as a Right-Hand empirical,
observable, natural phenomenon, no higher or “metaphysical” states were needed (and thus, Ockhamly, none were
allowed). Since every holon in the Kosmos does indeed possess a Right-Hand component, empirical science could
honestly, even decently, but nonetheless mistakenly, imagine that in registering the empirical component it had
covered all the bases.

Thus the Kosmos was collapsed into the Right-Hand path, and a flatland empirical holism (with a few flatland
atomistic cranks) replaced a multidimensional holarchy as the guiding paradigm (the fundamental Enlightenment
paradigm, as we put it earlier). The same Reason that allowed the deconstruction of the dominator hierarchies
inherent in the mythic structure could also, with the same tools, collapse the Kosmos in favor of the cosmos. This
“flatland,” I will argue, was the essence of the “bad news.”

And these are the two major trends (“No more myths!” and “No more Ascent!”) that gave modernity its “good

news, bad news” character (or so I will try to show).

From the very beginning of modernity—from the beginning of the changes wrought from Descartes to
Kant—there have been its many vocal critics (none more perceptive and brutal than Hegel, for whom the
Enlightenment in general, and Kant in particular, was a “vanity of the understanding” and a “monster of arrested
development”). From Nietzsche to Bataille to Foucault, from Heidegger to Derrida to Lyotard, the critics have
continued their assault, with the postmodern poststructuralists being merely the most recent, although possibly the
loudest, of the long line of antimodernists.

But it’s the “good news, bad news” nature of modernity that most of these critics all too often seem to miss, and
they especially miss (or ignore) anything resembling “good news.” But after all, the students in Tiananmen Square
were screaming the names of Locke and Jefferson; they were not screaming the names of Foucault and Derrida.

Charles Taylor surely captures the essence of the situation when he says, “I find myself dissatisfied with the views
on this subject [the nature of modernity] which are now current. Some are upbeat, and see us as having climbed to a
higher plateau; others show a picture of decline, of loss, of forgetfulness. Neither sort seems to me right; both ignore
massively important features of our situation. We have yet to capture, I think, the unique combination of greatness
and danger, of grandeur et misère, which characterizes the modern age. To see the full complexity and richness of
the modern identity is to see, first, how much we are all caught up in it, for all our attempts to repudiate it; and
second, how shallow and partial are the one-sided judgements we bandy around about it.”1

This is, as Taylor indicates, an enormously rich and complex topic; so much so that the entire third volume of this
series (The Spirit of Post/Modernity) is devoted entirely to it. What I am doing in this chapter and the next is simply
summarizing and condensing an enormous number of factors into these two broad trends, “No more myths!” (the
good news), and “No more Ascent!” (the bad news).2

The former was, so to speak, a step up, a shift in the center of gravity of society from mythic-membership to

rational-egoic; it was a major step in Ascent, driven by Eros. Most important of all, it brought a differentiation of the
Big Three (science, art, and morality), with the now-disclosed possibility of actually advancing each of their truth
claims in a worldcentric and universal pluralism of tolerance and mutual recognition. And even though that was
collectively an evolutionary advance, a moving forward of Eros, like every stage in development it nonetheless
brought its own problems that could not be solved on its own level (the dialectic of progress).

But quite apart from all that, as a separate line of analysis, there was “No more Ascent!”—that is, “Ascend to
Reason, but no further!”—and this brought nothing but bad news. It not only flattened the Kosmos to a one-
dimensional, monological affair, it sealed out the possibility of deeper and wider developments that alone could
defuse its own insoluble dilemmas. If, for example, rationality had finally differentiated the Big Three, so that art
and science and morality could fortify and enrich their own pursuits without dogmatic interference, nonetheless,
without a further ascent to vision-logic, there was no way that the Big Three could be integrated (as Schelling and
Hegel would both point out). The differentiation of the Big Three thus degenerated, by the end of the eighteenth
century, into the dissociation of the Big Three (a point made by Habermas)—which in turn allowed the Big Three to
be rudely reduced to the Big One of it-language: the flatland, one-dimensional, monological systems theory of the
representational and production paradigms, nightmares through and through, with all interior depth, whether in
humans or animals or any sentient being, reduced to being merely a strand in the endlessly flat and faded system.

confined to flatland

Thus, reason itself was an increase in interior depth compared to myth (formop transcends and includes conop).
But reason
(reason recognizing only Right-Hand, empirical, sensorimotor objects) is a
consciousness confined to a lesser reality than most myth acknowledged (e.g., a Divine domain). Thus, under the “No
more Ascent!” agenda, reason abandoned higher, other worlds altogether, and scrunched itself down to what it
could grasp with its senses—scrunched itself down, that is to say, to some of the most fundamental, least significant
holons in existence: exterior, sensorimotor, empirical objects, and its.

To put it all in a sentence, modernity brought a deeper subject in a shallower world: and thus, I have some good

news, and some bad news.

THE AGE OF REASON

In this chapter, the good news.

From the Renaissance to the Enlightenment, the names say it all: Copernicus, Kepler, Galileo, Leonardo da Vinci,
Botticelli, Michelangelo, Raphael, Machiavelli, Alexander Pope, Erasmus, Francis Bacon, Jan van Eyck, Giotto,
Shakespeare, Isaac Newton, John Locke, G. E. Lessing, Descartes, Spinoza, Voltaire, Leibniz, Rousseau, Diderot,
Hume, Kant, Thomas Paine, Thomas Jefferson.

What they all had in common (other than the fact that they were all men—that is part of the next, “bad news”
chapter) was that they shared, in various degrees and in different ways, the space of possibilities disclosed and
created by rationality. (“Reason,” with a capital R, technically refers to vision-logic or dialectical-network reason, as
opposed to simple formal-operational reasoning, or “the understanding.” But when historians refer to the “Age of
Reason,” they mean formal operational as we have defined it. The context will make clear which usage is intended.)

The “emergence of Reason” and the “Age of Reason” do not mean that individuals prior to this time had no access
to rationality. We saw that the space of rationality was accessible, to the few, even when the average or typical
mode was magical; and some individuals—the Eckharts and Teresas and Platos—had access not only to rationality
but beyond it to subtle and causal occasions.3

Rather, the “Age of Reason” simply means that access to the space of reason was now common enough that the
“center of social gravity”—the basic organizing principles of society—shifted from mythic-rational to rational
structures (as evidenced legally, politically, institutionally), with, again, some people falling below the norm, others
above it. Reason became both a basic principle of social organization and the highest expectable potential for the
average individual.

And while we eventually want to move beyond rationality (and its own inherent limitations and grave problems),

it is crucial to acknowledge what it did manage to accomplish, and what its evolutionarily phase-specific task was.

I believe it is a profound truth of human development that one can fully transcend any level only if one fully

honors it first (thus allowing embrace/Agape). Otherwise one’s “development” is simply a reaction to, a reaction
against, the preceding level, and thus one remains stuck to it with the energy of disapproval—Phobos, not Eros.

Let us come to bury Caesar; let us come to praise him first. If we look at the above-mentioned list of names,
virtually all of their works, and all of their accomplishments, can be read directly off the list of the characteristics of
formal operational awareness that we have already discussed:

1. Rationality is hypothetico-deductive or experimental—Tycho Brahe, Kepler, Galileo, Newton, Darwin, Charcot,
Kelvin. Rationality demands evidence and reasons, not dogmas and myths, which is precisely why (as Whitehead
pointed out for the West and Needham for the East) the mystics and the newly rising scientists often joined hands
against the Church (or exoteric religions), since both mysticism and science are experimental and evidential. It was
the demand for evidence that, more than any other component of the Age of Reason, would shatter the closed
world of mythology in an irreversible and irrevocable way: that toothpaste could never be put back in the tube.

But let us note the intricacy of what was actually involved: it wasn’t simply that the mythic worldview had no
recourse to evidence of any sort; its evidence, rather, was grounded in the obviousness (and “unchallengeableness”)
of its own worldspace, and was
true enough in that worldspace.4Within that mythic worldspace, there was
evidence aplenty: the gods and goddesses exist (“How do you know they exist?” “Are you crazy? Where do you think
the rain comes from? Look at the creation all around you! Can’t you see? Are you blind?”). And the gods and
goddesses have given us their words; the pharaoh/king/emperor is the descendant of the gods, and thus we owe our
allegiance to this temporal representative of the gods/goddesses; the evidence for this is everywhere, you have
simply to look!

Thus, to say that the mythic worldspace was not fallibilist misses the point. Any given interpretation within the
mythic worldspace could indeed be rejected by a community of interpreters, and this happened all the time. It is
true that the mythic worldspace was not fallibilist from the depth of rationality (i.e., was not fallibilist to the types
of evidence that rationality would disclose): but that evidence simply could not be seen in the first place, and so
didn’t (and couldn’t) enter the picture to dislodge any particular interpretations. But the bad interpretations within
the mythic worldspace were indeed rebuffed by a community of competent interpreters in tune with the nuances of
the mythic worldspace (and they were right more often than not, in that space). These structures weren’t stupid
(no structure is; and they all produced their own bona fide geniuses). Rather, each structure weighs carefully the
evidence that it can see.

In other words, the hermeneutics of any worldspace is closed and perfectly evidential for that worldspace. No new
interpretation will step outside the worldspace. Rather, a developmental supersession will suddenly, via emergence,
disclose new depths and wider perceptions that themselves pass judgment on yesterday’s relative blindness. It is
transformation that negates the old translations, and not anything the translations themselves could see from within
their own horizons (and bad interpretations within those relatively true horizons can be, and are, soundly rejected
by the evidence that the eyes of that structure can see, and see quite clearly, as far as it goes).

Likewise, Reason also imagines that its evidence is simply the evidence, obvious and incontrovertible per se (i.e.,
type of evidence is likewise stamped with “unchallengeableness”). Bad interpretations within its rational
its
horizon (which also means within its structural worldspace) will be soundly rebuffed from within that horizon by the
community of those whose eyes can see the depths disclosed by rationality. Interpretations from the transrational
structures will not be rebuffed: they will simply not be seen in the first place, and thus will be met with the standard
“What, are you crazy?” (which is not a rebuff but a retreat).

But the evidence disclosed by rationality will indeed be able to outcontextualize, and thus outtrump, the evidence
disclosed within the horizons and the structures of mythic awareness (just as mythic masterfully out-trumped and
outcontextualized magic). It is not that a greater and absolute truth overthrows a falsehood, so much as that a great
truth supersedes a lesser truth (no epoch lives, or can live, simply on falsehoods). And this is what the Age of
Enlightenment brought to bear upon the Age of Myth: a new horizon of evidence that outcontextualized the old.

And outcontextualize, it did indeed. We tend to forget the evidence that the mythic worldspace took to be
perfectly obvious. Here is one of the widely accepted “refutations” of Galileo’s discovery of the moons of Jupiter:
“There are seven windows given to animals in the domicile of the head, through which the air is admitted to the
tabernacle of the body, to enlighten, to warm and to nourish it. What are these parts of the microcosm? Two

nostrils, two eyes, two ears, and a mouth. So in the heavens, as in a macrocosmos, there are two favorable stars,
two unpropitious, two luminaries, and Mercury undecided and indifferent. From this and many other similarities in
nature, such as the seven metals, etc., which it were tedious to enumerate, we gather that the number of planets is
necessarily seven.”5

That is an excellent and very accurate description of the insides of the mythological worldspace, where syncretic
wholes define the nature of interconnectivity in the Kosmos as disclosed at that depth. Rationality can explain the
interconnectivity from a deeper dimension, and thus marshal more types of evidence, but rationality is not itself
operating from the final Archimedian point of all possible worlds.

A thousand years from now, when atoms are understood to be pinpoint entries of a massive intelligence from the
eighth dimension (or whatever the discoveries are that will shock and shake our present views, as shock they most
certainly shall), we will look not so bright and gifted in our firm assurances of what the Kosmos is “actually” like.
Atoms will still be atoms (no truths will be lost); but they will be set in deeper contexts that will render our narrower
perspectives and interpretations as silly-sounding as the poor soul who lit into Galileo all self-assured and confident.
But my present point is simple enough: the types of evidence rationality could disclose had it all over the mythic
structure; a shallower context gave way to a deeper disclosure; and the death rattle of an old and honorable
worldspace released its last breath into the rising wind blowing now across a strange new landscape.

2. Rationality is highly reflexive and introspective—as witness the constant introspective analyses of Descartes,

Locke, Berkeley, Hume, Kant (descendants each and all of Augustine’s rational and radical reflexivity).

Take, as an example, the study of psychology, the study of an individual psyche. The word “psychology” itself
wasn’t even used until Freigius in 1575; but by the closing decade of the sixteenth century, it was common to treat
anthropologia—the study of human nature—as composed of two parts: psychologia and somatologia, reflecting
the ever-clearer differentiation of mind and body (typical of formop). The first widespread use of the term
psychology was by Christian von Wolff, successor of Leibniz and predecessor of Kant, in such works as Psychologia
Empirica (1731) and Psychologia Rationalis (1734). The term was picked up by Hartley in England (1748) and
Bonnet in France (1755), and by the end of the eighteenth century it was in widespread use, reflecting, it appears, a
newly emergent entity to be studied: the individual ego.

The first modern “school” of psychology was the associationist school of David Hartley, John Stuart Mill, and
Alexander Bain (in England); and the first experimental approach was the great laboratory work of Weber, Fechner,
Wundt (in Germany) and Titchener (in England)—the point being that all of this was made possible, in large measure,
by the structural worldspace of rationality and its reflexive/introspective modes.

3. Rationality grasps multiple perspectives (or is universal as pluralism). This perspectivism/pluralism showed up
in everything from political theory to art. John Locke wrote three separate essays on tolerance (or the acceptance of
different perspectives and points of view, except those that condemn others), concluding, among other things, that
no one had a right to harm another in “life, health, liberty, or possessions”—the influence of which on subsequent
history was simply incalculable.

In art, to give a very different but very related example, perspectivism began to be actually depicted, for the first
time ever,
in painting, beginning in fifteenth-century Florence and eventually associated with the names of
Brunelleschi, Alberti, Donatello, Leonardo, Giotto. As Jean Gebser put it, “An entirely new spatial consciousness was
beginning to break out of the soul into the world. By virtue of the perspective, not only is space made visible and
brought out into the daylight of waking consciousness; man himself thereby attains visibility. The gradual possession
of the perspective, which became the principal concern of Renaissance man, had the effect of expanding the world
image. . . .”6 And this “visibility of man” is directly related to:

4.

Rationality brings forth an ego identity from the previous role identity. Morality is, or can now be,
postconventional and worldcentric, not merely conventional and ethnocentric and sociocentric (or mythic-
membership). Moral decisions thus rest with the individual, who must assume responsibility for his or her own
relatively autonomous choices (and who may or may not choose to live up to rationality and act from a worldcentric
space of universal pluralism—but the relatively autonomous choice is nonetheless present).

And, indeed, autonomy became one of the great and enduring themes of the Enlightenment. Kant would define
it as the courage to think for oneself and not rely on socially given rules and dogmas. (That this would play into the

disengaged subject of flatland holism is a point we will pursue in the next chapter.)

In political theory (and practice), this resulted, as we have seen, in the conception of men (and soon women) as
autonomous agents, which meant free and equal subjects of civil law, morally free subjects, and politically free
subjects or democratic citizens of the state.

In art, this meant, for the first time, that there was an actual person (ego-bearer) to paint: the beginning of
portraiture (such as by Jan van Eyck). And if there was now an ego to be painted, there was likewise a story to be
told, a narrative of, by, and about egos: the novel was born.

5. Rationality is ecological or relational. Along with autonomy, the great theme of the Enlightenment was systems
harmony, which did not mean “peaceful” or “without conflict,” but rather that the “whole system” of reality would
balance itself out in spite of the particular conflicts and discords that individual components might undergo. As we
have seen (and will see again in the next chapter), it was a thoroughgoing systems view of reality, where the totality
“self-regulated itself” despite all the ups and downs of individuals. And this systems view, despite what misuses it
might suffer, was nonetheless a great advance over mythology in understanding the interconnectivity of the Kosmos,
for it replaced belief in syncretic wholes (seven orifices mean seven planets) with an understanding of holons, or
whole/parts that are contextually situated in a way that does not do violence to individual wholes or parts.

(That this systems view would also involve the collapse of the Kosmos into the empirical holistic cosmos of
monological flatland—this is a separate issue, part of the “bad news” of the next chapter; and that this holistic
worldview would paradoxically be one of the greatest contributors to an ecological crisis: that, too, the topic of the
next chapter.)

In the meantime, the relational mode of systems thinking was all the rage. It was literally everywhere, and was
greeted with cries of Eureka across the Continent and the Isles. We see it in, for example, Adam Smith’s “invisible
hand,” where, in spite of the fact that each individual might act in a greedy fashion, the overall result was good and
beneficial for the whole (it was believed). We see it in Leibniz’s “preestablished” harmony of all monads. We see it
powerfully in John Locke’s notion of “interlocking orders.” In politics, it shows up most influentially in Rousseau’s
idea of the “general will” of the people, which supposed that if each individual follows his or her own reasons, a
majority or consensus will emerge that will be to the benefit of all. This volonte generale was a direct precursor to
the American and French revolutions. But the point is that “all the philosophers of the Enlightenment use this
concept of harmony directly or indirectly, explicitly or implicitly,”7
and all were given to exaltations of the
“perfection of the great Universal System.”

6. Rationality is nonanthropocentric. The shocking decentering that rationality/science brought is now notorious:
Copernicus, Darwin, Freud—men and women are merely links in that vast, vast chain of existence. (This had always
been obvious to the likes of Cusanus or Bruno or Plotinus; we are now discussing what rationality brought to the
average-mode and what thus came to be very commonly accepted views outside of the mythic holdovers.)

As we will see in the next chapter, this anti-anthropocentric stance became so intense at times that ethics virtually
stalled altogether, so paralyzed were people with the thought of their utter insignificance. To step outside of one’s
imperfection was viewed as pride, the great sin of the eighteenth century, and there emerged a moral atmosphere
that “may be described as a counsel of imperfection—an ethics of prudent mediocrity.”8 But all of this was a direct
result of the fact that reason could set aside its own viewpoint, its own egocentricities, and see the world through
the eyes of the other, and thus begin to honor the other in unprecedented ways, and, for better or worse, to
profoundly question its own right to existence.

7. Rationality brings a new space of deeper feeling and greater passion—the explosive idealism of the true
dreamer who can cognitively imagine all the possibilities. This new passion—coupled with reason’s capacity for
postconventional morality and its capacity to criticize the given state of affairs in light of a possible future—meant
that this was not just the Age of Reason, it was the Age of Revolution.

We must understand what this reason was. It was not [just] a calculating reason which decides whether to do
this or that, depending on which is more advantageous. Rather, it was a full, passionate, revolutionary
emphasis on man’s essential goodness in the name of the principle of justice [postconventional morality]. The
revolutionary fought against feudalism and the authoritarian churches. He had a passionate belief in the

[goodness or harmony] of reality and was convinced that the human mind is able to re-establish this structure
by transforming society. We could therefore call it revolutionary reason as well as critical reason. Because of
its depths this critical revolutionary reason overcame the prejudices of the feudal order, the heteronomous
[sociocentric] subjection of people both by the state and the church. It could do so because it spoke in the
name of [pluralistic or postconventional] truth and justice. The philosophers of the Enlightenment were
extremely passionate. They were not positivists [merely one of the possibilities of reason]; they were not
interested in merely collecting facts. They became martyrs for the passion. . . .9

This was particularly a passion, we might say, for the equality found only in the noospheric space of reason. The
result, of course, is the existence of today’s pluralistic democracies, forged by a passion for tolerance—a tolerance
that, since not all of its citizens can always live up to it, is therefore firmly embedded in legal institutions, and a
tolerance that, from its inception, has always been driving toward the emergence of planetary vision-logic with its
genuinely world-class citizens. And one can only stand in utter awe and admiration for the many men and women
who fought and died, from America to France, under the slogan “I disagree with what you say but will defend to the
death your right to say it.”

THE LIBERATION MOVEMENTS

The widespread emergence of reason meant, as always, a new differentiation demanding a new integration. We
have already seen that some of the new and important differentiations included a separation of church and state;
the differentiation of the Big Three (an important point we will return to in a moment); and the increasingly clearer
differentiation of the noosphere and the biosphere.

Most significantly, this differentiation of noosphere and biosphere meant, of course, that the differentiation could
go too far into dissociation, and this dissociation would show up in an extraordinary number of guises. First and
foremost, the stage was set for a possible ecological crisis, a possibility that of late has become an increasingly
gruesome actuality. The ecological crisis, as we earlier put it, is a worldwide, collective psychoneurosis—a denial,
alienation, dissociation of the biosphere by the noosphere.

The ecophilosophers maintain that the ecological crisis is the result of human beings not realizing that they are
merely a part of a larger biosphere. But that, as we have seen, gets the picture exactly backward, and cannot even
explain how a part can dominate the whole. No, we have seen quite clearly that the human compound individual is
not a part of the biosphere. Rather, a part of the human compound individual is a part of the biosphere, and the
biosphere itself is a part of the noosphere (because the noosphere transcends and includes the biosphere). And for
just that reason, repression can set in; for just that reason, the noosphere can dissociate the biosphere; and for just
that reason, the poisoning of our roots means the death of our branches as well.

But that is more of the “bad news” (next chapter). At this point, we should note instead that in the immediate
wake of the differentiation of the noosphere and the biosphere, biological determinants were no longer the strong
(and often overwhelming) factor they had been up to that point in history. In the biosphere, might makes right. In
the biosphere, big fishes eat little fishes. In the biosphere, muscle rules. And in the biosphere, men dominate other
men, and men dominate women.

Feminist and orthodox researchers both agree that, in virtually all known societies to date, power between the
sexes has been asymmetrical in a very specific and very widespread (virtually universal) fashion. That is, all known
societies can be arranged along a continuum from relatively “equalitarian” (males and females share power in the
public sphere roughly equally) to male-dominant (males alone govern the public sphere), but never the other way
around, never tending toward societies of female dominance of the public/productive domain.

In other words, the most feminine societies (such as early hoe/horticultural societies) were not ones dominated
by females, but ones where females shared public/productive power roughly 50-50 with men; whereas the “most
masculine” societies (such as the plow/agrarian) were ones where men possessed virtually 100 percent of
public/productive power (with women relegated to the private/reproductive sphere).

As researchers from Janet Chafetz to Riane Eisler to Rae Blumberg to Joyce Nielsen have pointed out, there are

virtually no known exceptions to this scheme—it goes from 50-50 male/female to 100 percent male, but never
toward 100 percent female. There is obviously a set of very strong, universal factors that are tilting the scheme in
one direction only (from balance to male dominance, never from balance to female dominance). What are these
virtually universal factors?

“To answer the question ‘Why are women nowhere superior to men in their access to scarce and valued societal
resources?’ one must look to the key sets of intervening variables,” says Janet Chafetz.10 “As a category, men
nowhere [in no known societies] specialize solely in the reproductive/private sphere activities, nor do women as a
group specialize solely in the productive/public sphere. Stated otherwise, women’s activities are either specialized in
nonproductive roles, which leads to inferior status, or divided between the two realms, which may afford them
relatively equal status”—in other words, at best 50-50, and that against the odds.

“This pushes the question back one step: why do women as a category never specialize solely in productive/public
sector roles? Since this is a constant [no known exceptions], logically it must be explained in terms of one or more
constants. In this case, a set of biological constants helps to answer the question raised: the women carry babies in
their bodies and lactate, which circumscribes their physical mobility. While this can be minimized [through low birth
rates, etc.], it cannot be eliminated and, in fact, for most human societies throughout most of human history, such
restriction due to pregnancy and nursing has been far from minimal.”

This has far-reaching, even massive, consequences. “Given these biological facts, most societies find it more
efficient if women also do the bulk of the caretaking of young children who are no longer nursing. That is, on the
basis of expediency, the nurturance role is typically extended beyond the biologically based phenomenon of breast-
feeding. And to the extent that these factors keep women in the proximity of the domicile more than men, it
becomes more efficient to extend their domestic role to encompass other household tasks, such as food preparation
and maintenance of family possessions. Since many societies have had a large share of their productive activities
moved away from the homesite, these fetters on female mobility restrict women’s opportunity to specialize in
productive roles.”

According to Chafetz, these biological givens, universal in nature, are part of the reason that societies universally
do not drift toward 100 percent female dominance of the public/productive sphere, but, at best, allow a 50-50
sharing, and, at worst, allow a drift toward 100 percent male advantage.

And this drift toward male dominance of the public/productive sphere is aggravated by a universal or constant
biological factor on the part of the males as well. “An additional biological constant is probably in force: male
superiority in physical strength. In many societies, especially pre-industrial, some or many productive activities
require—or at least are handled more efficiently by—greater strength. Again, females as a category find themselves
somewhat disadvantaged in competing for such roles.”

The conclusion, then, is rather straightforward: “In short, females are not found to have superior status to males
because their relative disadvantage in mobility and/or strength makes it more efficient for men to monopolize some,
many, or all productive roles and for women to assume at least some of the household labor. Thus, women as a
category are never free to specialize in or monopolize productive/public sector roles. Where men do specialize in or
monopolize such roles, they are vastly superior to women in status [100 percent male advantage]. Where the sexes
more equally divide the two realms, their statuses approach equality [roughly 50-50]. Females as a group do not
have vastly superior status to males [it never drifts in the other direction] because, in all the history of our species,
women have never been able to divest themselves of some involvement in the reproductive/private sphere of
activity.”

Now, Chafetz’s overall theory (which is very comprehensive, and which is examined in detail in volume 2) does not
simply rest with these biological constants (or “strong universals in the sexual scheme”). These biological givens are
simply the background constants against which numerous other factors play themselves out, variables such as
modes of technology, environmental threats, family structures, types of productive activity, population density,
nature of work organization, degree of separation of work- and homesites. In all, Chafetz isolates a dozen factors
that are involved in the overall “gender status” of men and women in various societies.

But given the biological constants, all of these other factors affect whether the given society will be relatively
equalitarian (50-50), or whether, for reasons of expediency and efficiency, it will drift toward a male dominance of

the public/productive sphere (but never drift in the other direction).

And the conclusion, backed by extensive empirical data, is that whenever these other variables do indeed
shift—whenever there are environmental threats or disasters, food scarcities, warfare, social threats, and intense
stresses—whenever these factors occur, then the 50-50 balance is inevitably disrupted, a premium is placed on male
physical strength/mobility, and the sexes polarize dramatically
(with males dominating the public/productive
sphere and females dominating the private/reproductive, but never the reverse).

And, most important, when the sexes polarize dramatically, a horrible stress is placed on both men and women.
(In fact, according to Chafetz, men have it worse in “male-dominant” societies than do women, starting with the fact
that they alone are conscripted for defense). Oppression as a causal explanation is deficient and inadequate in
almost every respect, since, among other things, it simply does not fit the data curve. “These oppression theories,”
says Chafetz, “are based on vaguely defined concepts often ill suited to operationalization, such as ‘patriarchy,’
‘female subordination,’ and ‘sexism.’ The use of such emotion-laden but unclear terms, combined typically with a
heavily normative approach to the topic of sex inequality, results in a maximum of rhetoric but a minimum of clear
insight.”

No, this polarization of the sexes—with males dominating the public/productive sphere and females dominating
the private/reproductive, to the detriment of both—has virtually nothing to do with male oppression and female
sheepdom/subjugation. It has everything to do with life in the biosphere.

Thus, with the differentiation of the noosphere and the biosphere, these biological constants are not eliminated,
but they are subordinated (preserved and negated). They are no longer necessarily the major determinants of the
form of social organization. Biology is no longer necessarily destiny.

Even in the relatively “equalitarian” societies of the past (such as early horticultural and some foraging), the
“equality” was kept in place, not by legal and moral (or noospheric) determinants, but by luck. The hoe placed
public/productive power in women’s hands, not by conscious and intentional design, but by sheer happenstance. It
turns out that a simple hoe or digging stick can be physically handled as easily by a woman as by a man; and further,
in hoe societies, the worksite is often right next to the homesite, so that pregnant women are not disadvantaged
when it comes to physical mobility (they, like the men, can walk to work). And, indeed, in such societies, women
produced about 80 percent of the foodstuff (the men still often hunted), and consequently the societies remained
relatively close to that ideal 50-50 balance—but a balance entirely at the mercy of circumstances.

And thus, just as the hoe had placed power in women’s hands, not by conscious design but by happenstance, so
the plow would yank that power away, not by oppression or oppressive design, but by the same biological givens
subjected now to entirely different (and equally nonintentional) circumstances. (Women who operated plows
suffered increased rates of miscarriage, as pointed out by Chafetz, so it is to their Darwinian advantage not to plow;
further, the plowed fields were always at a considerable distance from the homesite, discouraging a pregnant
woman from getting to work, as pointed out by Nielsen and others).11 The same biological constants that under one
set of circumstances simply happened to advantage women, under different circumstances simply happened to
disadvantage them.

There is neither oppression on the one hand, nor virtue on the other, operating here.
With the differentiation of the noosphere and the biosphere, these biological constants, although not eliminated,
are no longer necessarily the major determinants in the public status of men and women. In the biosphere, might
makes right, and status follows physical function. In the noosphere, right makes might, and status follows the rights
of free agents in the worldcentric space of universal perspectivism. Whether or not a woman is producing foodstuffs
in the public/productive sphere is irrelevant to her rights in that domain—and that idea was revolutionary and
absolutely unprecedented on any sort of large scale.

With the differentiation of the noosphere and the biosphere, women could secure rights as cultural-noospheric
agents, regardless of biospheric factors or functions or constants, which were judged, for the first time in history, to
be irrelevant to one’s public status as a citizen and a bearer, not just of children, but of rights. The noosphere, not
the biosphere, would determine rights and responsibilities. And these rights were not previously repressed, they
were previously meaningless (they were not oppressed, they had simply not yet emerged).

To repeat what was said in chapter 5 (for now I think it will make more sense): in this way, and this way only, can

we maintain the otherwise paradoxical and confusing truth—a paradoxical truth that has crippled feminism vis-à-vis
“female liberation”—that women now stand open to and in need of liberation, but previously were not acting in an
unliberated (or duped) fashion. The widespread emergence of the women’s movement in the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries occurred precisely because the noosphere and the biosphere were finally differentiated.12 And
this inescapably means that the widespread emergence of the women’s movement was not primarily the undoing
of a nasty state of affairs that easily could have been different, but rather it marked the emergence of an altogether
new state of affairs that was in significant ways unprecedented.

What had grounded both men and women in narrowly based biological roles was an evolutionary process that
was itself, until fairly recently, grounded in the biosphere, and that only recently is now in the process of liberating
both men and women from confinement to those particular roles—necessary at the time but now outmoded.

Historically, with the emergence of pluralistic rationality—with the differentiation of the noosphere and the
biosphere—right slowly began to replace might. Wherever pluralistic rationality emerged, social relations based on
physical power—particularly slavery and the polarization or dissociation of the sexes—were found intolerable to
reason, to pluralism and perspectivism—put yourself in the slave’s shoes (or lack of them) and see how it feels! This
was all radically new. . . .

And thus, in the West and in the East, wherever rationality emerged, feminist movements and antislavery
movements first emerged as well. As only one example from the East, the real revolution that Gautama Buddha
brought to India lay not so much in his actual spiritual practices—his yoga was already afoot in India—as in the fact
that he denied the caste system. Much more than a religious pioneer, he was a social revolutionary, and this rocked
India profoundly—yet another example of the “revolutionary passion” brought by reason. Even though Gautama was
transrational as well, his religion—one of the first “rational religions” in the world—was not based on mythic gods
and goddesses. He denied all of that, and thus he simultaneously denied the dominator hierarchies, the caste
system, inherent in the mythological worldview: this is what was so revolutionary about his system.

And my point is that it wasn’t so much that these various liberation movements (of slaves, of women, of the
untouchables) had tried to surface in the past but were rudely oppressed; it was mostly that they previously made
no sense whatsoever, to men or women or slaves or masters, and so were for all intents and purposes nonexistent.
Power was earned or taken; to share it was insanity, according to the evidence that these structures could see.
Only where the noosphere began to emerge and differentiate itself from the biosphere—only where right began to
bear down on might—did these “slave situations” come to be perceived as problems. Otherwise, the problem was
how to exercise power strategically, not how to share it. For the warrior ethic, for the duty ethic, and for the
ethnocentric ethic, universal compassion was a sign of weakness. The value of compassion was not suppressed or
oppressed; it simply was not seen in the first place.

But with the differentiation of the noosphere and the biosphere, there could—and therefore would—arise a
Mary Wollstonecraft, a John Stuart Mill, a Harriet Taylor (just as similar voices, although isolated, had arisen in
Greece and Rome and India and China, wherever pluralistic reason had lifted up its universal head).

After the death of her first husband, Harriet Taylor married John Stuart Mill (he reports he had been in love with
her for twenty years), and together they collaborated on the famous On Liberty (1859). The year it was published
was the hundredth anniversary of the birth date of Mary Wollstonecraft, whose Vindication of the Rights of Women
(1792) is generally regarded as the first major feminist treatise anywhere in history.

“Feminism as a modern ideology did not emerge until the middle of the nineteenth century,” points out Riane
Eisler. “Although many of the philosophical foundations for feminism had been articulated earlier by women like
Mary Wollstonecraft, Frances Wright, Ernestine Rose, George Sand, Sarah and Angelina Grimke, and Margaret Fuller,
its formal birthday is July 19, 1848, at Seneca Falls, New York. Here, at the first convention in recorded history held
for the express purpose of launching women’s collective struggle, Elizabeth Cady Stanton made a pivotal statement.
‘Among the many important questions which have been brought before the public,’ Stanton said, ‘there is none that
more vitally affects the human family than that which is technically called Women’s Rights.’”13

In the noosphere, right makes might. William Wilberforce, in a campaign forged with his lifelong friend William
Pitt, spearheaded a movement that resulted, in 1807, in the abolition of the slave trade in the British empire. In the
States, a war fought in part for antislavery motives would grind up as many men in single battles as were lost in all of

Vietnam: 51,000 were killed in three days at Gettysburg alone. The president at the time would remind the world, in
an address at that site, and in a mere 269 words, that this battle was fought because the nation was “dedicated to
the proposition that all men are created equal,” a proposition scorned by nature and by all societies embedded in it.
That proposition—that rational idea—very soon detached itself from remnants of biospheric power and extended
to women as well. In less than a century from Harriet Taylor’s death, women in democratic societies had secured the
legal protection,
institutionalized, of (1) free and equal subjects of civil law, (2) morally free subjects, and (3)
politically free subjects as citizens of the democratic state. That these freedoms and protections still need to be
extended and fortified does not denigrate the fact that they are structurally in place.14

With the differentiation of the noosphere and the biosphere, women could still claim a rich heritage in the
biospheric qualities (mostly, embodied communion) that differentiate them from men (mostly, hyperagency)—this is
the claim of radical feminists. But likewise, they could also claim noospheric equality and demand that it be
protected by law—this is the claim of liberal feminists.

I believe both are true, and can be true, now that the noosphere and biosphere have been differentiated and
enfolded, embraced, in the same human compound individual. And this is part of the rich heritage of the various
“liberation movements” (of women, of slaves, of untouchables) that emerged around the globe with the emergence
of rational perspectivism and universal pluralism.

In the same way, the female value sphere, freed by evolution from its confinement via the biosphere, could now
begin more readily to infuse the public domain with its own care and concerns. “For it was through the impact of the
‘female ethos’ embodied by women like Florence Nightingale, Jane Addams, Sojourner Truth, and Dorothea Dix, who
were now beginning to enter the ‘public world’ en masse, that new professions like organized nursing and social
work emerged, that the abolitionist movement to free slaves gained massive grass roots support, that the treatment
of the insane and mentally deficient became more humane.”15

Not to mention that it was in the “salons”—in the atmosphere—created by women such as Ninon de Lenclos,
Madame Geoffrin, Madame Rambouillet, and Madame du Chatelet, that so many of the ideas that we would
recognize as “humanist” and “Enlightenment” arose and were nurtured, an atmosphere that can only be called
“liberational.”16

All of which points unmistakably, as Riane Eisler puts it (and as Habermas has often argued): “What becomes
evident is that the great transformation of Western society that began with the eighteenth-century Enlightenment
did not fail but is merely incomplete.”17

(And the next “liberation movement”? Understanding that the real urgency is still to implement more fully the
liberations brought by rationality and the ego/centaur, then next up is: the Eco-Noetic Self, the Over-Soul that is the
World Soul, which demands a liberation not just of peoples but of life, of all sentient beings, not as having equal
rights, but as worthy of care and respect and honor, cherished as manifestations of Spirit. We will return to this topic
of “environmental ethics” in the last chapter. My point for now is simply that every Eros or Ascent brings a liberating
force which can then, barring fixation or repression, be embodied in a wider Agape or compassion.)

THE BIG THREE

I would like to point in particular to Immanuel Kant’s three critiques (Critique of Pure Reason, Critique of Practical
Reason, and Critique of Judgment), because they demonstrate more clearly than anything else that the three
spheres of science, morality, and art were now irrevocably differentiated. In mythic and mythic-rational syncretism,
science and morality and art are still in significant ways globally fused; and far from being “holistic,” this indicates, as
in all syncretisms, that the individual whole/parts are distorted, or not taken at face value, in order that they may be
bound and forced into the syncretic “whole.” A scientific “truth” is true only if it fits the religious dogma, and all true
art depicts some aspect of that mythic organization.

With Kant, each of these spheres is differentiated and set free to develop its own potentials without violence from
a “forced fit” in a global indissociation. These three spheres, we have seen, refer in general to the dimensions of “it,”
of “we,” and of “I.” (These are the four quadrants—the exterior and the interior of the individual and the
collective—with the two Right-Hand quadrants treated as one since both of them are described in similar it-

language; both deal with seen exteriors.)

The sphere of empirical science deals with those aspects of reality that can be investigated in a relatively
“objective” fashion and described in an “it” language (descriptive, monological, propositional truth, a state of affairs,
the Right half); this involves the exteriors or the surfaces of holons, since these can be seen with the senses or their
instrumental extensions. Practical reason or moral reason refers to the sphere of “we,” of how you and I can
pragmatically interact and interrelate in terms of something common that we can find between us, not as shared
surfaces but as a common depth of mutual understanding (“we,” justice, the good, the Lower Left). And the sphere
of art or aesthetic judgment refers, in the broadest sense, to how I express myself and what I express of myself, the
depth in the individual (“I,” sincerity, expressivity, the Upper Left).

That Kant differentiates these realms means that “I” and “we” are differentiated (I need no longer automatically
go along with society’s rules and norms; I can norm the norms; what the church and state say are not necessarily the
true or the good). It means that “I” and “it” are clearly differentiated (my subjective wishes do not constitute reality
or its scientific study). It means that “we” and “it” are clearly differentiated (the state or church does not have the
right to dictate what reality is).

Each of these three realms, then, can be judged separately to see if it is telling “its kind of truth.” In the realm of
“itness” or empiric-scientific truths, we want to know if propositions more or less accurately match the facts as
disclosed (“Is there life on Jupiter or not?”). In the realm of “I-ness,” the criterion is sincerity: you want to know if I
am telling the truth, if I am being sincere about how I feel, if I am being truthful about expressing my inner state (if I
am reporting my depth sincerely). And in the realm of “we-ness,” the criterion is goodness, or justness, or relational
care and concern: we want to know if our actions with each other show kindness and non-egocentric caring, or at
the very least, mutual understanding; we want to act with a worldcentric fairness (act as if the maxim of one’s
actions might be universal—the categorical imperative).

These differentiations of modernity are irreversible, irrevocable. Even those who intensely criticize them do so
from within their space; seven human orifices will simply never again automatically mean there must be only seven
planets: that doesn’t even make any sense to someone in the modern worldspace. The differentiation of the Big
Three can be criticized, but the criticism itself presupposes the differentiation.

What is required, of course, is not a retreat to a predifferentiated state (that’s not even possible, although retro-
Romantics often make the recommendation); what is required is the integration of the Big Three. And that, indeed,
is what might be called the central problem of postmodernity: now that science, art, and morality have been
irreversibly differentiated, how does one integrate them?

In the Third Critique, Kant attempts to integrate propositional and pragmatic truth via telos/organism and via the
aesthetic dimension (by which he meant, in this case, the sensory-aesthetic apprehension). This attempt was
immensely rich and suggestive, and theorists from Schiller to Schelling would, directly under Kant’s influence, look to
the aesthetic dimension for their attempted integration; and,
indeed, modernity and postmodernity would
henceforth find something immensely “healing” about the aesthetic/artistic dimension.

And yet, in the end, this attempt would fail. The sensory-aesthetic dimension is indeed a type of “connecting link”
between the empirical phenomena of sensorimotor cognition (“science”) and practical ethics (“morality”); in the
developmental spectrum, as a matter of fact, this aesthetic or “endoceptual” cognition lies between sensorimotor
cognition and conventional moral structures.18
It is indeed their “missing link” or “connecting link”; but a connecting
link is not an integration. It’s like saying that the fourth grade lies between the third grade and the fifth grade and
connects them, which it does; but the integration of the knowledge in those three grades is to be found in the sixth
grade, not in the third. The merely intermediate or connecting link cannot be an integrating link, since that
connecting link is a link between the lower and the higher, and is not itself the super-higher which would integrate
them all.

In other words, the integration of the Big Three would await (and is still awaiting) the emergence of vision-logic.
Kant would point out one of the connecting links between moral reason (“we”) and reason tied to objective
sensorimotor phenomena (“it”), namely, aesthetic apprehension (a lower portion of the “I” dimension). That would
indeed show some of the connections between the Big Three, but that could not finally integrate them, an
integration that would demand not an intermediate but a yet-higher level.

What rationality had put asunder, vision-logic would unite. That, at any rate, is the potential and the promise and
the struggle of postmodernity. What modernity differentiated, postmodernity must integrate. And if rationality did
the differentiation, then postrationality must do the healing (and postrationality, I have been maintaining, is
preeminently vision-logic). This is the postmodern integrative vision we have mentioned often before, in connection
with Gebser (“integral-aperspectival”), Habermas (whose theory of communicative action is specifically designed to
integrate the Big Three), and Heidegger’s centauric being-in-the-world (also an attempt to reweave the fragments);
we see it in Foucault’s systematic use of vision-logic to map the exteriors of epistemes (and then his including the
interiors as well in dispositifs, looking at the dimensions of truth, of power, of ethics, and of self; even Foucault, a
“Nietzschean,” returned to Kant again and again, and, in a surprise move, finally identified himself broadly with
Kant’s lineage). We have mentioned this integration in terms of “mind and body are both experiences of an
integrated self”; and we mentioned it in terms of the integration of the noosphere, the biosphere, and the
physiosphere. We have seen it in connection with integrating male and female in the noosphere. And now we see it
as an integration of science, morality, and art.

Those are all simply different aspects of the overall attempts to integrate the now irreversible differentiations of
the Big Three. And whatever we might think of any of those theorists and their proposed solutions (or my proposed
solutions), the point is that all of them came in the wake of the differentiation of the Big Three, and all were (and
are) responding in various ways to that differentiation—it was an epochal development, a world-shaking, world-
making emergence. Kant was well aware of this (particularly in his essay “What is Enlightenment?”), and his
immediate successors, and critics, are all
inescapably oriented now to a worldspace in which art, science, and
morality are not only differentiated, but are in danger of flying apart completely.

It was Schelling, we will see in the next chapter, who first responded most vigorously to this new world that was
not only differentiating but rapidly dissociating. And Schelling was simply the first of many “doctors of
modernity”—from Hegel to Marx to Schiller to Freud to Weber to Heidegger—who would try desperately, in their
various ways, to heal the fragments that began to cascade around them. For not only does modernity (and
postmodernity) have to worry about how to integrate what are now irrevocable differentiations in the growth
process, it has to deal “therapeutically” with those differentiations that go too far
into actual dissociation. We
already saw, as only one example, that the differentiation of mind and body can go too far into a repression of the
body by the mind, a repression that spews neurotic symptoms everywhere in its wake. Thus, at this particular point
in history, if Freud did not exist, evolution would have had to invent him in order to doctor some of the pathological
dissociations in its own processes of new and emergent growth.

But I am again drifting into the “bad news.” All I would like to emphasize, at this point, is that I personally believe
that the new integrations sought by modernity (and postmodernity)—the integrations particularly of I, we, and it; of
self, culture, and nature; of art, morals, and science; of consciousness, values, and facts—are already being slowly
effected by vision-logic. Science, values, and subjectivity are being approached as so many aspects of the centauric
being-in-the-world.

Volume 3 is devoted to just this topic, but at this point we might simply note that evolution has never produced a
differentiation that it could not eventually integrate (unless the differentiation goes utterly too far into dissociation,
at which point simple extinction ensues). Extinction seems to be a genuine possibility for humans, particularly with
reference to the threatening dissociation of the biosphere and the noosphere, the body and the mind. But assuming,
as I do, that extinction is not altogether a foregone conclusion, it follows that
integration is possible, and that
possibility lies, I believe, in centauric vision-logic, the step beyond the rational-ego, the postmodern counterthrust to
modernity (and, as I said, the burden of volume 3 is to render this thesis plausible).19

I mention all of this now only to point out that, with reference to the differentiations that have defined modernity,

the solution, if there is one, lies in the marriages of tomorrow, not in the syncretisms of yesterday.

THE DEATH OF GOD

ZEUS: Orestes, I created you, and I created all things. Now see! Impudent spawn! So I am not your king? Who,
then, made you?

ORESTES: You. But you blundered; you should not have made me free. You are God and I am free; each of us is
alone, and anguish is akin. Human life begins on the far side of despair.

ZEUS: Well, Orestes, all this was foreknown. In the fullness of time a man was to come, to announce my decline.
And you’re that man, it seems.

—JEAN-PAUL SARTRE, The Flies

Before we look more closely at exactly why a Descending God replaced an Ascending God (and then “God” dropped
altogether or, finally, reduced to monological nature), it is necessary, I think, to understand as clearly as possible the
historical relation of the Age of Reason to the preceding Age of Mythology, for that is exactly how the philosophers
of the Enlightenment viewed the situation. “No more myths!” was the philosophical battle cry of an entire age, and it
soon came to be summarized in Nietzsche’s famous dictum, “God is dead.”

And my conclusion will be that in throwing out a prerational, anthropomorphic, mythic God figure, the “modern
West” also tossed out any transrational, nonanthropomorphic, superconscient Godhead. Gone was a mass of
bathwater; gone too a precious baby.

The problem, for the Church, from its inception, was how to deal with a complex of literal-concrete myths that it
had inherited and to which it owed a certain allegiance. And in the life and figure of Origen (185–254 CE)—the
Church’s greatest theologian20—we see encapsulated the entire “problem of mythology” and its subsequent
influence on an entire civilization.

Origen, recall, was a fellow townsman of Plotinus in Alexandria, where he had attended lectures by Plotinus’s
teacher, Ammonius Saccas. He was steeped in a causal/nondual worldview and clearly sought to bring this worldview
into line with the causal realization of the Nazarene, which would not be hard in the least—were it not for a set of
concrete-literal mythologies in which the Nazarene’s realization was quickly being clothed.

Recall also that this was during the early flowering of the rational structure (widespread glimmerings of which had
begun, according to theorists from Gebser to Campbell, around the sixth century BCE in Greece, although, as
Habermas points out, formop was occasionally available to rare individuals much earlier). And even though the
contemplative sages of the time had, in their own cases, explored even further into the transrational domain, there
was a concerted effort to state the discoveries in rational terms. (This can be seen in a particularly clear case with
Gautama Buddha, c. sixth-century-BCE India. Where most previous systems of Indian religion would begin with the
gods and goddesses, and then prescribe rituals and incantations
to appease and persuade them, Gautama
radically dispenses with all of that, and recommends instead a direct and intensive introspection into the mind
stream, into the subject, and he expresses this in eminently rational terms, even if the result of his injunctions and
paradigms was the deconstruction of the rational stream and its supersession by transpersonal awareness.)

And wherever the contemplative philosopher-sages met mythology, either they dismissed it directly (which was
an extremely delicate procedure; as Socrates discovered, the gods are not so easily tossed aside, especially when
they serve the function of cultural “gluons”); or they began a long and slow process of rationally reinterpreting the
myths. This allowed them to preserve the myth while negating its original meaning. This is surely one of the most
fascinating features of this entire era, whether it was the Gnostics (“When you read the systems of the Gnostics, you
have the feeling that they have rationalized mythology. And this feeling is accurate”);21 Philo (“He is an upholder of
the verbal inspiration of the Old Testament, which nevertheless he turns into a moral and metaphysical romance by
his theory of . . . rational allegorism”);22 or Plato and Aristotle (“Plato had maintained strongly that religion must be
mythological

in its earlier stages . . . a ‘medicinal lie’; he warns us never to take them literally”).23

Origen was of the same mind. He openly derides the literal myths in the harshest of terms. “Origen speaks with
contempt of those Christians who take literally the temporal promises and threats of the Old Testament.”24 Origen
does not believe in the survival of the individual soul or ego, or that salvation consists of anything like egoic
perpetuity at all (that would in fact be hell; salvation, for Origen, consists in discovering that “God is all in all”: Origen
is, through and through, of a Neoplatonic mind).

Boldest of all, he does not believe in the future resurrection of the body. “He cannot restrain his impatience at the

crude beliefs of traditionalists about the last day and the resurrection of the dead. The Gospels cannot [be taken]
literally. How can material bodies be recompounded, every particle of which has passed into many other bodies? To
which body do these molecules belong? So, he says scornfully, men fall into the lowest depths of absurdity, and take
refuge in the pious assurance that ‘everything is possible with God.’”25

And yet, Origen was a Christian (by the age of eighteen he was already head of the Catechetical School in
Alexandria), and thus constrained to some degree by Scripture. And so he hit upon a brilliant solution, a solution for
which he is justly famous (with Philo) and justly regarded a genius, and a solution that would henceforth be used
whenever mythology needed to be both negated and preserved: the allegorical method.

Any myth, he says (referring to the Old Testament) can be interpreted on three levels: literal, ethical, and
allegorical, each successive reading being “higher.” The literal is just what the myth says; the ethical is taking the
myth and rationally reworking it to apply to a present ethical situation; the allegorical is using the myth to mean
(virtually any) mystical or spiritual or transrational thing we want it to.

The brilliance of this scheme is that it takes a prerational myth (literal) and reworks it at both a rational (ethical)
and a transrational (mystical) level, so that “the myth” can be made to say whatever it is necessary to make it say,
quite regardless of how its originators actually meant it. In other words, the interpretation takes the myth quite
beyond itself—first into the space of reason, and then into the space of spirit. The myth is thoroughly
preserved—and utterly negated.

This allows Origen to put into the myths whatever meanings from a higher level he wishes to put into them, so
that he can both claim scriptural authority and basically ignore it at the same time. And every subsequent
“mythologizer” in history, from the Catholic Church to Joseph Campbell, would use exactly this method whenever it
was necessary to make the myths mean something other than what the myths themselves plainly said they meant.

Even though the Church would adopt this method without fail—what possible choice did it have?—it nevertheless
found Origen’s emphasis on the “higher” meanings to be very dangerous (Origen was busy pouring into the myths
the entire corpus of the Neoplatonic outlook; Saint Jerome says he wrote eight hundred works). It was one thing to
say that the myths also had higher meanings; quite another to basically deny any substantial reality to the lower or
literal meanings. The Church suspected, rightly, that Origen had just blown a hole in their myths below the waterline.
During the persecution of Decius (c. 250 CE), Origen was imprisoned, tortured, and pilloried; he was eventually
condemned as a heretic by Justinian.

Origen referred to those who “took the myths literally” as possessing “mere faith,” the “simple ones.” And as
harsh as he could be on the philosophers who believed in the “silliness,” nonetheless “Origen extends to the popular,
half mythological beliefs of the uneducated Christian [a great deal of] tolerance. The Logos teaches men in various
manners, according to their capacities; some must be fed with milk, others with strong meat.”26 His idea was to start
people at one level of development and, using the transcendent or allegorical method, work them up to gnosis. At
(causal) gnosis, both the myths (literal) and the rationality (ethical) would be transcended, having thus served their
purpose.

The Church, in generally denying a pure Ascent to causal gnosis, denied that the myths could be transcended (for
all the reasons that we discussed). Other meanings could be added to the literal myths, but the myths themselves
could never be negated. It was a victory for the “simple ones.” Transrational gnosis was, once again, caught and
frozen in prerational forms—the literal myths.

And it is the literal myths that the philosophers of the Enlightenment railed against, as had Origen. Virtually every
single “scientific claim” of the Bible (and thus the Church) could be demonstrated, by disclosed evidence at a deeper
depth, to be woefully inadequate (which was taken to mean: simply and plainly wrong). “The chief affront of
Copernicanism to theological orthodoxy lay, not in any fundamental discrepancy between it and the more
philosophical parts of the traditional scheme of the universe, but in its apparent irreconcilability with certain details
of that body of purely historical propositions [myths taken literally] which Christianity had, to an extent matched in
no other religion, incorporated in its creed.”27

Church religion, across the board, became the laughingstock of the philosophers of the Age of Reason; it was met
everywhere with scorn and derision. Are we, quipped Thomas Paine, “to suppose that every world in the boundless
creation had an Eve, an apple, a serpent, and a Redeemer?”

The upshot of all this is that virtually the entire corpus of mythological belief was thrown overboard. And since,
additionally, the great philosopher-sages (from Plotinus to Eckhart), who had themselves significantly transcended
both myth and reason, were nevertheless speaking out from mythically situated cultures, virtually everything the
great contemplatives had to say was jettisoned as well.

The baby with the bathwater. Reason could (and can) just as easily look up as it can look down. Reason—for Plato,
for the Neoplatonists, and for the all-important Stoics—meant seeing one’s place in the Kosmos; to be “rational”
meant to see the great holarchy of existence and joyfully take one’s proper place in it (quite apart from any further
or transrational or mystical developments, where one directly identified with the Kosmos in toto). To be rational
meant attunement with the Kosmos (as a preparation for identity with the Kosmos, with the All itself).

But with the rejection by modernity of the Ascendent God in virtually any form, there was only the Descended
God left, the God of a marvelous and creative nature, a nature that was everywhere not to be denied, but a nature in
which alone could salvation now be found. The doctrine of Plenitude and the Many completely eclipsed that of the
Good and the One: God in any form was pronounced dead, and nature alone alive.

Reason, in reaction to myth, thus chose to look almost exclusively downward, and in that withering glance, the

modern Western world was born.

PLENITUDE AS A RESEARCH PROGRAM

It is common knowledge that the early Renaissance scientists believed strongly that they were looking for the “laws
of God”—that is, for the Logos (or archetypes) of a Creative and Effluxing and Descending God, archetypes that
expressed themselves in the regular patterns of a harmonious nature. The “laws of nature” were in “the mind of
God” (or the Ideas of God), and since that same Mind created us as well, we ought to be able to see and understand
and formulate those laws.

That they believed that is true enough; but it is much more specific than that. Lovejoy demonstrates, quite
convincingly I think, that many of the “scientific discoveries” from the Renaissance to the Enlightenment were not
originally empirical and “surprising” discoveries, but were in fact a priori assumptions derived directly (and
consciously) from the two main tenets of the Platonic/Plotinian doctrine of Plenitude: nature is graded in a holarchy
of being, and there are no missing links anywhere.

In other words, the Descending or Plenitude side of the originally Non-dual system—the side that had been
previously suppressed in the Middle Ages—was now isolated and emphasized and pressed into service as an actual
research agenda, and it was this agenda that then subsequently began to produce the scientific discoveries for
which the age is now famous, and in whose “modern shadow” we all now stand.

In bringing about the change from the medieval to the modern conception, it was not the Copernican
hypothesis, nor even the splendid achievements of scientific astronomy during the following two centuries,
that played the most significant and decisive part.

In the cosmography that by the beginning of the eighteenth century had come to be commonly held among
educated men, the features which differentiated the new from the old world-picture most widely—these
features owed their introduction and, for the most part, their eventual general acceptance, not to the actual
discoveries or the technical reasonings of astronomers, but to the influence of those originally Platonistic
[conceptions] which had, though potent and persistent, been always repressed and abortive in medieval
thought.

The more important features of the new conception of the world, then, owed little to any new hypotheses
based upon the sort of observational grounds which we should nowadays call scientific. They were chiefly
derivative from Platonistic premises [from the Descending side]. They were, in short, manifest corollaries of
the principle of Plenitude.28

If we look first at astronomy, the doctrine of Plenitude—the infinite creativity of an infinite Source—seemed to
demand not just the existence of this Earth and this inhabited world, but a virtual infinity or plurality of other worlds
(in the concrete sense of other solar systems, for example), and there was no reason those other worlds shouldn’t be

inhabited by conscious beings, some perhaps as or more intelligent than we.

This notion of an infinity or plurality of other worlds profoundly shook the medieval mind, and shook it much more
catastrophically than the simpler Copernican revolution. In fact, the heliocentric theory of Copernicus/Kepler had
been taken rather easily in stride. After all, even if that theory displaced the Earth from the center of the universe,
the Earth was still held to be unique, and still held to be the sole arena of rational beings watched over by a loving
God, and the sole theater of the descent and ascension of the One and Only Begotten. The heliocentric theory, to
the late medieval mind, might have displaced Gaia from the center of the solar system, but it did not displace Gaia
from the center of attention; and, as we would say today, it barely made the headlines.

But a plurality of other inhabited worlds, with the Earth but one of many? This moved Gaia (and the Nazarene) out
of the picture almost totally, and it was this acentric notion, derived not from any scientific evidence at all (we still
don’t have any scientific evidence for life on other planets) but derived rather from the doctrine of infinite Plenitude,
that more than any other conception jolted the medieval mind out of the Middle Ages and into the Renaissance.
“The change from a geocentric to a heliocentric system was far less momentous than the change from a heliocentric
to an acentric one.”29

And its chief proponent? It is no surprise: Giordano Bruno. The notion of a plurality of worlds was implicit (and
occasionally explicit) in the Plotinian system, and it had received its first “modern” expression by—again, no
surprise—Nicolas Cusanus. But “it is Giordano Bruno who must be regarded as the principal representative of the
doctrine of the decentralized, infinite, and infinitely populous universe.”30 The Gaia-aggrandizing systems, whether
geo- or heliocentric, were shattered (and with them, the always correlative egocentric, anthropocentric stance).

Cusanus and Bruno were thus the first to bring the Plenitude or Descending side (previously suppressed) into
prominence in astronomy,31 and the astronomers of Bruno’s own and succeeding generation—Tycho Brahe, Kepler,
Galileo—then dutifully began looking for that which was already assumed to be the case. And it was the Brunonian
revolution, not the Copernican, that jolted Europe into the modern age (and that, not incidentally, brought Bruno to
the attention of the Inquisition, and he was eventually burned at the stake). From Bruno the conception passed most
notably to Descartes, and by the end of the seventeenth century, the belief in a plurality of inhabited worlds was
accepted by most educated men and women, and the Gaia-centric mythology of the Church never recovered
(though it would often be reactivated, right down to today).

The point is that these ideas long antedated the discovery of the scientific evidence for any of them; they were
“becoming familiar in very widely read writings before the middle of the eighteenth century; and their development
seems to have been chiefly due to the influence of the principles of Plenitude and continuity.”32

If there could be no “gaps” or “missing links” in the heavens or macro-world, the same held for the micro-world.
Quite before van Leeuwenhoek actually began peering down his microscopes, representatives of Plenitude were
writing, as Leibniz did, that “I am convinced that there must be such creatures, and that natural history will perhaps
some day become acquainted with them, when it has further studied that infinity of living things whose small size
conceals them from ordinary observation and which are hidden in the bowels of the earth and the depths of the
sea.” Leeuwenhoek’s discoveries came after the fact, so to speak, and were of little surprise to most, least of all to
Leibniz.

But by far the most momentous, and certainly the most comical, search for “missing links” occurred in the “middle
realm” of humans themselves: the search for the missing links between species, and particularly between humans
and apes. This search was of crucial importance in the beginnings of the science of anthropology. Locke and Leibniz
had already made it quite clear that what appeared to be gaps or missing links in nature were due solely to our
ignorance, and thus yet another research agenda was set for the naturalist by the doctrine of Plenitude. As the great
Bonnet would put it, “It is here above all that it is impossible to fail to recognize the graduated progression of beings;
it is here above all that is verified the famous axiom of the German Plato [Leibniz], Nature makes no leaps. . . .”

Not only specialists but the general public was enthralled by the search, which looked for ever-earlier forms of
human life and their linkages to higher forms of apes. Rousseau asserted (in 1753) that humans and higher apes
were in fact members of the same species, since language was probably not originally natural to humans—a notion
that closed the gap genetically. But who other than the notorious P. T. Barnum could put his finger on the pulse of an
entire generation so accurately? In 1842 he advertised that among the exhibits in his museum were

the Ornithorhincus, or the connecting link between the seal and the duck; two distinct species of flying fish,
which undoubtedly connect the bird and the fish; the Mud Iguana, a connecting link between reptiles and
fish—with other animals forming connecting links in the great chain of Animated Nature.

And this was nearly two decades before the publication of the Origin of Species!

The doctrine of Plenitude as a research agenda: there was the Descending God of Infinite Efflux released from its
confinement in the Middle Ages and set loose with all its delight in glorious diversity. “Every discovery of a new form
could be regarded, not as the disclosure of an additional unrelated fact in nature, but as a step toward the
completion of a systematic structure of which the general plan was known in advance.”33

Although this systems-theory research agenda had started, in the hands of Cusanus and Bruno, as but one half of
the total picture of the Many to the One and the One to the Many, it soon became the entire picture (as we will see),
and attention centered solely on the Many, the All, the manifest Whole as a harmonious system quite apart from its
Source and Ground. The guiding agenda for this world was still the same—fill in the gaps in the Whole System—but
with no mention of the Source, the Good, the One. It was to the manifest Whole, the Great System of Nature, that
research was confined, and the research was indeed, through and through, a systems theory approach (“overall
harmony of the whole”), whether in economics, political theory, or science.

“Everything in nature is linked together,” began the Encyclopédie entry under the advancement of knowledge,
and “the art of the philosopher consists in adding new links to the separated parts.”34 Scientists and philosophers
alike “were wont, when they reached the height of their argument, to discourse with eloquence on the perfection of
the Universal System as a whole.”35 As Pascal would put it, “Its parts all are so related and interlinked with one
another that it is impossible to know the parts without knowing the whole or the whole without knowing all the
parts.” And Pope would memorialize the temperament of an entire age in search of “strong connections, nice
dependencies”:

He who through vast immensity can pierce,
See worlds on worlds compose one universe,
Observe how system into system runs,
What other planets circle other suns,
What vary’d being peoples every star,
May tell why Heaven has made us as we are.
But of this frame, the bearing and the ties,
The strong connections, nice dependencies,
Gradations just, has thy pervading soul
Look’d thro?

But in all of this, something very, very strange was occurring, and had in many cases already occurred. In the
multidimensional Plotinian Kosmos, the One gives birth to the Many—to the All—and the All return to the One, with
Each individual a perfect embodiment of the infinite One itself. The One underlies both Each and All.

However, in the new and truncated conception, since the infinite One was no longer admitted (“No more
Ascent!”), then the Descending or finite or manifest All or Whole was the sole residence of Providence and
Harmony. It was no longer the relation of Each and All to the One, but merely the relation of Each to the All.

Systems theory was born.
Put bluntly, the sum total of the shadows in the Cave was now confused with the Light beyond the Cave. And it
was dearly felt and firmly believed that salvation—both individual and social—could be secured if only we could
demonstrate with ever greater clarity that the shadows are not atomistic but rather holistic—that they hang
together as a great harmonious system, that the universal invisible hand of holism draws Each to the All in functional
perfection.

Salvation was no longer Each discovering that it

is the One (and thus capable of embracing the All). Rather,
salvation now demanded that Each somehow identify merely with the All (bypassing the One)—that Each would
functionally fit with the All, that Each would take its instrumental place in the great and glorious web, whether that

web be nature, the state, or the cosmos, the idea being that if shadows snuggle together tightly enough, Light will
somehow be produced.

The research agenda was thus to demonstrate the interlocking order and holistic nature of the shadows (as if that
would do anything to help one out of the Cave). It emphasized, as I said, the descending systems theory of Plenitude,
which is correct as far as it goes, but is only half the story. But it was that half-story that would soon claim to be the
alpha and omega of the universe (and that is the “bad news” of the next chapter).

In the meantime, the Great Holarchy, in its Effluxing side, was the research agenda for the new and rising culture
of modernity. And the Plenitude of Efflux would come to define, as it does to this day, the wondrous new world that
had just unfolded, and whose God would be defined solely by the maxim: The greater the diversity, the greater the
Goodness.

A NEW PLACE IN NATURE

Nothing shows more clearly that the Great Holarchy of Being was not a product of the medieval mind than the fact
that, by the middle of the eighteenth century, although virtually every single aspect of mythic and mythic-bound
Scholastic religion had been derisively rejected by the philosophers of the Enlightenment, virtually every single one
of them embraced the Great Holarchy. It quite obviously, to them, had nothing to do with mythic religion or the
medieval mind at all, or it would have been as thoroughly and as quickly abandoned.

There has been no period in which writers of all sorts—men of science and philosophers, poets and popular
essayists, deists and orthodox divines—talked so much about the Chain of Being, or accepted more implicitly
the general scheme of ideas connected with it, or more boldly drew from these their latent implications.
Addison, King, Bolingbroke, Pope, Haller, Thomson, Akenside, Buffon, Bonnet, Goldsmith, Diderot, Kant,
Lambert, Herder, Schiller—all these and a host of lesser writers not only expatiated upon the theme but drew
from it new consequences. Next to the word “Nature,” “the Great Chain of Being” was the sacred phrase of
the eighteenth century.36

The Great Chain of Being was palatable to the Age of Enlightenment, not just because it apparently expressed
certain profound truths, but precisely because it was not a mythic-level production (even if it also, in various forms,
was present there as well). The Church had appropriated the Great Chain straight from Plotinus via Origen and
Dionysius, but had, as we saw, precisely by mythologizing it, put a limit on the upper reaches of Ascent and generally
repressed Descent altogether. And the theme of this (and the next) chapter is that the Enlightenment would also
appropriate the Great Chain, in an equally lopsided but reverse fashion. It is fascinating, though, that both the mythic
and the rational mind, and the coming vision-logic, would all embrace the Great Holarchy; it clearly was one of the
very few conceptions that could withstand the complaints of each.

Of course, the Enlightenment would not accept the complete Circle of Ascent and Descent, as we will further see
in just a moment. But the net effect of the “virtually unanimous” acceptance of the Great Chain itself was a radically
altered view of the place of men and women in the universe, a view almost diametrically opposed to that of the
Middle Ages (where its mythologized version was in sociocentric service). In this particular regard, the “new” and
“modern” view was precisely that held by Plotinus or Bruno or Cusanus or any other upholder of the doctrine of a
radically decentered universe, and a view we have mentioned before: a radical nonanthropocentrism.

It is necessary to mention this point one last time, simply because of the misinformation displayed by most
ecological critics of the Great Holarchy. Let Lovejoy say it for us one last time: “It was implied by the principle of
Plenitude that every link in the Chain of Being exists, not merely and not primarily for the benefit of any other link,
but for its own sake; they all had an equal claim to existence; and therefore the true raison d’être of one species of
being was never to be sought in its utility to any other.”37

It is true that all beings were held to be different degrees of manifestation, and could therefore be ranked
according to degree, with the higher embracing the lower but not vice versa. But the reason that all beings were held
to have ultimately equal claim to existence was that the ranking was apparent only; it was the product of a not-fully-
awakened awareness. For, in the purely Nondual Ground, all points on the Great Circle, whether high or low,

ascending or descending, were equidistant from the Center—equidistant from an ant, a star, or a human, as Bruno
put it.

While this view still accepted a

relative or apparent-only ranking, and thus allowed for pragmatic value
judgments in the relative world (better to kill an apple than an ape), this was profoundly different from a mere
ranking or an absolute ranking, which would hesitate not at all in making all “lower grades” only and always
instrumental means. And it was exactly the medieval view—anthropocentric, geocentric—and its stubbornly
persistent remnants that the philosophers of the Great Chain were so intent on fighting. A principal text of Scholastic
religion/philosophy had stated:

As man is made for the sake of God, namely, that he may serve Him, so is the world made for the sake of man,
that it may serve him.

From a Protestant theological text much admired at the time:

If we consider closely what constitutes the excellence of the fairest parts of the Universe, we shall find that
they have value only in their relation to us, only in so far as our soul attaches value to them; that the esteem of
men is what constitutes the chief dignity of rocks and metals, that man’s use and pleasure gives their value to
plants, trees and fruits.

It was precisely against this worldview “that the logic of the conception of the Chain of Being worked potently.”38
And the chief opponent of anthropocentrism in all its forms was . . . Descartes. Leibniz and Spinoza (a dedicated
Cartesian) picked up the fight, and Goethe represented them all in his poem Athroismos: “Every animal is an end in
itself.” Or, as Schiller would so clearly put it, every being “has an unchallengeable right of citizenship in this larger
understanding of creation.” But perhaps, once again, Pope said it best:

Man walk’d with beast, joint tenant of the shade;
The same his table, and the same his bed;
No murder cloath’d him and no murder fed.
In the same temple, the resounding wood,
All vocal beings hymn’d their equal God!

That, indeed, was good news.

And so it was that Reason rose up to greet the new dawn, unaware that its very strengths would soon turn on it.
The sheer power of its capacity to represent the Kosmos empirically—a power unleashed by the differentiation of
the Big Three—would allow it inadvertently to collapse the Kosmos merely to its monological, empirical, Right-Hand
aspects, a collapse that would lock men and women into a purely Descended world, flatland to the core.

And strangest of all, the new Reason would appropriate even its own worst critics, take them up and hide them in
itself, and thus ensure that even the newly rising proponents of Gaia would harbor the flatland ontology that is still
destroying Gaia to this day.

For it would soon become obvious that the Descenders were destroying this world, because this world was the

only world they had.

12

The Collapse of the Kosmos

Everything that from eternity has happened in heaven and earth, the life of God and all the deeds of time
simply are the struggles for Spirit to know itself, to find itself, be for itself, and finally unite itself to itself; it
is alienated and divided, but only so as to be able thus to find itself and return to itself. . . .

As existing in an individual form, this liberation is called “I”; as developed to its totality, it is free Spirit; as

feeling, it is Love; and as enjoyment, it is Blessedness.

—HEGEL

IN THE WEST, from the time roughly of Augustine to Copernicus, the mythic-rational structure, for reasons I tried to

suggest in the last two chapters, emphasized quite heavily the Ascending current, and theoretically held out the Goal
of perfect Ascent in Christ (while at the same time officially prohibiting it).1 This combination locked the West into an
almost exclusively Ascending Ideal for over a thousand years. With rare individual exceptions, the great omega point
was promised always, delivered never: Ascendus interruptus at the heart of it all, leaving the West with a truly
peculiar spiritual hunger, a hunger found nowhere else, really, with quite the same sort of desperate face. . . .

With the widespread emergence of Reason as the center of gravity of social organizing forces, the mythic-rational
structure was itself transcended (in all the ways we discussed in chapter 5), which brought a step up in Ascent (Eros),
with a correlative increase in the capacity for Embrace (Agape; evidenced, for example, in universal benevolence,
worldcentric perspectivism, and the many liberation movements).

The rational structure itself could then, depending on contingent and cultural factors, emphasize, as an ideal, the
Ascending current, the Descending current, or both (preferably). And I have suggested that—largely as a reaction to
a millennium of (frustrated) Ascending Ideal—the Age of Reason, quite apart from the fact that it was itself a new
step of Ascent, almost wholeheartedly threw itself over to the Path of Descent and the glories of Creation and Efflux,
turned its back on its own Source and Origin, and pledged allegiance to a visible, sensible God. Unlike the Ascending
God, that God could be bedded. That God could be had. That itch, scratched . . . indefinitely.

Instead of an infinite above, the West pitched its attention to an infinite ahead. The vertical dimension of
depth/height was ditched in favor of a horizontal expansion, an emphasis not on depth but on span—and the
standard God of the modern Western world was set. It would become the God of the bourgeois as well as of the
dedicated scientist; the God of the materialist as well as of the social reformer; the God of the Greens and the “back
to nature” movement wherever it appeared; the God of democracy as well as the God of the Marxists and
Maoists—what they all had in common is the God of all that is visible, and all that can be seen, and all that can be
grasped with the hands (grasped, that is, with the Right Hand).

An “other world” of any sort was thrown over; and the eyes of men and women settled steely on the horizons
not above but in front of them, settled coldly on this world, and this world, and this world again. If salvation could
not be found on this small Earth, it could not be found at all.

THE COLLAPSE OF THE KOSMOS

Even though virtually all of the Renaissance and Enlightenment philosophers (and the Romantic philosophers, too, as

we will see) subscribed to the Great Chain, something profound had happened to it, and especially to its “upper
reaches.” Most educated men and women assumed that humans were somewhere in the middle of the Great Chain,
assumed that there were as many (or more) dimensions of “higher development” above them as there were below
them. “We have reason to be persuaded,” said John Locke, “that there are far more species of creatures above us,
than there are beneath; we being in degrees of perfection much more remote from the infinite Being of God, than
we are from the lowest state of being, and that which approaches nearest to nothing.”

This nonanthropocentric arrangement contributed to a not altogether unhealthy diminution of human pride.

Formey’s lament was typical of the time:

How little cause have I to exalt myself above others, and whence can I derive motives for pride? Heretofore I
used to conceit myself one of the most excellent of God’s creatures, but I now perceive how great my delusion
was. I find myself toward the lowest part of the Scale [of Being], and all I can boast of is, that I have a small
pre-eminence above irrational creatures; and this is not always so, there being many things in which they
possess advantages which I have not. On the contrary I see above me a multitude of superior intelligences.2

As Lovejoy notes, virtually every Renaissance and Enlightenment philosopher made that assumption. But quite
apart from whatever salutary humility the whole notion might have imbued in men and women, it is quite apparent
that, for them, the “upper reaches” of the Great Chain were simply being postulated to exist (“reason to believe”).
The higher or deeper dimensions were assumed to exist, they were a rational hypothesis put forward to “fill in the
gaps” between humans and Deity. Since, according to the principle of Plenitude, there could be no gaps in existence,
and since there was definitely a gap between humans and the infinite Source, then that gap simply had to be filled
by an almost infinite number of superior grades of intelligence, grades that, if they weren’t exactly “creatures,” were
at least a series of infinitely receding higher Ideas and forever unattainable Perfections utterly beyond human reach.
In the Middle Ages, the average mode had mythologized these “higher grades” as angels, archangels, and various
heavenly agents stretching from humans to the ultimate Divine. And now these “superior creatures” were instead
being rationalized as superior grades of intelligence and virtue and wisdom, but none of which could be reached by
the finite human mind. And however true that might be in a certain sense (they cannot be reached by the
conventional mind), this is not at all the way these higher grades were viewed by the originators of the system itself.
For Plotinus, Dionysius, Eckhart, and company, these higher dimensions of existence are, above all else, potentials
inherent or present in each and every being (since each and every being issues forth from them), and thus these
higher potentials can be realized or consciously actualized for any being who can find the requisite height/depth in
his or her own soul. These higher levels are not angels out there, or metaphysical notions merely postulated to exist
somewhere, or philosophical and logical assumptions used to fill in any “gaps” in the world. They are potentials that
can be directly experienced and directly realized. There is absolutely nothing other about them, except the
otherness created by our own lack of inner awareness.

For a child who has not yet learned language, the world of symbols and concepts seems to float around all about it
and above it; language is “over its head”; language is an “other world,” full of powerful magic and populated with
beings who seem to understand things that the child does not, beings who seem to possess a great deal of power
incomprehensible to the child—there are gods and goddesses out there, angels out there, “creatures” out there,
against which the child can feel only its own miserable impotence. But once language emerges as a developmental
component of the child’s own being: voilà! the linguistic powers, the conceptual angels, are all within.

For Plotinus (and similar nondual sages everywhere), the higher grades of consciousness are not otherworldly or
metaphysical in the least; they are not philosophical postulates; there is nothing about them that cannot be directly
experienced and directly realized in one’s own case, given the proper growth and development (following the proper
paradigms, injunctions, and exemplars in a community of shared social practice).

And while the mythic mind and the rational mind will construe these higher dimensions—their own higher
potentials—in terms that reflect their own stage of development (I have no quarrel with that), nonetheless to even
theoretically turn these higher stages into merely metaphysical postulates is a disaster. It denies the very essence of
these higher stages: they are all experimental, contemplative, experiential realities that are directly disclosed to
immediate awareness under the proper laboratory conditions.

The Enlightenment mind was, I have suggested, following two very different but fused agendas. One was “No
more myths!,” which was phase-specifically appropriate enough. But since the myths were almost exclusively
upward-looking (although frustrated), the second agenda, quite unnecessary, was “No more Ascent!” The upper
reaches of the Great Chain were thus converted into mere metaphysical postulates—and subsequently dropped
altogether.

The result was that Ascent—transcendence—of any higher sort was looked upon with gravest suspicion (“No
more Ascent!” meant “Ascend to Reason, but no further!”). Incredibly, the higher stages of the Great Chain became
exactly those virtues and powers that one could not reach and should not even try. The very attempt to reach
them, in fact, was equated with pride, which, we will see, was the dreaded sin of the century.

The Great Chain, which was always supposed to be a map of one’s own highest potentials—a map of the course
that Eros would follow in the blossoming of a love that would embrace the entire Kosmos with Agape and
caritas—that extraordinary map of liberation became instead a cage into which humans were locked with no
possibility of higher/deeper development. As Rousseau (in Emile) would exhort an entire generation: “O Man!
confine thine existence within thyself, and thou wilt no longer be miserable. Remain in the place which Nature has
assigned to thee in the chain of beings, and nothing can compel thee to depart from it . . .” (my italics).

Pride thus became any attempt to “rise above one’s station,” to “counterwork the Universal Cause,” to “disturb
the very system of the universe.” The way up, in any form, in any variety, in any guise, was the arch-sin, the sin of
horrid pride. Any hint of “otherworldliness” was openly scorned, severely derided—not to mention completely
distorted and misunderstood. Pope again:

Go soar with Plato to the empyreal sphere,
To the first good, first perfect, and first fair,
Or to tread the mazy round his follow’rs trod,
And quitting sense call imitating God;
As Eastern priests in giddy circles run,
And turn their heads to imitate the sun.

So the way up—any form of Ascent beyond Reason—was viewed as not just a bad idea, but as a literal crime

against nature, a crime against the Great Chain and its allotted spot for men and women.

In pride, in reas’ning pride, our error lies;
All quit their sphere and rush into the skies.
Pride still is aiming at the blest abodes. . . .

The theme of the modern age thus became, as Pope again would have it: “Trace Science then with modesty thy
guide.” Do not soar, do not look up, do not transform, but follow downward-looking Science with modesty thy guide.
The Deists—Toland, Tindal, Voltaire, Rousseau, Jefferson, Franklin—would try to salvage what they could of some
sort of a God—a God that originally created the world, “wound it up,” and then retired from the scene entirely.
Unlike Aristotle’s Pure Omega God, from which nothing issues but to which all aspires, the Deists’ God was the pure
Alpha Source, from which all issued but toward which nothing moves. The two paths of Ascent and Descent at this
point had utterly and totally separated, dissociated, divorced, anemic and fractured, with no point of contact, no
point even of discourse, let alone integration. And the Deists’ God, it soon became obvious, served precisely no
function whatsoever, either morally, practically, or even theoretically—and was understandably dropped altogether.
The wonderful world of Plenitude was no longer from God; Plenitude itself was God, the only God. In all directions
there was only Descent. In all directions, only Shadows. In all directions, only Flatland. And the only real sin? To try to
leave, to try to escape from the Cave, to try to see some reality more than the eye of flesh might manage to take in,
to try to transform instead of merely translate. All of that was . . . pride.

The realm of the senses, guided by Reason: there was the foundational reality. The wonders of creation—who
needs a source for them? The bigness of creation!—who could ask for more? Let me bask in the riches of the sensory
world, and reason upon it where necessary, but why ask behind the scenes for more than this display? Let cosmic

emotion and piety carry the day, and let me weep with joy at any passing sight in nature that strikes the slightest
chord of egoic sentiment, and let me spend my days and nights suckling shadows that are dear enough to me. And
let me never, never, never sin by asking beyond the shaded nooks and crannies. Let me always be known for saving
and defending the wonderful appearances, and with eyes so modestly reverted from that all-embracing Source, let
me never look up and never step out of my allotted spot on that great, great Chain.

And so, after more than two millennia, it had finally come to this: the path of liberation ended up the sin of pride.
The Great Chain, the map of what we could become, became a map of what we should not even try. The Great Chain
was used to deny the Great Chain. The way out of the Cave was used to imprison men and women in it. The Great
Chain was no longer the map of escape, but the plan of the prison cell with a sentence of life.

THE GREAT INTERLOCKING ORDER

With the collapse of the Kosmos into the merely and purely Descended world, all that was left of the Great Holarchy
showed up as an empirical, flatland interlocking order of surfaces, or exteriors, or Right-Hand components. In place
of the Kosmos, flatland systems theory.

I would like, in this section, to explore carefully this “great interlocking order” (as John Locke would have it)—how
and why it arose, what it accomplished, and what it aggressively violated. Because, one way or another, in one guise
or another, the only God the modern world would henceforth acknowledge, if it chose to acknowledge a God at all,
would be the God of the great interlocking order.

And so let me say it one last time: for Plotinus or Aurobindo or Eckhart or Shankara, the great interlocking order
was true but partial; it was only half the story (the “no gaps in Plenitude” half, the Descending or Effluxing aspect). It
represented the mutual interpenetration of the Each and the All. But the ground of both the Each and the All was the
nondual One, found not merely in the Descent of Goodness but in Ascent to the Good. But when this half-story
became the “whole” story, there precisely was the birth of the nightmare known as modernity.

And modernity’s collapse of the Kosmos occurred right alongside its genuine accomplishments, which, I believe,
are not to be denied (the good news / bad news nature of modernity). We have seen that one of the great defining
marks of modernity—what has been called its genuine dignity—was the clear differentiation of the Big Three, the
differentiation of science (it), morals (we), and art (I), so that each could pursue its own course and establish its own
truths without domination by the others. “Cultural modernity’s specific dignity is constituted by what Max Weber
called the differentiation of the value spheres in accord with their own logics.”3 And “by the end of the eighteenth
century, science, morality, and art were even institutionally differentiated as realms of activity in which questions of
truth [science], of justice [morals], and of taste [art] were autonomously elaborated, that is, each of these spheres of
knowing [was pursued] under its own specific aspect of validity.”4

But if the dignity of modernity was the differentiation of the Big Three, the disaster of modernity would be that
it had not yet found a way to integrate them. Indeed, with no unifying center, the Big Three had already begun to
move into dissociation—to exist as radically separate, “hyper-autonomous” realms, with nothing to say to each
other, bound only by a thoroughgoing and often mutual disdain. “This separation and self-sufficiency, which,
considered from the standpoint of philosophy of history, paved the way for emancipation from age-old
dependencies [mythic-membership syncretisms], were experienced at the same time as abstraction, as alienation
[dissociation] from the totality of an ethical context of life. Once religion had been the unbreakable seal upon this
totality; it is not by chance that this seal has been broken.”5

In the absence of the as-yet-undisclosed integration, the three spheres went virtually their separate and lonely
ways. In particular, the subjective and moral spheres—the Left-Hand path, the interior path—pursued its own logics
rigorously, and the Right-Hand path, that of the study of the objective and empirical exteriors, pursued its own
course in isolation as well. Both paths were making absolutely world-shaking discoveries, but discoveries that spoke
to each other virtually not at all.

It was this dissociation of the Big Three that, more than anything else, allowed the sweeping advances of the
natural sciences (the it-domain) to overwhelm the interior, subjective, moral, and cultural domains (I and we), and
this is what I mean when I say the Big Three were reduced to the Big One, or reduced to the Right-Hand path alone,

the path of objective it-language (the representation/reflection paradigm, and its converse, the production
paradigm, and the overall validity claims only of propositional truth and/or functional fit). The very power of
monological reason (ever so important and ever so partial), which was released from mythic syncretism precisely by
the differentiation of the Big Three, was allowed an overwhelming dominance because of the dissociation of the
Big Three, and thus their subsequent reduction to the Univocal One, the flatland world of monological, empirical-
analytic, positivistic “its,” where only the entities studied by empirical-natural sciences are “real.”

In subsequent volumes, I trace a large part of this dissociation and resultant emphasis on flatland to the strong
influence of the techno-economic base of industrialization and the machine mentality (which is similar to, but not
quite the same as, the more common analysis that traces it to capitalism): the techno-economic base supported
instrumental-purposive activities, and in a way all out of proportion to the instrumental-purposive rationality that
did in fact build it: a positive feedback loop that sent calculative rationality spinning out of control, precisely in the
avowed purpose of gaining control.

In the meantime, Donald Rothberg gives an excellent summary of these broad trends, which is quite consistent
with my presentation: “For a variety of reasons, these emergent potentials of modernity, these three modes of
knowing and acting [art, science, morality: the Big Three], were not evenly developed. Rather, as many of the main
critical analysts of modernity have suggested, modernity as it actually unfolded (and still unfolds) was (and is) heavily
weighted toward the knowing and manipulation of the first world [the it-world, Right Hand, objectivistic], of a ‘disen-
chanted’ and objectified world dominated by an ‘instrumental’ or ‘technical’ rationality (Berman, Habermas,
Heidegger, Horkheimer, Marcuse, Merchant, MacIntyre).”

Thus, Rothberg points out, “The content of the other two worlds (the intersubjective [we] and subjective [I]
worlds) was increasingly organized according to the structures of the empirical sciences and instrumental or
calculative rationality; Habermas links this unbalanced development especially with the powerful influences of the
forces of capitalism. Under the ‘scientistic’ influence of positivism and empiricism, there were claims of a unified
empirical science that encompasses all ‘real’ knowledge, excluding the various attempts to claim an autonomous
status for the emerging human sciences of cultural and subjective reality”6—the Big Three reduced to the Big One.

The flattening, the leveling, the collapse of the Kosmos. The universe was pushed through a strainer of
objectification, and the result was thin soup indeed. All that was left of a richly multidimensional Kosmos was simply
the sensory/empirical exteriors and outlines and flatland forms, much as if a sphere had been projected onto a plane
surface, producing only a series of flat circles—all span, no depth—at which point we say, “What sphere?”

The vertical and horizontal holarchies—the interior and exterior dimensions—which, we might say, “interlock”
in a rich network of values, degrees of consciousness, and qualitative distinctions, none of which can be measured in
terms of physical size or empirical inches or material span: these were reduced to their sensory/empirical and
physical correlates, to the physical forms and positivistic exteriors that could be seen (the Left reduced to its
correlates in the Right), and these indeed could be measured primarily by physical size or other extensional
attributes (mass, velocity, momentum, number, span).

And where qualities and values are measured in terms of better and worse (compassion is usually better than
murder), empirical sizes are not better or worse, only bigger or smaller (a star is not better than a planet, only
bigger). And thus the great interlocking order of sensory surfaces and exterior forms—the final result of pushing the
universe through the strainer of objectification—was inexorably the disqualified universe.7

The Kosmos, literally, was a shadow of its former self. The vertical and interior holarchies (of I and we) were
ditched in favor of the merely horizontal and exterior holarchies (of the great interlocking order of valueless
its).8Qualitative distinctions were replaced merely with quantitative distinctions and technical measurements.
“What does it mean?” was fundamentally replaced with “What does it do?” Intrinsic value disappeared into
empirical action terms. “What worth?” was replaced with “How much?” Greater was replaced with bigger. Cultural
meaning drifted into functional fit and holistic interaction of surfaces. Morals melted into systems theories. Eros was
converted to instrumental-functional efficacy, and Agape melted down into an affirmation of ordinary Descended
life.

In short, depths that required interpretation were largely ignored in favor of the interlocking surfaces that can
simply be seen (empiric-analytic)—valueless surfaces that could be patiently, persistently, accurately mapped: on

the other side of the objective strainer, the world appeared only as a great interlocking order of sensory surfaces,
empirical forms, process its.

The massive empirical mapping game—the epistemological game of modernity—was afoot.
We heard Taylor summarize this whole shift as: “The universe as a meaningful order of qualitatively differentiated
levels [vertical holarchy] gave way first to a vision of mathematical order, and then finally to the ‘modern’ view of a
world of ultimately contingent correlations, to be patiently mapped by empirical observation.”9

And, as we saw in chapter 1, it wasn’t just that this empirical mapping game was partial: taken in and by itself, it
was perfectly self-contradictory. On the other side of the objective strainer, there was simply no evidence
whatsoever that this thin objective soup was the only evidence worth knowing. No, that assertion (Right-Hand
data alone are real) was a Left-Hand judgment that denied all Left-Hand judgments. The objectivistic worldview
could not account for its own status (the “view from nowhere”): it could prove objects but could not prove the
exclusiveness of objects—could not prove itself—but rather was taken, literally, on blind faith, a faith blind to the
entire Left half of the Kosmos, even as it surreptitiously dipped into that dimension for its own hidden judgments,
judgments which it forcefully and vehemently made and then flat-out denied making. “Empirical knowledge alone is
true knowledge”—and where is the empirical proof for that?

The net effect was that the Great Chain was tipped on its side, so to speak—an infinite within and beyond was

ditched in favor of an infinite in front of and ahead, and the West began to scratch that itch in earnest.

I want to briefly interrupt the narrative at this point to mention a simple but crucial item. This will take us ahead of
our story, but it’s important, so let us at least briefly note the following before returning to the main narrative.

With the postmodern overthrow of the Univocal One—that is, with the return of an investigation of the Left-Hand
dimensions, including multicultural interpretation and deep hermeneutics, introspection and interior disclosures, the
existence of intersubjective discursive formations and cognitive paradigms, chains of signification and depths of
communication, the demand for qualitative distinctions and the search for worth and meaning—with, in short, the
beginning return of the Big Three as opposed to monolithic flatland, interest can once again turn (and has turned) to
the depths of the subjective I and the intersubjective we: depths that range from Heidegger’s clearing or opening
(the pure transcendens), to hermeneutics’ restless search for the depths, to the mystical openings found even in
Nietzsche and Bataille and Derrida and, yes, in Foucault’s intense search for limit experiences and the “mad mystical”
poets. Depths that have sparked an explosion of interest in everything from humanistic and transpersonal
psychology to Eastern mysticism and yoga. Depths that call out even to the postmodern poststructuralists, who, if
nothing else, are quite certain that truth is not merely a clean game of positivistic and empirical mapping.

For all postmodern currents have at least one thing in common: mere empiricism is dead. The surfaces are shot.
The flat and faded system is anemic to the core. The thin soup is causing malnutrition: epistemological, ontological,
motivational.

The whole point is that once the weight of the Univocal One is lifted from the shoulders of awareness, the Big
Three jump instantly back into focus, and interior depths once forbidden to serious discourse—depths forbidden
with the shuddering collapse of the Kosmos—now unfurl before the mind’s inward eye: the surfaces are not all, the
shadows hide something else. The appearances don’t just reveal, they conceal: something other is going on. There
are nutritional supplements that this thin soup of shiny surfaces does not contain, secrets not apparent to the
senses, items that are more . . . interesting.

And among those waiting for us in this renewed investigation of interior subjective and intersubjective depths
are precisely the original pioneers in that endeavor: the great mystic philosopher/sages from Plotinus to Dionysius to
Augustine to Teresa to Eckhart to Emerson, pioneers that struck out to investigate a vast and unchartered continent
of consciousness, a voyage of interior discovery that continued right up to the historical point—this point in our
narrative—where that particular continent was proclaimed nonexistent and all explorers were banned (by “cultural
marginalization”) from even discussing their findings. The interior dimensions were no longer considered serious
discourse: all of that was part of the “merely mythic” past (no more myths, no more Ascent). As Foucault would put
it of this entire period (of collapse), if something couldn’t be laid out on a flat table of representation, then it didn’t
exist
it seemed not to bother the classical Enlightenment that the drawer of the

(and, said Foucault,

table—subjective consciousness itself—could not itself be laid out on the table). So much for the extraordinary
pioneers of the interior (from Plotinus to Ficino to Eckhart . . .).

But they left us their early maps, maps of the interiors of what now amounted to a New World awaiting
(re)discovery. And most of these maps were of the general form: turn left at mind, cut straight into the formless, rest
in Spirit, embrace the world; and all of the steps required for that extraordinary journey (maps such as figure 9-1).

But, indeed, many of the specific details of these maps are less than accurately drawn. These early maps are in
many ways like the early maps of the Americas: Cuba is the size of Texas, Greenland extends forever, Florida is a
huge continent. But the fact that some of these maps are crude or initial or outdated does not mean that Cuba and
Florida and Greenland don’t exist.

Thus, it is not necessary that we embrace every detail of their maps. Not only are some of them hastily drawn, the
whole point of consciousness development is that it also creates territories as it goes, and doesn’t simply discover
totally pregiven landscapes. The fact that certain broad domains of interior consciousness are available to us (as
deep structures) does not mean that the surface structures are given once and for all (which is why even excellent
interior maps, such as Plotinus’s, have to be refined and updated). Even if Columbus had drawn a perfectly accurate
geographical map of Florida, it would still be woefully inadequate for most of today’s uses (it wouldn’t show the new
cities, roads, towns, developments, etc. Where are all the subsequently created surface structures?). Each level of
consciousness is actually a four-quadrant affair, molded equally by intentional, behavioral, cultural, and social
factors, all of which have continued to evolve and develop since the time of the great pioneers.

Rather, these early maps are much along the lines of what Foucault suggested: “Among the cultural inventions of
mankind there is a treasury of devices, techniques, ideas, procedures, and so on, that cannot exactly be reactivated,
but at least constitute, or help constitute, a certain point of view which can be very useful as a tool for analyzing
what’s going on now—and to change it.”10

Thus, as we will see shortly, when the Idealists began the overthrow of flatland, the overthrow of the collapsed
and disqualified universe, they had recourse to precisely these early maps of the interior Worlds. And, as we will also
see, if there was one person who could be said to be seminal to this entire movement, that person was . . . Plotinus.

But that, indeed, is quite ahead of our story. All I wish to emphasize here is that, with the postmodern possibility
of the return of the Big Three, we do indeed have the early maps of the interior New World left by these
extraordinary pioneers. And relying on those maps—at least initially—is not a regressive yearning for yesteryear, nor
a mythic devolution, but rather the only sensible course of action for a new breed of pioneers trying once again to
plumb the depths that were utterly disqualified with the modern collapse. Refine the maps, yes; redraw many of
their outlines, surely; but thank the stars for the guts and glory of those who went before, and left a trail, clearly
marked, for all those souls sensitive enough to follow.

A CALCULUS OF PLEASURE

To return to our narrative. With the collapse of the Big Three to the Big One: the collapsed and disqualified world
was still a hierarchy, still a holarchy, but now played out strictly and only in the horizontal plane (any vertical move
was the sin of pride). So of course the universe was still viewed as a massive interlocking order, a great net of
systems theory, but a net that was now merely empirical and physical, that could be seen with senses or their
extensions, a net of the Right-Hand path.

Thus, not also depths to be interpreted and interiors to be accessed, but simply exterior surfaces to be seen and
“patiently mapped by empirical observation”—the so-called “reflection” or “representation paradigm,” where a
pregiven, unproblematic subject simply reflects on or represents the objects in the pregiven, sensory, empirical
world.11

The Upper-Right quadrant, for example, was still a holarchy—atoms to molecules to cells to organisms, and so on.
This wasn’t denied. What was denied was that the Left-Hand dimensions needed to be explained in any terms
other
than those found in the Right Hand. This is subtle reductionism. (A few ingenious cranks then went
further—into gross reductionism—and claimed everything in the Right Hand could actually be reduced to atoms, the
old Epicurean move.) But in both gross and subtle reductionism, reality is merely monological and empirical and

representational (reflection on the empirically available), and thus no inner transformation (no interior Ascent or
vertical development) is required in order to have access to “all the truth that is fit to know.”

And this fit perfectly but perfectly with the arch-sin of the age. To attempt to rise above one’s station—that was,
of course, the dreaded pride. Well, the Right-Hand path doesn’t require anybody to rise above anything: just look
more carefully at the empirical world that is more or less available. Not arduous transformation, but simply more
precise
The Great Chain tottered off into empirical
observables, degrees of depth collapsed into degrees of span, interpretive dimensions disappeared into empirical
action terms, and qualitative distinctions melted down into functional interrelations: the great interlocking order of
empirical its.

(mapping of the empirically accessible).12

translation

And after all, every event in the real Kosmos does indeed have its Right-Hand correlate,

its empirical or
sensorimaterial footprint (its exterior form), and so some sort of evidence for the empirical and positivistic course
could always be supplied. Thoughts have their correlates in brain physiology. Intentions have their behavioral
aspects. Culture has material social components. The Right-Hand path is never just simply wrong.

Just very partial. Plenitude without Spirit is systems theory. And systems theory, in its various guises, was now all
the rage (from the Enlightenment down to today; in its various forms, the subtle reductionism of systems theory is
the arch-paradigm of the Right-Hand path, where it does bitter battle with the gross reductionists—atomists,
mechanists—neither of them formally acknowledging the Left half of the Kosmos).

In the great systems paradigm, which swept through the Enlightenment like wildfire (based, as both were, on
monological rationality): instead of the relation of Each to the One (and thus to the All), one’s salvation depended
upon how the Each fit functionally and instrumentally into the All, into the whole functional system. The holistic
world was an instrumental world, to the core. Since all things were merely strands in the great empirical web, all
things had merely extrinsic and instrumental value in the overall system.

Accordingly, quality (interior depth) was measured in terms of quantitative fit with the great interlocking order
(exterior span), and this was, incredibly, true for both the natural sciences and the religions of the time. The “great
instrumentalization” was in motion.13 “It is interesting to note,” says Taylor of this collapse, “that this conception
itself had undergone the transformation which made the instrumental central. Our grasp of this [holistic] order was
referred to by the term ‘technologia,’ and the unity of God’s order was seen not as a structure to be contemplated
but as an interlocking set of things calling for actions which formed a harmonious whole.”14

Taylor is discussing the central strands in religion from the Reformation to the Puritans to the Deists. How one’s
actions
fit into the harmonious whole: this was crucial to salvation. “The harmony between the parts [of the
harmonious whole] was captured in the term ‘eupraxia’; it was more a matter of the coherence of the occasions for
action than of the mutual reflection of things in an order of signs.” In other words, a harmonious whole of surfaces
and exteriors involved in action (“What does it do?”) and not also interior contemplation and an order of signs
(“What does it mean?”).

This conversion of qualitative value to instrumental action, Taylor shows, marked the entire era. “This means that
.
the instrumental stance toward the world has been given a new and important spiritual meaning.
Instrumentalizing things is the spiritually essential step. . . .”15 The instrumentalizing consisted precisely in
converting all things into strands
in the web of a now purely descended Plenitude, therein to take their
instrumental place in the great universal system of sensory surfaces (“reflected on” by instrumental rationality).

.

.

No less than John Locke—“the teacher of the Enlightenment”—would stamp this holistic instrumentalizing with
his seal of approval. “Instrumental rationality, properly conducted, is of the essence of our service to God. This is
how we participate in God’s purposes. Not through instinct, like the animals, but through conscious calculation, we
take our place in the whole.”16 As Taylor summarizes it, “Locke helped to define and give currency to the growing
Deist picture, which will emerge fully in the eighteenth century, of the universe as a vast interlocking order of
beings, mutually subserving each other’s flourishing. . . .” And instrumental awareness was thus “our avenue of
participation in God’s will.”

(It should be obvious by now that if we substitute “Gaia” for “God’s will,” we have the “new paradigm” of many of
the ecophilosophers of today, who extend in an unbroken lineage to the originators of the collapse of the Kosmos.
Far from being a new paradigm,
it is still covertly following the fundamental Enlightenment paradigm, still

attempting to instrumentalize the world subservient to a web-of-life ideology, still caught in Foucault’s biopower,
still doing bitter battle with the gross reductionists, which is fine, but still missing the larger violence they have
perpetrated on the Kosmos in the process of their own subtle reductionism—all topics we will investigate further
below.)

Thus, the Great Holarchy (with “No more Ascent!” allowed) was converted, by a flatland monological and
instrumental reasoning (technologia), into mutually interlocking and interpenetrating surfaces and exteriors, into a
coherent and harmonious whole of mutually subserving strands in the great universal and objective system, a
structural-functional system defined in procedural and action terms (“What does it do?”)—in short, into a flatland
web of life that lacked all interiority and degrees of depth—lacked, as Taylor puts it, all qualitative distinctions: I and
we reduced to interwoven its.

It was thus a short step to “the greatest good for the greatest numbers”—a calculus of interlocking exteriors
described in action terms (the great hallmark of the Right-Hand path). With no depths to be accessed, there are only
surfaces to calculate: the more, the merrier. In a disqualified universe, “quality” is found by addition. And who can
doubt, in such an atmosphere, that bigger must be better?

On the one hand, we can appreciate, I think, that “the greatest good for the greatest numbers” was a genuinely
worldcentric notion (it often even included animals). And all of that was due in large measure to the positive
emergence of postconventional and worldcentric rationality. So far, so good.

But with the collapse of the Kosmos from both Left and Right dimensions to merely Right-Hand empirical and
sensory markers, there was no room left for, there was no way to register, differences in the types or qualities of
the “good” that is supposed to be extended to all beings. There is only the functional fit of surfaces, and more or
less of only that.

In other words, the flatland world means a homogenization of motives for all beings, and the ethical imperative
then becomes to extend this homogenized mess to as many beings as possible. And this means as well that the
homogenized motive would have to be the
for all beings: namely, sensory
pleasure/pain, hedonic happiness.

lowest common denominator

Already, by 1742, Hutcheson would declare that “that action is best which accomplishes the greatest Happiness
for the greatest Numbers.” And never mind that there might be different types or levels of happiness. In a flatland
cosmos, all happiness is the same, all happiness is monohappiness, sensory happiness, hedonic happiness, and thus a
flatland calculus simply says to extend the span of monohappiness in all directions, in accord with the great
interlocking order: not also degrees of depth but simply endless addition of sensory span, a truly bad infinity in an
expanding nightmare of the great interlocking order.

“The most important notion Hutcheson and Locke share is that of the great interlocking universe, in which the
parts are so designed as to conduce to their mutual preservation and flourishing.”17 Hutcheson himself would clearly
explain that “our Affections were contrived for the whole; by them each Agent is made,
in great measure,
subservient to the good of the whole. [All] are thus linked together, and make one great System, by an invisible
Union. He who voluntarily continues in this Union, makes himself happy: He who does not continue this Union freely,
but affects to break it, makes himself wretched; nor yet can he break the Bonds of Nature.”18

Become anything other than an instrumental strand in the great interlocking order and System of Nature—look
beneath the surfaces, look into the depths or heights—and you are not only guilty of pride but doomed to wretched
unhappiness. You have broken the hedonic calculus, have subtracted from the Sum Total of what should be
uniformly happy Egos fitting snug as a bug into sensory flatland: you have disrupted the cavalcade of smiley-faced
Shadows.

For the Cambridge Platonists, who at the time were fighting a losing battle, the key to salvation was theiosis—one
becomes the Divine, and thus participates in the depths of the All, embracing Each as a perfect manifestation of the
One. Not just fitting into the System as a part, but discovering the Source of the System as the One. On the other
hand, for the purely Descended worldview that was now developing, God’s Goodness was found solely in the
plenitude of benevolence shown in the interlocking order of beings—in the great System—each part of which was
assumed to be pursuing essentially the same monohappiness of sensory pleasure.

This is why, as Taylor points out, the instrumental and interlocking-order theorists (from Locke to Bentham)

hedonistic theory of motivation.

always had recourse to a
In an empirical-sensory world, there is only
empirical-sensory motivation (what else could there be?). Since we are all strands in the great empirical web, we
must all share something in common, and what all living beings have in common—the lowest common denominator,
in fact—is the pursuit of physical pleasure and the avoidance of physical pain.19 The homogenization of motives, the
reduction of all motives to the lowest common denominator.

(Closely related to physical pleasure/pain, in terms of motivation, is simple survival or self-preservation, and
subsequent systems theorists would often make self-preservation of the system—autopoiesis—the mono-
motivation that all holons possess. This is partially true in an abstract fashion—it’s tenet 2a—but it is incapable of
differentiating Left-Hand qualities, since any that exist are equally autopoietic. Autopoiesis would thus become
another common mono-motivation in flatland.)

In other words, the disqualified universe still needed some sort of quality to move it into action, it needed some
sort of push for its action terms—it still needed some type of motivation to turn the gears, jiggle the web—and the
lowest common denominator was all that remained. Hedonic pleasure, so to speak, was the furthest into the interior
that would be ventured, and this “sole” quality—because it was essentially the “same” for all—could then be easily
“quantitized” and thus “calculated.” (Different qualities cannot easily be added precisely because they are different
types of entities—we say, “It’s apples and oranges.” But if you can get rid of the differences in quality, if you can
disqualify the universe by converting it into more or less of only one quality, convert it into nothing but apples—well,
apples can be added.)

Of course, it is one thing to say that we are all linked at that fundamental

level of pleasure/pain (for indeed we
are, at the sensorimotor level, and for all holons that possess that level). It is quite another thing to say that we all
have only that level of motivation. But already Helvetius would announce that “Physical pain and pleasure are the
unknown principles of all human actions.”20 Significance is here completely collapsed to fundamentalness, and the
interlocking-utilitarians thus arrive at the common weakest-noodle motivation, and this weakest-noodle motivation
then defines the single, sole, mono-happiness that we are supposed to extend throughout the flatland order as an
ethical imperative: the more hedonic happiness for each, the better for all.

The idea seemed to be that if I can just extend my mediocrity to more and more beings, then a collective good and
a great happiness would somehow result. But it was exactly the expansion of this weakest-noodle motivation,
calculated by a monological and instrumental reason, that would allow me to take my rightful place in the great
instrumental whole. Since it is only in reason that I can comprehend the great interlocking order, and since we are all
strands in that order, then reason demands that I extend the same monohappiness throughout the entire
monochrome system.

Even Aristotle had ranked motivations in a holarchy of deepening significance. Not everything we do is equally
valuable, or equally good, or equally just. In Aristotle’s version, there are several “goods” in life, but some of them
are “more good” than others. Least significant was sensual pleasure, or hedonistic involvement. This was still a
“good,” and not to be condemned per se, but there were also other and more significant pursuits.

Deeper and wider than sensual pleasure was the life of ordinary production and consumption of material goods.
Deeper and wider than production and consumption was the citizen life, the life of intersubjective relationship and
interpersonal friendship. And deepest/highest of all, was the contemplation of the timeless (we approach the Divine
most closely by contemplating the unchanging).21

This is, of course, just another version of the Great Holarchy. For Aristotle and the Stoics, this hierarchy was an
order of goals, and an order of motivation. For Plato and Plotinus, it was also the structure of the Kosmos (which is
why Plato’s “science” and his “ethics” are of a piece).

But in all cases, it meant that the ethical life involved significant transformations in consciousness (or in one’s
being). The deeper or higher motivations are not simply given from the start; one has to grow, develop, and unfold
to effect these changes (just as in Maslow’s needs hierarchy, which is precisely the same Great Holarchy in modern
form). Above all, one had to change one’s perceptions, because the deeper and wider and more encompassing
motivations are not just lying around waiting to be seen by the senses or their extensions. Transformation was
mandatory for a truly ethical life.

But with the collapse of the Kosmos to the empirical Right-Hand path and to the weakest-noodle motivation of

pleasure/pain (the very shallowest motivation on Aristotle’s and Plato’s holarchy), a profound and altogether
far-reaching shift has occurred: since the weakest-noodle motivation is already present in most adults (it is present,
in fact, in most sentient beings, a true fundamental)—since it is already present in awareness, then one does not
have to transform in order to live this “ethical” life: one simply extends one’s present state to as many others as
possible. One translates more widely; one does not have to transform more deeply. (It is interesting that, when
Foucault switched his studies to ethics, the major criticism he had of modern ethical theories compared with the
premodern ones was that, as he put it, the modern theories by and large had no ascesis, no transformative practice:
one merely thought differently, one didn’t have to transform.)

In fact, aiming for any deeper and transformative motivation (which is also actually much wider and more
encompassing)—this is our old friend “pride.” Seeking a deeper meaning and motivation must now be viewed as
stepping outside of the great interlocking order of weakest-noodle motivation. It was literally labeled, as we saw, a
“crime against nature” and a crime against “the great Universal System.”22

And thus, to come full circle, it was through weakest-noodle motivation, calculated by an instrumental-holistic
rationality, that we could embrace the flatland whole. “The importance of instrumental reason then comes from its
being the way that we are intended to play our part in the design . . . of the great interlocking order of the
universe.”23
It is a concord of interlocking exteriors described in action terms, not an embrace of both interiors and
exteriors demanding an inner transformation.

In this withering monological gaze, Agape is fast becoming Thanatos—not just a higher embracing a lower, but a
higher regressing, being reduced to, a lower: the drive to dismantle the higher into its lowest common denominator
parts (thus killing the higher in the process: Thanatos). There is no longer a deeper or higher happiness, only a wider
happiness. No longer a vertical happiness that would embrace all beings as the One, but merely a horizontal
happiness that would reduce Each to a sensory component in the All, and then attempt to ameliorate the
devastating damage by an endless addition of broken parts, this bad infinity being the sole “happiness” of Each in the
flattened All.

An old Catskills joke: Two elderly women, vacationing in the Catskills, are having dinner in the resort dining room.

The food arrives, and one woman says, “This food is just awful.” The other says, “Yes, and such small portions!”

The utilitarian ethic of this age was devoted to the proposition that bigger portions of bad food would somehow

constitute the social good.

The instrumental-holistic and utilitarian atmosphere that dominated the age would simply level moral distinctions,
and make it impossible to see that there are altogether different degrees of moral virtue, make it impossible to see
why it is “better to be an unhappy Socrates than a contented pig.” Rousseau and Kant would tear into this
homogenization of motives with a vengeance, and Hegel would tear into them for not being nearly nasty enough.
But in the meantime, the mono-motives of flatland would make it impossible to see that deeper human happiness
might reside in a profound transformation of consciousness, and not just in an expanding translation of one’s
present state.24

The great advantage of the Descended God: I can already see that God clunking around in my visual field.
Pleasure and pain already govern that world. They are given to me. That God is obvious, present, demands no work,
no ascesis; the pleasure is there with each sunrise. And I shall extend the pleasure—and only that—indefinitely,
thus never stepping out of the great interlocking system.

Accordingly, “sensuality was given a new value. Sensual fulfillment . . . seems to be one of the irreversible changes
brought about by the radical Enlightenment. The promotion of ordinary life [nontranscendental], already transposed
by Deists into an affirmation of the pursuit of happiness, now begins to turn into an exaltation of the sensual.
Sensualism was what made Enlightenment naturalism radical.”25

Aristotle’s lowest good is here the only good!—because it is the only good that fits the weakest-noodle net. For a
merely empirical-sensory world, a merely empirical-sensory motivation. No deeper stages of growth, transformation,
or development are necessary, and certainly none were allowed.

Heaps of sensual mono-happiness, not wholes of higher transformation: this would be a crucial ingredient in the
newly forming Descended worldview—a world where there are no depths to be interpreted, only surfaces to be
seen. Thus no inner transformation required, only exterior and empirical mapping. No qualitative distinctions to be

forged, only quantative extensions to be measured. No better or worse inherent in the Kosmos, only bigger and
smaller found in the cosmos. Not also an interlocking order of interpretive depth, but only a great interlocking order
of empirical span. Not also degrees of value and motivation, but merely degrees of functional fit, driven by pleasure
and survival. Not also “What does it mean?” but basically “What does it do?”

A Descended worldview where, to summarize bluntly, an expansion of span replaced a deepening of depth.

THE EGO AND THE ECO

We earlier noted the altogether extraordinary paradox of the Enlightenment paradigm: the holism of nature
produced the atomism of the self. That is, so holistic was this great empirical interlocking order and interwoven net,
so perfect was the “great Universal System,” that the subject perceiving this net, the rational-ego, was left
disengaged and dangling as its own “autonomous” and “self-defining” agency, with no way, in participatory terms,
that the subject could actually fit into the interlocking world of objects it had so seamlessly described. The I and we
could find no room in the inn of interwoven its.26

This massive rift in the holistic world, in the Système de la Nature, was rapidly becoming all too apparent. “The
Enlightenment developed a conception of nature, including human nature, . . . as a harmonious whole whose parts
meshed perfectly. But the rift was still there between nature, whether as plan or instrument, and the will which
acted on this plan”27—the will or agency which could not be described in the same terms as the net of its in which it
found itself, a subject that could not fit into the world of empirical objects.

Thus, the newly emergent rational-ego might simply say it was merely a strand in the great empirical web of
nature, but that was to reduce the subjective sphere to an empirical dimension (reduce the Upper Left to a merely
Right-Hand dimension: this is precisely what systems theorists continue to do to this day). But that did not explain
the fit of the subject into the empirically holistic net; rather, that explained away the subject as being merely another
object. It erased the very terms it was supposed to explain.

The holistic flatland world left no point of insertion for the subject with depth (no room for interiors, for I’s or

we’s, for genuine depth in any holons anywhere, animal, human, divine, or otherwise).

And thus arose what has been called the central problem of modernity: human subjectivity and its relation to the
world. Not only was it the central problem of the Enlightenment and the Romantic-Idealist rebellion, it has continued
to be a central, often the central, topic in theorists from Habermas to Foucault to Taylor. (Foucault, for example,
said, “The goal of my work during the last twenty years . . . has not been to analyze the phenomena of power, nor to
elaborate the foundations of such an analysis. It is not power, but the subject, which is the general theme of my
research.”)28

What is of most interest to us now is that the two poles of the fundamental Enlightenment paradigm—namely,
the autonomous subject (or the rational-ego) and the holistic world—were a mutual discord in essentially the same
flatland ontology.29 Both poles accepted the collapse of the Kosmos into fundamentally empirical and naturalistic
terms. It was no longer a battle between the Ascenders and the Descenders. The Descenders had fundamentally
triumphed—in rejecting the bathwater of myth they had tossed out the baby of Ascent: no deeper or higher stages
than the rational-ego and its empirical world were acknowledged. On this, all sides were in virtual agreement.

No, it was now a battle between what was left over: it was a battle, at the egoic-rational level, between the
agency and the communion of that particular level: a battle of the ego-subject that was supposed to be self-
defining, self-generating, and self-autonomous versus the objective/empirical world that was supposed to
encompass and govern the ego-subject as well (as part of the great universal web)—and both of those assertions
obviously cannot be unadulteratedly true.

Thus, this was not a battle of higher transformation (both sides had ruled that out), but a battle of translations,
in the form: given the rational ego-subject, does the good life consist in (1) following the autonomous agency of
the rational-ego in order to generate its own self-assured morals and aspirations, or in (2) connecting the ego with
the wider ground of its shared communions in the natural world and thus finding something “larger” than the
isolated ego?

This battle—it is still with us today—I will call the battle between the Ego and the Eco. Both were flatland to the

core, which prevented their ever being synthesized in a higher union (they cannot be vertically integrated if both
sides deny vertical holarchy). Rather, in a flatland world, the more there is of one, the less there must be of the
other, and so the Ego camps and the Eco camps lined up as mortal enemies, each accusing the other, once again, of
being the essence of Evil.

The battle: Did the good life reside in the Ego’s agency or in its communions? In the Ego or the Eco?
Plotinus, of course, had a coherent way to say both (namely, the subjective agency of Each and the objective
communions of the All are transcended and included in the nondual One). But since both sides had now thoroughly
rejected holarchic Ascent to the Nondual One, there was only the thorny question of how to relate the finite and
supposedly autonomous subject (the Each) with finite and supposedly all-inclusive net of objects (the All), without
reducing one to the other and thus violently and syncretically sabotaging the hard-won integrity of each.

The two camps,

in other words, were completely and mutually incompatible (this they both happily—and
aggressively—acknowledged). The more the Ego was emphasized as the true ground of a rational morality and an
ethical will not found in nature, then the more the Eco was devalued, the more it came to be perceived as a source
of heteronomy (“other-direction”) opposed to the rational autonomy of the ego-subject. Nothing in the system of
nature seeks universal compassion or mutual understanding or ethical restraint, the argument ran, and thus the task
of the Ego is to free itself from the nasty, short, and brutish net of nature. The task of the Ego was to disengage from
the Eco. To establish its agency over the communions of the great and grinding system. In short, and in all ways: the
less Eco, and the more Ego, the better.

The Eco camp watched all of this with absolute alarm. The Ego wasn’t just establishing its agency, this camp
maintained; it was severing and repressing its connections and communions with nature—both external nature and,
more important, internal nature (sensual, desirous, sexual, vital). And the more the Ego succeeded in its goal of
devaluing the Eco, then the more abstract, arid, dry, and desiccated it became. The very emergence of the Ego, they
maintained, was now destroying the rich fabric of communions on which the Ego itself depended. And the solution
seemed equally obvious: the more Eco, and the less Ego, the better for all.

Without a genuine holarchy, the two partial views could not be superseded: they both claimed to encompass the
other camp, but they both did so only through aggressive subtraction. They were in fact locked into a battle royale
that, in many ways, was the archbattle, and remains the archbattle, of modernity and postmodernity.30

In this world, this Descended world, the Ego and the Eco battle for the good life, doomed as they are to mutual

repugnance.

It would be useful, then, to look more closely at the flatland Ego and the flatland Eco—both what they
accomplished (which was much) and what they mutilated (which was much more), since, as I indicated, this fruitless
battle, which cannot be solved in a flatland ontology, is still with us today, and still contributing equally to the
despoliation of the real world, the world they both claim to be saving.

A DIAGRAMMATIC OVERVIEW

Because this topic is so crucial, and also somewhat intricate, I would like in this section to give a very simplified
overview using a handful of diagrams. As is always the case with diagrams, they can cause more problems than they
solve; but as long as we keep in mind the very schematic nature of these figures, they might highlight several of the
central issues.

Figure 12-1 is a summary of the traditional Great Chain of Being, in a simplified form, matter to body to mind to
soul to spirit. Since each level transcends and includes, I have drawn it more accurately as the Great Nest (or Great
Holarchy) of Being. Moving upward from the center (matter, the most fundamental) is the process of evolution
(Reflux or Ascent, driven by Eros), and moving downward from spirit (the most significant) is involution (Efflux or
Descent, driven by Agape). Each senior level is an emergent, marked by properties not found in its juniors. Spirit is
both the highest level (which transcends all, includes all), and the equally present Ground of each level (equidistant
from a star, an ant, a man).

But what the traditional Great Nest failed to do, on any sort of significant scale, was to clearly differentiate the
four quadrants. The material brain, for example, was simply placed, with all matter, on the bottom rung of existence,

instead of seeing that the material brain is the exterior correlate of interior states of consciousness (so that the brain
is not simply part of the lowest of all levels, but rather is the exterior correlate of some very high levels). Instead of
seeing that consciousness is intimately associated with the material brain, consciousness seemed to hover above all
matter, transcendental and metaphysical and completely other-worldly. (The discovery that states of consciousness
have correlates in brain states—that all Left-Hand events have Right-Hand correlates—was a devastating blow to the
Great Chain and all metaphysics as traditionally conceived, and rightly so, even though it went too far and
contributed to the collapse of the Kosmos into nothing but scientific materialism.)

Figure 12-1. The Great Nest of Being. Spirit is both the highest level (causal) and the nondual Ground of all levels.

Likewise, the traditional Greaet Nest embodied little understanding of the profound ways that cultural contexts
(LL) mold all perception; of the ways that the techno-economic base (LR) strongly influences individual
consciousness; of the evolution of worldviews, individual consciousness, modes of production, and so on. In all these
ways and more, the Great Chain was severely limited. (This did not stop individuals from using the Great Chain as a
perfectly adequate map for individual spiritual development in the Upper-Left quadrant, which is what many did. But
it did severely limit the sensitivity of the Great Nest to those aspects of reality that we are calling the four quadrants,
because they were not differentiated on a large scale by the average mode.)

All of this would change with modernity and the widespread differentiation of the Big Three. This can be
represented as in figure 12-2 (and simplified as in fig. 12-3), which is the Great Nest differentiated into the four
quadrants (or the Big Three). This integral vision is what could have emerged, and what might yet still emerge, but
what in fact did not emerge in any enduring fashion. Instead, the quadrants were differentiated just fine, but then
eventually collapsed into their material (or empirical or objective) correlates, to result, soon enough, in flatland, in
scientific materialism, in sensory mononature, in the great interlocking order. Tracing this collapse of the Kosmos is
the crux of our story in this chapter.

This collapse could occur, I have suggested, because every Left-Hand event does indeed have a Right-Hand or
empirical correlate in the material (or objective) world—and thus it is always tempting to reduce the former (depths
that require arduous interpretation) to the latter (surfaces that can be easily seen). This is shown more explicitly in
figure 12-4. Each interior state of consciousness (from bodily consciousness to mental consciousness to spiritual
consciousness) has some sort of correlate in the material/objective brain and organism (Upper Right). Thus, for
example, even somebody who is having a spiritual experience (UL) will show changes in objective brainwaves that
can be measured on an EEG machine (UR).

Figure 12-2. The Great Nest with the Four Quadrants

Figure 12-3. The Big Three

Figure 12-4. Correlations of Interior (Consciousness) States with Exterior (Material) States

But conscious states, values, depth, and intentions cannot be reduced to material brainwaves because, although
one value is better than another, one brainwave is not. You experience compassion and you know it is better than
murder; while you are thinking that, your brain will be producing brainwaves that can be registered on an EEG. But
although you know that compassion is better than murder, there is nothing on the EEG machine that says, “This
brainwave is more valuable; this brainwave is more moral; this brainwave is more beautiful.” The EEG machine can
only show that one brain state is different than another; it cannot say that one state is better than another. To
make that judgment, you have to rely on interior consciousness, depth, and value recognition—holarchies of
quality—while the EEG machine can only register holarchies of quantity. To reduce the Left to the Right is to reduce
all quality to quantity and thus, as we have seen, land directly in the disqualified universe, also known as flatland.

Which is precisely what happened. And within flatland, as we were saying, there arose two camps: the Ego and
the Eco. Both were fundamentally oriented to flatland, to the Right-Hand world of empirical, sensory, objective
Nature, which was the “really real” world. Both, that is, were involved in subtle reductionism to some degree or
another. But with a difference: the Ego camps held on to the Left-Hand rational Ego and its agency, and the Eco
camps wanted to go all the way and insert the Ego into the great web of Nature and its communions altogether. This
state of affairs can be represented as in figures 12-5 and 12-6.

In figure 12-5, we see the basic story as we have told it thus far, up to and before the collapse into flatland.
Cultural evolution (LL) has moved from archaic to magic to mythic to rational
(in the individual or UL:
body/sensorimotor to preop to conop to formop), with a correlative moral evolution from egocentric to ethnocentric
to worldcentric, and a social evolution (LR) from foraging to horticultural to agrarian to industrial, accompanied by a
social organization from tribes to villages to empires to nations (i.e., social systems). The four quadrants (or simply
the Big Three of I, we, and it) have been differentiated, and although they are not yet genuinely integrated,
nonetheless they are not yet dissociated; at this point in time each is pursuing its own truth unhampered by
domination from the others. (Fig. 12-5 is also a map of what the Big Three, when integrated, might look like, with
each quadrant given its own respected and honored place: a task of vision-logic to which we will return.)

But then begins the one-century or so slide into flatland, into the great interlocking order of empirical realities,
into subtle reductionism, into the holistic web of interwoven its, the great Système de la Nature. This is represented
in figure 12-6, which is a general map of flatland itself.

The most conspicuous item about that map is that virtually everything is missing in the Left-Hand domains except
the rational Ego. That is a stark and graphic representation of the dangling, disengaged, alienated, hyper-
autonomous subject that was the Enlightenment ego.

In the Upper-Left quadrant, the rational Ego was cut off from its own lower levels (interior nature), and it was cut
off from the higher levels of its own Spirit, its own higher Self (“No more Ascent!”). In the Lower-Left quadrant, it
was ignorant of the vast role played by cultural contexts in disclosing truths and molding values, and thus it tended
to mistake its own cultural givens as universal truths (when they were often merely the preferences of propertied
white bourgeois males). And although the rational Ego would, for the most part, consider the Right-Hand world of
empirical Nature and the great interlocking order to be the fundamental reality, the Ego had cut itself off from
communion or union with that Nature because it imagined that its job was impartially and in detached manner to
reflect on Nature (the representation paradigm, the “mirror of Nature”). All of this is quite accurately represented by
the Ego dangling in midair in the Upper-Left quadrant.

Figure 12-5. The Ego and the Eco before the Collapse

This plight of the rational Ego was partly innocent.

It was not connected to its own interior roots (the
developmental stages leading up to the rational Ego) because, in many ways, these simply had not yet been
discovered. Most people of today use reason without really knowing the ontogenetic stages that produced
it—namely, the stages of sensorimotor, preop, conop, and then formop. It is simply not immediately obvious to
reason that reason itself developed or evolved. And yet reason is the first structure that can impartially reflect on the
world. Thus, the natural stance of reason is to simply assume that it is apart from the world and can innocently
reflect on it. This part of the Cartesian dualism is completely understandable,
if mistaken. And most of the

Enlightenment philosophers, from Locke to Kant, made this assumption by failing to grasp the actual developmental
stages that lead up to reason. In fact, one of Hegel’s main criticisms of Kant was that consciousness is not simply
given, but rather “can only be conceived as one that has developed”—and tracing that development was one of the
extraordinary gifts of Idealism. Still, it was only in the last half of this century that the stages of consciousness
development were outlined in any sort of rigorous fashion backed by research—Baldwin, Werner, Graves, Maslow,
Piaget, Loevinger, and so on. Thus, what I have drawn in figure 12-5 is how we of today can understand the
quadrants, with all of the research that has gone into them. Although the Enlightenment philosophers had full access
to the quadrants, research in each was just beginning, and this simple and innocent ignorance is partly responsible
for the world looking like figure 12-6, which is how the Enlightenment generally viewed the world.

Figure 12-6. Flatland

The stages beyond the rational Ego were also denied (or ignored)—the higher transrational stages of subtle soul
and causal spirit—precisely because, as we have seen, the Enlightenment screamed “No more Ascent!” This was part
of the noble attempt to move beyond ethnocentric religious mythology into the worldcentric rights of man (and
soon woman)—“No more myths!” But the transrational baby was tossed with the prerational bathwater, and thus
the Ego was cut off from both its roots in earth and its branches in heaven.

But not all of the Ego’s isolation was innocent or noble. After all, Plotinus fully possessed reason and he did not
gut the interiors. Something else was afoot in this game of collapsing the Kosmos, and, as we will continue to see,
that game was the reduction of all Left-Hand events to their Right-Hand correlates, the reduction of all realities to
the great interlocking order of the system of Nature. And once that reduction was complete, the Ego as subject had
no room to fit into the world of holistic its—and thus once again, as shown in figure 12-6, the rational Ego was left
dangling.

The Eco camps agreed with the Ego camps that the great interlocking order and the system of Nature was the
“really real” world (both camps subscribed to Descended flatland); but the Eco camps were alarmed at the Ego’s
detachment and its rational distancing (“the disenchantment of the world”), and desired instead a sympathetic
union with the great Web of Life: it desired union with flatland, not a reflection on flatland. And in this desire for
“union with Nature,” we see the archetypal philosophical problem of modernity (which is to say, of flatland), namely,
the mind/body problem, which is another name for what we called “the central problem of modernity,” or how the
subject (“mind”) fits into the world (“body”).

THE MIND/BODY PROBLEM

The mind/body problem is a product of flatland. It has proven so intractable because, in the wake of the modern
collapse, both “mind” and “body” have at least two completely different meanings, giving us four problems hidden in
one. But it’s not as bad as it sounds, and you can easily follow all of this using figure 12-5.

To begin with, “body” can mean the biological organism as a whole, including the brain (the neocortex, the limbic
system, the brain stem, etc.)—in other words, “body” can mean the entire Upper-Right quadrant, which I will call
“the organism.”

But “body” can also mean, and for the average person does mean, the subjective feelings, emotions, and
sensations of the felt body. When the typical person says, “My mind is fighting my body,” he means his will is fighting
some bodily desire or inclination (such as for sex or food). In other words, in this common usage, “body” means the
lower levels of one’s own interior. On figure 12-5, I have numbered the levels 1 through 4, so in this usage “body” is
level 1 in the Upper-Left quadrant, and the other meaning of “body” is all of the Upper-Right quadrant (the total
organism).

Moving from body to mind, many scientific researchers simply identify “mind” with “brain,” and they prefer to
speak only of brain states, neurotransmitters, cognitive science, and so on. I will use the term “brain” to cover that
meaning, which refers to the upper levels of the Upper-Right quadrant (e.g., the neocortex).

On the other hand, when the average person says, “My mind is fighting my body,” he does not mean that his
neocortex is fighting his limbic system. By “mind” he means the upper levels of his own interior, the upper levels of
the Upper-Left quadrant (although he might not use exactly those terms)—in other words, his rational will is fighting
his feelings or desires (level 4 is fighting level 1). The mind is described in first-person phenomenal accounts and I-
language, whereas the brain is described in third-person objective accounts and it-language.

(There is another general meaning for mind/body: “mind” can mean the interior dimension in general—or the Left
Hand—and “body” the exterior dimension in general—or the Right Hand; I will specifically indicate that usage when
it comes up.)

Those various definitions of mind and body have been used in juxtaposition to both create and solve the
mind/body problem. The reductionist simply reduces the mind to the brain, and since the brain is indeed part of the
organism, there is no dualism: the mind/body problem is solved! And that is correct—the brain is part of the
organism, part of the great web of life and the empirical interlocking order, so there is no dualism; nor are there any
values, consciousness, depth, or divinity anywhere in the resultant universe. And that reductionism is exactly the
“solution” that the fundamental Enlightenment paradigm would impose on reality, a “solution” still rampant in most
forms of cognitive science, neuroscience, systems theory, and so on: reduce the Left to the Right and then claim you
have solved the problem.

But the reason most people, even most scientists, are uneasy with that “solution”—and the reason the problem
remains a problem—is that, even though materialistic monism announces that there is no dualism, most people
know otherwise, because they feel the difference between their mind and their body—they feel it every time they
consciously decide to move their arm, they feel it in every exercise of will. And the average person is right, in a
general sense: there is a differentiation of mind and body, noosphere and biosphere, and this can be felt in the
interior or Left-Hand domains. It is not a rigid dualism, as some philosophers have postulated, but rather a case of
“transcend and include,” and almost every rational adult has a sense of the transcend part, in that the mind can, on a
good day, control the body and its desires. And all of that is phenomenologically true for the Left-Hand domains (in
more precise language,
formop transcends and includes
sensorimotor, and thus can operate on it). But none of those interior stages of development are captured when
“body” means Right-Hand organism and “mind” means Right-Hand brain—all of those important distinctions are
completely lost in material monism, which does not solve the problem but obliterates it.

formop is indeed different

from sensorimotor:

On the other hand, an “all-quadrant, all-level” approach allows a place for each of those definitions of mind and
body and brain and organism, because each of them represent genuine and nonreducible realities. This integration
of the four quadrants (and the levels in each)—a task of vision-logic—helps to defuse the many forms of the

mind/body problem. It allows (and demands) an equal
first-person phenomenal accounts (“I”),
second-person structures (“we”), and third-person organismic systems (“it”). [See Integral Psychology, “The 1-2-3
of Consciousness Studies.”] Moreover, the ultimate mind/body problem—the relation of interior-subjective to
exterior-objective—is solved only in nondual awakening, which transcends and includes the quadrants. My claim,
then, is that an “all-level, all-quadrant” view substantially handles the mind/body problem in its major forms.

inclusion of

The details of that claim would obviously require a large book in itself; I mention it now only because it directly
relates to the topic at hand, namely, the relation of the Ego and the Eco. For the Eco camps, in claiming that the
great Web of Life covered all of reality, slipped into the standard flatland notion of “reality” (namely, the Right-Hand
world), and this was reflected in their use of the term “Nature” and consequently in their recommendations for
“reenchanting” the world, recommendations that are still with us.

NATURE

The word “nature” has at least three meanings (paralleling those of “mind/body”). It can mean the entire Kosmos, or
the Great Holarchy of Being, including both Right- and Left-Hand dimensions. Call that “NATURE.” It can mean the
entire sensory and empirical world, the world disclosed to the senses—in other words, the entire Right-Hand world.
Call that “Nature,” which is so listed on the Right Hand in figure 12-5. And it can mean nature as opposed to culture,
or nature as opposed to history, or the biosphere as opposed to the noosphere (a meaning which is similar to
sensory body versus rational mind). Call that “nature,” which is listed as level 1 in figure 12-5.

All three of those definitions

represent actual realities, and thus all three of them are acceptable. But the
problems start when one does not specify which is meant. (Henceforth I will generally indicate which usage is meant,
but the context should also be the guide.)

What we will see happening is this: since the interior dimensions—and especially the higher, transcendental
dimensions—were denied fundamental reality in flatland, NATURE was ruled out of the picture altogether (by both
the Ego and the Eco camps). Instead, reality came to be “Nature,” or the entire sensory and empirical world—this
was the great interlocking order and system of Nature. And since all interiors have correlates in exteriors, and since
the sum total of exteriors was called Nature, then if you reduce all interiors to exteriors, it appears that Nature
includes everything (whereas it simply includes the Right-Hand world).

Once we focus on Nature (or the entire sensory and empirical world), it becomes very hard to grasp how the
noosphere transcends the biosphere, which transcends the physiosphere. For those distinctions rest in part on
interior domains (see fig. 12-4). In the world of material monism or scientific materialism, there is no reason to
make any of those distinctions. They are all
just variations on complex matter/energy systems. Noosphere,
biosphere, and physiosphere are all viewed as simply complex forms of the physiosphere itself. What we call the
noosphere, for example, is simply reduced by scientific materialism to the functions of the neocortex, itself a
complex system of matter/energy and information fluctuations. And since the brain is part of the organism, which is
part of Nature, then obviously the noosphere is just a part of Nature (or just a part of the “biosphere” in the broad
sense of “Nature”). And so obviously the noosphere does not transcend and include the biosphere—the noosphere
is part of the biosphere, or so it seems to flatland. When all interiors are reduced to exteriors, one can no longer
recognize degrees of interior depth, and thus everything becomes equally a strand in the great interlocking web of
valueless its. Everything is part of Nature. . . .

On the interior dimensions, on the other hand, the distinctions between biosphere, noosphere, and theosphere
show up, for example, as the distinctions between bodily feelings and desires (prerational), the reasoning mind
(rational), and soul and spirit (transrational)—all of which can be known directly and immediately in consciousness,
and all of which have objective correlates in the world of Nature (as shown in fig. 12-4), but none of which can be
reduced to Nature without ending up precisely with the flatland shown in figure 12-6. Which is, of course, what
happened.

There, in the world of flatland, “transcend and include” is still the general rule (the twenty tenets are true in all
four quadrants), and thus the neocortex still transcends and includes the limbic system, which transcends and
includes the reptilian stem, just as its cells transcend and include molecules, which transcend and include atoms, and

so on. Destroy the lower, and the higher is also destroyed (but not vice versa; tenet 9). That is already enough to
show us that the higher transcends and includes the lower. But as we have repeatedly seen, in that Right-Hand
scheme there are no qualitative rankings, only quantitative: there is no better or worse, only bigger or smaller, and
thus to reduce NATURE to Nature is to land squarely in flatland. Which is exactly what both camps did.

Thus, both the Ego camps and the Eco camps ended up embracing the general reality depicted in figure 12-6. And

with that, we can pick up the story.

THE EGO

In this and the next section, we will look more carefully at the strengths and the weaknesses of both the Ego and the
Eco camps.

As I indicated, this was a battle that was fought fundamentally within the Descended and flatland world, with the
internal disengaged Ego attempting to figure out its relation to the external holistic Eco, both monological to the
core. As we will see, however, the Ego camps were constantly breaking in the direction of a pure Ascending Path,
attempting to disengage the Ego altogether in the direction of a Pure Self, and this would culminate in Fichte’s
infinite Subject as the transcendental One. And the Eco camps were constantly breaking toward a pure and radical
Descent, embracing fiercely the purely Descended world of the diverse and immanent Many, epitomized in Spinoza’s
pure Substance (which was often taken to mean pure immanence or Descent, as Fichte’s infinite Subject was taken
to mean pure transcendence or Ascent).

And by the end of the eighteenth century, this tension—between the Ego and the Eco, and in its extreme forms,
between pure Ascent and pure Descent—this tension had become extremely and even unbearably acute, and the
watchwords of the age became “unite Fichte and Spinoza!”—unite Ego and Eco, unite Ascent and Descent, and thus
heal the two-thousand-year-old schizoid God that had dominated Western culture virtually from its inception. And a
very special individual would rise to that occasion and attempt the long-sought integration. . . .

But in the meantime, the Ego and the Eco squared off as mortal enemies, and the battle, as I said, was: Did the

good life reside in the Ego’s agency or in its communions? In the Ego or the Eco?

I will divide each section into “positive” and “negative.” In the positive, I will sympathetically state the case for
each camp, and include what seem to be the genuinely enduring truths of each. In the negative, I will give the
criticisms that each camp failed to answer satisfactorily, criticisms that exposed the real weaknesses in each camp,
weaknesses that would historically drive Idealism to attempt the long-awaited integration.

Ego-positive: Freedom

We can correctly situate the Ego camp(s) only if we remember the genuinely beneficial gains that the rational-ego
had indeed accomplished in its emergence from the role identity of mythic dominator hierarchies.

(And recall the confusing terminology: the rational-ego was not, per se, “egotistical,” but something of the
opposite:
the self had developed from egocentric to ethnocentric to worldcentric capacities—to the
postconventional worldview of universal pluralism, tolerance, and perspectivism, as shown in fig. 12-5. To the extent
the ego lived up to its rational potential, that mature ego was worldcentric—a decentered view of universal
pluralism. It is this “mature ego” that I mean by “the Ego” camp, and it was this mature ego of worldcentric reason
that its proponents had in mind.)

This was indeed part of the dignity of modernity, part of the liberating and enlightening move that strove, ideally,
to free itself from ethnocentric prejudice and mythic imperialism, and the violence inherent in those shallower
engagements. No more myths!

“In the tradition of the Enlightenment,” Habermas reminds us, “enlightened thinking has been understood as an
opposition and counterforce to myth. As opposition, because it opposes the unforced force of the better argument
to the authoritarian normativity [dominator hierarchy] of a tradition interlinked with the chain of generations; as
counterforce, because it . . . breaks the spell of collective powers. Enlightenment contradicts myth and thereby
escapes its violence.”31

The power—and violence—of mythology is due in large measure to the fact that it is making claims that cannot be
exposed to deeper evidence . . . without destroying the authority of the claim itself. That is the definition of ideology:
hidden interests, hidden power claims, parading as truth, a truth that cannot be exposed to evidence without
robbing it of its power. “That behind the back of the theory there lies hidden an inadmissible mixture of power and
validity, and that it still owes its reputation to this—they are confused because validity claims are determined by
relationships of power.”32

And at its best, the Enlightenment committed itself to exposing these power relations and to dismantling the
dominator hierarchies that had formed the core of the social, cultural, and religious institutions of the entire mythic
and mythic-rational epochs. Liberty, equality,
fraternity: “No more myths!” meant “No more dominator
hierarchies!,” and the Age of Reason and Revolution set out to prove just that.

“Despite all the efforts of tyranny, despite the violence and trickery of the priesthood, despite the vigilant efforts
of all the enemies of mankind,” cried an impassioned Holbach, “the human race will attain enlightenment; nations
will know their true interests; a multitude of rays, assembled, will form one day a boundless mass of light that will
warm all hearts, that will illuminate all minds” (Essai sur les prejuges). Ecrasez l’infame!

The utilitarians may have been operating within a purely flatland ontology (which now goes without saying), but
even they were driven by a goal of universal benevolence extended to all humans (and often animals), regardless of
race, creed, color (and soon gender). Bentham: “Is there one of these my pages in which the love of humankind has
for a moment been forgotten? Show it me, and this hand shall be the first to tear it out.”

All of this, indeed, was radically new, on any sort of collective scale. That reason could rise above the narrow
interests of an egocentric or ethnocentric stance, and attempt to discover and affirm what was good and fair for all
beings, and not merely for me or my tribe or my nation—this was one of the enduring drives of the rational Ego.

And in order to rise to this worldcentric pluralism, I, as Ego, must fight, in myself, any tendencies to act in
egocentric or ethnocentric ways. I must fight my own inclinations, my own desires, my own natural impulses, to the
extent that they deter me from a worldcentric fairness.

The rational Ego, then, has to battle those currents both in nature and in culture that pull it away from its
worldcentric moral stance. Reason, and reason alone, delivers this moral vision to me, and thus I, as Ego, must
distance myself from those powers and pulls that do not live up to this rational ethics of universal care.

And, the Ego camp would argue, if the rational-ego were really just another strand in the great natural web, then
all of its actions would already be determined by the web itself. We would then be driven merely by pleasure and
pain and self-preservation, and thus we would have no resources in ourselves that could deny our own egocentric
drives in the name of a deeper and wider compassion for others. It is certain the fox never goes out of its way to help
a stranded chicken (unless it’s on the menu), and why should it? But is
the ideal model of my ethical
response?33

that

No, the great web of Nature, the Eco-world, can offer me nothing for a worldcentric moral response. Rather it is
reason, and reason alone, that allows me to step outside of my own natural inclinations and act for the benefit of
others, and to treat others as I would myself be treated.

The central figure in all of this is, of course, Immanuel Kant. The moral subject, the rational-ego, is free precisely
to the degree that it can disengage itself from the lesser pulls of egocentric desire, merely natural self-
preservation, and dispersed inclinations, and reside as moral freedom.

One of Kant’s central aims was to vindicate this moral freedom and independence of the ego-subject—to establish
its autonomy as against the pull of heteronomy, or “other-directedness,” by which he meant especially the other-
directedness of ethnocentric culture, of mythic (metaphysical) religion, and of lower natural inclinations and desires.
The truly moral will draws its worldcentric perspective from within, from its own reason, and not from any external
source whatsoever, whether that source be church or state or nature.

Thus, for Kant, a person is truly free—that is to say, truly self-determined, and not pushed by some external
other—when, and only when, the person acts from a determination imposed by his or her own rational will. When I
act from a worldcentric perspective, then I am truly free, free of the lesser and meaner stances that wound me in
their shallowness. When I act from a worldcentric stance, I am truly free—and that worldcentric stance is itself
generated and understood only by rationality (by universal perspectivism).

And thus, I am truly free only when I am acting in accord with my own moral will in its worldcentric capacity.
When I act from that rational stance, then I am acting in the pure freedom of the rational will, since that is my own
deepest and truest self (so to speak). I am not being forced by some other to act in this way (heteronomy), because
the worldcentric stance is generated only by my own rationality: I am fully self-determined and thus free in the
truest sense.

Thus, I am not really free when I am acting egocentrically—that is simply being a slave to my desires. Nor am I free
when I am a slave to the herd mentality and mass opinion (of the ethnocentric and conformist mode). Further, Kant
would say, neither am I free in amoral nature—there, I am merely a cog in the interlocking web. Rather, I am free
only when I act from the worldcentric stance given by my own rationality, free because I transcend these lesser and
shallower engagements, engagements that proceed without benefit of universal compassion and categorical care,
and thus engagements that hurt me as well.

In moral freedom, I declare my independence from nature and its amoral ways. “Such independence,” says Kant,
“is called freedom in a strict, i.e. transcendental sense.” And conversely, to be bound by external authorities,
traditional customs, Church dogma, or nature and nature’s net: all of that drags me down from a worldcentric stance
and into one or another partiality, meanness, narrowness, theft.

“This is the central, exhilarating notion of Kant’s ethics. Moral life is equivalent to freedom, in this radical sense of
self-determination by [one’s own] moral will. This is called ‘autonomy.’ Any deviation from it, any determination of
the will by some external consideration, some inclination, some authority, even as high as God himself,
is
condemned as heteronomy. The numinous which inspired awe was not God as much as the moral law itself, the self-
given [but worldcentric] command of Reason . . . the moral law which he gives to himself as rational will. So that men
were thought to come closest to the divine, to what commands unconditional respect, not when they worship but
when they act in moral freedom.”34

There is much truth in Kant’s position, I believe, and certainly in the general terms as I sketched it. Not only has
Kant carefully differentiated the Big Three, he is fighting mightily the reductionistic flatland trend of the Age.35 Kant
would point out (to use our terms) that the noosphere is not
in the biosphere; therefore the noospheric moral
imperative cannot be found empirically (but only interpersonally or practically). And he is clearly fighting the
homogenization of motives so prevalent with the utilitarians; for Kant, expanding sensual inclinations and desires is
just expanding heteronomy, expanding slavery, expanding addictions.

But Kant’s view is also hobbled by his inability to finally integrate the Big Three (despite his efforts in the Third
Critique via art and organism; and indeed, this integration or “reconciliation” is what Schelling and Hegel took upon
themselves to provide, as we will see shortly). For among other things, this deficiency left the intractable problem:
how are the Ego and the Eco related?

But in the meantime, some of the obvious truths in this type of position were the driving force behind the Ego
camps in their many forms. The greater the agency of the Ego—that is, the more the Ego can disengage from the Eco
(and heteronomy in general)—the greater the knowledge and freedom of the self.

And thus arose the subjective pole of the fundamental Enlightenment paradigm, variously referred to as the “self-
defining subject,” the “autonomous ego,” the “disengaged self,” the “punctual self,” the “philosophy of the subject,”
“self-sufficient subjectivity.”36 Taylor refers to this overall emergence as “a revolution in moral consciousness.”
Foucault calls it a “sudden, radical restructuring” and a “profound upheaval, an archaeological mutation.” It is, in
essence, the emergence of modernity. It is the emergence of the Ego.

We could say, on the positive side, that it is an ethic of self-responsibility and self-esteem needs (Maslow) arising
out of conformist and belongingness needs. But its general trend is clear: from Descartes to Locke to Kant to Fichte:
the more Ego, and the less Eco, the better.

And here the Ego camps began to veer into the negative.

Ego-negative: Repression

For each of those theorists (and for a host of others in the rational-egoic camp), the disengaged subject does indeed
disenchant the world, and so much the better! It is precisely by disenchanting the world that the knowing subject

liberates itself!

(Apart from a definite truth in that stance—namely, reason does indeed disenchant mere myth: grownups no
longer need to believe in Santa Claus—nonetheless, this is the point where the Eco camps would generally begin
their critiques. Even if a large dose of disenchantment was called for, the Eco camps would maintain, it had gotten
quite out of hand, even wreckless and vicious, and disenchanted was fast becoming disemboweled.)

In the meantime, the disengaged Ego-subject, in its cruder forms, simply set about to unambiguously reflect on
the world in purely objective terms (since the two were radically divorced, this did not seem to present any problem:
one simply looks). The disengaged subject stares at the world, objectifies it, and describes the results—the so-called
“reflection paradigm”—a representational epistemology that has been one of the central tenets of modernity from
Descartes and Hobbes and Locke down to Quine—what Habermas calls “the Enlightenment’s proud culture of
reflection” and Taylor summarizes as “To know reality is to have a correct representation of things.” And if it wasn’t
merely the Ego reflecting on the Eco, then it was the Ego working on the Eco—the so-called “production
paradigm” (Marx). As shown in figure 12-6, all reality is Right-Hand, and the Ego simply reflects on those empirical
objects: the mirror of Nature.

In this scheme, language is thought to be very simple: it is a set of conventional signs that straightforwardly
represent concrete things (and we see this from Hobbes and Condillac to today’s empiricist linguistics, all of which
overlook the fact that signs themselves possess meaning only by virtue of the intersubjective system of other signs,
and, further, only the least interesting signs “point” to things; most signs point to other signs: language creates
worlds, it doesn’t just reflect pregiven worlds).

In all of these accounts, and in the reflection paradigm in general, what we see is the world reduced
unambiguously to monological terms, to it-language, to objective surfaces with no depth requiring interpretation
and no dialogue requiring mutual understanding. (As shown in fig. 12-6, there is no Lower Left as an irreducible
reality.) The world is simply a collection of objectively interlocking events, and knowledge consists in correctly
representing those events. Knowledge is of those objects, and not also the mutual understanding between subjects
(and certainly not the transcendence of both subjects and objects in the nondual One). This knowledge is not
translogical; it is not dialogical; it is monological.

Again, it is not that representational and objective (or empirical) knowledge is simply wrong, but rather is
extremely partial. It reduces all dimensions to their Right-Hand correlates (which is subtle reductionism; in gross
reductionism, the Right-Hand dimension is itself further reduced to its atomistic elements; both are monological).
And since all dimensions do have some sort of Right-Hand correlate, the project can always seem to be making
headway—there is always some sort of evidence one can point to (even though it involves a reduction). It genuinely
appears, within this prejudice, that the entire world can be captured in it-language.

Thus is the Kosmos reduced to the neutral flatland cosmos. And whereas the Kosmos possesses interior
depth—and thus intrinsic value inheres in the depth of each and every holon (animal, human, divine)—the flatland
cosmos itself (or so it appears to it-language) is completely devoid of meaning, value, awareness, prehension,
consciousness—there are no Left-Hand components at all! As Whitehead’s famous summary has it, the cosmos is
now “a dull affair, soundless, scentless, colourless; merely the hurrying of material, endlessly, meaninglessly.” (To
which he added, “Thereby, modern philosophy has been ruined.”)

But that is how all surfaces correctly appear anyway; and thus if the only knowledge one allows is objectifying
knowledge—knowledge of surfaces that can be seen with the senses or their extensions—then the results of that
type of investigation are pre-determined: look at any value in an objectifying fashion, and you find no value, just
neutral surfaces, at which point you say, “What value?”

As we have seen, this empirical, objective, mutually interlocking and holistic world of “its” left no room for the
subject (I’s and we’s). And so, in the strangest twist in this already strange tale, beginning around the eighteenth
century (with a few earlier efforts), the subject attempted to get at itself, to know itself, by turning this monological
gaze inward upon itself. It retroflected the monological gaze. That is, the subject attempted to categorize, describe,
and explain itself in objective terms, in it-language. Not in intersubjective terms of mutual understanding and mutual
recognition, but in the neutral, naturalistic, “scientific” terms of it-language.

And thus was born what Foucault called “the Age of Man”—the merely “objective” study of humans. And in a

beautiful phrase that would summarize the net effect of the entire Enlightenment paradigm (right down to today’s
systems theory), Foucault points out that with the “Age of Man,” humans became “the object of information, never
the subject in communication.”37

Much of Foucault’s work is a cataloguing of the nightmares that descended on citizens as they became merely
objects (and thus “subjugated subjects”) in the holistic net of monological knowledge (particularly in the biologized
form of “biopower”).

This is likewise what Habermas refers to as “the totalitarian characteristics of an instrumental reason that
objectifies everything around it,
In this respect, Habermas is in complete agreement with
Foucault. “It is an idea that attains dominance at the same time as subject-centered reason: that killing off dialogical
relationships transforms subjects, who are monologically turned in upon themselves, into objects for one another,
and only objects.”39

itself included.”38

Further, says Habermas, “The same structure [retroflected monological gaze] is to be found at the cradle of the
human sciences”—the so-called “dehumanizing humanism” and the “sciences of man” (toward which so much of the
postmodern attack has rightly been focused). Habermas, noting his point of agreement with Foucault, is specific: “A
gaze that objectifies and examines, that takes things apart analytically, that monitors and penetrates everything,
gains a power that is structurally formative for these institutions. It is the gaze of the rational subject who has lost all
merely intuitive bonds with his environment and torn down all the bridges built up of intersubjective [and dialogical]
agreement, and for whom in his monological
isolation, other subjects are only accessible as the objects of
nonparticipant observation.”40 Habermas makes clear that this is yet another version of . . . monological systems
theory, where the great monological systems net descended on citizens for their own “benefit and welfare.”

The bad news continues. These objectifying and systematic “sciences of man” are in fact pseudo-sciences,
according to both Foucault and Habermas, and pseudo-sciences driven by self-aggrandizing power.41 “Because the
human sciences with their borrowed models and alien ideals of [exclusive] objectivity, became involved with a
human being that was for the first time turned into an object of scientific investigation by the modern form of
knowledge, an impulse could prevail in them unawares, which they could not admit without risking their claim to
truth: just that restless pressure for knowledge, self-mastery, and self-aggrandizement. . . .”42

In other words, the “sciences of man” and the new “dehumanizing humanism” did not just study the objective
(and monological) aspects of human beings (which would be fine), they reduced human beings to their merely
objective and empirical components (which was the crime). Humans were not “subjects in communication” but
merely “objects of information.” And because that
reduction is not supported by the Kosmos, because that
reduction is a violation of the richness of the universe, then it must be driven by something other than truth: it must
be driven in large measure by self-aggrandizing power, according to both Foucault and Habermas.

And with this, the whole dark side of the Enlightenment comes lurching to the fore. The catastrophe was not the
emergence of reason, but reason confined to and initially captured by empiric-analytic modes—objectifying,
monological, positivistic—modes which see only the Right-Hand dimensions and never the Left-Hand (even though
their own operation depends intimately on them). It was a reason that differentiated the Big Three only to let them
fall into dissociation, with the resultant emphasis solely on the Right-Hand (the Big Three reduced to the Big One of
it-language).

Or again, it was a reason that went from an altogether commendable worldcentric understanding, to a virtual
repression of anything not automatically of its ilk. It was a higher emergence used for altogether rude purposes,
turning everything into objects of the monological gaze, and severing, alienating, repressing the rich communions
that allowed its agency to function in the first place.43
If only the Right-Hand dimensions are acknowledged, then
the entire Left half of the Kosmos has to be repressed, denied, reduced, distorted.

It was the repressive side of the Enlightenment that its critics have especially focused on (in various forms, their
names would soon be legion: Schelling, Hegel, Nietzsche, Heidegger, Bataille, Foucault, Derrida). But few of the
Enlightenment’s critics have been more acute than Hegel. We have already heard him brand the Enlightenment as a
“vanity of the understanding”—“the understanding” being empirical-categorical, reflective, and monological reason,
as opposed to (or rather subsumed in) mature Reason (vision-logic), which is dialectical, dialogical, and process-
oriented. Hegel felt that “in the modern world emancipation became transformed into unfreedom because the

unshackling power of [monological] reflection had become autonomous and now achieved unification only through
the violence of a subjugating subjectivity . . . it posited as absolute that which is conditioned.”44

In short, reason that has become monological holds all nonreason at arm’s length, marginalizes it, excludes it,

dominates it, objectifies it, disinfects it with disgust.

Put a final way: it was reason shot through with Phobos. The great Enlightenment rationality did not just
transcend and include, and meet the world with an Agape to balance its Eros. Instead of embrace, there was all too
often a distancing gone mad, disengagement gone extreme, alienation and repression and dissociation—all out of an
understandable but ultimately insane aversion to anything that looked like “heteronomy.”

Not just commendable Eros but a prickly Phobos was at work in the Ego’s cherished autonomy, an autonomy and
an agency that therefore all too often severed its communions with nature, body, sensuality, community—and sent
scattered fragments running to the winds where union and integration were supposed to be gloriously forthcoming.
(The Ego’s isolation—from its own inner depths, its culture, and Nature—is well illustrated in fig. 12-6. Notice that
this is a precise example of a holarchy gone pathological, which we discussed in chapter 1—an arrogant holon usurps
its place in the normal holarchy, thus dominating/repressing those holons upon which its own existence intimately
depends. Not holarchy, but pathological holarchy, with hyper-agency severing and dominating—precisely because
fearing—its communions: there was rationality run amok, and there was Phobos driving the repression.)

Thus, even Habermas, proponent of reconstructed modernity, could recognize that objectifying reason
“denounces and undermines all unconcealed forms of suppression and exploitation, of degradation and alienation,
only to set up in their place the unassailable domination of rationality. Because this regime of a subjectivity puffed
up into a false absolute transforms the means of consciousness-raising and emancipation into just so many
instruments of objectification and control, it fashions for itself an uncanny immunity in the form of a thoroughly
concealed domination.”45

And thus, “The permanent sign of enlightenment is domination over an objectified external nature and a

repressed internal nature. Reason itself destroys the humanity it first made possible.”46

The repressive side of the Enlightenment, the tendency of monological reason to marginalize everything that is
not of its ilk, Eros gone catastrophically into rampant Phobos—this cancer was eating its way into the Age of Reason
even while its nobler ideals were remaking Europe. Holbach could indeed sing—and who would not join him?—“How
this portrait of mankind, free of all these chains, no longer under the enemies of progress, and walking with a sure
and certain step on the path of truth, of virtue and happiness, presents to the philosopher a sight which consoles
him for the errors, the crimes, the injustices which still sully the earth. . . . He then dares to bind these efforts to the
chain of human destiny: there he finds virtue’s true reward, the pleasure of having created an enduring good, which
fate will no longer destroy with a deadly compensation by bringing back prejudice and slavery. Living in thought with
a humanity re-established in the rights and dignity of its nature, he forgets the one which is corrupted and
tormented by greed, fear, or envy; it is there that he lives . . . , which his love for humanity has embellished with the
purest enjoyments.”47

There, truly, the noble aspirations of the Age, and never so nobly expressed.
What Holbach could not know, as he wrote those words, was that he had but a few months to live. He was hiding
in Paris, 1793, where a warrant for his arrest had been issued by the Jacobins, whose main leader, Robespierre—by
all accounts a man of great integrity, courage, and devout republicanism—would soon oversee the Reign of Terror, in
which many thousands would be drowned or guillotined for the revolutionary cause of a reason rising up to build the
radiant future—only to succumb to its own limitations mistaken for the absolute, and set Phobos loose with terror
and retaliation in its hardened heart.

THE ECO

The Eco camps would seize most immediately upon the repressions and exclusionary practices that reason could,
and often did, bring in its wake. The representational/reflection paradigm left the subject staring out at an alien
world, with an unbridgeable gap, hiatus, rift running right down the middle of the Kosmos. The Eco camps found this
rift intolerable and set out to heal the split between the ego and the eco, between the self and Nature, which was

then—and is now—as noble a goal as one can imagine.

Eco-positive: Wholeness

The intentions, as always, were honorable (as were those of the Ego camps), and the approach contained much that
was (and is) undoubtedly true. First and foremost was the attack on the absolute status of the reflection paradigm,
where a disengaged and dangling subject stared out mutely, dumbly, at a monochrome world. The Enlightenment,
the Eco camps felt, had introduced “a false world of representation which cuts man off from the real
living
sources.”48 And it was only in a return to nature, to the rich fabric of the great organic life stream, that the “living
sources” could be resurrected, recontacted, celebrated, renewed. (In this section, “nature” means both nature and
Nature, or the empirical-sensory world within and without. In the next section we will use our more precise
definitions for an overall summary.)

As Taylor summarizes the situation, “If the Enlightenment anthropology recommended itself through the sense of
freedom, even exhilaration, of self-definition, the reaction to it [the Eco camp] experienced this picture of man as
dry, dead, as destroying life. For the sense of freedom as a self-defining, reasoning subject was won by objectifying
nature, and even our own nature in so far as we are objects for ourselves [retroflected monological gaze]. It was won
at the expense of a rift between the subject who knows and wills, and the given: things as they are in nature.”49

The originators of the broad Eco movement—Rousseau (1712–1778), Herder (1744–1803), the various Romantics
(the Schlegels, Schiller, Novalis, Coleridge, Wordsworth, Whitman)—took it upon themselves to heal this rift. Herder:
“See the whole of nature, behold the great analogy of creation. Everything feels itself and its like, life reverberates
with life.”

The mode of knowing most appropriate to this type of vision was not disinterested thought or representation, but
rather a type of ecstatic feeling, what Wordsworth called “the spontaneous overflow of powerful feelings.” As
Herder put it, “Impulse is the driving force of our existence, and it must remain this even in our noblest knowings.
Love is the noblest form of knowing, as it is the noblest feeling.” And as for those who believe detached
representation is the truest form of knowledge, they must be, says Herder, either “liars or enervated beings.”

Thus, the truest and purest use of language, the Eco camp maintained, was not merely to reflect or represent an
objectified and stultified reality, but rather to express the wondrous currents of life—and for this poetry and art
were most ideally suited. (This was an important move, with far-reaching repercussions, to reintroduce the Upper-
Left dimension of sincerity and truthfulness in expression, and not just the Right-half dimension of the truth of
propositions; this was a truly profound contribution, even if it was often overblown to silly proportions.)

The idea wasn’t to stand back and impartially and disinterestedly reflect on nature; the idea was to participate
with nature and express nature, to join in the great currents of communion that nourish each and all, and not
merely glorify one’s own self-generated, self-independent agency. “This feeling cannot stop at the boundary of my
self; it has to be open to the great current of life that flows across it. It is this greater current, and not just the
current of my own body, which has to be united with higher aspiration . . . if there is to be unity in the self. Thus our
self-feeling must be continuous with our feeling for this larger current of life which flows through us and of which we
are a part; this current must nourish us not only physically but spiritually as well. Hence it must be more than a
useful interchange of matter. It must be experienced as a communion.”50

Thus, what the Ego camp had taken as proof of self-freedom and self-determination—namely, the objectification
and disenchantment of nature—the Eco camp took as a sign of a deep inner cleavage, a profound alienation within
the subject that expressed itself as a cleavage or rift between the subject and nature as well. Where the Ego camps
had developed a passion for what they saw as self-determination, independence, and self-responsibility, the Eco
camps displayed an equal passion for what they saw as unity, wholeness, harmony. For the one, self-responsible
agency; for the other, self-abnegating communion.

“There was a passionate demand for unity and wholeness. The [Eco] view bitterly reproached the Enlightenment
thinkers for having dissected man and hence distorted the true image of human life in objectifying human nature. All
these dichotomies distorted the true nature of man which had rather to be seen as a single stream of life, or on the
model of a work of art, in which no part could be defined in abstraction from the others. These distinctions thus

were seen as abstractions from reality. But they were more than that, they were mutilations of man. . . . It was a
denial of the life of the subject, his communion with nature and his self-expression in his own natural being.”51

And thus, as Taylor summarizes the aspirations of an entire age of Eco-thinkers, “What they themselves yearned
for was unity with self and communion with nature—that man be united in communion with nature.” And this was
to be accomplished by a “sympathetic insertion into the great stream of life of which they are a part.”52

Eco-negative: Regression

And just there was the problem. Granted that this insertion was desirable, just how does the ego insert itself into
something larger without losing the positive side of the beneficial gains that it had just made, and for which it had so
valiantly fought? By giving up ego, the Ego camps asked, do you mean giving up autonomy and going back to
heteronomy? Back to conformist determination by the church or state, since they are definitely “larger”? Back to
personal impulse and inclination and natural feeling, no matter how self-serving or self-absorbed they might be?
Back to the amoral currents of nature that, however lively and vital, still do not have to construct intersubjective
cultures and do not therefore provide a model for human interaction? Back to fox eats chicken—which is supposed
to be good simply because it is natural?

The problem was that we cannot simply say the subject and the object are one in the great stream of life. We
have to show how this is so, and how it can be so, without resorting to facile verbal flourishes. The Ego camps were
quite persuasive in this particular regard. If we are supposed to insert ourselves into the great stream of nature, they
asked, then you—the Eco camps—must tell us how we can do this without losing the moral stance of worldcentric
benevolence and postconventional compassion. Since the worldcentric stance is achieved only in the space of
rationality—it is found nowhere in nature—then you must tell us how to dissolve reason into life-feeling without
destroying the very stance that allows that sympathy to exist in the first place.

The Ego camp, from Kant to Fichte to Hegel, rather brutally tore into the Eco-minded “mushiness.” Standing in
nature and egocentrically emoting, they maintained, and seizing any sentiment that makes me weep at my
wonder—that hardly constitutes the “noblest knowing, noblest feeling.”

To be more precise, using our three definitions (NATURE, or the entire Kosmos, the Great Nest of Being; Nature, or
the Right-Hand world and great Web of Life; nature, or bodily feelings and prerational awareness). At their best, the
Eco-Romantics desired a union with NATURE, a union with the Kosmos (an Eco-Noetic Self or higher, the Over-Soul
that is the World Soul). But for all the reasons we have discussed, the Eco camps drifted into an equation of NATURE
with the great Web of Life, with the vast sensory-empirical world in all its organic richness and vitality. Under the
intense gravitational pull of flatland, they reduced NATURE to Nature. And to Nature they pledged their undying
allegiance.

The best of the Eco-Romantics understood, quite correctly, that NATURE (or Spirit) can only be grasped by an
awareness that moves beyond the rational-ego. But in their understandable passion to go transrational, they often
ended up recommending anything nonrational, including much that was frankly prerational; not postconventional,
but
but
descending—regressing—below it. Not beyond reason, but beneath it.

preconventional;

transpersonal,

not

ascending

but

prepersonal;

not

above

the

ego,

In other words, in order to embrace Nature, the great Web of Life, they often recommended a simple return to
nature (or preconventional sensory awareness). Not a transcendence from biosphere to noosphere to theosphere
(or prerational to rational to transrational, or nature to mind to spirit), but a movement in exactly the opposite
direction. Under a pre/trans fallacy and the pull of
flatland, they confused postconventional spirit with
preconventional nature.

They thus ended up with the same general flatland as shown in figure 12-6, but instead of standing back from
Nature with rationality, they would insert themselves into Nature with feeling. The great Web of Life, which in any
event is the world as known to the senses, is to be grasped not by a rationality that distances itself from Nature, but
by an intense feeling or communion that inserts itself into Nature, that is close to Nature, that gets back to Nature,
back to the immediate richness of the sensory-empirical world and the preconventional awareness that more
immediately discloses it.

In short, the Eco-Romantics sought to become one with Nature by trying to get back to nature. (“Back to Nature”
and “Back to nature” thus came to mean essentially the same thing, because “Nature” is the entire Right-Hand,
empirical-sensory world, and “nature” is the empirical-sensory awareness that knows that world. To recontact my
own interior nature is thus to become closer to Nature, since they are both essentially the same empirical-sensory
world.) And thus, the Eco camps maintained, the job of the rational-ego is to insert itself into the seamless web of
Nature/nature, to become one with the great, holistic, empirical Web of Life. The job of the rational-ego is to get
back to Nature/nature; the job of the noosphere is to get back to the biosphere. In any event, “to get back to” was
the operative phrase.

The great Romantic regressive slide was about to begin. Confusing postconventional spirit with preconventional
nature, the Romantics set out on their search for a visible, sensible God. They would not stand back and reflect on
flatland; they would become one with it.

In this move there was an almost complete confusion of differentiation and dissociation. Since the Eco-
Romantics were seeking Wholeness, any sort of differentiation was looked upon with suspicion. Instead of seeing
that differentiation is the necessary prerequisite for a new and higher integration (and thus a deeper and wider
Wholeness), the Romantics took any differentiation as a sign of dissociation and fracture, a sign that a prior “union”
had been torn asunder, a sign of a lost paradise.

And thus, instead of going forward to a higher but not-yet-emerged integration, we are supposed to go back to
nature prior to the alleged crime—back to a time before the differentiation of the noosphere from the biosphere,
back to those cultures that do not differentiate the Big Three, back to those idyllic times of the noble savage and the
pristine communion with nature, back in any case to some sort of Eden that must have existed because
differentiation is now thoroughly mistaken for alienation.

In other words, instead of seeing that differentiation is the necessary prelude to a deeper or higher and emergent
integration, it was seen, in all cases, as a disruption, a division and destruction, of a prior harmonious state. The oak
was somehow a violation of the acorn.

And in this confusion—this pre/trans confusion—all true critical edge was lost, because the cure for the actual
dissociations that had indeed beset modernity was mistakenly thought to be a regression to a state prior to all
differentiation whatsoever.

In other words, where the Ego camps were marked by repression, the Eco camps were shot through with

regression.

Both camps would tear aggressively, often brutally, into the fabric of the Kosmos with their preferred ideology,
precisely because, as we will continue to see, they were (and are) both locked into the same flatland paradigm,
where the more of Ego means the less of Eco, and vice versa—with no way to consolidate their equally important
claims in a new and emergent and integrative growth.

In the meantime, the Eco-Romantic atmosphere was all aglow with yesterday. Central to most of the Eco-theorists
was the notion that something had gone horribly wrong, that somebody or something had made a terrible mistake,
that history was primarily the shadow of a great and heinous Crime, and that salvation, above all, was the
resurrection of the dead and dismembered Paradise Lost.

Various theorists would set their Way Back machine to different dates, depending primarily, it seemed, on what
they personally disliked most about modernity. Because differentiation and dissociation are now confused, culture
itself becomes, not also a mode of emergent transformation that discloses deeper and wider worlds, but primarily a
distorting force that conceals and contorts both a pure nature and my truly pristine self. Culture is not a
transformative emergence of greater differentiation/integration that can go too far into dissociation/alienation. No,
culture is primarily an alienating force that necessarily and nastily separates humans from nature and me from
myself.

And so above all, I must get away from culture and get back to nature, back to a wilderness that expresses a pure
nature and my own most authentic impulses. Culture is fundamentally a crime of distortion, and I must seek behind
this distortion for the truth of pure nature and the truth of my pure self.

(That “back to nature” might be headed in a preconventional and not postconventional direction did not seem to
dawn on the Eco-Romantics, or at any rate did not deter them in the least. When differentiation is confused with

dissociation, regression is confused with salvation.)53

And so the search for Paradise Lost commenced. First stop on the Way Back was the medieval age, which was
eulogized by many Romantics (then and now) as an “organically seamless society” whose members were tightly
woven together in a net of meaning that did not yet sever culture and nature. This society certainly did not
differentiate the Big Three—seven body orifices demanding seven planets is indeed a tight organization. On the
other hand, there was that nastiness of the dominator hierarchies of King and Pope and hypermasculine God:
perhaps, after all, ’tis not the Paradise sought.

The next, and by far the most popular stop on the Regress Express, was classical Greece, the admiration for, even
worship of which, reached fevered proportions. “For the ancient Greeks represented to this Age a mode of life in
which the highest in man, his aspiration to form and clarity was at one with his nature and with all of nature. It was
an era of unity and harmony within man, in which thought and feeling, morality and sensibility were one, in which
the form which man stamped on his life whether moral, political or spiritual flowed from his own natural being, and
was not imposed on it by the force of raw will.”54

Never mind that the force of raw will had in fact made approximately one out of every three people into slaves,

and assured a virtually identical fate for all women. This, of course, did not stop Schiller from singing:

When poetry’s magic cloak
Still with delight enfolded truth
Life’s fulness flowed through creation
And there felt what never more will feel.
Man acknowledged a higher nobility in Nature
To press her to love’s breast. . . .

The Eco camp continued unabated (and virtually unchanged) into many of today’s ecophilosophies and “new
paradigm” movements, which have taken up the Regress Express but in even more enthusiastic forms. The
ecofeminists do not at all approve of ancient Greece (patriarchal), but rather prefer the immediately preceding
period of horticultural society, ruled by the Great Mother, where women, who did most of the productive work
(women produced about 80 percent of the food in such societies), at least shared in many of the public policy
decisions. This often produced what has been called “equalitarian” societies, or what Riane Eisler calls “partnership”
culture.

But that partnership, we have seen, was not established by conscious choice in the noosphere, but rather by luck
and happenstance in the biosphere: it was the product of a hoe, not a mutual recognition. Such predifferentiated
societies are no model for an integrative partnership culture; they are models for biological slavery. And thus the
actual statistics tell the real story: as Lenski’s massive data makes obvious, an astonishing 44 percent of these
societies engaged in frequent warfare and over 50 percent in intermittent warfare (which effectively challenges the
notion that the Great Mother societies were “peace-loving”); 61 percent had private property rights; 14 percent had
slavery; and 45 percent had bride price. And let us delicately ignore the fact that many horticultural societies
practiced ritual human sacrifice, which was required, among other things, to insure crop fertility (one such site
revealed eighty one-year-old girls sacrificed to the Great Mother). These horticultural societies were anything but
“pure and pristine,” as the ecomasculinists themselves have aggressively pointed out.

On the other hand, today’s ecomasculinists have pushed the Way Back machine to its human limits. They do not at
all approve of horticultural societies (the heaven of the ecofeminists)—in fact, the beginning of farming is for them
the beginning of the great Crime of Humanity, of which industrialization is merely the inevitable endgame of planting
seeds and thus “interfering” with “pure” nature. (This is one of the reasons that ecomasculinists and ecofeminists
often do not get along well—one’s “pure and pristine nature” is the other’s “primal crime against pure and pristine
nature”—the reason is that “pure and pristine nature” is pure ideology to which both camps equally succumb, and
thus each is irritated that the other is infringing on its territory.)

Ralph Metzner, representing a long line of ecomasculinists, explains that “in tracing back the historical origins of
the split between human consciousness and nature”—and notice already that in speaking only of a “split,” he is not
distinguishing between differentiation and dissociation, and so he is going to have to push back to the very

beginning in order to get beneath the Crime, because every differentiation is going to be interpreted as a
distortion—“it is possible to discern further layers of distortion, further choice-points and cultural transformations
that lead to deeper dissociation and alienation. The first movement toward a controlling, altering attitude toward
nature came with the neolithic [horticultural] domestication, ten thousand to twelve thousand years ago, when the
hunting-gathering way of life that we had practiced for hundreds of thousands of years, attuned to the changing
seasons and rhythms of life, gave way to herding and farming economies, settlement in small villages and towns, the
accumulation and hoarding of surpluses, raiding and warring upon neighboring tribes, and so forth.”55

And so there we have it. The Regress Express crashes into ground zero, beyond which it cannot go and still call
itself human. There is the ultimate Lost Paradise: prior even to the invention of the wheel, the pristine and pure
state is to be found in an updated version of the noble savage in small foraging tribes. All of this is told in the most
idyllic terms. The typical day was a nice nature hike, then a little male bonding in the great hunt, then home to the
women, barefoot, pregnant, around the campfire; smoke some herb, a little singing (“Nature loves me, this I know,
for the raindrops tell me so . . .”).

And let us conveniently forget that, as Lenski reports, the average life expectancy was 22.5 years; one out of three
infants were “thrown away” for population control; 10 percent of these societies had slavery, 37 percent had bride
price, and 58 percent engaged in frequent or intermittent warfare. . . .

And so the search would go, scraping more and more layers of depth off the Kosmos in search of a pristine and
foundational paradise, beyond which all evolution was then thought to be a grotesque mistake. The representatives
of this Paradise were then in possession of a critique of culture, they believed, that gave them immense power in
condemnatory rhetoric for all things modern, or rather, all things past the chosen paradisaical epoch. Not only did
this condemnatory rhetoric plot the course of humanity’s horrific Fall, it gave these critics the key to Salvation,
because the Paradise Lost, from which we had egregiously deviated, would also be the Promised Land, to which we
must all return (following the directions of those who possessed the chosen critique).

In all of these particular Eco camps (from the Romantic era to today), the result of the regressive slide—of the
failure to understand the difference between differentiation and dissociation—results usually in a rather dualistic,
Manichaean, almost Zoroastrian, worldview. There is the good spirit (pristine nature) and the bad spirit (human
intervention interpreted as any deviation from “harmony with nature”).

But “harmony with nature” is impossible to define or even indicate. We already saw the ecofeminists eulogize
in harmony with the seasonal currents of nature and the Great Mother, while
farming societies as being most
ecomasculinists damn farming altogether as the primordial Crime against nature. The ecomasculinists, of course,
then claim that the even earlier tribal and foraging life represented pure and pristine harmony with nature. But
these tribes cooked, built shelters, created clothing, entered into rituals to influence the outcome of the hunt, and so
forth. These are all “interferences with nature” of one sort or another.

It soon becomes obvious that, since “harmony with nature” is impossible to define in any way that allows humans
to be anything other than primates, then each Eco-theorist simply and arbitrarily decides what he or she doesn’t like
about the current of humanity’s necessary differentiations.

Like its Ego cousin, this Eco-stance has its own sad pathos and absolute irony. The Ego-Enlightenment set out to
free Eros from its heteronomy, its immersion in conformist and herd mentalities; and it sought this autonomy with
such force that it went too far into alienation, and ended up with Eros degenerating into Phobos: seeking freedom, it
found only fear and alienation, which bound it even more tightly to that which it wished to transcend.

And the Eco camps, so intensely desiring insertion into a Larger Life, an Agape that embraced the depth of the
Kosmos with joyful Love and Care, ended up scrapping layers and layers of depth off the universe in search of the
primal ground where this insertion could occur: it reduced the deeper and higher to the lower and shallower, a
reduction and regression and leveling that, by any other name, is Thanatos. In search of a larger life, they found only
a morbid death (i.e., a lesser depth), a rancid leveling of just those differentiations that allowed their search in the
first place.

“This leveling,” says Habermas, “can also be seen in the diachronic comparison of modern form of life with pre-
modern ones. The high price earlier exacted from the mass of the population (in the dimensions of bodily labor,
material conditions, possibilities of individual choice, security of law and punishment, political participation, and

schooling) is barely even noticed.”56

What is noticed, in these Eco-schools, is that today’s world is God-forsaken. At some point in the historical (or
prehistorical) past—at some point in yesterday’s time—we have actually deviated from the Great Spirit, we have
dissociated from the Great Goddess. And it is this dualistic notion—the notion that we can profoundly deviate from
the actual Current of the Kosmos—that often sets up a regressive Zoroastrian worldview, a worldview that overlooks
the fact that the Great Spirit, if it really is Great, must be behind even those moves that look to us like deviations. All
of which overlooks, as Zen would have it, that “that which one can deviate from is not the true Tao.”57

The Ego and the Eco: the flatland twins locked in the dance of ironic self-destruction, both contributing equally to
the failure of integration. The one absolutizes the noosphere, the other absolutizes the biosphere, neither of which
alone can integrate the other. And that which does not contribute to the integration of both contributes directly to
the destruction of each.

It was in this climate of mutual repugnance—Ego versus Eco—that two events would emerge that altered the

course of history irrevocably.

One was the discovery of evolution.

13

The Dominance of the Descenders

It is the time of the gods that have fled and of the god that is coming. It is the time of need, because it lies
under a double lack and a double Not: the No-more of the gods that have fled and the Not-yet of the god
that is coming.

—MARTIN HEIDEGGER

BOTH THE EGO camps and the Eco camps, starting out with the best and even noblest of intentions, had paradoxically

brought about precisely what they had set out to eradicate. The reason was fairly simple: since both camps were
(and still are) playing on the same flatland field, then the more one pole succeeds, the more the excluded pole
returns in paradoxical forms—the more the “return of the repressed (or regressed)” comes to haunt the house of its
originator. Lacking a holarchical Ascent to (and Descent from) the nondual One—which negates and preserves both
Ego and Eco in a Nondual transcendence and embrace—there was only a mutual negation, and mutual repugnance,
of one camp for the other.

The integration of the Big Three (person, culture, nature), now that they had been finally differentiated: this was
(and is) the single greatest task facing modernity (and postmodernity). In simplified form, what was demanded was
the integration of the interior or subjective worlds (I and we) with the exterior or objective (Nature); or again, the
integration of Ego and Eco.

The great differentiation had already, irreversibly, irrevocably occurred. What the world awaited, anxiously, was a

voice signaling integration.

THE PARADOX OF DAMAGE

Both the Ego camps and the Eco camps had responded with their own healing agenda, only to find that both agendas
aggravated what they were meant to soothe and inflamed what they were meant to cure. Both camps were their
own worst enemy, and both camps contributed to a violent fracturing of the world they were supposed to heal.

We already saw that the rational Ego took as its goal the transformation from egocentric inclinations and
ethnocentric dominator hierarchies to a worldcentric stance of universal pluralism, altruism, benevolence, and
freedom. It was a “declaration of independence” in more ways than one: independence from religious and mythic
domination, from state-imposed interference in personal life, from conformist modes of the herd mentality, and
from nature conceived as a source of not-yet-moral drives and inclinations. The autonomy of the rational Ego had to
be fought for, had to be actively secured against all those forces of heteronomy that constantly were at work to pull
it down from its worldcentric stance of universal tolerance and benevolence.

These values—in particular, universal pluralism, altruism, and freedom—are what Taylor calls the three
“hypergoods” (goods that are felt to be better than other goods) that have most deeply characterized modernity
(and postmodernity), and they are values that no doubt constitute much of the true dignity of modernity. But no
sooner had the rational Ego secured some notion of these hypergoods than it began not just to differentiate from
other goods, but to alienate them, dissociate them, repress them, seal them off.

And in all directions:

1. The rational Ego totally refused transrational and

occasions—“No more Ascent!” In
understandably wanting to preserve the autonomy it had fought so hard to secure, it latched onto it with a death
grip, and pressed its own autonomous agency in an extreme and exorbitant
form—what we will call
“hyperagency”—and this meant, above all else, not handing its newly won freedom over to anything that looked
even remotely like a God or Spirit.

transpersonal

2. It completely ignored, almost totally forgot, its own interpersonal dimension, the dimension of dialogical and
intersubjective communication, in favor of the merely monological and objectifying mode, which is also a very
hyperagentic mode, in that the communions of intersubjectivity are ditched in favor of the monologues of
individual power and agency. The Age of Man: the disengaged (hyperagentic) subject staring at other humans as
“objects of information” and not “subjects in communication” or communion.

3. And where it could have transcended and included the prepersonal dimension of élan vital, biotic roots,
organic richness, it all too often simply dissociated and repressed them (in a hyperagentic fashion: nothing would
touch its “freedom”). The disenchantment of the natural world, both without and within. (See fig. 12-6.)

Each of those dissociations and alienations—of the transpersonal, the interpersonal, and the prepersonal—would
severely curtail its cherished freedom. And thus the paradox of damage: in aggressively pursuing intense freedom, it
manufactured massive unfreedom.

In seeking freedom—autonomy not bound by any sort of heteronomy—it ended up cut off from spirit, cut off
from nature, cut off from its own body, cut off from its fellows. And the worse it felt, the more it intensified its
hyperagentic withdrawal and disenchantment: the unfreer it became. Not within and beyond, but within and
withdrawn.

In short, in all those domains (spirit, nature, body, civics), corpses lay strewn everywhere on the road to a reckless
independence. The rational-ego, hyperagentic and hyperindependent, took its own relative autonomy (which had
indeed increased significantly), and blew it up to absolute proportions. In understandably wishing to increase
freedom and liberty, it paradoxically left massive road kill everywhere on the highway to rational heaven.

But the same paradox of damage beset the Eco camps. In starting out with the express intention of decentering
the Ego, of inserting it back into the larger currents of Life and Love, the Eco camps ended up—inadvertently,
paradoxically—championing modes of knowing and feeling that were often egocentric and flagrantly narcissistic. In
wishing to overthrow the Ego—and still being stuck, with their opponents, in monological flatland—the Eco camps
introduced the modern world to a glorification of divine egoism: the outrageous return and exaltation of that which
it expressly set out to overcome.

It started innocently enough. It started, as all modern and postmodern currents do, with a worldcentric stance

secured in rational space—a stance of universal pluralism.

THE ECO SLIDE INTO DIVINE EGOISM

Rationality, or worldcentric and universal perspectivism, operates in a worldspace that allows, as all structures do,
several different and apparently contradictory stances, which can be confusing if we don’t look carefully at what is
actually occurring.

Thus, on the one hand, rationality can tend toward a rather rigid version of “universal” truth, operating in a very
abstract and mechanical and formulaic fashion, ignoring all individuality and all particulars and all differences.
“Universal” comes to mean rigidly “uniform,” and an otherwise admirably worldcentric perspective comes to mean
“must be the same for everybody everywhere.” And, we might say, rationality tends first to emerge in this fashion, in
a monological and objectifying universalism that is, in fact, a uniformitarianism (and that is certainly the way it first
emerged in the Age of Reason). It understands nicely the worldcentric perspective, but in its excitement it goes much
too far and imagines that the worldcentric perspective is, in all its particulars, necessarily the same for everybody
everywhere, with all colorful differences ironed out of the abstraction.

Thus, in the Age of Reason and the Enlightenment—with the exhilarating excitement of newly emergent reason,
but reason captured almost exclusively by the monological and objectifying mode—uniformitarianism was all the
rage. The central and by far the dominant reason that mythic-religions were rejected by the Age of Enlightenment

was that these religions were everywhere different
from each other—this god here, that goddess there, one
creation story here, another there. Since they all disagreed with each other, how could they possibly all be true?
What conceivable use could they have except to divide and fragment humanity? Precisely because they all lacked a
true universality, a true worldcentric perspective, then they must be rejected: “No more myths!” meant “No more
isolated and contradictory truths!”

There thus arose a positive mania for the universal and “common truths” of humankind, truths that could speak to
everybody, and thus truths that must be “truly true,” deeply true, for all peoples. All merely individual preferences
and tastes, all peculiarities, all local differences, were dismissed as not being part of a common and universal
humanity. “La réligion naturelle,” proclaimed Voltaire, can only include “les principes de morale communs au genre
humain.” And Dr. Samuel Clarke spoke for an entire age when he said, “What is not universally made known to all
men is not needful for any.”

This search for a universal and unvarying set of codes and “natural law” (meaning universal law) swept through
every branch of learning, science, political and social theory—and reached right down into the arts, into poetry, into
painting, into architecture.

Dr. Johnson’s pronouncements on uniformitarianism in aesthetic theory are well known; it is, he says, “a general
rule of poetry that all appropriated terms of art should be sunk in general expressions,” which meant, as he put it,
“poetry is to speak a universal language.” A universal language, a common humanity.

Thomas Wharton, the English poet and literary historian, came to view his youthful embrace of Gothic
architecture as a “deviation” into a merely particular style, and recanted his grievous error with this exclamation,
offered in 1782:

Thy powerful hand has broke the Gothic chain,
And brought my bosom back to truth again.
To truth, by no peculiar taste confined,
Whose universal pattern strikes mankind.

And thus,

for nearly two centuries, “the efforts made for improvement and correction in beliefs, in institutions,
and in art had been, in the main, controlled by the assumption that, in each phase of his activity, man should
conform as nearly as possible to a standard conceived as universal, uncomplicated, immutable, uniform for every
rational being.”1

Spinoza, no doubt, summed it up best: “The purpose of Nature is to make men uniform, as children of a common

mother.”

A universal language, a common humanity, a uniform pattern. It was a noble enough cause, and there are some
important truths in it. For we all, all of us, share the capacity for images and symbols, for concepts and desires, for
aspirations and hopes; we are all born from a womb and find our way to a tomb; we all eat and labor and love and
learn.

And thus, during its first large-scale emergence, the admirably worldcentric stance of rationality took all the
various perspectives of different peoples, places, races, and creeds, and attempted to abstract those items that they
all agreed upon, that were not merely idiosyncratic or egocentric or ethnocentric.

But in its frantic rush to find and speak a “universal language”—whether in science, politics, art, or religion
(Deism)—it simply steamrollered over every single trace of individuality wherever it appeared. Humans were
monologically objectified, and only objectified, to find their commonalities (and this, we have seen, was a central
project of the Ego-Enlightenment camps).

But rationality can rise to its fullest potential and find its fairest expression when it also pursues more even-
handedly the actual space of universal perspectivism. The whole point of rationality and its capacity for multiple
perspectives is not simply to abstract the commonalities (important as that might be, for example, in medicine), but
to put oneself in the shoes of others and thus find a mutual enrichment and appreciation of differences. This is the
same worldcentric rationality, but now celebrating all the multiple perspectives and not merely steamrollering them
into monotonous uniformity.

And it was precisely this celebration of diversity that was behind so much of the Eco-Romantic rebellion against

the Ego-Enlightenment. Eco-Romanticism often called itself “antirational,” but in this particular regard it was actually
“anti-uniformitarian.” It started from the same rational stance of universal perspectivism, but it emphasized the
“perspectives” instead of the “universal.”

This trend is altogether unmistakable in the early Romantics. Notice how Schlegel moves from the rational-
universal perspective seamlessly into the cherishing of cultural differences: “One cannot become a connoisseur
without universality of mind, that is, without the flexibility which enables us, through the renunciation of personal
likings and blind preference for what we are accustomed to, to transpose ourselves into that which is peculiar to
other peoples and times, and, so to say, to feel this from its centre outwards.”

It was precisely the decentering or worldcentering capacity of rationality that allowed cultural differences to be
cherished and even glorified, something that had never happened on a large scale anywhere before in history (it is
simply inconceivable, for example, that one horticultural society would celebrate the specific values of another).
People, wrote Wackenroder at the time, “always think of the point at which they stand as the centre of gravity of the
universe; and similarly they regard their own feeling as the centre of all that is beautiful in art, pronouncing, as from
the judge’s seat, the final verdict upon all things, without remembering that no one has appointed them to be
judges. If you are unable to enter directly into the feelings of so many beings different from yourself and, by
penetrating to their hearts,
feel their works, [then] strive at least, by using the intellect as a connecting bond, to
attain such an understanding of them indirectly.”

This was not simply a tolerance for different points of view, although that was certainly part of expansive
rationality’s worldcentric project (even the Ego camps would champion tolerance). The Romantic move was that and
much more: it was rather a direct attempt to cultivate an understanding and a sympathetic valuation of different
points of view, both as a means of enriching one’s own inner life and as a way to give objective validity to different
cultures and valuations. Thus, where Kant would search for the universal in all humans, the Romantics, standing in
the same open space of worldcentric rationality, would search out all the differences.

Accordingly, an ethic of individuality, of diversity, of idiosyncrasies, of the exotic, of the deeply personal, even of
the strange and weird, of the anything-out-of-the-ordinary, rushed in to displace the previous uniformitarianism. “It
is precisely individuality,” as Friedrich Schlegel would put it, “that is the original and eternal thing in men. The
cultivation and development of this individuality [is] one’s highest vocation.” Or Novalis on art: “The more personal,
local, peculiar, of its own time, a poem is, the nearer it stands to the center of poetry.” Schlegel on literature: “From
the romantic point of view, the abnormal species of literature also have their value—even the eccentric and
monstrous—as materials and preparatory exercises for universality”—universality in the sense that everything is to
be honored. As he puts it, “Does admiration for one really require of us depreciation of the other? Can we not grant
that each is in its own way great and admirable, even though the one is utterly unlike the other? The world is wide,
and many things can coexist in it side by side.”

The idealization of diversity. This was, in very large measure, the direct influence of the Great Chain theorists,
who, we have amply seen, saw diversity and Plenitude as marks of the superabundant Efflux and Goodness of the
Divine—the visible, sensible God: the greater the variety, the greater the Goodness. The early Romantics, just like
the Enlightenment philosophers, were themselves dedicated theorists of the Great Chain, and traced much of their
heritage to Plotinus (as we will see), so it is not surprising in the least that they would eulogize and celebrate, as
Akenside put it, “the fair variety of things.”

Most of the “politically correct multiculturalists” of today would, no doubt, be shocked and horrified to learn that
their ideas come directly in an unbroken lineage from Plato and Plotinus (the dreaded Eurocentric, logocentric Plato,
not to mention dead, white, and male). But Lovejoy is surely accurate in his appraisal: “The discovery of the intrinsic
worth of diversity, with all of the perils latent in it, was one of the great discoveries of the human mind; and the fact
that it, like so many other discoveries, has been turned by man to ruinous uses, is no evidence that it is in itself
without value. In so far as it was historically due to the age-long influence, culminating in the eighteenth century, of
the [Great Chain] principle of Plenitude, we may set it down among the most important and potentially the most
benign of the manifold consequences of that influence.”2

At its very best, then, the Romantic idealization of diversity tended “to nothing less than an enlargement of
human nature itself—to an increase of men’s, and nations’, understanding and appreciation of one another, not as

multiple samples of an identical model, but as representatives of a legitimate and welcome diversity of cultures and
of individual reactions to the world which we have in common.”3

“The fair variety of things.” And thus, it is only a slight exaggeration to say that where the Ego-Enlightenment
project of modernity would emphasize universal uniformitarianism, the Eco-Romantic project, searching for a larger
Life and Love beyond the self-defining Ego, would emphasize universal diversitarianism.

Both were universal stances, because both stood in the same postconventional, worldcentric space of reason.
But their aims were diametrically opposed, and their methods as well. The Ego camp was still intent upon securing
its self-defining freedom, autonomy, and agency in an absolute and monologically aggressive enterprise; the Eco
camp, on the other hand, was desperately reaching out for a larger and more variegated Life and Love, enriched with
the
imaginable variety—in nature and in other cultures—and promoting diversity and
egalitarianism with a passion.

communions

of all

This diversitarianism would continue unabated right down to today’s “postmodern” and “multicultural”
movements. And as much as “post-modern poststructuralists” like to claim wild originality for their musings, it is all
right there in the original Eco-Romantic agenda (including, of course, the emphasis on individual uniqueness and
“wild originality”).

Read carefully Lovejoy’s summary of the Eco-Romantic project (and remember, Lovejoy wrote this in 1932; he
could not possibly have had the “poststructuralists” and “multiculturalists” in mind, even though his summary reads
with frightening accuracy their standard agenda, and not it alone; moreover, Lovejoy is describing the agenda as it
first developed a century and a half ago):

The immense multiplication of genres and of verse-forms; the admission of the aesthetic legitimacy of the
genre mixte; the goût de la nuance [relishing of differences]; the naturalization in art of the “grotesque”; the
quest for local color; the endeavor to reconstruct in imagination the distinctive inner life of peoples remote in
time or space or in cultural condition; the étalage du moi
[display of self]; the demand for particularized
fidelity in landscape-description; the revulsion against simplicity; the distrust of universal formulas in politics
[or social theory]; the feeling of “the glory of the imperfect”; the cultivation of individual, national, and racial
peculiarities; the depreciation of the obvious and the general high valuation (wholly foreign to most earlier
periods) of originality, and the usually futile and absurd self-conscious pursuit of that attribute.4

Where the Ego-Enlightenment counseled each and all to be uniformly universal, the Eco-Romantics’ deepest
desire was to be absolutely and even radically different, that is, utterly and radically unique. “It is precisely
individuality,” we heard Friedrich Schlegel announce, “that is the original and eternal thing in men.” To which he
adds, “The cultivation and development of this individuality, as one’s highest vocation, would be a divine egoism.”

Imagine one’s highest vocation being, not the alleviation of human suffering, not the promotion of universal
tolerance, not selfless service, not duty or devotion to family or kin or nation or globe, not compassion and not care:
but the cultivation of divine egoism!

There is a worldcentric cherishing gone catastrophically egocentric. There is the Eco-Romantic slide into forms of
ego-absorption that no Ego camp would even dream of! In fact, this divine egoism was precisely the heteronomy
that the Ego camps were fighting!—and fighting because this self-absorbed and self-glorifying stance actually pulls
me down from the higher and wider stance of worldcentric embrace and compassion—pulls me from worldcentric to
sociocentric to egocentric—pulls me away from the freedom of a deeper and wider self to the confines of a
shallower and narrower engagement, an engagement that hurts me as well as others, because it is so much less than
what is available, and the lesser always tears at the seams, and leaves an agony where joy ought to sing.

And that indeed is heteronomy—other-directedness—because the egocentric self is not my true self, not my
higher and deeper worldcentric self, but rather an addiction to a lower impulse, rendering me a slave of my own me-
ness. Divine egoism is a sickly other within my own deeper possibilities. And thus, in divine egoism, I am other-
directed, off-centered, out of my true self and out of my right mind.

The Eco-slide into an absolute anarchy of the particular, a riot of individual differences, a heap of the necessarily
isolated and fragmented, with no commonalities at all, save a mutual divine egoism, which, at bottom, despises the
existence of all other egoists as well—this fanatical diversitarianism “promoted a great deal of sickly and sterile

introversion in literature—a tiresome exhibition of the eccentricities of the individual Ego, these eccentricities being
often, as is now notorious, merely conventions painfully turned inside out. Thus the wheel came full circle; what may
be called a particularistic uniformitarianism, a tendency to seek to universalize things originally valued because they
were not universal, found expression in poetry, in a sort of philosophy, in the policies of great states and the
enthusiasms of their populations. It has lent itself all too easily to the service of egotism, and especially—in the
political and social sphere—of the kind of collective vanity which is nationalism or racialism. The belief in the
sanctity of one’s idiosyncrasy—especially if it be a group idiosyncrasy, and therefore sustained and intensified by
mutual flattery—is rapidly converted into a belief in its superiority. More than one great people, in the course of the
past century and a half, having first made a god of its own peculiarities, good or bad or both, presently began to
suspect that there was no other god.”5

The Eco-diversitarian slide into egocentric glorification. Precisely what it had set out to avoid, it now preeminently

embodied.

And nowhere could this be more clearly seen than in the Eco-Romantic approach to what it now called “nature.”

A DENATURED NATURE

In the eighteenth century, the whole approach to nature itself underwent a monumental shift (and by “nature” in
this section, I mean both Nature and nature, or the empirical-sensory world without and within. We will, in the next
section, use our more precise definitions for an overall summary). Nature was no longer a syncretic indissociation, as
in magic and also, to a lesser but still
in mythic-membership (and this newly emergent
differentiation was itself a step up, so to speak: it was part of the differentiation of the Big Three, part of the dignity
of modernity). But neither was nature an embodiment of Spirit or an expression of the One (as in Plato or Plotinus
or Eckhart—or Lao Tzu or Huang Po or Padmasambhava).

important degree,

Rather, nature became, first and foremost, the source of egoic sentiment. Nature became “nature as it makes me

feel.”

Although this was of course called “spiritual”—the “pure and pristine” encounter with a spiritual nature away
from the confines of culture—it was in many cases, as we will see, the simple biosphere as reflected in divine
egoism—nature as narcissistic reflecting pond—a monological nature that was, in all respects, the photographic
negative of the monological ego. The Ego and the Eco were still battling it out on the flat and faded landscape of the
great interlocking order—both of them monological to the core.

We have already traced this general development—the collapse of NATURE (or Spirit) to Nature (or the empirical
Web of Life). But Charles Taylor comes to a similar conclusion based on a meticulous reading of texts of the time,
and thus it is important to touch bases with his presentation. Indeed, part of Taylor’s task, in Sources of the Self, is to
trace this extraordinary shift in our encounter with nature, and he is not alone in his conclusions. “I have been
tracing a movement, indeed, a massive shift in the notion of nature.”6 One aspect of this shift, he points out, is what
we have been calling “the collapse of the Kosmos”—the Great Holarchy of Being was collapsed into a monological
and flatland holism of observable exteriors, namely, the great interlocking order.

In flatland holism, as we have seen, nature and reality are still conceived as hierarchical or holarchical (or
(the great interlocking order, or the
composed of interlocking wholes), but these wholes are now all empirical
universal system, is simply how the Great Holarchy looks when empirically and monologically collapsed; it is the
result of subtle reductionism).

Since the wholes and the holarchies are now all empirical, then inner transformation is no longer needed to see a
truer reality. One simply pokes around, with more sophisticated instruments, in one’s already given empirical field.
No ascesis, no yoga, no shiktan-taza, no personal
injunctions or transformations are required to get at the
truth—one simply opens one’s eyes and sharpens one’s monological gaze.

The radical Enlightenment had offered instrumental or calculative reason as a way to orient the Ego to the great
interlocking order; the Eco-Romantic rebellion chaffed at the too-often exclusionary reason, and offered instead
sentiments as a way to “feel” ourselves into the great interlocking whole. It offered, we might say, not instrumental
reason but instrumental feelings, feelings that allowed us to fit into the Web of Life as a part and not try to dominate

on the whole. Nature—the “true” or “real” nature—was thus disclosed to me primarily in feelings; nature was the
sum total of what it evoked or awakened in me, as my own inner nature, and as my own pure and undistorted
feelings.

This is what Taylor means when he says that “this new orientation to nature was . . . concerned with the
sentiments which nature awakens in us. We return to nature, because it brings out strong and noble feelings in us:
feelings of awe before the greatness of creation, of peace before a pastoral scene, of sublimity before storms and
deserted vastnesses, of melancholy in some lonely woodland spot. Nature draws us because it is in some way
attuned to our feelings, so that it can reflect and intensify those we already feel or else awaken those which are
dormant. We turn to nature, as we might turn to music, to evoke and strengthen the best in us. But always the point
lay in the feelings” (his italics).7

Taylor’s acute insight is that this “nature as sentiment” presupposes a profound denial of the Platonic/Plotinian
notion of nature as the embodiment of Spirit (or what Taylor calls an “ontic logos”—another way of saying that this
“new” nature was not part of the Kosmos but was itself the entire cosmos of which we are now simply a part:
we are merely a strand in the great Web, instead of seeing that the Web is merely a strand in the Kosmos, whose
Self I-I can become: the Web itself is not Spirit, but is simply a manifestation of Spirit).

According to this new understanding, he says, “the meaning that the natural phenomena bear is no longer defined
by the . . . Ideas [or Spirit] which they embody. It is defined through the effect of the phenomena on us, in the
reactions they awaken. The affinity between nature and ourselves is now mediated not by an [ontic or Kosmic] order
but by the way that nature resonates in us. Our attunement with nature no longer consists in a recognition of ontic
hierarchy [the Great Holarchy], but in being able to release the echo within ourselves.”8The egoic echo . . .

It is the same flatland Web of Life, the great interlocking whole, but now approached in egoic sentiment and not
egoic logic. Taylor’s well-argued point is that they (the Ego and the Eco) are, in essence, the photographic negatives
of each other. In the Platonic/Plotinian view, says Taylor, “our being is identified with our being attuned to the order
of things”—that is, attuned to the multidimensional Kosmos, to the Great Holarchy that “interlocks” not only
horizontally in empirical wholes, but also vertically in inner transformations aspiring to the nondual One. “But in the
feeling for nature which we see emerging in the eighteenth century and since, this [order] is fundamentally broken
and then forgotten”9—the collapse of the Kosmos into the flatland interlocking order, into a monological reason and
an equally monological nature—a mononature, itself conceived as absolute (just as the Ego considered its “reason”
to be absolute).

“In other words,” summarizes Taylor, “this modern feeling for nature which starts in the eighteenth century
presupposes the triumph of the new identity of disengaged reason over the premodern one embedded in an ontic
logos.” The Ego and the Eco as flip sides of the same flat and faded coin, both oriented toward the same great
interlocking order, however much their responses to it indeed varied (the Ego trying to get out of it, the Eco trying to
get into it).

This is why Taylor can point out that, for the Eco camps, “our nature is no longer defined by a substantive order of
purposes [ontic Kosmos], but by our own inner impulses and our place in the interlocking whole”10—the same
interlocking whole of the Ego camps! The Ego and the Eco: the Tweedledum and Tweedledee of interlocking flatland.

We might summarize the overall shift in this way:
The differentiation of the Big Three, which released the rational-ego from its confinement to syncretic mythic-
membership, fell into dissociation with the capture of reason by its objectifying, monological, and instrumental
forms (a capture concomitant with industrialization). The Big Three were reduced to the Big One of mononature: the
empirical flatland world, the great interlocking order of the système de la nature.

The Ego camps approached the great interlocking order of nature with an objectifying and monological analysis
(empiric-analytic)—a “dry and abstract” approach against which the Eco-Romantic camps aggressively rebelled,
preferring instead to find a unity with self and communion with nature via a more feeling-oriented awareness.

But Taylor’s point is that in both cases, the nature that is approached is essentially the same nature, and this
“nature” is a denatured nature in comparison with the Platonic/Plotinian view, where nature is a direct expression
and embodiment of Spirit. In the Ego camps, nature is the final and ultimate reflected reality, and in the Eco camps
nature itself gets elevated to Spirit, simply because real Spirit can no longer be found.

In both cases the same flatland nature is the object of awareness; in both cases, an ontic Order has been “broken
and forgotten”; in both cases, mononature is serving a purpose it cannot ultimately sustain; and both cases
absolutely presuppose the same collapse of the Kosmos.

THREE NATURES

In short, and using our more precise definitions: with the collapse of the Kosmos, NATURE (or the great Nest of
Being) was reduced to Nature, or the great Web of Life. The Ego approached Nature with reason, the Eco
approached Nature with nature (or preconventional feelings). In both cases, Nature reigned.

We have already seen that the Ego camps would approach this mononature in an objectifying and analytical
fashion: Nature was the fundamental reality to be known by reflection (the “mirror of Nature”; Nature was the
ultimate “reflectee”). The Eco camps would approach the same mononature in an attempt to unite with it, commune
with it, return to it, spiritualize it. Communing with or even uniting with flatland became the ultimate spiritual
occasion. The way you embrace Nature is by returning to nature, returning to wilderness feelings.

We have seen that in the modern world, nature has two related but slightly different meanings, which we have
called “Nature” and “nature.” Both refer in general to the empirical-sensory world. But, due to the collapse of the
Kosmos, the empirical-sensory world appears in two paradoxical guises (both of which can be seen in fig. 12-5). In
the great evolution from physiosphere to biosphere to noosphere, there are the interiors of those domains, and the
exteriors. Nature, in common usage, refers both to the sum total of those exteriors (“Nature”)—or the entire Right-
Hand empirical world—and to those aspects, whether interior or exterior, that are just the biosphere (“nature”) and
not the noosphere (mind or culture). In the latter usage, “nature” as biosphere means the body as opposed to the
mind, or nature as opposed to culture, or empirical as opposed to rational, or sensory as opposed to conceptual.

Both Nature and nature are different views of the same empirical-sensory domain: they are both the world as
disclosed to the senses (both without and within). But the massively confusing item is that aspects of the noosphere
exist in Nature, but not in nature. (This is identical to the mind/body problem, which is the same problem created by
flatland.)

We can follow this easily on figure 12-5. (Instead of matter, body, and mind, I will treat the physiosphere as a part
of the biosphere, which it is; so we will simply be dealing with the general relation of biosphere and noosphere, or
body and mind.) In figure 12-5, the biosphere is level 1 (in both interiors and exteriors); the noosphere is level 4 (in
both interiors and exteriors); and levels 2 and 3 represent stages where the noosphere and biosphere are
differentiating (and possibly dissociating). Level 1 is the biosphere or nature, and the entire Right Hand is Nature.

In the interior or Left-Hand domains, the biosphere exists as prerational feelings, emotional-sexual impulses, life
vitality, sensory richness, and all those items that people generally mean by the “body” as opposed to the “mind.”
Likewise, in the interior, the noosphere refers to all of those “mental” items as contrasted with bodily ones, such as
rationality, symbolic culture, language and linguistic communication, and so forth. The interior noosphere also
houses a moral development that moves from egocentric (preconventional) to ethnocentric (conventional) to
worldcentric (postconventional), none of which are found in the sensory body or the biosphere or nature. And, of
course, the noosphere transcends and includes the biosphere (formop transcends but includes sensorimotor). That
is, the biosphere is a part of the noosphere, because if you destroy the biosphere, you destroy the noosphere, but
not vice versa. In other words, nature (not Nature, but nature) is a part of mind (in the sense shown in fig. 12-5).

The difference between noosphere and biosphere—or mind and body, or culture and nature—shows up in
common speech when we say that humans are destroying nature or ruining the biosphere. And when we look at the
empirical world out there, we tend to think of trees as being part of nature, but we do not think of automobiles as
being part of nature. In other words, we make a distinction between the products of the biosphere and the products
of the noosphere.

So far, so good. The confusing part is that the exterior of the noosphere exists in Nature, but not in nature. And
thus, the relation of the mind to the natural world depends upon whether you mean nature or Nature. For all of
nature is in the noosphere, but the exterior of the noosphere is in Nature (as shown in fig. 12-5).

Thus, if you reduce all interiors to exteriors, if you reduce the Kosmos to Nature, it then appears that Nature

includes everything, so of course the mind is just part of Nature! (for that reduces mind to brain—the mind/body
problem is isomorphic to the Kosmos/Nature problem).

The interior of the noosphere is the mind, or your own consciousness right now, but the exterior of the
noosphere is the neocortex, and the neocortex exists in Nature. The neocortex is an objective system of structures
and functions that can be seen with the senses or their extensions; it possesses simple location and is built of
holarchies of spatial extension. The brain exists in Nature.

But the mind does not exist in Nature. The mind is not a sensory object but an interior awareness. As we have
seen, concepts and ideas and meanings and values do not have simple location; they are not running around out
there in the sensory world; they cannot be seen anywhere in the empirical Web of Life. They are interior values
known by the eye of mind, not exterior objects seen with the eye of flesh.

Thus, in an individual, nature (the biosphere or the body) is in the noosphere or the mind (reason transcends but
includes feelings): nature is in the mind, but the brain is in Nature—and the latter makes the former almost
impossible to see. There is the paradox of flatland and another version of the world-knot of the mind/body problem
(whose unraveling we discussed in the previous chapter).

In Nature, or the Right-Hand world, the noosphere still transcends the biosphere, in the sense that more complex
forms of evolution (e.g., neocortex) transcend and include the less complex (e.g., reptilian stem). And all of those
exteriors exist in the world of Nature. The brain, the organism, the limbic system, cells, molecules—all of those exist
in the vastness of Nature. They are all exteriors appearing in the world of the senses.

Thus, even though mind and feelings and interiors cannot be found in nature, all of their exteriors can. And thus,
as I said, if you reduce the Kosmos to empirical flatland, it appeard that Nature includes everything, whereas it is just
the Right-Hand world, or the great empirical Web. It then appears that, if we want to achieve Wholeness with the
Kosmos, we must become one with Nature! (Because Nature is now all that is left of the Kosmos.)

But—and here is where the confusing part about Nature/nature reenters the Romantic agenda: not all of Nature is
pure and pristine. If we look around in the empirical-sensory world (Nature), we can see not only the exteriors of the
biosphere (trees and lakes and nature), but also the exteriors of the noosphere (such as airplanes and automobiles),
and those exteriors are often problematic. The exteriors of the noosphere include things like industrialization,
pollution, ozone depletion, and so on, which we do not count as part of nature. Even though those are part of
Nature, they are not part of nature.

Already you can see that the Romantic recommendation to become one with the natural world has an inherent
dilemma: do we become one with Nature, or one with nature? And, of course, the Eco-Romantics generally
recommended that we must get back to nature.

Thus, with the modern collapse of the Kosmos to Nature, the Eco-Romantics did not embrace all of Nature,
because those aspects of Nature that were produced by the noosphere (and especially by the noospheric items as
industrialization) were shunned. The Romantics embraced Nature in general, but nature in particular. They aimed for
NATURE, got Nature, and ended up glorifying nature.

“Back to nature” was thus the calling card of every good Eco-Romantic. Both Nature and nature are the sensory-
empirical world, but nature (or the biosphere) is that part of Nature untouched by culture (or the noosphere). And
thus, when the modern era had ensconced Nature (the descended, monological, Right-Hand, empirical Web of Life
and great interlocking order) as the only God, the Eco-Romantics attempted to embrace the purer aspects of Nature
by returning to nature.

Both Nature and nature I will often refer to as mononature, because both were equally monological. Taylor’s
conclusion can thus be stated very simply: there was no longer NATURE (or Spirit), but only Nature as disclosed in
nature. No longer Spirit, but simply an empirical Web of Life disclosed in feelings and sentiment: Nature as it makes
me feel. The theosphere and the noosphere reduced to the biosphere; postconventional spirit confused with
preconventional nature.

We already heard Emerson strenuously arguing against this flatland Eco-view (which equated mononature with
‘’spirit”): “Beauty in nature is not ultimate. It is the herald of inward and eternal beauty, and is not alone a solid and
satisfactory good.” Rather, he says, “nature is a symbol [or expression] of Spirit. Before the revelations of the Soul,
time, space and nature shrink away. Vast spaces of nature, the Atlantic Ocean, the South Sea; long intervals of time,

years, centuries, are of no account. Let us stun and astonish the intruding rabble of men and books and institutions
by a simple declaration of the divine fact. Bid the intruders take the shoes from off their feet, for God is here within.
Let our simplicity judge them, and our docility to our own law demonstrate the poverty of nature beside our native
riches.”11

But now, with the collapse of the Kosmos, nature was itself spirit, was the ultimate source of spiritual sentiment
and the ultimate foundation of a salvation to be found away from the distortions and crimes of culture.12 The Ego
was to immerse itself in nature, in the simple biosphere, and therein was to be found its liberation from the
stultifying grip of rationality.

Thus, in this new and flattened orientation, during a pure encounter with nature, spirit would flow from nature
and into me, instead of flowing through me and into nature. No longer did Spirit or the Over-Soul shine through
me and illuminate nature with a spiritual radiance, disclosing nature as a perfect manifestation of Spirit. Rather, now
I am flooded by feelings released in my self by and from a mononature.

And the more immersed in this sensory mononature I can become, the closer to “spirit” I will be. I am no longer an
opening or clearing through which the Divine can flow, baptizing nature and all manifestation with the Goodness of
the Divine; I am now the receptacle of feelings coming from nature and into me, carrying me away in floods of
sentiment and communions of sensory drenching.

Which is why Emerson would continue and say, “To the senses and the unrenewed understanding, belongs a sort
of instinctive belief in the absolute existence of nature. In their view [the Eco camp’s view] man and nature are
indissolubly joined. Things are ultimates, and they never look beyond their sphere. His mind is imbruted, and he is a
selfish savage.”

But true intuition breaks this divine egoism, says Emerson, because “the best moments of life are these delicious

awakenings of the higher powers, and the reverential withdrawing of nature before its God.”

But nature would not now withdraw before its God, because nature was now the only God. Monological thought
(by collapsing the Kosmos) had converted nature into God (for the Eco camps), and thus “God” was to be known by
the impact that nature released in me. Nature was valued because of the thrill it sent swishing through the ego in
“pristine” wilderness encounters. Not a transparency to the Divine, but the divine ego reflected to itself in
monological feeling. This new nature was not
translogical, and certainly it was not the dreaded dialogical
intersubjectivity of culture—instead it was away from all of that and back to pristine and unadulterated nature: the
same monological gaze, settled now on the simple biosphere.

In place of NATURE (or Spirit as the nondual One), there was now only sensory nature, and sin is therefore
anything that separates me not from NATURE but from nature. Thus return to biocentric impulse and feeling is and
must be my salvation, with rationality and culture being fundamentally the forces that stifle and contort this nature,
both within me and without. And in immersing myself in this nature, I will find my true self.

(Culture is thus not a development on the way to conscious realization of Spirit; rather, culture is the crime that
hides and distorts and negates nature, that negates “spirit.” Of course, what culture is actually negating is biocentric
and egocentric perception, and this the divine ego will not countenance.)

In mononature, away from dialogical culture, I can do as I please. In mononature, my pristine self reemerges. In
mononature, I expand my glory and freedom without the stultifying presence of cultural demands, a culture that
anyway embodies the great Crime of Humanity against the système de la nature. In this nature, I find my God or
Goddess in the mute purity of the monological gaze.

And I can find my release and my salvation by an immersion in and union with the world so disclosed. To unite
with the Shadows: that would be the Light. To become one with a denatured nature: there would be salvation. To
unite with flatland: there would be the glory. To return in feelings so as to be closer to the Shadows: there would be
my true self.

It wasn’t that true spiritual insights weren’t available in this new encounter with nature. But even Wordsworth
knew the true source of the spiritual intuitions and illuminations that might be evoked in nature: “An auxiliar light,
Came from my mind, which on the setting sun, Bestowed new splendour.”

But in the new flat and faded cosmos, that splendor would immediately be interpreted as flowing from the
sunset and into me, and I would then imagine that the sunset, that nature, is the source of the spiritual

illumination. But that “splendor” is not lying around “out there” waiting to be perceived by the senses. Rabbits and
weasels and foxes and company do not stare for hours at the splendor and beauty of the sunset, even though in
many cases their senses are sharper.

No, nature is not the source of this spiritual splendor but rather its destination. When I can relax my egoic
contraction (and many people appropriately find nature a fit and inviting space for this more easily to happen), then I
can relax into that great Over-Soul, and then through me comes rushing the spiritual splendor of the One which
outshines even the setting sun and bestows on it new glory.

But as long as I am locked into the flatland world of empirical mononature, as long as I

interpret nature as the
source of the Divine, then to just that extent I am locked out of any deeper or truer spiritual illuminations and
intuitions: in glorifying merely the golden eggs, I am ignoring to death the goose that laid them.

Moreover, I am thus completely locked out of any sort of integrative vision. If the biosphere is the Divine, then the
I can only

I cannot integrate nature and culture in Spirit (or true NATURE),

noosphere must be the Crime.
recommend back to nature. I must recommend, that is, regression.

Away from the transpersonal, away from the interpersonal—and back to the prepersonal, back to biocentric
immersion—perfectly geocentric and perfectly egocentric—back to the prerational divine egoism that mistakes
unconfined sensory immersion for transpersonal release. Back to a sensory nature that, as Taylor puts it, all too
often confuses self-indulgence with self-transcendence.

And thus the horrible realization dawns: back to nature is away from NATURE. And the Eco camps, like the Ego
camps, end up bringing about precisely that which they wished most to avoid: the glorification of the ego and the
denial of true NATURE.

The Ego and the Eco will never be integrated in this scheme, with the one absolutizing the noosphere and the
other absolutizing the biosphere. Neither of them will allow a true integration because both are rabid about
privileging their chosen fragments. Both insist on converting the other by sharing their disease.

Under these circumstances, we will never be able to take monological nature up and into dialogical culture, and
then take both nature and culture up and into translogical Spirit. The Ego and the Eco, the noosphere and the
biosphere, will never be integrated in this scheme. Each will remain forever the great Devil in the other’s eyes.

And so the paradox of damage. Playing on the same flatland field, locked in mutual incompatibility and mutual
repugnance, both camps would bring about precisely that which they most wanted to avoid. The Ego camps, seeking
first and foremost autonomy and independence, sought this as a freedom from the heteronomy of nature and
conformist modes, only to find that its own intense demand for a higher freedom choked off its roots in nature and
in cultural communions, and these repressions would return to sabotage and dramatically curtail its own freedom, a
rancid transcendence (alienation and repression) driven by a Phobos bound ever more tightly to the objects of its
disgust.

And the Eco camps, seeking first and foremost a freedom from the Ego, embraced the world of Eco-nature with
such exuberance, and moved so intensely to do away with the rational Ego, that they ended up with prerational
impulses in nature’s display, and were alarmed to find that the prerational modes are precisely the most egocentric.
The closer you get to nature, the more egocentric you become.
In setting out to do away with Ego, they ended up
locked into their own sentiments, the echo within of a mononature without, both glorified as Divine. From
worldcentric pluralism to divine egoism and biocentric sensory immersion—at one with sentimental nature in my
own self-reverberating feelings—this was the other endgame of flatland holism, a morbid embrace driven by a
Thanatos that, in the way of all deception, whispered always of the wonders of ever-shallower engagements.

SEXUALITY AND MODERNITY

Small wonder that both the Ego’s view of nature as the fundamental reflected reality and the Eco’s attempt to glorify
nature as spirit would both meet in an absolute obsession with: sexuality. (Henceforth, unless necessary, I will not
distinguish nature and Nature, since both refer essentially to the empirical-sensory domain. In any event, context will
indicate.)

As Foucault ably demonstrates,13

the rise of modernity was marked, not so much by a repression of sexuality

(although he does not deny that happened) as by an obsession with sexuality. The entire era (beginning a century
before Freud) saw an explosion of interest in all things sexual, from medicine to psychiatry to literature to education.
Never, says Foucault, had an epoch’s discourse been so dominated by sexuality in so many domains. “Never, it
seems, had so much attention been focused on every aspect of the body and every dimension of its sexuality. Sex
became the object of a major investment of signification, of power, and of knowledge.”14

We needn’t go into Foucault’s explanation (or rather, description) of this obsessive sexuality, or how I would

reconstruct it; this is dealt with in volume 3. In the meantime, I have a simple take on the whole situation:

If nature is the fundamental and in many respects the final reality (according to the reflective Ego) and nature is
the source of deep, ultimate, and often hidden truths (according to the Eco), then how better to unite them than in
the belief that sexuality holds the secret to human personality? When nature alone is the final reality, what other
secrets are there?

There was something (and still is something) in the obsession with sexuality that satisfied nearly all parties in the
flatland world: hedonic happiness for the utilitarians; a source of hidden interpretations for the psychologists,
interpretations that nevertheless safely remained quite shallow and flatland, very empirical-sensory (a hermeneutics
that hugs the surface); a finding in nature (in the biosphere) the ultimate and most profound impulses of human
life, which delighted the Romantics.

In general, the differentiation of the Big Three (and the differentiation of the noosphere and biosphere) meant
that now there was indeed a differentiated body/nature/libido to be obsessed with (and likewise repressed in novel
ways). And since, with the collapse of the Big Three to the Big One—to the objective and empirical interlocking order
of mononature—sexuality came very close to being all things to all people: the ultimate hidden secret of human
personality; the ultimate motivation that pushed all human beings; the great Life Force into which we can immerse
ourselves for liberation and freedom (“sexual freedom,” “liberation from repression,” “sexuality as cultural anarchy,”
“free love”), a great Life Force that is, in and by itself, the ultimate spirit of the universe: sex as God, sex as Goddess,
nature alone can rule supreme: the push of the bios is the only push around.

Georg Groddeck’s The Book of the It

(which was based in part on Eastern mysticism, the great “It” being
essentially the great Tao that moves us all) was explicitly acknowledged by Freud to be the source of what he also
started calling “the it” (translated as “the id”). The id is what moves all psychic life, and disrupting the id is the source
of most pathology (and unhappiness). And the id is biospheric sex and aggression, the great organic and vital-somatic
life of nature, the pranamayakosha. Not Spirit but sex is the great secret, and digging down into the depths of the
human soul we will ultimately find the hidden, deepest, darkest and profoundest secret of all: not Ur-Geist, but
orgasm.

The Tao reduced to the id: there is only the most notorious example of the collapse of the Kosmos into a flatland

mononature, with sexuality the new and virtually sole (or certainly “most important”) drive of the flatland world.

It’s not just that Plotinus or Shankara or Garab Dorje would have found that notion preposterous; it was a perfect
example of the great collapse, where the most superficial (the shallowest, the least-depthed) holons were
proclaimed the most profound, precisely because the collapse of the Kosmos left no place else to situate profundity.
Like so many other features of this collapse, most fundamental was confused with most significant.

Approaches such as the Freudian were called “depth psychology” precisely as a misnomer: it was actually
“shallow psychology.” (Although not, of course, as shallow as behaviorism, in contrast to which psychoanalysis did
indeed seem “deep.” In the nine-layered onion of the self—the nine Fulcrums—where matter is the first skin or
sheath, libido or prana is the second layer or sheath, and this appears “deep” only in comparison with behaviorism-
positivism-empiricism, which refused to peel beneath even the first skin. Psychoanalysis was thus a bold and daring
plunge into the “depths” for the flatland world! And never mind the seven deeper/higher sheaths beyond
psychoanalysis!)

And thus, in “digging down” into the libido, one was not actually digging toward any great depths, but more or less
the opposite: one was suspending the deeper or higher cognitive faculties in order to temporarily regress to a
lower and shallower
and more ontologically surface level. One intentionally surrendered the deeper/higher
cognitive faculties of intersubjective and worldcentric reason (“secondary processes”) and moved to shallower and
more narcissistic feeling-toned and imaginary processes (“primary process”), thus recontacting these shallower

occasions, which, precisely because they were more fundamental (and less significant), could cause so much
subsequent developmental damage. The point being (true enough) that when these lower/shallower levels are
traumatized, then deeper/higher developments are often hobbled.

Thus, getting in touch with these earlier, shallower occasions was (and is) quite difficult, not only because they
were laid down in earlier development, but mostly because they are indeed so altogether shallow. Staying with the
libido is like having to stay afloat on the surface of the ocean, instead of relaxing and sinking into the real depths (of
higher consciousness). One has to thrash around incessantly to remain on the surface: as everybody knows,
hedonism is absolutely exhausting.

(One of the often misunderstood aims of Tantra is to take sexual orgasmic thrill and release it from its exhaustion
in surface forms by opening it to deeper and higher spiritual occasions, where thrill is converted to bliss and
exhaustion to rejuvenation. Sex is not apart from or against Spirit, but is simply one of the lowest or most
fundamental of Spirit’s expressions, and so a person’s sexual nature is one of the easiest of the many threads that
can be used to return to Spirit. There is indeed Life Force or prana or “cosmic libido,” as it were, but it is only one of
the lower of several sheaths of Spirit: the sheath found in nature, in the biosphere.)

But for a reality that is only nature, and is thus only moved by sex, pleasure, pain—and wonderfully strange
Marquis-de-Sadean combinations thereof—then a thrashing exhaustion that demanded constant obsession was the
only basic course (and curse) available to the collective mind: mononature is the ultimate reality, the surface is
supreme, and the “deepest deep” of those surfaces is sexuality—and that exhausts the secret motivations of nature
and captures the key to human personality.

And thus captures the key to human liberation. When monological thought turns nature into God, then spiritual
liberation consists not in the developmental emergence of a transcendental Spirit, but in digging up a repressed
sexuality. What other hidden god is there? Where else could liberation be found?

In its Romantic version: when nature is the ultimate reality, what other kind of liberation could there be, except a
liberation from anything (such as culture) that “obstructs” nature and sexuality from its free play? Not progression to
superconscious Spirit but regression to infraconscious nature; not recollecting a Spirit prior to manifestation but
digging up an impulse prior to culture; not postconventional transcendence but preconventional
immersion:
sexuality is the great Deus abscondus, the great repressed and absent God, a God buried and suppressed by the
Crime of Culture, by the wretched “smothering” of the life force that is known as civilization, a smothering that
brings only the winter of our discontent.

And thus the libidinal God must be resurrected, a resurrection that will confer salvation, in the form of liberation
from repression, on all who participate in the Great Libidinal Body as it rises from the dead night of repression and
confers free orgasmic release on all who eat of that body and drink of that blood. Not Spirit, but sexuality, is the
gateway to the Kingdom; and the liberation offered is not a freedom from finitude and mortality and temporal
suffering, but a freedom from stultifying culture by finding orgasmic potency.

What’s wrong with this picture? It’s not that sexuality wasn’t being repressed and couldn’t use a little “loosening
up.” Nobody (including Foucault) is denying that culture can “go too far” and repress sexuality, and that a certain
amount of “de-repression” is called for. Precisely because the noosphere and biosphere had been differentiated,
they could indeed be dissociated (repression), and this no doubt accounted for a good deal of the explosion of
interest in sexuality that marked modernity.

But something else was going on. Sexuality was invested with a force, a power, a mystique, an aura, an authority,
all out of proportion to anything that could actually be dug up from the libido itself. The actual Deus
abscondus—authentic spiritual realization of the truly deeper or higher disclosures—was being dramatically sought
in the hidden and oppressed thrill of orgasmic release, because, again, what other kind of release can be found in a
flatland world where mononature alone is real?

Thus the basic and otherwise quite different interests of the Ego and the Eco came together in a proclaiming of
the fundamental and even ultimate reality of mononature (the flatland interlocking order), and consequently both
their interests intersected in an obsession with sexuality, which is, after all, the great mover of the natural world.

Put differently, when monological thought became the God of the Ego—an Ego which confidently and supremely
reflected on reality—then empirical nature (the reflectee) became equally absolute (it was the final and ultimate

reality “reflected on” by the Ego): the monological thought of the Ego “absolutized” empirical nature (the Big One).
And in similar fashion, the same monological thought, absolutizing nature, would, in the hands of the Eco-
Romantics, simply proclaim this new and absolute mononature to be the ultimate God/Goddess/Spirit (the Ego and
the Eco as the twin poles of the monoworld, both created by the same collapse, both oriented to the same
denatured nature: this was Taylor’s point). Thus both camps were united by their worship, in very different ways, of
monological nature. And the great secret of nature is sex.

And so began the fabulous search of modernity for sexual release, upon which so many hopes were pinned. The
Marquis de Sade became an enduring (and quite influential) point of reference, and Freud became Every-person’s
doctor. As modernity unfolded, “free sexuality” would spread into Reichian forms (where culture was converted into
muscular armor and liberation identified with orgasmic potency); into political forms (where sexual “de-repression”
joined forces with Marxist “de-oppression”: “free love” would not only undo repression, it would bring down
capitalism:
repression, and orgasmic potency would end dictatorships, whether
dictatorships of capital or of authority); it would drive student rebellions (Paris, May 1968: frenetic shouts of “Marx,
Mao, Marcuse”); it would revitalize the retro-Romantic movements and invade literary theory (Norman O. Brown’s
salvation through libidinal “polymorphous perversity,” all the way to Roland Barthes’s Le Plaisir du texte and
Bataille’s shock-value orgasmic release and even Foucault’s sadomasochistic pursuits, a “new economy of bodies and
pleasure”). When an authentic spiritual realization is no longer part of serious discourse, then endless digging into
the personal libido is one of the only and lonely substitutes.

fascism supports genital

The orgasmic well would be dipped into time and time again; strange that the release obtained never seemed to
measure up to the liberation promised. And yet these “liberators” would still keep looking in the same direction, the
hidden libidinal and biospheric god, the lunar goddess of sexuality, which had, it was fervently believed, been so
brutally suppressed by modernity (completely overlooking the other side of the coin: the obsession with sexuality
was not an escape from modernity but a mark of modernity. This obsession was not simply and solely due to the
fact that real sexuality had been repressed, but was in part a substitute for a release no longer recognized; and thus
in pursuing their intense sexual liberation as an escape from modernity, the “liberators” were pursuing something
quintessentially modern—another version of the paradox of damage: they were once again presupposing and
pursuing exactly that which they claimed to be overthrowing).

And when the liberation was not in fact forthcoming, when orgasm after orgasm left the participants not
enlightened but exhausted, what was the recommendation? Try harder, fuck longer, come wilder, scream louder:
the liberation has to be in there somewhere.

All these movements, and so many more, bound by the notion: the secret to human liberation is the liberation of

sexuality.

Scholars have puzzled for decades over the fact that Freud was both a supreme rationalist (Ego camp) and a
profound Romantic (Eco camp). He was said to possess “the mind of a moralist” and yet also called the “last great
Romantic.” He has been seen as primarily Victorian, repressive, and harshly puritanical; and yet he is also the father
of virtually every Reichian, free love, antirepression movement of modernity. He has been seen as the reactionary
upholder of culture and the status quo, and yet he has inspired virtually every progressive “sexual anarchy”
movement of the last century. He has been proclaimed as the great prophet of the pleasure principle, and yet also as
the firm and rigid upholder of the reality principle.

My point is that this is not surprising in the least. Freud was a prime example of the perfect intersection of the Ego
and the Eco in an obsession with sexuality, the only real “juice” left in the flatland world. Since development now
moved only from prerational
libido to rational culture (and no genuinely transrational Spirit was officially
acknowledged), then a profound and agonizing ambivalence developed around libido itself: if nature is the absolute
(is even “God”), and if libido is the primary and “paradisaical” state free of repression, nonetheless an exclusive
allegiance to that God has to be surrendered for culture to develop at all. Libido might be God (the Romantic
position), but that God has to be broken (the Ego-rationalist position), and this leaves everybody, Freud included, in
an altogether depressing dilemma: we want our God, but we really can’t have it.

The Eco-Romantics would forever lament the loss and wail at modernity for killing their God, and take from Freud
the urgent “necessity” to de-repress sexuality and free nature from the suffocation of culture (they would thus

remain forever fascinated with sexuality as the great liberating force that would undo modernity, a way for the
de-repressed biosphere to throw the noosphere off its back once and for all).

The Ego-rationalists, on the other hand, would remain just as fascinated and obsessed with sexuality, but take
from Freud the “necessity” to build against the libido the bulwark of civilization (while meanwhile producing an
endless scientific and medical literature on the subject of sexuality, which assured the scientific community of its
own right to investigate every nook and cranny of individuals’ sexual lives, rather like the antipornographer who
nonetheless carries with him always the X-rated photographs to demonstrate the dangerous force that he is nobly
trying to control. Foucault’s work on “biopower”—the modern rational Ego’s obsession with sexual and bodily
information as a way to control it—is merely one of numerous indicators).

In short, when monological thought became God, sex became God’s obsession.
And when monological thought likewise converted nature into God, sex became the key to human liberation and

salvation.

In both cases, monological thought collapsed the Kosmos into flatland nature, which was the one, final, ultimate
reality “reflected on” by the Ego and exalted to Spirit by the Eco, which left them both obsessed with a nature whose
prime mover is sex. And in this obsession Ego and Eco were secretly united—mononature was all, sex was the secret.

The Ego would control it, the Eco would liberate it. But the “it,” in both cases, was sex.
And so it came about that “modernity” and “sexual obsession” would be another two names for the same

headache. And modernity rarely answered, Not tonight, dear. . . .

EVOLUTION

We could, indeed, embrace the whole in the single principle of development; if this were clear, all else
would result and follow of its own accord.

—HEGEL

The Ego and the Eco—apart from their shared obsession with sexuality and their worship, in very different ways, of
mononature—remained nevertheless in a theoretical standoff, locked otherwise in mutual contempt: approach
nature by disengaging from it versus uniting with it.

And here the stalemate might have remained, were it not for the discovery of evolution.
There were many forerunners to the doctrine of evolution—Thales, Empedocles, Anaximander, Aristotle, Saint
Gregory. Yet for fifteen centuries any sustained inquiry into evolution was effectively halted by the literal Genesis
myth. But by the sixteenth and seventeenth century, upholders of the Great Chain began to realize that the Holarchy
itself, exactly as presented by Plotinus, could in fact be not just a map of individual growth and development, but a
map of the growth and development of the Kosmos at large. If the Great Holarchy was a general map of the
dimensions of Reality, what difference would it make when they unfolded? And, indeed, philosopher-sages such as
Origen had long ago proposed that Plotinus’s hierarchy was actually played out over cosmic epochs, one epoch after
another, stage by unfolding stage.

Thus, a century before Darwin, theories of cosmic and human evolution were springing up everywhere, theories
that, as we saw, were looking for “missing links,” but missing links that were now believed to have unfolded in time
and history. Leibniz maintained that “the species of animals have many times been transformed,” and that, for
example, at some previous time “many species which have in them something of the cat, such as the lion, the tiger,
the lynx, may have been of the same race, and may now be regarded as new sub-varieties of the original cat-
species.” The entire universe, he suggested, may have been one that developed, because we see everywhere the
creative advance of nature—what he called “transcreation” (transformation).

Again, long before any scientific evidence had been marshaled for any of these ideas, the conclusion had been
quite firmly reached that, as Lovejoy puts it, “the world is as yet incomplete, and the Chain of Being must be
construed as a process in which all forms are gradually realized in the order of time.”15 Already by 1693 Leibniz was
deducing from this the necessity for the past extinction of certain species and the “transcreation” of others. By 1745,

the president of the Berlin Academy of Sciences, Maupertuis, had advanced the thesis that all species alive today had
derived from a very small number, perhaps a single pair, of original ancestors, and this thesis was echoed by Diderot,
the major editor of the Encyclopédie, in 1749. (This was one hundred and ten years before the publication of Origin
of Species.)

Kant, as is well known, soon produced a rather profound theory of cosmic evolution. The universe began relatively
simple and undifferentiated, he says, and became progressively more various, complex, organized. Even matter, he
says, “has even in its simplest state a tendency to organize itself by a natural evolution into a more perfect
constitution”—surely one of the clearest descriptions of the self-organizing property of evolution (reaching into even
the physiosphere). Thus evolution, he says, “is forever busy achieving new ascents of nature, bringing into existence
new things and new worlds.” And the Fecundity (Plenitude) of Nature has one law, he maintains: progressive
diversification (what we would call progressive complexification or differentiation).

Nature’s unfolding, in short, has a direction—greater and greater creative diversification. From Robinet to Bonnet
to Schelling to Bergson, “the pageant of evolution is the progressive manifestation of the expansive, self-
differentiating energy, the creative urge. . . .”16

But not just differentiation; each ascent, it was maintained, also brings a new and higher union or integration. As
Kant put it, “the creation, or rather the development, of Nature spreads by degrees with a continuous advance to an
ever greater breadth. . . .” Schelling, writing in 1800, was specific:

Succession itself is gradual, i.e., it cannot in any single moment be given in its entirety. But the farther
succession proceeds, the more fully the universe is unfolded. Consequently, the organic world also,
in
proportion as succession advances, will attain to a fuller extension and represent a greater part of the
universe. And on the other hand the farther we go back in the world of organisms, the smaller becomes the
part of the universe which the organism embraces within itself [notice the distinction between significant and
fundamental].17

The greater the advance and differentiation, the greater the embrace and integration. As with Plotinus,
development included diversity, took diversity with it, into higher unions, higher embraces—it is not the One versus
the Many, it is the One-in-the-Many, played out in successive differentiations and integrations, each unfolding more
of the universe and therefore enfolding more of the universe.

And here we have our old friend Eros, ever striving for greater unions, greater integrations, the binding love that
unfolds more, enfolds more (Eros/Agape), the omega force hidden even in matter, driving it into higher levels of self-
organization and self-transcendence, the omega force that will not let even matter sit around in unorganized heaps.
We will return, in a moment, to this part of the story, and to Darwin’s drudging and dutiful accumulation of evidence
for a conception that was in the main already known in advance.

But how the new evolutionary understanding would fit into the prevailing flatland worldview was not at all
obvious. Ego and Eco were still staring at each other across an unbridgeable gulf, and the two absolutisms were
altogether incompatible.

THE AGONY OF MODERNITY: FICHTE VERSUS SPINOZA

The Ego camp had developed into the end limit of Fichte’s Pure Ego or infinite Subject, and however much the Pure
Ego was indeed partly a genuine intuition of the Over-Soul (and even the Witness),18 and however much the Pure
Ego or infinite Subject was said to have posited nature out of itself, nonetheless the pragmatic and ethical point was
clear enough: the more of the Ego, and the less of the Eco, the better for all.

This was indeed a genuine attempt to escape flatland and introduce Spirit, but a Spirit found by radicalizing the
Subject or Ego (and thus a path breaking toward pure Ascent, free of any descended nature, free of any objects).19
And indeed, to an entire age Fichte stood for Spirit as pure freedom in the transcedental and Absolute Subject. It was
the height of the aspirations of everything that the Ego camps had stood for: a radical autonomy that found pure
freedom in the Pure Subject.

The Eco camps, on the other hand, all had recourse to Spinoza, suitably interpreted for their purposes (this

recourse to Spinoza is still quite common in ecomasculinist circles).20 Spirit was here viewed as the absolute and total
Objective System, into which the ego was to insert itself seamlessly, and so the ethical imperative was just as clear:
the more of the Eco, and the less of the Ego, the better for all.

This, too, was in essence an altogether noble attempt to introduce Spirit, but a Spirit found by radicalizing the Eco
(and thus a path embodying pure Descent, pure immanence).21 To the same age, Spinoza stood for Spirit as eternal
and total objective Substance (or infinite and Absolute Object, as Fichte stood for infinite and Absolute Subject). It
was the essence of everything the Eco camps had stood for: a dissolution of the ego into the Greater Order of infinite
Life and Love, Spirit present as the total diversity of the manifest world.

The great interlocking order of nature: the Ego camps wanted out of it (tending toward the Pure Ascending
Subject, driven, at its best, by Eros), and the Eco camps wanted into it (as pure Descended Union, driven, at its best,
by Agape). For the Ego, the more it could disenchant and disengage from nature and communions, the greater the
knowledge and freedom of the self. The more agency, and the less communion, the freer and more liberated it
would be. And the purest freedom would be the Pure Ego, the pure Subject,
transcending nature and objects
altogether, and finding ultimate ethical clarity. And apart from the paradox of damage (the Ego’s reckless
repressions), there was much truth in this stance of mature self-responsibility and self-determination.

For the Eco camp, self-isolated agency, however important, had sealed off the rich networks of unions and
communions with nature and other cultures, and thus the more reenchanted the world, the better. The more
communion, and the less agency, the freer and the more whole it would be. And the purest wholeness would be the
Pure Eco, free of separate egos altogether. And this was Spinoza’s great system as an Objective and Eternal
Substance, purely immanent (Descended). And apart from the paradox of damage (the Eco’s reckless regressions),
there was much profound truth in the Eco’s insistence on reengaging with the world of cultural and natural
communions.

As Frederick Copleston, Taylor, and numerous other scholars have pointed out, an entire intellectual age was
devoted to, or at least obsessed with, the integration of Absolute Subject and Absolute Object, of Fichte and Spinoza
(or Kant and Spinoza, or Fichte and Goethe)—it came to the same thing: how can you possibly unite Subjective
Freedom with Objective Union?22

That is: how can you unite a path of radical freedom and detachment heading in the direction of the ascending
One, versus a path dedicated to descending union and communion with the diverse Many? How to heal this deepest
of dualisms that had cruelly carved the landscape of Western culture for two thousand years? How to end the
schizoid fracture in the massive footnotes to Plato? How to join the two broken Gods that had dominated Western
history from its inception? And that had finally found their endpoint champions in Fichte and Spinoza? And that
showed up in individuals as Subjective Freedom versus Objective Union?

We can’t simply add them together with glib platitudes about subject and object being one, because subjective
autonomy and objective heteronomy are absolutely incompatible, which is why, if consistently pursued, these
positions lead inevitably to Fichte or Spinoza. Since the gain of one is the loss of the other, it’s a win-lose situation,
never a win-win.

By the end of the eighteenth century, the split between the ascending Ego and the descending Eco, although
fundamentally the same basic split, showed up in an extraordinary number of dualisms, of which Taylor summarizes
some of the more pertinent: “The opposition between thought, reason, morality, on one side [Ego], and desire and
sensibility on the other [Eco]; the opposition between the fullest self-conscious freedom [autonomy/agency], on one
side, and life in the community [civic communions], on the other; the opposition between self-consciousness [Ego]
and communion with nature [Eco]; and beyond this the separation [and] the barrier between the Kantian subject
and the Spinozist substance. . . .”23

Notice that the dualisms Taylor mentions include the split between mind and body, human and human, human
and nature, and nature and spirit. Both camps claimed to have handled these massive dualisms; both camps lied. The
Big Three had indeed been differentiated, but there was no apparent way to fashion their integration without
privileging one or another domain. The “I” split from the “we,” and the “I” and “we” split from the “it” . . .

. . . and in particular, there was that Sovereign I (Kant/Fichte) and that holistic It (Spinoza), the total I and the total
It, the Ego and the Eco. “And the ambition becomes general in the 1790’s: autonomy must be reconciled with unity

with nature, Kant and Spinoza must be united; these were the watchwords.”24

In order to honor the positive and true contributions of both the Ego and the Eco camps, we would have to
simultaneously separate from the Kosmos (to preserve autonomy) and unite with the Kosmos (for wholeness), and
neither camp had the slightest clue as to how to actually proceed with that necessary but seemingly contradictory
project. How to reconcile Ego-agency with Eco-communion, reconcile a path tending toward pure Ascent cut off
from all, and a path tending toward pure Descent immersed in all: It was an agony for the entire era, and it was not
at all obvious how to proceed.

And indeed, it might have remained a mystery to this day, were it not for an altogether extraordinary individual.

SPIRIT-IN-ACTION

Schelling is lecturing to an amazing audience, but amidst so much noise and bustle, whistling, and knocking
on the windows by those who cannot get in the door, in such an overcrowded lecture hall, that one is
almost tempted to give up listening to him if this is to continue. During the first lectures it was almost a
matter of risking one’s life to hear him. However, I have put my trust in Schelling and at the risk of my life I
have the courage to hear him once more. It may very well blossom during the lectures, and if so one might
gladly risk one’s life—what would one not do to be able to hear Schelling?

I am so happy to have heard Schelling’s second lecture—indescribably. The embryonic child of thought

leapt for joy within me when he mentioned the world “actuality” in connection with the relation of
philosophy to actuality. I remember almost every word he said after that. Here, perhaps, clarity can be
achieved. This one word recalled all my philosophical pains and sufferings.—And so that she, too, might
share my joy, how willingly I would return to her, how eagerly I would coax myself to believe that this is the
right course—Oh, if only I could!—now I have put all my hope in Schelling. . . .

—SØREN KIERKEGAARD, letters from Schelling’s Berlin lectures (1841)25

Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von Schelling (1775–1854) was born at Leonberg in Wurttemberg, and, always something
of a boy wonder, was at age fifteen admitted to the University at Tübingen, where he became friends with Hölderlin
and Hegel (both were five years older). He began publishing in his late teens and, though younger than Hegel, was
the senior partner in their period of collaboration at Jena (where, in 1798, he was appointed to a chair at the age of
twenty-three; his writings had already won commendation from Fichte and Goethe; he had Hegel called there in
1800).

Unfortunately, Schelling is usually treated summarily as the transition from Fichte to Hegel (that is, from Kant’s
critical philosophy to absolute idealism). This is a great mistake, I believe, because in many ways he was eventually
more influential, in my opinion, than even Hegel (Heidegger, for one, felt Schelling was always the most profound of
the Idealists). Hegel’s system was so massive and so coherent that when it began to unravel, which it did, it rather
totally collapsed, whereas Schelling ended up planting numerous small time bombs that are still going off.

Schelling began, in a sense, by reacting to the Enlightenment notion that rationality alone is the highest Ascent to
which we can aspire. For if it is true that the Enlightenment had succeeded in differentiating mind and nature, the
noosphere and the biosphere, it had also tended to forget the transcendental and unifying Ground of both, and thus
it tended to dissociate mind and nature (the great potential pathology of reason). This dissociation of mind and
nature, Ego and Eco, with mind “mirroring” nature in scientific inquiry (the reflection paradigm) was, of course, well
under way; but reflection had, Schelling pointed out, introduced a rift or cleavage between nature as external object
and the reflecting self as subject (which also, he said, made humans objects to themselves—the retroflected
monological gaze, as we earlier put it). And when reflection is made an end it itself, it becomes “a spiritual malady.”

At the same time, Schelling realized that the dissociation could “not be overcome by a return to the immediacy of
feeling, to the childhood, as it were, of the human race.”26 There was no going back to Eco-nature, and Schelling
knew it.

Rather, he maintained, we have to go forward beyond reason in order to discover that mind and nature are both
simply different movements of one absolute Spirit, a Spirit that manifests itself in its own successive stages of

unfoldment and enfoldment. As Hegel would soon put it, Spirit is not One apart from Many, but the very process of
the One expressing itself in successive unfoldings in and through the Many—it is infinite activity expressing itself in
and as the finite process of development itself (or evolution).

The Absolute is thus both the Alpha and the Omega of development. Schelling: “I posit God as both the first and
the last, as the Alpha and the Omega, as the unevolved, Deus implicitus, and the fully evolved, Deus explicitus”—in
other words, both Source and Summit—and present throughout the entire ascending or developmental process as
telos (Eros), as the self-organizing and self-transcending drive of the whole process. And, as Schelling put it, it is this
“organizing principle which makes the world a system . . . a self-organizing totality.”

Whatever else we might say, the world does hang together, and evolution does have a direction: Eros as Spirit-in-
action. Thus, both Schelling and Hegel would maintain that evolution is not simply the drive toward Spirit; it is the
drive of Spirit toward Spirit, manifested in a series of increasing wholes and integrations (holons) that express
increasing degrees of Spirit’s own self-realization or self-actualization. Eros is fully present at each and every stage
of the process, as the very process itself. As Fichte had put it, Being is one “endlessly self-developing life which
always advances toward a higher self-realization in a never-ending stream of time.” Or Hegel: the Absolute is “the
process of its own becoming; it becomes concrete or actual only by its development.”

As Hegel explained in his Lectures on the Philosophy of History: “That the history of the world, with all the
changing scenes which its annals present, is this process of development and the realization of Spirit—only this
insight can reconcile Spirit with the history of the world—that what has happened, and is happening every day, is not
only not ‘without God,’ but is essentially God’s work” (which is precisely why “that which one can deviate from is not
the true Tao”).

Each stage of development (or evolution) is thus Spirit’s

through the structures (and
limitations) of that stage. Each stage is therefore a thesis (Fichte, Hegel) that eventually runs into its own limitations
(Fichte: antithesis; Hegel: contradictions; Schelling: checking forces), which triggers a self-transcendence to a new
synthesis (Fichte, Hegel; Schelling: organic unity), which both negates and preserves its predecessor (Schelling,
Hegel). This dialectic, of course, is Eros, or Spirit-inaction, the drive of Spirit to unfold itself more fully and thus unify
itself more fully.

knowledge of itself

Thus, Spirit tries to know itself first through sensation, then perception, then impulse.27 At this point Spirit is still
un-self-conscious. Both Fichte and Schelling make much of the notion of the unconscious, quite along the lines used
by Plotinus: the higher stages are implicit in the lower, they are unconscious potentials of the lower, and as they
develop they envelop.

Thus the whole of nature Schelling refers to as “slumbering Spirit.” Moreover, nature is not a mere inert and
instrumental backdrop for mind. Rather, nature is a “self-organizing dynamic system” that is “the objective
manifestation of Spirit”—“nature as a unified, self-developing super-organism”28—precisely Plato’s “visible God,” but
now set developmentally or evolutionarily afloat.

Thus nature is most definitely not a static or deterministic machine; it is “God-in-the-making.” All life processes are
manifestations of the Divine Life, unfolding in space and time. But it is, says Schelling, Spirit slumbering because
Spirit has not yet become self-conscious, the Kosmos has not yet begun to consciously reflect on itself.

With the emergence of mind, Spirit becomes self-conscious. Spirit seeks to know itself through symbols and
concepts and reason, and the result is that the universe begins to think about the universe—which produces the
world of reason and, in particular, the world of conscious morals. Thus, says Schelling, where nature was objective
Spirit, mind is subjective Spirit.29

And it is here, he says, that mind and nature can seem to drift apart, to be totally unrelated, to stare blankly and
uncomprehendingly across the subject/object dualism at the alien beings on each side of the divide. The Ego and the
Eco.

These two “apparent absolutes,” as he calls them, are synthesized in the third great movement of Spirit, which is
the transcendence of both nature and mind and thus their radical synthesis or union “in which these two
absolutenesses (absolute objectivity and absolute subjectivity) are again one absoluteness,” as he puts it (with Fichte
and Spinoza in mind). This is also the identity of subject and object in one timeless act of self-knowledge, of Spirit
directly knowing itself as Spirit, a direct mystical (or contemplative) intuition, says Schelling, that is not mediated

through any forms, whether those forms be the feelings of objective nature or the thoughts of subjective mind.

There is an unmistakable and profound glimpse of the formless and nondual groundless Ground; Schelling would
often have recourse to the “indifference” and the “Abyss,” precisely in the lineage of Eckhart and Boehme (and
Dionysius). “In the ultimate dark Abyss of the divine Being, the primal ground or Urgrund, there is no differentiation
but only pure identity.”30 Precisely what the Sufis would call the Supreme Identity. And, as Schelling says, “A division,
a difference must be posited, if we wish to pass from essence to existence” (and thus start the whole process of
what we have called involution or Efflux).

Thus, for both Schelling and Hegel, Spirit goes out of itself to produce objective nature, awakens to itself in
subjective mind, and then recovers itself in pure Nondual perception, where subject and object are one pure act of
nondual awareness that unifies both nature and mind in realized Spirit. Spirit knows itself objectively as nature;
knows itself subjectively as mind; and knows itself absolutely as Spirit—the Source, the Summit, and the Eros of the
whole sequence.

(We would also recognize these three large movements as subconscious, self-conscious, and superconscious; or
biosphere, noosphere, and theosphere; or prepersonal, personal, and transpersonal—the three large domains that
we have met many times in the previous chapters.)

The whole evolutionary sequence is thus holonic through and through. Each stage (of Ascent) builds upon and
incorporates its predecessors—“the last is the result of all earlier: nothing is lost, all principles are preserved”
(Hegel). What
is lost is the narrowness of the predecessor, or its claim to be the Whole (Hegel calls this “the
negation of the negation”). Each stage incorporates its predecessor but negates its partiality. Says Hegel: “To
supersede is at once to negate and to preserve.”

Schelling’s view is likewise a precise and perfect summary of development or evolution as emergent holons within
emergent holons: “The lower is the necessary foundation for the higher, and the latter subsumes the former in itself.
But there is also the emergence of something new, and this new level explains the level which it presupposes.”31

This is a truly stunning vision, a profound integration of Ego-mind and Eco-nature, of Spirit descending into even
the lowest state and ascending back to itself, with Spirit nonetheless fully present at each and every stage as the
process of its own self-realization and self-actualization, its own self-unfolding and self-enfolding development, a
divine play of Spirit present in every single movement of the Kosmos, yet finding more and more of itself as its own
Play proceeds, dancing fully and divine in every gesture of the universe, never really lost and never really found, but
present from the start and all along, a wink and a nod from the radiant Abyss.

We will return to Schelling’s vision in the next chapter, and point out more clearly just how it managed to unite
Ego and Eco, Ascending and Descending, without sacrificing the gains of either.32 But for the moment, we should
note that if all of this sounds like Plotinus temporalized, that would not be far wrong. As one historian of the period
put it:

If we are to speak of a “key” to early Romanticism, it is to be found in one of the thinkers of antiquity, Plotinus.
For this Neoplatonic philosopher not only inspired the entire system of Novalis, and many of the ideas of
Schelling in his middle period; his arm reached further: through Novalis and Schelling he exercised an influence
upon both Schlegels, and without a knowledge of this fact many a passage in the “Dialogue Concerning
Poetry” and in the Berlin lectures [of W. Schlegel] remains an enigma.33

The “genius Novalis,” as he is usually referred to, wrote in a letter to Friedrich Schlegel, “I do not know if I have
already spoken to you of my beloved Plotinus. Through Tiedemann I have been initiated into this philosopher, born
expressly for me, and I have almost been frightened by his resemblance to Kant and Fichte. He pleases me more than
either of them.”

He certainly pleased Schelling, and Schelling’s influence was enormous, and not only as the starting point for
Hegel’s system. Schelling was friends with Hölderlin, Goethe, Schiller, the Schlegels. He directly influenced Friedrich
Schleiermacher, who revolutionized the concept of religion by suggesting that all genuine spirituality is a result of
direct experience, not beliefs. Schelling’s notion of organic unity, and his belief that perception is not “mirroring” but
“actioning,” anticipated much of Gestalt psychology (and autopoietic cognitive theory). In his idea of Eros as
unlimited activity, he set off a whole line of “will” theorists, from Schopenhauer to Bergson to Nietzsche. Paul Tillich

traces this line of influence: “The most important pupil of Schopenhauer was Nietzsche. The line then runs from
Nietzsche to Bergson, the French voluntarist, Heidegger and Sartre, and to Whitehead, the great metaphysician of
our century—all of this came from Schelling.”34

With his theory of art and aesthetic perception—namely, that in great art we have a chance to transcend the
subject/object duality—he became, with Schiller, the father of virtually all Romantic aesthetic movements. And his
theory of symbolic forms was a forerunner, as Cassirer pointed out, of his own work and much of Jung’s analytic
psychology.

Schelling’s (Plotinian) notion of the unconscious passed to Carus, whose book Psyche (1846) maintained that the
key to conscious mental life is to be found in the unconscious. From there it reappears in Schopenhauer, one of
whose students, Eduard von Hartmann, wrote the enormously successful and influential
Philosophy of the
Unconscious (1869)—it went into ten editions, and appeared two decades before Freud and Breuer’s Studies in
Hysteria (1895).

Connected with the notion of the unconscious was Schelling’s introduction of the extremely influential concept of
alienation, which specifically meant that Spirit “loses” itself in manifestation, and evolution or development is the
overcoming of this self-estrangement, an overcoming of alienation by the return of Spirit to Spirit, or a direct
rediscovery of the Non-dual (what we called dis-memberment re-membered). Men and women, caught in the
subject/object duality, are thus alienated from Source and Summit—and thus alienated from the All—and it is only
in overcoming duality and existential alienation that men and women can find genuine happiness. Among those
attending these Berlin lectures were Søren Kierkegaard, Jakob Burkhardt, Michael Bakunin, and Friedrich Engels,
collaborator with Karl Marx.

But the immediate effect of this “developmental philosophy” (or the philosophy of Eros) was that the notion of
“A theory of emergent
evolution was everywhere “in the air”—and this was still six decades before Darwin.35
evolution [was] demanded by Schelling’s view of the world as a self-developing organic unity. Indeed, he explicitly
refers to the possibility of evolution. He observes, for instance, that even if man’s experience does not reveal any
case of the transformation of one species into another, lack of empirical evidence does not prove that such a
transformation is impossible. For it may well be that such changes can take place only in a much longer period of
time than that covered by man’s experience.”36

Thus, by 1810, Schelling’s friend and student, the naturalist Lorenz Oken, maintained that “the philosophy of

Nature is the science of the eternal transformation of God into the world,” and outlined the research agenda:

It has the task of showing the phases of the world’s evolution from the primal nothingness [doesn’t sound
quite so silly anymore, does it?]: how the heavenly bodies and the elements arose, how these advanced to
higher forms, how organisms finally appeared. . . . These phases constitute the history of the generation of the
universe.37

Plotinus temporalized = evolution. Lovejoy, ever on the scene with a perceptive report, points out that “the
appearance of the general notion of an evolutionary advance long antedated the discovery of most of the scientific
evidence for that hypothesis; it was becoming familiar in very widely read writings before the middle of the
eighteenth century. Thus one of the effects often attributed to the influence of biological evolutionism had in fact
come about long before the establishment and general diffusion of that doctrine, and quite independently of it.”38

When Darwin came along and dutifully supplied some of the empirical evidence for biological evolution, it shocked
nobody except the remnants of the mythic believers in the literal Genesis myth; but they were already shocked by
what Schelling and other developmentalists were doing anyway.

For the past century or so, it has been scientific dogma that Darwin’s great and enduring contribution was the
discovery, not that evolution occurred (this, as we have seen, was an almost century-old hypothesis by then), but
how it occurred: namely, through natural selection (codiscovered by Wallace). In an updated version: chance
mutation leads to genetic alterations, the vast majority of which are maladaptive, but a few of which contribute to a
greater (or at least different) capacity for adaptation and survival, and thus these mutations are selected and
genetically carried forward in the gene pool. Whatever else this theory did or did not accomplish, it preeminently
allowed science to ignore any sort of Eros, any sort of “gentle persuasion” or transcendent/emergent drive, and thus

men and women could “trace science then with modesty thy guide.”

But it is now almost universally recognized by scientists that, although natural selection can account quite well for
“microevolution” (or variation within a given range of possibilities), it can account not at all for macroevolution (or
the emergence of new ranges of possibility).39 Add to that the fact that the Big Bang has made Idealists out of
virtually anybody who thinks about it, and the result is that most philosophers of science now openly admit—and
even champion—the fact that evolution has some sort of self-transcending drive tucked within its own
processes—what we called tenet 2c, the self-transcending capacities of all holons. In other words, Eros.

The lasting contribution of Darwin’s theory, then, was not that it discovered a mechanism for macroevolution, for
it did not; rather, it obscured for over a century the fact that a genuine theory of evolution demands something
resembling Eros. Darwin’s lasting contribution was primarily a massive obscuratanism. Scientists all cheery and self-
content began to scrub the universe clean of anything resembling love and its all-encompassing embrace, and all
congratulated themselves on yet another victory for truth (Wallace, as is well known, did not think natural selection
could replace Eros; evolution was itself, he thought, “the mode and manner of Spirit’s creation,” and Darwin himself
notoriously wavered).

But the world did not waver. As we will see in the next chapter, with the collapse of virtually any form of Idealism,
the Western world nestled comfortably into the Descended domain of the naturalistic flatland, with its altogether
low center of ontological gravity, like a beanbag chair already settled. And within this cozily low and snug—some
would say cowardly—stance, the mono-Ego and mono-Eco battled it out in mortal combat, fighting for the royal
right to dominate a cardboard cosmos.

And there the Western world would remain until only the most recent of times.

It is the time of the gods that have fled and of the god that is coming. It is the time of need, because it lies
under a double lack and a double Not: the No-more of the gods that have fled and the Not-yet of the god that
is coming.

14

The Unpacking of God

This awareness, free from an inside or an outside, is open like the sky.
It is penetrating Wakefulness free from limitations and partiality.
Within the vast and open space of this all-embracing mind,
All phenomena of samsara and nirvana manifest like rainbows in the sky.
Within this state of unwavering awareness,
All that appears and exists, like a reflection,
Appears but is empty, resounds but is empty,
Its nature is Emptiness from the very beginning.

—TSOGDRUK RANGDROL, The Flight of the Garuda

THE GOD THAT was to come. The Descent of the all-pervading World Soul. The coming of the Over-human, the Over-

Soul, the transpersonal dawn, Homo universalis. And not merely in rare, individual, isolated cases, but as a center of
social organizing forces—just as magic and mythic and mental had previously emerged at large and organized
cultures around the world according to their basic patterns. The coming of the World Soul, blessing each and all with
intuitions of the Over-Soul, joined each and all in the council and communion of all sentient beings, the community
of all souls, likewise institutionalized in structures that guard its preciousness the way the worldcentric rationality is
now institutionalized and guarded in law and education and government and community. The integration of the
physiosphere and biosphere and noosphere in each and every compound individual, not as a theory but as a central
identity in consciousness (just as the ego or person is the central identity institutionalized in rational cultures of
today).

The coming of the Over-Soul that is the World Soul, touching each and all with its Goodness and its Glory,
baptizing each with its Brilliance and its Blessing. The coming of the World Soul, trailing clouds of wonderment,
singing songs of liberation, dancing madly and divine in splendor and salvation. The long-sought coming of the World
Soul, changing every “it” and every “we” and every “I” it touches: in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, we will be
changed, we all will be changed.

The loveless, beaten, battered self will let go the torment and the torture of its self-embracing ways, tire of that
marriage to a special misery that it had chosen over loneliness, to nurse it through the long brutality of a life that
doesn’t care, surrender the murderous love affair with its own perplexed reflection, which had itself pretended to
the throne of the Divine, and find instead its soul in Grace and drenched throughout with a luminous God that is its
own true Being—its always and only Original Face, smiling now from the radiant Abyss, unreasonably happy in the
face of every sight, set helplessly afloat on the Sea of Intimacy, adrift in currents of Compassion and caressed in
unrelenting Care, one with each and one with all in mutual Self-recognition, dancing in the dawn that heralds now
the Self of all that truly is, and the Community of all that well might be, and the State of all that is to come.

And every I will sing of the Self, and every We will resonate with worship of the Divine, and every It will radiate the
light of a Spirit happy to be seen, with dialogue the abode of the Gods and perception the home of Grace, and gone
the lonely loveless self, the god of its own perception, and gone the Godless destiny of time and separation.

The blessed, blessed Descent of the World Soul: in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, we will be changed, we

all will be changed.

Perhaps it will happen after all.
And perhaps it will not. I believe that the intuition of the Over-Soul, the World Soul, is indeed increasing in
frequency and in intensity in more and more individuals around the globe; and in the next two volumes in this series
we will look more closely at the evidence, quite impressive, I believe, that this is indeed happening.

But as always, we have to make the future that is given to us. And it is my strongest conviction that the Descent
of the all-pervading World Soul is facilitated, or hindered, to precisely the degree that we unpack its intuition
adequately.

As we have seen, all depth must be interpreted. And how we interpret depth is crucially important for the birth
of that depth itself. New depth allows us new interpretations; the new interpretations cocreate and give birth to that
depth, help unpack that depth. Unpacking the depth is the emergence of that depth.

And thus, let us oh-so-carefully unpack this precious Gift of spiritual intuition.
Many individuals intuit the Over-Soul (or higher) and yet unpack that intuition, interpret that intuition, in terms
merely or solely of the Higher Self, the Inner Voice, the care of the Soul, interior Witnessing, the Universal Mind,
pure Awareness, transcendental Consciousness, or similar such Upper-Left quadrant terms. And however true that
aspect of the intuition is, this unpacking leaves out, or seriously diminishes, the “we” and the “it” dimensions. It
leaves out the social and cultural and objective manifestations: it fails to give a seamless account of the types of
community and social service and cultural activity that are inherently demanded by a higher Self; it ignores or
neglects the changes in the techno-economic infrastructures that support each and every type of embodied self
(whether higher or lower or anything in between); it ignores the overall objective state of affairs or objective reality
that does not detract from the Self but is an unavoidable aspect of that Self’s very manifestation.

The idea seems to be that if I can just contact my higher Self, then everything else will take care of itself. But this
fails miserably to see that Spirit manifests always and simultaneously as the four quadrants of the Kosmos. Spirit (at
any level) manifests as a self in a community with social and cultural foundations and objective correlates, and thus
any higher Self will inextricably involve a wider community existing in a deeper objective state of affairs.
Contacting the higher Self is not the end of all problems but the beginning of the immense and difficult new work to
be done.

Thus, intuiting Spirit but interpreting it merely in “I” terms as a Higher Self or whatnot (Upper-Left quadrant)—this
ends up being a merely Ascending Path, with no sincere and well-conceived interpretations of exactly how to go
about embracing the manifest world in all its dimensions. It is the old Fichtean move. It is still caught in one pole of
the fundamental Enlightenment paradigm: the pure Ego, the pure Self, will solve all problems.

And thus the lingering suspicion that soaks these approaches: if you really care about the world, or worry about
the world, then you can’t actually be contacting the Higher Self (because the Higher Self would take care of that:
your “concern” or “worry” for the world shows you haven’t found the true Self). Whereas in fact, it is just the
opposite: the more you contact the Higher Self, the more you worry about the world, as a component of your Very
Self, the Self of each and all. Emptiness is Form. Brahman is the World. To finally contact Brahman is to ultimately
engage the World.

Thus, a true and profound intuition is corrupted, or distorted, or tilted, by a well-meaning but not very adequate
interpretation. The intuition of Spirit is unpacked poorly, hastily, and the Gift is damaged in the process. Conversely,
a more graceful unpacking facilitates further and deeper intuitions, intuitions touching the I and the We and the It
domains: not just how to contact the higher Self, but how to see it embraced in culture, embodied in nature, and
embedded in social institutions.

Realized, embraced, embodied, embedded: a more graceful interpretation covering all four quadrants (because
Spirit itself manifests as all four quadrants) facilitates the birth of that Spirit which is demanding the interpretation.
Graceful interpretation midwifes Spirit’s birth, Spirit’s descent. The more adequately I can interpret the intuition of
Spirit, the more that Spirit can speak to me, the more the channels of communication are open, leading from
communication to communion to union to identity.

And Spirit’s interpretation merely as a Higher Self is not very graceful, I don’t think.1
Likewise, there are many good souls who have a profound intuition of Spirit but unpack that intuition in merely

“It” terms, describing Spirit as the sum total of all phenomena or processes interwoven together in a great unified
system or net or web or implicate order or unified field (Lower-Right quadrant). All of which is true enough, but all of
which leaves out entirely the interior dimensions of “I” and “we.” This less-than-adequate interpretation is
monological to the core, flatland through and through.

It is the old Spinozist move, the other pole—the Eco pole—of the fundamental Enlightenment paradigm (in the
form of the Romantic rebellion). It thinks that the enemy is atomism, and that the central problem is simply to be
able to prove or demonstrate once and for all that the universe is a great and unified holistic System or Order or
Web. It marshals a vast amount of scientific evidence, from physics to biology, and offers extensive arguments, all
geared to objectively proving the holistic nature of the universe. It fails to see that if we take a bunch of egos with
atomistic concepts and teach them that the universe is holistic, all we will actually get is a bunch of egos with holistic
concepts.

Precisely because this monological approach, with its unskillful interpretation of an otherwise genuine intuition,
ignores or neglects the “I” and the “we” dimensions, it doesn’t understand very well the exact nature of the inner
transformations
that are necessary in the first place in order to be able to find an identity that embraces the
manifest All. Talk about the All as much as we want, nothing fundamentally changes.

And nothing changes because the “proof” or the “new paradigm” or “great system” is still being put in
monological it-language. This doesn’t engage the process of inner transformation. The profoundly transformative
question is not: is the world holistic or atomistic? The transformative question is: who or what is aware of both
holistic and atomistic concepts? (The move from the exterior to the interior.) And then: having rested in the Witness
of those concepts, a Witness that itself is neither holistic nor atomistic, see here the Witness dissolve in an
Emptiness that embraces the entire Kosmos. (The move from the interior to the superior.)

To remain arguing about the exteriors is to effectively seal out the interior and thus the superior. Focusing on the

exterior world being holistic thus misses the central transformative occasion.

Long ago Nagarjuna devastated such approaches, pointing out that holistic or atomistic, or both or neither, are all
beside the point (and, he added, they’re all false anyway). It is the radical deconstruction of all conceptualizations
whatsoever that paves the way for pure intuition (prajna) of Shunyata (Emptiness or Openness). If we meet even the
Buddha and are supposed to kill him, guess how holism will fare.

Thus, however true the original intuition of Spirit is (and I do not doubt that it is true), it is not facilitated by an
interpretation that reduces all of Spirit’s dimensions merely to the Right-Hand path, merely to descriptions of the
great interlocking order (even if those descriptions are true enough).2 Those interpretations, taken in and by
themselves, block the transformative event; those interpretations, driven originally by a true intuition of the very
Divine, do not facilitate the further descent of that Divine; those interpretations are unskillful to midwife the birth of
Spirit (which is nonetheless the original source of what turns out to be less-than-adequate interpretations).

And worse: when the intuition of Spirit is unpacked merely or solely in it-terms, in monological terms, the
approach ends up being a purely Descended worldview. Spirit is simply identified with the Sum Total of exteriors, the
Sum Total of the shadows in the Cave. So intent are we on proving that the shadows are one great interlocking order
that we never move from these exteriors to the real interior, and thus we never find the genuine superior.

This less-than-adequate interpretation makes it appear that the most urgent problem in the modern world is to
teach everybody systems theory (or some version of Gaia’s web-of-life notions, or some version of the “new
physics”), instead of seeing that what is required is an understanding of the interior stages of consciousness
development. Gaia’s main problem is not toxic waste dumps, ozone depletion, or biospheric pollution. These global
problems can only be recognized and responded to from a global, worldcentric awareness, and thus Gaia’s main
problem is that not enough human beings have developed and evolved from egocentric to sociocentric to
worldcentric, there to realize—and act on—the ecological crisis. Gaia’s main problem is not exterior pollution but
interior development, which alone can end exterior pollution.

Preconventional/egocentric and conventional/ethnocentric could care less about the global commons; only
postconventional/worldcentric can fully see, and effectively respond to, the universal dimensions of the problem
(only formop and vision-logic can grasp universal perspectives). Thus, the more we emphasize teaching a merely
Right-Hand map of systems theory or a Gaia Web of Life, instead of equally emphasizing the importance of interior

development from egocentric to sociocentric to worldcentric, then the more we are contributing to Gaia’s demise.
Global problems demand global awareness, and only interior and Left-Hand stages of development—precisely the
domain ignored by flatland Eco approaches—can even begin to handle the problem.

The pure Eco approach, like its cousin the pure Ego (or pure Self) approach, simply reduces all of Spirit’s
dimensions to one privileged domain, crippling the full emergence and descent of Spirit itself. Just as the idea in the
pure Self camp is that if we simply contact the Higher Self, all our problems will be solved, so the idea in the pure Eco
approach is that if we can just demonstrate, once and for all, the unified and holistic nature of the pure Eco, then
that will solve all our problems. That forceful demonstration (that Spinozist proof
in objective terms) will itself
compel all individuals to transform to ultimate unity, or so it is maintained.

Thus, the only “interior” change this camp recognizes is the single change from holding an atomistic conception
to holding a holistic conception. Because this camp centers on exteriors, it has an incredibly naive and anemic
conception of all the inner and interior developments necessary in order to be able to embrace the All. Further, in
recognizing only this “single” change from atomistic to holistic concepts, it misses the crucial fact that change of
beliefs does not mean change of consciousness.
It means simply a new translation, not necessarily a new
transformation.

The standard response from the Eco camps is that if people truly learned and really understood the holistic
oneness of reality and the great web, that would force them to give up their egos and they would indeed truly
transform. But, as we have seen, it is actually quite the contrary: embracing a monological worldview in flatland
terms results precisely in divine egoism.

development—from

preconventional/egocentric

(Because the Right-Hand-only view of systems theory lacks an understanding of the interior stages of
consciousness
to
postconventional/worldcentric—or more precisely, because it lacks an understanding of all nine fulcrums of interior
unfolding, it has no way to carefully gauge consciousness evolution and development. For this reason, flatland
cannot spot the difference between infrarational consciousness and suprarational consciousness—because it cannot
spot interior consciousness at all—and thus it constantly falls prey to massive pre/trans fallacies. This allows its
proponents to embrace preconventional interiors as if they were postconventional realities: allows them to fall into
preconventional/egocentric enthusiasms, even as they champion exterior holism and the great Web of Life, precisely
as we saw with the Romantics.)

to

conventional/sociocentric

This approach, then, focuses almost exclusively on Dharma, or the objective Truth, and not enough on Buddha
(subjective) and Sangha (intersubjective), or how that Truth refracts as well through the psychological and cultural
domains (how that Spirit manifests as all four quadrants of the Kosmos). And when objective truth is made the “total
truth”—when it is really thought to be “utterly holistic” and “all-encompassing”—then Buddha and Sangha are
violently reduced to flatland objectivist terms, and an approach that originally wishes us to transcend and include,
ends up being a merely and purely Descended worldview that effectively blocks transcendence altogether.

My point is that less-than-skillful interpretations of otherwise genuine Spiritual intuitions do not facilitate the
birthing of further intuitions, and thus a special care and thoroughness is required in the unpacking of this Gift of
God, this precious spiritual intuition.

I would like to spend the rest of this chapter exploring this idea, and end with a brief review and summary of the
difficulties in both the Ego and the Eco views. And we will finish our account of the Idealists and their enduring
legacy. But I would like to start with one last reason that an approach to Spirit based on monological exteriors is a
losing proposition.

INCOMPLETE OR UNCERTAIN

Addition 2: Every holon issues an IOU to the Kosmos.

A general theme running throughout the Idealist writers—and indeed, a theme found in virtually all of the
mystically or contemplatively oriented philosopher-sages the world over—is that finite things, finite holons, are
somehow profoundly
contradictory, in and of themselves. “All finite things are

lacking, or even profoundly

contradictory,” as Hegel put it. Nagarjuna would maintain the same for all finite phenomena (both thought and
things are self-contradictory). From Eckhart to Bradley,
from Abinavagupta to
Gaudapada—the general notion is that, as Hegel put it, “All things in themselves are contradictory.”

from Shankara to Ramana,

These types of statements have often stirred much controversy in philosophical circles, and many philosophers are
either annoyed or puzzled by what they mean (or even can mean). But the reason these types of statements (“All
holons are self-contradictory”) come from mystically oriented philosopher-sages is that they have glimpsed the
eternal, tasted infinity, and thus all finite things by comparison are pale, incomplete, uncertain, shifting, shadowy.
And thus to be merely finite is not only a constriction, it is ultimately self-defeating: to be merely finite is to deny
infinity, and this is self-contradictory in the deepest sense because it denies one’s deepest reality.

This is why, I think, Hegel says, “For anything to be finite, is just to suppress itself and put itself aside.” And thus,
“all that is determinate and finite is unstable.” And it is this incompleteness, this instability, that drives the agitated
movement of the entire finite and manifest universe: “Only insofar,” he says, “as something has contradiction in
itself does it move, have impulse, or activity.” (And Eros, as we saw, is this agitated movement to find higher unions
and thus overcome or escape the instability, and Eros therefore finally rests only in the infinite, which itself has no
contradiction and thus is the “timeless,” the “changeless,” the indestructible Abyss, the Vajra or Diamond
nature—although all of those terms are not descriptive per se, but only developmental signifiers.)

I mention all of this because, as I said, virtually every mystically oriented philosopher ends up making some sort of
these types of statements—none, perhaps, with more exuberance than Francis Bradley: “Relation, cause, space,
time, thing, and self are self-contradictory.” And Nagarjuna’s powerful dialectic is an intense and unrelenting
bearing-down on every single category of thought imaginable, all with the same result: they are totally self-
contradictory and, if consistently pressed, they totally self-destruct (leaving Emptiness, leaving the formless infinite;
the deconstruction of the phenomenal leaves prajna).

The deconstructionists have picked up certain of these lines of thought (mostly from Hegel, whom Derrida
uncharacteristically treats with much respect), but after Bradley and Nagarjuna, the deconstructionists are very thin
soup indeed, and, depressingly, they almost always miss the punch line: if you don’t want to be a complete self-
contradiction, then you must rest in infinity.

But admittedly, the philosopher-sages’ explanations of why all holons are “self-contradictory” are not very clear,

and have caused a great deal of confusion. I think the situation can be explained more easily and a bit more clearly.

The point, as I would put it, is that every holon is a whole/part. There are no wholes and no parts anywhere in the
manifest universe; there are only whole/parts. If actual wholes or actual parts really existed somewhere, then they
could rest; they would simply be what they were; there would be no massive instability, no internal “self-
contradiction.”

But every holon is simultaneously a whole/part. It has a dual tension inherent in its very constitution. As a
wholeness, it must achieve a degree of coherence and consistency in order to endure at all as the same entity
across time (this is its regime, code, agency, relative autonomy, and so on). But as a partness, as a part of some
other holon, it must embrace its partialness, embrace its incompleteness, or else it will simply not fit in, will not be a
part but will always drift off into its own isolated wholeness. In order to be complete, or to complete itself, it must
join with forces larger than itself. As a whole/part, there is thus a constant tension between coherency or
consistency, on the one hand, and completeness, on the other.

And the more of the one, the less of the other—neither “force” can win without destroying the holon, and so the
holon remains in constant instability. The more consistent (self-contained), then the less complete (the less in
communion).

And thus the second Addition: All holons issue an IOU to the Kosmos, where IOU means “Incomplete Or
Uncertain,” and which specifically means, the more complete or encompassing a holon, the less consistent or
certain, and vice versa. To say a holon can be complete or consistent, but not both, is also to say that every holon is
therefore incomplete or inconsistent (uncertain), and thus: every holon issues an IOU to the Kosmos.

Put more simply, since every holon is incomplete or inconsistent, every holon issues a promissory note to the
universe, which says, in effect: I can’t pay you now, I can’t achieve certainty and stability and completeness and
consistency today, but I will gladly pay you tomorrow. And no holon ever delivers, or can deliver, on that promise.

This IOU principle has, of course, started to become very obvious (and very famous) in certain branches of
knowledge, particularly mathematics, physics, and sociology (to name a few). In mathematics, it shows up as Tarski’s
Theorem and Gödel’s Incompleteness Theorem, both of which are taken to mean that in any sufficiently developed
mathematical system (mathematical holon), the holon can be either complete or consistent, but not both. That is,
if the mathematical system is made to be consistent (or self-certain), there remain fundamental truths that cannot
be derived from the system itself (it is incomplete); but if the system is made to include these truths and thus
attempts to become complete, then it inevitably (and inherently) contradicts itself at crucial points—it becomes
inconsistent.

Perhaps a simple example from sociology will illustrate what is involved. The United States and Japan are often
taken as examples of two very different types of social organizations. Japan is an extremely coherent or very tightly
woven society (it is consistent); but it achieves this consistency only by excluding foreign races (Japan’s xenophobia
being rather notorious). In other words, it is very consistent but very incomplete (very partial or very exclusionary).
The United States, on the other hand, attempts to be as complete as possible, attempts to open its doors to any
and all (the “melting pot”), but it does so at the cost of being rather incoherent and unstable: at times, the U.S.
seems so willing to embrace various cultures that it is in danger of flying apart at the seams. It achieves a great deal
of completeness at the cost of being inconsistent or incoherent or uncertain, of having no tightly knit unifying
regime or common principle.3
coherent, and the more of one, the less of the
other—IOU.

In other words: complete or

In mathematics, the introduction of the IOU principle (in various ways, by Russell, Tarski, Gödel), the introduction
of “the paradoxes” in set theory, initially caused an uproar, almost panic, because it meant that set theory and
arithmetic (and by implication, the whole of mathematics) were on very shaky ground—that is to say, on self-
contradictory ground. And in a sense that is true, but mathematics “escaped” the paradoxes by postulating
unendingly expanding sets (“transfinite”).

We saw, in chapter 2, that this was just another example of “holons all the way up, all the way down.” And we can
see now that this also means that mathematics simply issued a transfinite IOU to the Kosmos. Put rather
simplistically, the only way for mathematics to avoid profound self-contradiction is to postulate a yet higher level of
inclusion, which avoids the paradoxes of one level—but then faces the same paradoxes on its own level. Another
yet-higher level is thus postulated, and this continues endlessly (“transfinitely”).

Thus, the mathematical paradoxes and IOUs of one level can be superseded at the next higher level (the next
more-encompassing set), but that set then faces its own IOU (it is either incomplete or inconsistent), and that
continues . . . forever. The sets must be postulated to expand forever, because the moment they stop, mathematics
becomes self-contradictory. Nobody ever actually sees all of these transfinite sets: they are just a promissory note
that allows mathematics both to keep going and to get going in the first place.

Thus the IOU: it says, I cannot pay you now, but I will gladly pay you tomorrow. It will even gladly pay with lots of
interest, because the point is: it can never actually pay. The debt is never settled. Mathematics, like all holons,
lurches forward forever in an attempt to get over its inherent limitations, its “self-contradictions.” (Recall Hegel:
“Only insofar as something has contradiction in itself does it move, have impulse, or activity.”)

The point: all holons issue an IOU to the Kosmos, and the debt is never redeemed.
IOUs, then, represent the tension or instability (incomplete or inconsistent) inherent in all manifest holons by
virtue of the fact that they are all whole/parts. Another way to say exactly the same thing is to say that all holons
are agency-in-communion (wholes that are parts of other wholes). As agency (as wholeness), a holon must seek
consistency in order to endure. But as communion (as partness), it must seek union with other holons in order to be
more complete. And the more of one, the less of the other (on the same level; a supersession embraces both, but
then the new level faces its own IOU).

In other words, the more agency, the less communion, and vice versa (another version of the IOU), and neither
side can finally win without destroying the other. They are mutual antagonists that depend on each other for
existence (which, we might say, makes samsara an unpleasant place to be caught).

In volume 3, I attempt to explain this IOU principle in much greater detail, and this is meant only as a very brief
introduction. I attempt to show that agency across time and communion across space, as the two fundamental

“drives” of all holons (on a given level), show up in various fields as, respectively: time and space, coherence and
correspondence, rights and responsibilities, metaphor and metonym, intrinsic value and extrinsic value, determined
and probabilistic, necessity and chance, consistency and completeness, consciousness and communication—the list
is virtually endless. But the central point is that these typical dualisms (such as coherence versus correspondence in
epistemology) are dual partners forever fated to battle it out with each other . . . and never, never win.

The final example I will mention of an IOU principle that has become quite famous is the Heisenberg Uncertainty
Principle, whose many forms all state the same thing: the more we can know of the time-component of a wavicle
(agency), the less we can know of the space-component (communion)—momentum and position, for example—with
the crucial point being: the wavicle doesn’t know either. The wavicle issues an IOU to the Kosmos. The more one
aspect is pinned down, the more the other fades into obscurity.

EMPTINESS

Now the real reason I mention all these examples of the IOU principle, and the real reason the mystically oriented
philosopher-sages are always bringing it up (Hegel to Bradley to Nagarjuna to Shankara), is very simple:

Addition 3: All IOUs are redeemed in Emptiness.

Emptiness is neither a Whole nor a Part nor a Whole/Part. Emptiness is the reality of which all wholes and all parts
are simply manifestations. In Emptiness I do not become Whole, nor do I realize that I am merely a Part of some
Great Big Whole. Rather, in Emptiness I become the opening or clearing in which all wholes and all parts arise
eternally. I-I am the groundless Ground, the empty Abyss, that never enters the stream of endless IOUs; that never
lives the transfinite nightmare of ceaseless self-contradiction, the perpetual agony of samsara’s cascading wholes
and parts; the empty Ground that never bows to the terrors of time and the perpetual motion sickness known as
space; that steps off the relentless torment of unending IOUs—only to embrace them all, to embrace the All, as a
mirror one with its many reflections, and nothing comes to rest except the insane thought that I ever could have
found liberation in endless IOUs, or that salvation had anything to do with the unending debts and promissory notes
that samsara calls “reality,” the sickness-inducing self-contradiction in the very heart of every finite thing.

And there is the message of the mystics, ever so simply put: Emptiness, and Emptiness alone, redeems all IOUs. In
Emptiness alone, my debt is paid to the Kosmos, because in Emptiness, I-I am the Kosmos. Redemption of debt,
erasure of guilt, a balancing of the Kosmic books, a release from transfinite insanity.4

Not in Emptiness, but as Emptiness, I am released from the fate of a never-ending addition of parts, and I stand
free as the Source and Suchness of the glorious display. I taste the sky and swallow whole the Kosmos, and nothing is
added to me; I disappear in a million forms and nothing is subtracted; I rise as the sun to greet my own day, and
nothing moves at all.

THE LEGACY OF THE IDEALISTS

The Idealist movement was, in the West, the last great attempt to introduce true Ascent and, most important, to
integrate it believably with true Descent—the Ego and the Eco both taken up, preserved and negated, honored and
released, in all-encompassing Spirit. The true heirs of Plotinus.

And although the great Idealist movement finally failed, its enduring contributions will, I believe, be part of any
graceful unpacking of spiritual intuition for the modern and postmodern world. Its enduring contributions will, I
think, be a necessary component in any sort of truly comprehensive worldview, a worldview still begging to emerge,
a World Soul still struggling to break into collective consciousness and heal the fragments of a modernity gone
slightly mad.

The details of the Idealist system are explored in volume 3. For the moment, I think we could fairly summarize the
thrust of the Idealist movement as: an intuition of the transpersonal domain expressed in vision-logic. And there was
both its great strength and its fatal weakness.

As vision-logic, it was a developmental evolution beyond simple formal operational rationality, a move beyond
instrumental and ego-centered rationality (Verstand) into dialogical, dialectical, intersubjective reason (Vernunft),
carrying with it a unifying of opposites and a reconciliation of fragments.

As holarchic vision-logic, it saw neither isolated wholes nor abandoned parts: each stage of development was a
whole/part that preserved and negated its predecessors. Idealism pointed out, in effect, that since every holon is
simultaneously both a subholon and a superholon, then all agency is always agency-in-communion (the insight
utterly lacking in the Enlightenment’s “proud culture of reflection,” that “monster of arrested development”). Thus
no dualism has a final place to rest; no whole, and no part, can ever repose triumphant; Spirit speaks throughout the
evolutionary process, as the process itself—self-unfolding, self-enfolding, self-realizing: “nothing is lost, all
is
preserved.”

As vision-logic, the integration of the Big Three could be seriously contemplated and in many ways completed:
nature is not just a collection of phenomenal interlocking processes or “its,” but of potential I’s; and I’s exist only in
an intersubjective space of we. Accordingly, science, morality, and art are all integral expressions and moments of
Spirit; none can claim isolated authority; each is to be honored in its respective task. And I can integrate them
because I am vehicle of Spirit, and not any particular manifestation.

Most important, these integrations were not just verbal formulas; up to a certain point, the Idealists genuinely
managed to “square the circle,” as Taylor summarizes the seemingly impossible task of reconciling Ego and Eco,
Fichte and Spinoza, Mind and Nature, Ascent and Descent, Subjective Freedom and Objective Union.

The requirements were inordinately intense: “If the aspirations to radical freedom [Ego] and to integral expressive
unity with nature [Eco] are to be totally fulfilled together, if man is to be at one with nature in himself and in the
cosmos while also being most fully a self-determining subject, then it is necessary first, that my basic natural
inclination spontaneously be to morality and freedom; and more than this, since I am a dependent part of a larger
order of nature, it is necessary that this whole order within me and without tend of itself toward spiritual goals,
tend to realize a form in which it can unite with subjective freedom. If I am to remain a spiritual being and yet not be
opposed to nature in my interchange with it, then this interchange must be a communion in which I enter into
relation with some spiritual being or force. But this is to say that spirituality, tending to realize spiritual goals, is of
the essence of nature. Underlying natural reality is a spiritual principle striving to realize itself.”5

And those were precisely the requirements met by Schelling and hammered out by Hegel. Nature and Mind are
both taken up and integrated in Spirit, an integration that can occur precisely because the Spirit that is awakened in
the integration is the same Spirit that was present throughout the entire process of unfolding and enfolding itself.
“So that while nature tends to realize spirit, that is, self-consciousness, men and women as conscious beings tend
toward a grasp of nature in which they will see it as spirit and one with their own spirit. In this process men and
women come to a new understanding of self: they see themselves not just as individual fragments of the universe,
but rather as vehicles of spirit. And hence men and women can achieve at once the greatest unity with nature, i.e.,
with the spirit which unfolds itself in nature, and the fullest autonomous self-expression. The two come together
since man’s basic identity is as vehicle of spirit. [This] provides the basis of a union between finite and cosmic spirit
which meets the requirement that men and women be united to the whole and yet not sacrifice their own self-
consciousness and autonomous will.”6

Recall that the dilemma—and the agony—was how to “unite Fichte and Spinoza”—that is, how to be both
autonomous (or self-defining) and whole (or one with nature and therefore defined and determined by nature,
which means surrendering autonomy): how can you possibly do both, since they are mutually exclusive? On the one
hand, there was the desire to preserve the worldcentric moral autonomy and capacity for compassion for which the
Ego had fought so long: to merely become “one with nature” would be to lose that autonomy and be governed by
natural laws such as fox eats chicken—and there goes moral compassion. On the other hand, there was an intense
desire for wholeness and completion, a desire to be part of something bigger than my ego, a desire to fit into the
great Eco. How to unite the Ego and the Eco? the self and nature? It certainly appears that the more of the one, the
less of the other—the IOU principle haunting all manifest holons!

The great Idealist realization was that both the Ego and the Eco are manifestations of Spirit, and Spirit redeems all
IOUs. On the one hand, the Spirit (or highest Self or pure Ego or I-I) of the Kosmos is perfectly autonomous, because

it is the pure Self (which is self-positing and self-defining and thus completely free or autonomous); and, on the
other, it is perfect wholeness at the same time, because there is nothing outside of it: both Mind and Nature are
expressions of its own Being and Becoming. And thus, to the extent that I rise to a intuition and identity with Spirit,
then both the free will of Mind and the union with Nature are given to me simultaneously.
I-I am everything that
is arising, and thus I am autonomous and whole, free and determined, ascended and descended, one and many,
wisdom and compassion, eros and agape.

Thus, Spirit redeems all IOUs, because in Spirit I am not a whole/part, but the infinity in which all whole/parts
arise, remain a bit, and pass. And thus, by developing from nature to mind to Spirit, I can embrace the entire
Kosmos in a free and complete fashion, for I-I am that Kosmos for all eternity: which is to say: right now, when seen
in the eye of Spirit, for which both mind and nature are simply integral chapters in my own continuing story.

United in Spirit without erasing differences—there is the One-in-the-Many as my truest Self (the ultimate I or
Buddha), and as the highest Truth (the ultimate It or Dharma), and as the all-encompassing Community of all
sentient beings (the ultimate We or Sangha).

Further, according to the Idealists (and nondual sages everywhere), the extraordinary and altogether paradoxical
secret is that the Final Release is always already accomplished. The “last step” is to step off the cycle of time
altogether and find the Timeless there from the start, ever-present from the very beginning and at every point
along the way. The great far-off spectacular climax . . . is right now. “The Good,” says Hegel, “the absolutely Good, is
eternally accomplishing itself in the world; and the result is that it need not wait upon us, but is already in full
actuality accomplished.”

As J. N. Findlay, one of Hegel’s greatest interpreters, puts it: “It is by the capacity to understand this that the true
Hegelian is marked off from his often diligent and scholarly, but still profoundly misguided misinterpreter, who still
yearns after the showy spectacular climax, the Absolute coming down . . . accompanied by a flock of doves, when a
simple return to utter ordinariness is in place [the language of ordinariness, as we saw, always marks the Nondual].
Finite existence in the here and now, with every limitation, is, Hegel teaches, when rightly regarded and accepted,
identical with the infinite existence which is everywhere and always. To live in Main Street is, if one lives in the right
spirit, to inhabit the Holy City.”7

As Plotinus knew and Nagarjuna taught: always and always, the other world is this world rightly seen.
This is a truly staggering synthesis and integration. (Credit for this type of developmental synthesis often goes to
Aurobindo; without in any way detracting from Aurobindo’s magnificent contributions, the pioneering credit belongs
to Schelling, and by a century.) And yet, in the end, the Idealist movement failed to live up to its bright promise and
huge potential. Although, as I mentioned, the details will be taken up in volume 3, I think we can quickly summarize
the failure in two parts.

The first was a failure to develop any truly injunctive practices—that is, any true paradigms, any reproducible
exemplars. Put differently: no yoga, no contemplative practices, no meditative paradigms, no experimental
methodology to reproduce in consciousness the transpersonal insights of its founders. The great Idealist systems
were mistaken for metaphysics—which in this sense, they were, alas—and suffered rightly the fate of all mere
metaphysics.

The second failure: although profound intuitions and insights into the genuinely transpersonal domains were
clearly some of the major, I would say the major, driving forces behind the Idealist movement, these intuitions and
insights were expressed almost totally in and through vision-logic, and this burdened Reason with a task it could
never carry.8 Particularly with Hegel, the transpersonal and transrational Spirit becomes wholly identified with
vision-logic or mature Reason, which condemns Reason to collapsing under a weight it could never carry.

In 1796, Hegel wrote a poem for Hölderlin, which says in part: “For thought cannot grasp the soul which forgetting
itself plunges out of space and time into a presentiment of infinity, and now reawakens. Whoever wanted to speak
of this to others, though he spoke with the tongues of angels, would feel the poverty of words.”

Would that Hegel had remained in poverty (with Plato: “No treatise by me concerning it exists or ever will exist”).
But Hegel decided—in part in reaction to the Eco camp’s calamitous slide into regressive feeling and divine
egoism—that Reason could and should develop the tongues of angels. This would have been fine,
if Hegel also had
more dependable paradigms, more reproducible injunctions, for the developmental unfolding of the higher and

transpersonal stages. As we said, Zen masters talk about Emptiness all the time! But they have a practice and a
methodology (zazen) which allows them to discover the transcendental referent via their own developmental
signified, and thus their words (the signifiers) remain grounded in experiential, reproducible, fallibilist criteria.

The Idealists had none of this. Their insights, not easily reproducible, and thus not fallibilistic, were dismissed as
“mere metaphysics,” and gone was a priceless opportunity that the West, no doubt, will have to attempt yet again if
it is ever to be hospitable to the future descent of the all-embracing World Soul.

In the meantime, the collapse of Idealism left the Descenders virtually unchallenged as the molders of modernity.

DARK SHADOWS

Darwin’s “naturalism”—this denatured nature—seemed, to the dominant flatland worldview, to cover all the
necessary bases. Mononature alone was all the “spirit” men and women needed, and all the “spirit” there was.

But it wasn’t the Darwinian “revolution” that would play most decisively into the hands of the Descenders. After
all, the Darwinists could always be seen, whether they wished to or not, as simply supplying empirical evidence for a
scheme already known and accepted, namely, evolution as God-in-the-making, Eros not simply seeking Spirit but
expressing Spirit all along via a series of ever-higher ascents, which Darwin had merely chronicled in a not-very-
surprising fashion.

Darwin was never the problem. It was Carnot, Clausius, and Kelvin. At about the time that Darwin was on HMS
Beagle, William Kelvin and Rudolf Clausius were formulating two versions of the second law of thermodynamics,
versions later shown to be equivalent, and both of which were taken to mean: the universe is running down. In all
real physical processes, disorder increases.

This split the world of science into two utterly incompatible halves: a biology describing the world winding up, and

a physics describing a world winding down. The “two arrows” of time . . .

With this, of course, we have come full circle, come to the point where we began our account in chapter 1. This
wasn’t just subtle reductionism—the collapse of the Kosmos into the empirical interlocking order—this was gross
reductionism—the further collapse of the interlocking order into its atomistic components, a situation that can fairly
be described as complete psychotic insanity. (If the Kosmos is the wondrous multidimensional reality anything
similar to that described from Plotinus to Schelling, from Mahayana Buddhism to Vedanta Hinduism, or even from
Kant to Rousseau, imagine the blindness and the violence of the mentality that acknowledges only atoms.)

The laws of thermodynamics seemed to totally undermine any sort of “organic unity” or “self-organizing nature”
or “the total and unitary process of self-manifestation” (Schelling, Hegel)—let alone any sort of Eros operative “even
in the lowest state of matter” (Kant). And if the Idealists couldn’t even get the first floor of evolution right, why
should we believe them about any “higher stages”? There is no Eros in the physical world, and if the physical world is
part and parcel of Spirit’s manifestation, then there is and can be no Eros in Spirit. Which is to say, there is no Spirit,
period.

This completely undercut any sort of idealist or spiritual view of evolution or manifestation in general. The first
floor of the magnificent Idealist edifice crumbled, and the higher floors almost immediately followed suit (Idealism
would survive in any viable form no more than a few decades after Hegel’s death).

The net effect of the utter collapse of this noble attempt to escape the Cave was that, once again, Ascent was
looked upon very suspiciously. Everywhere the cry “Back to Kant!” arose, which eventually meant: back to rationality
and its grounding in the senses, back to “tracing science then with modesty thy guide.”

Back to the phenomena, back to the shadows. Back to “this world.” The collapse of Idealism left the Descenders
virtually unchallenged as the holders and molders of modernity. Not only was any sort of transcendental Spirit
abandoned, vision-logic itself was scaled back to various forms of instrumental, subject-centered rationality. “As a
consequence,” Habermas reminds us, “in the period after Hegel, only those who grasp reason in a more modest
fashion have any options.” Modernity then, he says, “pruned reason back into understanding and rationality back
into purposive rationality”—that is, vision-logic back into the reflection paradigm and back into subject-centered
instrumental-rationality.9

Ludwig Feuerbach, a student of Hegel, would soon announce that any sort of spirituality, any sort of Ascent, was

simply a projection of men and women’s human potentials onto an “other world” of wholly imaginative origin. And,
according to Feuerbach, it is exactly this projection of human potential onto a “divine” sphere that cripples men and
women, and is the true cause of self-alienation. Any real social progress, then, is not spirit’s return to spirit, but
man’s return to himself. Feuerbach: “Religion is the separation of man from himself: he sets God over against
himself as an opposed being. God is not what man is, and man is not what God is. God is the infinite Being, man the
finite; God is perfect, man is imperfect; God is eternal, man is temporal; God is almighty, man is powerless; God is
holy, man is sinful. God and man are extremes.”

However well that does indeed describe aspects of mythic dissociation, it has precisely nothing to do with one’s
own transpersonal potentials, vertical potentials that if they aren’t actualized are merely projected horizontally
into utterly futile schemes to turn this finite world into a utopian world of infinite wonderment: an infinite above
collapses into an infinite ahead, and whether that infinite ahead be endless scientific progress or boundless material
possessions or political utopianisms as ultimate salvation, they are all fundamentally ways of fussing about in the
finite looking for the infinite, and doing irreparable harm to the finite world in the process by placing demands upon
it which it could never fulfill.

But that is exactly what Feuerbach would recommend: “Politics,” he says, “must become our religion.” Karl Marx
and Friedrich Engels were paying very close attention. “Apart from Nature and human beings,” Engels would write,
“nothing exists; and the higher beings which our religious fantasy created are only the fantastic reflection of our own
essence. The enthusiasm was general; we were all for the moment followers of Feuerbach.”
And the entire modern (and postmodern) world is, in effect, the followers of Feuerbach.

THE CONTOURS OF THE CAVE

And so it was, I believe, that the Descenders became the inheritors of frustrated Ascent—the ever-frustrated desire
to move up became the ever-frustrating desire to move forward. One crippled God replaced the other, and Ascent
pitched headlong into the endless world of scurrying shadows.

With “No more Ascent!” the infinite vertical yearning toppled forward, and that correct intuition of infinity was
now misplaced and displaced onto the horizons of a temporal and agitated and insatiable hunger for all things
material and “natural,” a hunger driven by the same power of infinite yearning, but now under the gaze of a
different God.

And there remains the modern—and the postmodern—mind. People had, and have, two basic choices in these
modern times: myth or naturalism. Remain at a mythic level of development, and embrace this or that imperialistic
fundamentalism with its (promised and frustrated) Ascent; or evolve to rationality, shed the myths, and embrace a
world of pure Descent, basking in the shadows, never getting metaphysical sunburn of any imaginable variety,
“tracing science then with modesty thy guide,” but seeking always to reform the phenomena, tinker with the shades,
eat the shadows, endlessly.

And within naturalism, there are still the same two-centuries-old “paradigms” engaged in the same shopworn
arguments: the Ego versus the Eco, both still dragging behind them the same pitiable paradox of damage. The Ego,
for all its otherwise admirable worldcentric stance, still has no idea how to go about integrating the biosphere in a
higher synthesis of its own interests; still leaves everywhere the corpses of its reckless repressions; still totally
confuses transrational Spirit with prerational myth; and thus still runs breathlessly away from the Source of its own
salvation.

If the Ego camps still absolutize the noosphere, the Eco camps are still absolutizing the biosphere, utterly unaware
that this contributes every bit as much as the Ego camps to the destruction of the biosphere itself. “Saving the
biosphere” depends first and foremost on human beings reaching mutual understanding and unforced agreement as
to common ends. And that intersubjective accord occurs only in the noosphere. Anything short of that noospheric
accord will continue to destroy the biosphere.

Thus, if the Ego is destroying the biosphere by a sin of commission, the Eco is destroying it by a sin of omission.
As we saw, Gaia’s primary problems and threats are not pollution,

industrialization, overcultivation, soil
despoliation, overpopulation, ozone depletion, or whatnot. Gaia’s major problem is lack of mutual understanding

and mutual agreement in the noosphere.

The problem is not how to demonstrate, in monological terms and with scientific proofs, that Gaia is in desperate
trouble. The general evidence of this serious trouble is already and simply and absolutely overwhelming. Anybody
can grasp the data. But most just don’t care.

In other words, the real problem is not exterior. The real problem is interior. The real problem is how to get
people to internally transform from egocentric to sociocentric to worldcentric consciousness, which is the only
stance that can grasp the global dimensions of the problem in the first place, and thus the only stance that can
freely, even eagerly, embrace global solutions.

And about these interior transformations, and all the intricate psychological changes necessary in order to effect
them, the Eco camps have virtually nothing to say. They are so focused on exterior, monological, reflective
“paradigms” that their understanding of
interior dynamics and development is incredibly anemic; thus they are
contributing little to the real changes that have to occur in order to “save Gaia.”

Hence, the only “transformation” most ecophilosophers talk about is having everybody change their objective and
monological views of reality and accept a “web-of-life” conception, as if that would effect a genuine interior
transformation. But not only is the web-of-life ontology regressive (its end limit is always biocentric feeling in divine
egoism), but, more tellingly—and this is the only point I would like to emphasize—even if the web-of-life ontology
were absolutely true, nonetheless change in objective belief
interior
development.

the primary driving force of

is not

(For example: all ecological forecasts are forms of as-if and what-if scientific projections, often computerized.
These can only be grasped by formop. Teach these what-if scenarios to preop or conop individuals, and no matter
how much they repeat the words, they do not possess the developmental signified and thus they have no real idea
of the actual referent. Genuinely global or worldcentric consciousness is not possible short of formop. In other
words, global consciousness is not an objective belief
to anybody and everybody, but a
subjective transformation in the interior structures that can hold the belief in the first place, which itself is the
product of a long line of inner consciousness development.)

that can be taught

We have an enormous amount of information about how and why those interior psychological transformations
occur (egocentric to sociocentric to worldcentric), but the Eco camps by and large display no awareness of, and no
interest in, those inner dynamics, fixated as they are on describing exterior mononature in “holistic” terms.

This is most naive, and belies the inadequacy of attempting to change people by altering the object instead of
growing the subject. Focusing merely on monological and objective and exterior and scientific terms—no matter
how utterly true—beyond a certain point simply detracts away from the fundamental problem, hides the
fundamental problem, which is not exterior pollution but interior development.10

Everywhere the paradox of damage: absolutizing the biosphere contributes inexorably to its destruction.
Everywhere the same old story: the Ego and the Eco as the congenital twins in the dance of Gaia’s demise.

THE EGO AND THE ECO: PHOBOS AND THANATOS

And thus, to return to my point at the beginning of the chapter: stuck with these two variants of flatland ideology,
any intuitions of deeper and higher occasions become immediately misinterpreted in terms of one or the other of
these monological paradigms. People continue to have strong and powerful intuitions of the Over-Soul and World
Soul, but they immediately misinterpret these otherwise correct intuitions in terms of either a disengaged “Higher
Self” (à la Fichte) or a “reengaged biospheric union” (à la Spinoza).

The “Higher Self” camp is notoriously immune to social concerns. Everything that happens to one is said to be
“one’s own choice”—the hyper-agentic Higher Self is responsible for
that happens—this is the
monological and totally disengaged Ego gone horribly amok in omnipotent self-only fantasies. This simply represses
the networks of communions that are just as important as agency in constituting the manifestation of Spirit.

everything

This is not Eros; this is Phobos—a withdrawal from social engagement and intersubjective action. All of this totally
overlooks the fact that Spirit manifests not only as Self (I) but as intersubjective Community (We) and as an objective
State of Affairs (It)—as Buddha, Sangha, Dharma—each inseparably interwoven with the others and interwoven in

the Good and the Goodness of the All.

The Eco camps likewise too often misinterpret the intuition of the World Soul, but in the other direction, as some
sort of Gaia-self, but still and equally framed in monological and flatland terms. Not NATURE, but nature, is their
beloved God/dess. Actual hierarchies of any sort are denied in the name of a diversitarian stance that explicitly
denies that which its own stance implicitly presupposes. In their understandable zeal to go transrational, they often
embrace any prerational occasion simply because it is nonrational—any occasion that looks biocentrically oriented,
from horticultural planting mythology to rampant tribalism to indissociated magic and sensual glorification of a
sentimental nature, all in the name of saving Gaia.

The Eco-Noetic Self

(the absolutizing of

is thus often misinterpreted as a merely ecological self

the
biosphere)—completely overlooking the fact that no ecological self can take the role of other. The resultant
regressive slide is just as disheartening as the Ego’s aggressive repression. This is not Agape; this is Thanatos. An
attempt to save the lower by killing the higher.

Under these conditions—Ego versus Eco—we will never take monological nature up and into dialogical culture,
and then take both nature and culture up and into translogical Spirit. And yet that, I will argue in the next two
volumes of this series, is exactly the task whose initial steps will define postmodernity.

ENVIRONMENTAL ETHICS: HOLONIC ECOLOGY

In my opinion, one of the first steps toward an integral postmodernity is the development and establishment of a
genuine environmental ethics, or a moral and ethical stance to nonhuman holons.

Nowhere are the difficulties of the Eco camp more obvious than in its attempts to develop an environmental
The Liberation of Life, Michael
ethics. With some notable exceptions (such as Birch and Cobb’s wonderful
Zimmerman’s work, and a handful of others),11 most approaches center predominantly on the principle of
“bioequality,” a reworking of the tenets of the Descending path of Plenitude (divorced and dissociated from any true
Ascent).

The point, it is argued, is that all holons, or certainly all life forms, have equal value and equal worth (another
qualitative distinction that denies all qualitative distinctions). This environmental ethics—noble enough in itself, and
often driven by a profound intuition of the World Soul, the Eco-Noetic Self—is nonetheless crippled by operating
within the flatland paradigm.

In volume 2,

I will examine each of the major ecophilosophies in great detail, and then present an

alternative—holonic ecology—which may be very briefly summarized as follows:

1. All things and events, of whatever nature, are perfect manifestations of Spirit. No holon, whether
conventionally considered high or low, sacred or profane, simple or complex, primitive or advanced, is closer or
farther from Ground, and thus all holons have equal ultimate value or equal Ground-value. All Forms are equally
pure Emptiness, primordial Purity.

2. But in addition to Ground-value, all holons, we have seen, are also both particular wholes and particular parts.
As a wholeness, any holon has “whole-value.” It has a value in itself, and not merely for something else. It is an end
in and for itself, and not merely a means
for something other. It has autonomous value, and not merely
instrumental value. This is usually referred to as “intrinsic value,” which I accept; I will also call in-itself value
“autonomous value” or “wholeness value.” All holons, as wholes, have intrinsic value.

From which it follows, the greater the wholeness, the greater the intrinsic value. Wholeness-value, in other words,
is the same as depth-value. The greater the depth, the greater the value (and the greater the potential depth, the
greater the potential value).

This also means, as we have seen repeatedly, that there are levels of significance: the greater the depth, or the
greater the wholeness, then the more significant
that wholeness is for the Kosmos, because the more of the
Kosmos is embraced in that wholeness, embraced in that depth. (Thus, cells are more significant than molecules,
because cells contain molecules, thus embracing and signifying more of the Kosmos. An ape is more significant than
a cell, and so on.)

Likewise, as a wholeness (as agency), all holons have rights which express the conditions that are necessary for

that holon to remain whole. The greater the wholeness, the more rights necessary to maintain it (i.e., the more
significant the wholeness, the greater the network of rights required to sustain the significance. An ape has more
rights than an ant). These rights are not something added to the holon; these rights are a simple statement of the
conditions (objective, interobjective, subjective, and intersubjective) that are necessary to sustain the wholeness of
the particular holon. If those rights are not met, the wholeness dissolves or disintegrates.

3. All holons are also parts, and as a part, all holons have instrumental value (also called extrinsic value). That is,
all holons have value for others. All holons have part-value, or partness-value (as part of a larger whole, and that
whole and its members depend upon each part: each part is thus instrumental to the existence of the whole, each
part has extrinsic value, value not just in and for itself but for others). And the more partness-value a holon
has—that is, the greater the number of wholes of which that holon is a part—the more fundamental that holon is
for the Kosmos, because the more of the Kosmos there is that contains that part as a necessary constituent. An atom
is more fundamental than an ape. (From which it follows, as we put it earlier, the more fundamental, the less
significant, and vice versa.)

Likewise, as a part (in communion), each holon exists in a network of care and responsibility. Like rights,
responsibilities are not something added to holons. Networks of responsibility simply define the conditions
necessary to support the whole of which the part is indeed a part. Further, the greater the depth of a holon, then the
more networks of communion it is involved in, and thus the greater its responsibilities in communion (correlative
with its greater rights of agency).12

Thus, each and every holon in the Kosmos has equal Ground-value as a pure manifestation of Spirit or Emptiness.
Further, as a particular wholeness, each holon possesses intrinsic value, depth value, which is valuable precisely
because it internally embraces aspects of the Kosmos as part of its own being (and the more aspects it embraces,
then the greater its depth and the greater its intrinsic value, the greater its significance). And finally, as a part, each
holon possesses extrinsic or instrumental value, because other holons external to it nonetheless depend upon it in
various ways for their own existence and survival (and the more networks and wholes of which the holon is a part,
then the greater its extrinsic value, the greater its fundamentalness: its existence is instrumental to the existence of
so many other holons).13

My point in mentioning this example now is simply that this type of multidimensional environmental ethics is
subverted by the flatland holism so prevalent in the Gaia-centric approaches. The fact that all holons have equal
Ground-value
intrinsic value
(“bioequality”), and this paralyzes any sort of pragmatic action at all.

is often confused with the notion that they must therefore all have

equal

It is much better to kill a carrot than a cow, even though they are both perfect manifestations of Spirit. They
both have equal Ground-value, but one has more intrinsic value because one has more depth (and therefore more
consciousness). And the Eco camp’s general attempt to “save the biosphere” by privileging it and leveling any
distinctions in it
(bioequality) paralyzes any actual pragmatic steps that might be taken to reform our
anthropocentric stance.

Worse, in a flatland world,

intrinsic value is often given only to the web-of-life or the system as a whole (the
great interlocking order)—and thus we are all fundamentally nothing but strands in the great web. This attempt to
introduce “wholeness” actually instrumentalizes all of us, instrumentalizes each and every individual living being,
because now living beings only have part value, extrinsic value,
instrumental value. Holism instrumentalizes
everything! (Another example of the paradox of damage inherent in flatland: trying to holisticize everything converts
everything into parts, into fragments, with no individual wholeness value, no intrinsic value apart from the great
web.)14

In short: this approach confuses equal Ground-value with equal instrinsic value (“bioequality”), which leaves only
the biosphere as a whole with instrinsic value, and this converts every individual living being into merely a part, a
strand, an instrumental means in the glorious web (leaves, that is, what many critics have called ecofascism).

As I said, I believe in many cases the original intuition is true and good, namely, all holons have equal Ground-
value (I believe that is the primary intuition behind the noble attempts to deanthropocentrize ethics). But in
unpacking this noble intuition merely in terms of a flatland holism (the Right-Hand path, which always embodies a
qualitative distinction that
in this case, “bioequality”), we end up

all qualitative distinctions:

denies

instrumentalizing everything: precisely the fundamental Enlightenment paradigm most responsible for despoiling
Gaia is still claiming, in its new guise, to save that which it is inexorably destroying.15

Thus, a correct and often noble intuition of the World Soul and Eco-Noetic Self is misinterpreted in terms of a
flatland holism that, in leveling qualitative distinctions, paralyzes actions that would further the descent of that
World Soul. And in this case it is still true: that which is not part of the solution is most definitely part of the problem.

EGO AND ECO: THE ASCENDERS AND THE DESCENDERS

There is nothing that can cure the senses but the soul; And nothing that can cure the soul but the senses.

—OSCAR WILDE

My point, then, is that the World Soul is very often being correctly and profoundly intuited but not very gracefully
interpreted. It tends to be interpreted as either a Higher Self or a Gaia-self, both dualistic to the core, and both trying
to convert the other by proselytizing their wounds. They represent respectively not Eros and Agape, but Phobos and
Thanatos.

It comes to the same thing to say that, to the extent that individuals in modernity even attempt a genuine

spirituality, they still tend to fall into either a purely Ascending Higher Self, or a purely Descending biospheric self.

The Ascenders have recourse to various forms of Gnosticism, Theravadin Buddhism, a type of Advaita Vedanta, a
“higher Inner Voice,” the inner Holy Spirit, archetypal psychology, the care of the Soul, contacting the Higher
Self—all of which are true enough and altogether important; but in their partiality, in their exclusively Ascending
bent, they attempt to get out of flatland by denying it altogether: Phobos, the fear-laden hand of earth-denying,
community-denying, body-denying, sensory-denying escape.

The Descenders, on the other hand, have recourse to the visible, sensible God/dess—but that profound truth, cut
off from its complementary Ascending current, degenerates into geocentric, egocentric, highly individualistic and
anti-authoritarian stances, desiring to preserve themselves in the free play of uncoerced shadows.16 By becoming
one with the Shadows and seamlessly inserting ourselves into a denatured nature, salvation will finally be
found—and if it doesn’t seem to be working, just insert harder.

The idea still seems to be that if I can just kiss the Shadows, I will see the Light. All transcendental occasions are

reduced to this-worldly embrace: Thanatos, the dead and heavy hand of reduction and regression.

And these purely Descended approaches absolutely despise the Ascending paths, and blame them for virtually all
of humanity’s and Gaia’s problems. But not to worry, the loathing is mutual: the Ascenders maintain the Descenders
are simply caught in self-dispersal and outward-bound ignorance, which is the real source of all humanity’s turmoils.
The Ascenders and the Descenders, after two thousand years, still at each other’s throat—each still claiming to be
the Whole, each still accusing the other of Evil, each perpetrating the same fractured insanity it despises in the other.

The Ascenders and the Descenders. Still crazy after all these years.

AT THE EDGE OF HISTORY

The great quest of postmodernity,
is for the bodymind integration of the centaur anchored in
worldcentric vision-logic, and there are signs everywhere that this is in fact occurring. But most important, from
within and beyond the centaur are now emerging glimpses of the Over-Soul as the World Soul (and I believe the
evidence for this, too, is quite compelling).17

I will argue,

But Spirit’s misinterpretation does not further its descent; its flattening and leveling in monological terms
sabotages its very birth and blessing. We cannot integrate the Ascending and Descending currents in the emerging
World Soul, but merely play them off against each other in a brutal torment of chosen ideology.

But the crucial components have already been won through for us. The breakthrough to Nonduality has already
been accomplished by Plotinus in the West and Nagarjuna in the East (and not them alone). And the evolutionary
understanding of Nonduality has already been won by Schelling in the West and Aurobindo in the East (and not them

alone). What they (and their many descendants) have accomplished is already the foundation for a World Federation
and a council of all beings. And whereas they were, in their times, the rare and isolated, the average mode is now
catching up with them: their paths can be ours, collectively, now.

Much work, of course, remains to be done. But the foundation is there, it has been won through for us; the basics

are in existence. These roads are open to us: roads present but untraveled; paths cut clear but not chosen.

Can we not embrace these roots? Can we not see Spirit as the Life of Evolution and the Love of Kosmos itself?
Does not the Good of Spirit, its Eros, release both Nature and Mind from the torments we have inflicted on them in
vain attempts to make them each the source of infinite value? Does not the Goodness of Spirit, its Agape, embrace
both Mind and Nature in a loving caress that heals the self-inflicted wounds? Does not the refluxing movement of
God and the effluxing movement of the Goddess embrace the entire Circle of Ascent and Descent? Can we not round
out the original insights and see that Spirit always manifests in all four quadrants equally? Is not Spirit here and now
in all
its radiant glory, eternally present as every I and every We and every It? Will not our more adequate
interpretations of Spirit facilitate Spirit’s rescue of us?

As Plotinus knew: Let the world be quiet. Let the heavens and the earth and the seas be still. Let the world be
waiting. Let the self-contraction relax into the empty ground of its own awareness, and let it there quietly die. See
how Spirit pours through each and every opening in the turmoil, and bestows new splendor on the setting Sun and
its glorious Earth and all its radiant inhabitants. See the Kosmos dance in Emptiness; see the play of light in all
creatures great and small; see finite worlds sing and rejoice in the play of the very Divine, floating on a Glory that
renders each transparent, flooded by a Joy that refuses time or terror, that undoes the madness of the loveless self
and buries it in splendor.

Indeed, indeed: let the self-contraction relax into the empty ground of its own awareness, and let it there quietly
die. See the Kosmos arise in its place, dancing madly and divine, self-luminous and self-liberating, intoxicated by a
Light that never dawns nor ceases. See the worlds arise and fall, never caught in time or turmoil, transparent images
shimmering in the radiant Abyss. Watch the mountain walk on water, drink the Pacific in a single gulp, blink and a
billion universes rise and fall, breathe out and create a Kosmos, breathe in and watch it dissolve.

Let the ecstasy overflow and outshine the loveless self, driven mad with the torments of its self-embracing ways,
hugging mightily samsara’s spokes of endless agony, and sing instead triumphantly with Saint Catherine, “My being is
God, not by simple participation, but by a true transformation of my Being. My me is God!” And let the joy sing with
Dame Julian, “See! I am God! See! I am in all things! See! I do all things!” And let the joy shout with Hakuin, “This
very body is the Body of Buddha! and this very land the Pure Land!”

And this Earth becomes a blessed being, and every I becomes a God, and every We becomes God’s sincerest

worship, and every It becomes God’s most gracious temple.

And comes to rest that Godless search, tormented and tormenting. The knot in the Heart of the Kosmos relaxes to
allow its only God, and overflows the Spirit ravished and enraptured by the lost and found Beloved. And gone the
Godless destiny of death and desperation, and gone the madness of a life committed to uncare, and gone the tears
and terror of the brutal days and endless nights where time alone would rule.

And I-I rise to taste the dawn, and find that love alone will shine today. And the Shining says: to love it all, and love
it madly, and always endlessly, and ever fiercely, to love without choice and thus enter the All, to love it mindlessly
and thus be the All, embracing the only and radiant Divine: now as Emptiness, now as Form, together and forever,
the Godless search undone, and love alone will shine today.

THE ONE THAT WAS TO COME

Today’s world of modernity gone slightly mad: Myth for the peasants, flatland naturalism for the intelligentsia. It is
more than a little ironic, then, that it was science, Descended science, that in the closing decades of the twentieth
century would rediscover the self-organizing and self-transcending nature of evolution itself. More than a little ironic
that in uniting the “two arrows” of time it would make Eros the single and all-pervading principle of manifestation.
More than a little ironic that it would pave the way for an evolution beyond rationality, since it has clearly
demonstrated that evolution stops for nobody, that each stage passes into a larger tomorrow. And if today is

rationality, tomorrow is transrationality, and there is not a single scientific argument in the world that can disagree
with that, and every argument in favor of it.

And so there we stand now, at rationality, poised on the edge of transrational perception, a scientia visionis that
is bringing here and there, but ever more clearly, to all sorts of people in all sorts of places, powerful glimmers of a
true Descent of the all-pervading World Soul.

Notes

CHAPTER 1. THE WEB OF LIFE

  1. See Roger Walsh’s perceptive discussion of this in Staying alive.
  2. Warwick Fox has given a very useful summary of these historical developments; see Toward a transpersonal ecology.
  3. Capra, Turning point, p. 16.
  4. In Diamond & Orenstein, Reweaving the world, pp. 156, 161.
  5. In Devall & Sessions, Deep ecology, pp. 8, 20.
  6. Laszlo, Evolution, pp. 9, 4.
  7. Ibid., p. 5.
  8. Exactly how these domains are related, whether they are in fact three spheres or instead just aspects of one encompassing
sphere, and how they might relate individually or collectively to the “theosphere”—the Divine Domain: these are questions we
will want eventually to address. In the meantime perhaps we can accept these three domains as provisionally given.

To present only one example now: In Ecology, community, and lifestyle, Arne Naess points out that “humankind is the first
species on earth with the intellectual capacity to limit its numbers consciously and live in an enduring, dynamic equilibrium with
other forms of life,” but that “a global culture . . . is now encroaching upon all the world’s milieux, desecrating living conditions
for future generations” (p. 23; my italics). This is surely true, and the fact that human culture can consciously either accord with
the biosphere (living conditions) or deviate from it shows precisely that culture is not
in all ways the same thing as the
biosphere—it is differentiated from it in some significant ways, even though it depends upon it for its own existence; and that
differentiation we call the noosphere. We will be returning to this topic time and time again throughout this book, each time
refining it; so I ask my ecological friends, many of whom are profoundly suspicious of anything resembling a “noosphere,” to bear
with me until the arguments unfold more fully.
  9. Bertalanffy, General system theory, p. 87.
10. Lovejoy, Great chain of being, whose themes we will explore in detail in chapter 9.
11. Ibid., p. 26.
12. Laszlo, Evolution, p. 14.
13. Ibid., p. 13.
14. Thus, for example, the following from Ilya Prigogine: After quoting Ivor Leclerc, who says, “In our century we are suffering
the consequences of the separation of science and philosophy which followed upon the triumph of Western physics in the 18th
century,” Prigogine goes on to say: “However, I believe that the situation today is much more favorable in the sense that the
recent rediscovery of time [i.e., irreversibility] leads to a new perspective. Now the dialogue between hard sciences on one side,
human sciences and philosophy on the other, may become again fruitful as it was during the classic period of Greece or during the
17th century of Newton and Leibniz”—this being exactly the point after which what we might call the “great fracture” (between
life and matter, or more accurately, interiority and exteriority) occurred. Nobel Prize conversations, Saybrook, 1985, p. 121.

15. Gardner, Quest for mind, p. 172.
16. Jakobson, On language, p. 11. This is the editor’s summary of Jakobson’s view.
17. Gardner, Quest for mind, p. 172.
18. Encyclopedia of philosophy, ed. Paul Edwards, vol. 2, p. 474.
19. Koestler, Ghost in the machine.
20. Eisler, Chalice and the blade, p. 205.
21. Taylor, Sources of the self, pp. 19, 20.
22. Ibid., p. 31, my italics.
23. Ibid., pp. 27, 78.
24. Ibid., pp. 22, 98.
25. Ibid., p. 88.
26. In “The evolution of consciousness? Transpersonal theories in light of cultural relativism,” Michael Winkelman marshals the
cultural relativist arguments against ranking any sort of consciousness achievement as higher or lower than another across
cultures. No cultural position is or can be superior to another, he says; it has to be decided on its own merits, and on those alone:

no position is intrinsically superior. He then proceeds to explain why his position is intrinsically superior.

Sensing a contradiction, he then exempts his own global-theorizing stance from having any adaptive value. He must do this,
because if he admits that a worldcentric, global perspectivism has adaptive advantage over narrower perspectives, then he must
admit that his cultural stance of universal-global perspectivism is superior to those cultures that he studies that do not share
his universal pluralism.

Thus, Winkelman’s performative contradiction shows up most obviously in the fact that he is convinced that his overall stance
is superior to alternative and rival approaches, but his own theory cannot state why this is so. Instead, he simply lashes out at
those who profess any sort of ranking system (and he does so using his implicit ranking system). This performative contradiction
is then extended to all of religion, with the same results: nobody can say anything is higher or deeper; whatever works for one
culture is absolutely as good as any other, as long as it is functioning in an adaptive fashion.

Besides being an incorrect assumption (are the Nazis as good as anybody else? We’re not allowed to judge them with our own
standards), the position is also secretly biased. The collapse of cultural values into adaptive or functional fit is, as we will see in
great detail, simply part of the fundamental Enlightenment paradigm, and as such, is in its own way very ethnocentric (we will
examine this in chapters 4, 11, 12, and 13).

What little theoretical evidence Winkelman presents for his position comes mostly from synchronic structuralism (e.g., Lévi-
Strauss), which is now widely acknowledged to be unable to account for development (or diachronic structures) at all. Lévi-
Strauss (e.g.,
The savage mind) believed that early cultures displayed hidden structural patterns that, when objectively
represented, were every bit as complex as patterns displayed by advanced cultures, and thus the cognitive richness of early
cultures was not fundamentally lacking with respect to modern cultures. This led him likewise to claim that there was no
fundamental difference in cognition between a five-year-old and a scientist.

But this is like saying that since the Schroedinger wave equation, which represents the probability of an electron’s behavior, is
every bit as complex as the formulas of Aristotle’s formal logic, then there is no fundamental difference between an electron’s
cognitive capacity and Aristotle’s. The claim that the scientist and the five-year-old both possess incredibly complex structures is
not enough to show that there aren’t also profound differences in capacity as well. And, indeed, Lévi-Strauss subsequently
withdrew his claim about five-year-olds and scientists being essentially equivalent in capacity, and this recanting of merely
synchronic (unchanging) structuralism marked the end of a lack of developmental (diachronic) sensitivity. Culture is not as static,
synchronic, and ahistorical as the early structuralists imagined, but rather involves deeply historical and developmental currents,
and cultural/historical development shows broad learning trends, in cognitive, moral, legal, and technological aspects (as we
will see).

Thus, if we acknowledge (with Winkelman) that universal perspectivism is better (in any sense of the word) than narrow
ethnocentrism (and this is the true part of all cultural relativists’ stance), and since this worldcentric perspectivism is not simply
given to cultures at the start but develops and evolves slowly over the millennia, then we are justified in examining the
developmental stages that lead to a capacity to take a worldcentric stance. This leads inexorably to theories of communication
and the evolution of societies, and this is precisely the path that Habermas and others have taken.

In so doing, Habermas arrives at a series of universal validity claims that are cross-cultural and extra-linguistic, and open to
fallibilist criteria. There is, so to speak, no other way to proceed if we want to actually acknowledge the moments of truth in
cultural relativism, moments of truth that, if pursued sincerely (and not merely exempted from their own claims), lead inexorably
to universalist validity claims (as we will see). These claims do not rank so much between cultures, but within cultures: the
cultures themselves recognize higher and lower, or deeper and shallower, or better and worse values. And, not the values per se
but the types of values can indeed be ranked—and are ranked by the societies themselves (criteria we will be investigating as the
book proceeds).

We will, in the succeeding chapters, be explaining Habermas’s views in great detail, and their significance will, I believe,
become quite apparent. (For a critique of Winkelman’s position in light of these more recent developments, see note 26 to
chapter 5.)

27. Thus, universal and worldcentric pluralism is a very difficult, very rare, very special, very elite stance. In many ways I happen

to agree with that elite stance. But I am not impressed when these elitists call it anti-elitist.

28. We will be going into this in detail in chapters 9 and 10, so for the moment a few very brief examples will suffice. In his
book Forgotten Truth, Huston Smith summarizes the world’s major religions in one phrase: “a hierarchy of being and knowing.”
Chögyam Trungpa, Rinpoche pointed out in Shambhala that the essential and background idea pervading all of the philosophies
of the East, from India to Tibet to China, lying behind everything from Shintoism to Taoism to shamanism, is “a hierarchy of earth,
human, heaven,” which he also pointed out is equivalent to “body, mind, spirit.” And Coomaraswamy in Hinduism and Buddhism
(New York: Philosophical Library, 1943) noted that the world’s great religions, bar none, “in their different degrees represent a
hierarchy of types or levels of consciousness extending from animal to deity, and according to which one and the same individual
may function on different occasions.”

CHAPTER 2. THE PATTERN THAT CONNECTS

  1. We will be returning to this topic throughout the book; I can’t state my final position until we discuss the IOU principle, in
chapter 14. Suffice it to say, for now, that trying to decide absolutely in favor of “unvarying laws” or “learned habits” involves us
in various contradictions. To say that there are no fixed laws, only learned habits, is itself a fixed law. But to say that there are
only fixed laws is to ignore those laws that do in fact develop.

  2. Hofstadter, Gödel, Escher, Bach, pp. 142, 146. Likewise, as Jakobson pointed out, “An important structural particularity of
language is that at no stage of resolving higher units into their component parts does one encounter informationally pointless
fragments.” On language, p. 11.

  3. Edwards, Encyclopedia of philosophy, vol. 5, pp. 202–3.
  4. Bataille, Visions of excess, p. 174.
  5. Ibid.
  6. Quoted ibid., p. xi.
  7. Culler, On deconstruction, p. 215. My italics.
  8. Ibid., p. 123.
  9. Philosophical discourse of modernity, p. 197. As I point out in the next paragraph of the text, sliding contexts do not
invalidate the existence of truth, but simply situate it. And there are many nonarbitrary ways that contexts are held still in order
for the situating to occur. Habermas points out that in communication, for example, the presumption of identical meaning must
be made or else the communication does not, and cannot, get started in the first place: and that stops the slide.

10. Varela, in Thompson, Gaia, p. 50.
11. Koestler, Ghost in the machine, p. 63, my italics.
12. Whitehead’s “Category of the Ultimate” includes three concepts: creativity, many, and one. In a sense, he could have
reduced that to creativity and holon, since holon is one/many (and since many and one never exist separately). Whitehead’s
prehensive unification is the present, subjective holon passing as object into the succeeding present, subjective holon, so that
every holon prehends its entire actual universe, and lives on in the prehensive unification of all
its descendants
(“causality”)—with, of course, the whole series showing gradation (hierarchy), depending upon the degree of creativity injected
into the stream at any given moment.

This is why “emergence” as used in science doesn’t really explain anything, it only describes what in fact happens. The
explanation has to lie in something like Whitehead’s ultimate category of creativity, a feature of reality itself that accounts for
emergence and cannot itself be accounted for. We will be returning to this topic throughout this book, each time refining it. But it
is clear that some sort of Eros is involved in the process, or it could never get going in the first place. Eros/creativity shows up
especially in the self-transcending capacity of every holon.

13. In self-transformation or self-transcendence, the agency of the subholons are subsumed in the new agency of the

superholon, and that new agency then exists in its own networks of new types of communion.

14. Jantsch, Self-organizing universe, p. 11.
15. Ibid., p. 183, my italics.
16. Laszlo, Evolution, pp. 76, 78, 35, 36.
17. Murphy’s summary of Simpson’s view. Murphy, The future of the body, p. 28.
18. Ibid., pp. 28–29.
19. Jantsch, Self-organizing universe, p. 49.
20. Quoted in Gardner, Quest for mind, p. 199–200.
21. Foss and Rothenberg, Second medical revolution, p. 151.
22. Hofstadter, Gödel, Escher, Bach, p. 308.
23. Laszlo, Evolution, p. 36.
24. Varela et al., The embodied mind, pp. 88, 90. We will be returning to this important work at several places in the following
chapters, drawing on its considerable strengths (and suggesting a few possible weaknesses). I can’t reference their work as fully
as I would like in this chapter because I need to introduce several new topics before the significant contours of their valuable
contribution can be fully appreciated. But I believe the general outlines presented in this chapter are consonant with the main
themes of their work on enactive cognition and structural coupling, and when we later return to their work, these parallels will, I
believe, be more apparent. See notes 49 and 52, below; chap. 4, notes 13 and 43; chap. 14, note 1.

25. Mayr, Growth of biological thought, p. 63.
26. We can see why a holon acted in a particular way, but not that it would act in only that way.
27. Natural, monological sciences study holons that, through a relatively free emergence, have settled into habits so fixed, so
stable, with such a minimum of creativity, that their behavior approaches (and thus mistakenly appears to follow) immutable

laws. This, I take it, is the essence of Sheldrake’s position.

28. Laszlo, Evolution, p. 196.
29. Bertalanffy, General system theory, pp. 74, 87.
30. Goldsmith, The Way, p. 28.
31. Sheldrake, New science of life, p. 74.
32. Varela, Principles of biological autonomy, p. 86.
33. Naess, Ecology, community, and lifestyle, p. 58.
34. Ibid.
35. Jantsch, Self-organizing universe, pp. 33, 16.
36. This does not mean that every transcendence necessarily includes every predecessor in every detail, but simply that each
transcendence builds upon some of the fundamental features of its predecessor(s). We will see numerous examples of this as we
proceed.

37. Varela, Principles of biological autonomy, p. 86.
38. Mitchell (ed.), Nobel Prize conversations, p. 59.
39. This turns out to be very important in development, where the failure to surrender an exclusivity structure results in
fixation, or pathologically narrowed identity. In human development this is the difference between, for example, an oral drive and
an oral fixation: the need for food is a basic structure that remains in existence in subsequent development, but if the infant
exclusively clings to it, an oral fixation results; it refuses to be negated and preserved, and wants only preservation, hence
fixation—Hawaii wants to be part of the Union but won’t surrender its right to print its own money.

All development is fundamentally the conversion of exclusivity structures to basic structures, which is another way of saying

that one still possesses the function but is not exclusively identified with it.

40. Sheldrake, New science of life, pp. 83, 87, 88; my italics.
41. Laszlo, Evolution, p. 54.
42. Sheldrake, The presence of the past, pp. 120–21.
43. Koestler, Ghost in the machine, p. 50.
44. In the same vein, some critics object to the use of the terms “vertical” and “horizontal” (not to mention “higher” and
“lower”), because they feel that those notions are, among other things, either anthropocentric or patriarchal (androcentric) or
“old paradigm.” And this goes hand in hand with these critics’ entire rejection of the notion of holarchy itself, which seems
confused, in that most of these critics also claim to be holistic.

But that confusion stems, as I will try to show later, from mistaking great span with great depth, mistaking “wider” with
“higher” (which then leads them to reject the concept of “higher” or “vertical” altogether, since they believe that it is not
necessary, being merely subsumed under the concept of “wider”). This is, I will suggest, a form of reductionism, and we will have
much to say about the inherent problems of that approach in our discussion of ecofeminism and deep ecology.

For the moment, then, let me repeat that I believe that what these critics are really (and rightly) objecting to is not holarchy
per se (as Laszlo said, “the empirical evidence for this is indisputable”), but rather pathological holarchy wherever it appears, and
particularly as it appears in anthropocentrism and androcentrism, where agency is drastically out of balance with communion,
and where certain arrogant holons have usurped their role in the Kosmos. This is one of the major topics in volume 2 of this
series.

45. Transcription is at work already in the models of subatomic particles: how does what we recognize as, say, an electron (its
deep structure) actually manifest as a given particle? The collapse of the wave function is an example of transcription (after all,
the electron manifests as an electron and not a frog). In the biosphere we see transcription in an explicit form with, to give only
one example, nucleic acid reproduction, which involves both translation and transcription (which are so named); transformation
in this domain is called “mutation.” In the noosphere, cognitive behaviorists and linguists, from Piaget to Chomsky, have dealt
with various transcription rules, whereby the potentials of the deep structure are unfolded in actual surface structures. And much
of the work on “worldviews”—from Gebser to Heidegger to Habermas—involves elaborating the pre-articulate deep structures of
the worldview (or pre-understanding) that tends to govern the actual surface perceptions of its inhabitants. We will see many
more examples as we proceed.

46. Of course, both translation and transformation actually deal with whole/parts (there are only holons); but transformation
deals with emergent holons that subsume those of its predecessors, and thus is “more holistic.” The wholes of the previous level
are now parts of the senior level, so the “whole units” of the previous translation are now “parts” of the new: the senior has more
depth and is thus more encompassing.

Differentiation divides and produces more regimes on a given level, but integration produces a new level, a new wholeness, a
new regime, a new deep structure—it is a transformation, not a mere translation (we will return to this topic of differentiation
and integration in tenet 12).

We heard Jantsch explain that evolution was not simply expanding communion (or self-adaptation), for that produces merely

more of the same, not something novel. Likewise, Laszlo reminds us that expanded agency, even in its living, self-organizing form
(as autopoiesis), cannot account for evolution either: “Autopoiesis is not evolution, however, even if autopoietic cellular
automata models can simulate certain evolutionary phenomena such as the convergence of cells into multicellular systems. In
order to understand evolution one needs also to understand how discontinuous, nonlinear change takes place in real-world
dynamic systems” (Evolution, p. 39). In other words, one needs not merely translation models but transformation models.

As for translation itself, the fact that all holons are involved in translation means, in the broadest sense, that all holons are
signs. Borrowing from Peirce, I define a sign as: any aspect of reality that stands for another, to another. Thus, even atoms
translate the physical forces around them into terms that they respond to: an empty orbital shell is a sign, to an electron, that it
may enter the shell. It is an aspect of reality (the empty shell) that stands for another aspect (it may be entered), to another
aspect (the electron). All holons are signs because all agents are always agency-in-communion (or agents-in-context), and all signs
are sliding because contexts are boundless.

And finally, this is why no signs, in any domain, are merely representational, or merely one holon representing another holon;
signs are always a holon representing a holon to a holon. See Jakobson’s interesting discussion on this in relation to Peirce: “all
signification is but the ‘translation of a sign into another system of signs’”[Framework of language, p. 10.]—which, among other
things, is why linguistic theory can never define a sign without reference to the system in which the sign occurs (de Saussure), and
why poststructuralism has been able further to point to endlessly sliding signification (although that is not so totally
“deconstructive” as they imagine, but simply normal life in any world). And this also prevents knowledge from being merely
representational; an interpretive moment is built into cognition (which we will examine at length in chapter 4). [For an “integral
semiotics,” see The Eye of Spirit, chap. 5, note 12.]

47. All types of holons at the same level would be destroyed; the different types that are also destroyed are higher; the

different types not destroyed are lower.

48. This principle also holds for all types of human developmental sequences. For example, if we destroyed all conventional
moral stages, we would also destroy all postconventional stages, but not preconventional stages. Destroy all concepts, and all
rules are gone, but images still remain—and so on.

This principle also points up the bankruptcy of pure heterarchy. If there were only a horizontal dimension of pure heterarchy,
where everything exists solely by virtue of its internal connections or relations to everything else, then if I destroyed all of one
type of anything, I would simultaneously destroy all types of everything, since there is no ontological gradation of any sort in a
pure heterarchy. This is where flatland ontologies fall apart; they ignore evolution and the meaning of emergence. There are
aspects of evolution that are perfectly continuous, and aspects that are quantized or discontinuous, and emphasizing exclusively
one or the other leads to pathological heterarchy and pathological hierarchy, respectively.

49. That agency is always agency-in-communion is a central feature, as I construe it, of Varela’s enactive paradigm. As I would
phrase it, a holon’s agency (“intrinsic self-organizing properties”) enacts a worldspace (brings forth a domain of distinctions) and
does so relatively autonomously, with the crucial addition that a holon’s agency is partly a result of “structural couplings” with the
appropriate worldspace (all of which we will be explaining in more detail as we proceed). Agency as agency-in-communion thus
explains both relative autonomy and micro/macro codetermination. As Varela, Thompson, and Rosch put it:

“The crucial point here is that we do not retain the notion of an independent, pregiven environment but let it fade into the
background in favor of so-called intrinsic factors [agency]. Instead we emphasize that the very notion of what an environment is
cannot be separated from what organisms are and what they do. This point has been made quite eloquently by Richard Lewontin:
‘The organism and the environment are not actually separately determined. The environment is not a structure imposed on living
beings from the outside but is in fact a creation of those beings. . . .’”

They continue: “The key point, then, is that the species brings forth and specifies its own domain of problems to be solved by
satisficing; this domain does not exist ‘out there’ in an environment that acts as a landing pad for organisms that somehow drop
or parachute into the world. Instead, living beings and their environments stand in relation to each other through mutual
specification or codetermination. Thus what we describe as environmental regularities are not external features that have been
internalized, as representationism and adaptationism both assume. Environmental regularities are the result of a conjoint history,
a congruence that unfolds from a long history of codetermination” (Embodied mind, p. 198).

This is also why the “unit” of evolution is, basically, a micro/macro unit, which is to say: almost any holon in existence. “A full
list of units looks rather formidable: DNA short sequences, genes, whole gene families, the cell itself, the species genome, the
individual, ‘inclusive’ groups of genes that are carried by different individuals, the social group, the actually interbreeding
population, the entire species, the ecosystem of actually interacting species, and the global biosphere. Each unit [holon] harbors
modes of coupling and selection constraints [communion], has unique self-organizing qualities [agency], and so has its own
emergent status with respect to other levels . . .” (pp. 192–93).

For more on the enactive paradigm, see note 52 below; chapter 4, notes 13 and 43; and chapter 14, note 1.
50. Jantsch, Self-organizing universe, p. 85.
51. A thousand years from now, quarks will have been found to contain as many new levels of particles as its investigators have

discovered new levels of consciousness in themselves; but that belief, needless to say, is not necessary for this argument.

52. In Up from Eden, I tried to demonstrate that this was the only way we could really understand developmental pathologies;
namely, as disturbances in relational exchanges with a social environment at the same depth, with disturbances on one level
(physical, emotional, linguistic) reverberating throughout the entire system, inclining other levels to reproduce the distortion
developmentally.

And, as we will see throughout this book, same-level relational exchange does not mean that the micro exchanges with a
pregiven macro: they co-create each other in emergent worldspaces. What this means will become more obvious as we proceed.
For the moment, note Varela et al.: “The key point is that such systems do not operate by representation [of a pregiven world].
Instead of
representing an independent world, they enact a world as a domain of distinctions that is inseparable from the
structure embodied by the cognitive system” (or, more generally, by the deep structure or agency of the holon; Embodied mind,
p. 140).

53. Jantsch, Self-organizing universe, p. 75.
54. Laszlo, Evolution, p. 25.
55. Lowe, Understanding Whitehead, p. 36. Lowe’s wording.
56. Ibid.; the last phrase is Lowe’s.
57. Derrida, Positions, p. 101.
58. Coward, Derrida and Indian philosophy, p. 40.
59. Ibid., pp. 40, 135, 137, 148.
60. Derrida, Positions, p. 26.
61. Culler’s translation, in Sturrock, Structuralism and since, p. 164.
62. Or, as Saussure put it, “Language is a system of interdependent terms in which the value of each term results solely from
the simultaneous presence of the others”—that is, it is never simply present on its own. Quoted in Hawkes, Structuralism and
semiotics, p. 26.

As for the differentiating process of language, Saussure’s famous quote puts it in a strong form: “In language there are only
differences without positive terms. Their most precise characteristic is in being what the others are not. Whether we take the
signified or the signifier, language has neither ideas nor sounds that existed before the linguistic system, but only conceptual and
phonic differences that have issued from the system” (p. 28). And that is where integration is crucial, as Hawkes summarizes:
“Language stands as the supreme example of a self-contained [relatively autonomous] relational structure whose constituent
parts have no significance unless and until they are integrated within its bounds.”

Saussure’s great breakthrough was to treat language as a relatively autonomous holon, such that its structure or regime
constituted the differentiating and integrating patterns that governed every element (subholon) in the system, so that a heap of
otherwise entirely meaningless elements come together to form meaningful signs—by virtue of the system, the higher holon that
confers meaning on the subholons by holding them in a common relationship. Saussure did not quite win through to a totally
holonic view, but it was a major step in the right direction, and had an enormous historical impact (virtually all structuralists, and
therefore all poststructuralists, and many semioticians, trace their lineage to Saussure). We will return to his thoughts on
linguistic signs in chapter 7.

Finally, that “nothing is ever simply present” has almost nothing to do with mystical Presence, as we will see later. Nor is it to

be confused with Buddhist Emptiness.

63. Habermas, Philosophical discourse of modernity, p. 359.
64. Ibid., pp. 345-46. Habermas makes clear that he is, in part, picking up certain Hegelian themes and pursuing them along a
road not taken, that of reason as communicative action. Hegel’s entire philosophy is, in a sense, the philosophy of holons, and the
differentiating-and-integrating dialectic that drives all development.

65. Dreyfus and Rabinow, Michel Foucault, p. 55.
66. Laszlo, Evolution, p. 35.
67. Futuyma, Evolutionary biology, p. 289, my italics.
68. This is so for the same reason, as Varela pointed out, that a level in a holarchy is external to its juniors and internal to its

seniors.

69. The whole of literary theory can be seen as a rather spirited attempt to decide just what we will identify as a literary holon,
and therefore where we can find or locate the meaning of a text. It used to be that “meaning” was something the author
created and simply put into a text, and the reader simply pulled it out. This view is now regarded, by all parties, as hopelessly
naive.

With the arrival of psychoanalysis, which undermined the autonomous ego with organic drives (i.e., there are unconscious
drives motivating the supposedly “autonomous” ego), it was recognized that some meaning could therefore be unconscious, or
unconsciously generated, and this unconscious meaning would find its way into the text even though the author was unconscious
of it. It was therefore the job of the psychoanalyst, and not the naive reader, to pull this hidden meaning out.

The “hermeneutics of suspicion” (Ricoeur), in its many forms, thus came to view texts as repositories of unconscious meaning
that could be pulled out only by the knowing critic. Any repressed, oppressed, or otherwise marginalized context would show up,
disguised, in the text, and the text was a testament to the repression, oppression, marginalization. Marginalized context was
hidden subtext.

The Marxist variation was that the critics themselves existed in the context of capitalist-industrial social practices of covert
domination, and these hidden contexts (and therefore meanings) could be found in (and therefore pulled out of) any text written
by any person in that context. Similarly, texts would be read in the context of racism, sexism, elitism, speciesism, jingoism,
imperialism, logocentrism, phallocentrism.

Various forms of structuralism and hermeneutics fought vigorously to find the “real” context which would, therefore, provide
the real and final meaning, which would undercut (or supersede) all other interpretations. Foucault, in his archaeological period,
outdid them both, situating both structuralism and hermeneutics in an episteme (later, dispositif) that itself was the cause and
context of the type of people who would even want to do hermeneutics and structuralism in the first place.

In part in reaction to some of this, the New Criticism (actually many decades old now) had said, basically, to hell with all that.
The text, in and by itself, is the autonomous literary holon. Ignore the personality (conscious or unconscious) of the author, the
time, the place, and look solely at the structural integrity of the text (its regime, its code). “Affect-response” or “reader-criticism”
theory (Fish) reacted strongly to all that and maintained that since meaning is only generated in reading (or in viewing the
artwork), then the meaning of the text is actually found in the response of the reader. The phenomenologists (e.g., Iser,
Ingarden) had tried a combination of the two: the text has gaps (“spots of indeterminancy”), and the meaning of the gaps can be
found in the reader.

And deconstruction came along and said, basically, you’re all wrong (it’s very hard to trump that)—meaning is context

dependent, and contexts are boundless.

While I agree with that latter statement of deconstruction, I do so for almost opposite reasons, because what interests me is
not why all of those theories of meaning are wrong, but why all of them are right. They are all (relatively) true snapshots of a
particular context, and they can all be relatively accurate because contexts are always contexts within contexts, making room for
each and all (except where they deny other contexts).

The study of holarchy,

is the study of nested truths. Deconstruction in its American form simply takes the
photographic negative of that and declares any approach (other than its own) to be the study of nested lies, which is precisely
why that attitude lands it squarely in nihilism, whereas the study of nested truths leads not to nihilism but to Emptiness, the
creative plenum of the Kosmos. [See The Eye of Spirit, chaps. 4 and 5.]

in short,

70. Laszlo, Evolution, p. 41.
71. Ibid. Compare Varela et al. “What all these diverse phenomena have in common is that in each case a network gives rise to
new properties, which researchers try to understand in all their generality. One of the most useful ways of capturing the
emergent properties that these various systems have in common is through the notion of an ‘attractor’ in dynamical systems
theory.” Varela et al., Embodied mind, p. 88.

72. Laszlo, Evolution, p. 43.
73. Ibid.
74. Ibid., p. 46.
75. Ibid.
76. Laszlo, The choice, p. 93.
77. Or Jonas Salk: “It is in the nature of the organism to be oriented for the change that occurs. The intrinsic nature of the
organism [regime, deep structure] influences the range and direction of change that can occur; the change that occurs becomes
added to others, all of which together seem to be ‘causes’ toward which the developing organism is drawn, and the word ‘cause’
in this context obtains the philosophical meaning of ‘end or purpose’.” All quotes from Jakobson, On language, pp. 481, 482,
483.

And, of course, Sheldrake’s immensely thoughtful application of morphogenetic fields (which he now calls simply morphic
fields) is an attempt to explain many of the incontrovertible facts of teleological development that simply cannot be explained by
materialistic reductionism.

78. Gardner, Quest for mind, pp. 187–88. I have substituted “development” for “genesis.”
This also points up a fact that all psychological growth theorists (especially the humanistic and transpersonal psychologists)
have known for a long time: most neurosis is due not primarily to past conditioning per se, but to a future omega prevented from
emerging. Even Freud’s fixations, when they occurred, were aborted omega points: libido cannot distribute in its normal and
preferred pattern, but instead is traumatized in its growth, much like stepping on an acorn. These aborted omega drives then
become conditioned and thus appear as past
fixations, but that is not how they started. Recovery therapies in general
(“regression in service of the ego”) thus attempt to return to the point where the past conditioning was an aborted future growth,
then take the boot off the acorn, and thus allow the growth to proceed forward in a more normal pattern, following its more

natural omega. (Of course, it’s a little more complicated than that—the acorn has continued to grow in slightly twisted ways, and
this can’t simply be cleanly undone; but the point is clear enough.) If the past conditionings didn’t have a preferred pattern
(omega), they couldn’t have been aborted in the first place.

79. Quoted in Jakobson, On language, p. 483.
80. Ibid., pp. 481, 20.
81. Habermas, Philosophical discourse of modernity, p. 347.
82. Harold Coward’s wording, Derrida and Indian philosophy, p. 92, my italics.
83. Because holarchy is the study of nested truths, no matter how much we expand our contexts, this does not invalidate the
relative truths of smaller contexts. It negates their exclusiveness (or their ultimateness), but preserves their moment of truth,
their context-dependent truth. Even if we go beyond Freud (which I trust we will), even if we expand our contexts beyond the
isolated ego to the communitarian society, or to the whole biosphere, or even to God Thunderous and Almighty, this will not
change the fact that if I have a really vicious oral fixation, I am not going to have an altogether fun time in life.

CHAPTER 3. INDIVIDUAL AND SOCIAL

  1 Capra, Belonging to the universe, p. xii.
  2. In Diamond & Orenstein, Reweaving the world, p. 227.
  3. From The self and its brain, p. 17.
  4. Jantsch, Self-organizing universe, p. 117, 118.
  5. Evolution is indicated not necessarily by increasing size but by increasing depth, or degree of structural organization. In
Gödel, Escher, Bach, Hofstadter makes the point that, given that evolution is transcendence and inclusion (“embrace”), what is
included in all cases is the code or canon or regime, and not always the physical material; or sometimes, the physical material is
“shrunk” while the code is included. Thus, for example, the paleomammalian brain includes and envelops the reptilian brain, but
dinosaurs are much bigger than mammals. What the mammals include is not the size but the capacities and functions of the
reptilian brain and its codons. Thus, while size is sometimes an indicator, that fact obscures what is really going on: increasing
depth of embrace, not increase in spatial extension.

Further—and this is really the most important point, but a point I can’t make until the concepts of the next chapter are
introduced—the size factor, or physical extension, applies only to the exterior or surface forms of holons, and does not apply to
their interiors. In cognition, for example, concepts include symbols but are not physically bigger than symbols. Interiors deal with
degrees of intentions, not extensions, and trying to convert all evolutionary changes into physical size is simply part of the
flattening of the Kosmos, part of the brutalization of qualitative distinctions, that has marked the instrumentalism of all flatland
ontologies.

  6. In other words, communities get smaller between levels, larger within levels (up to eco-equilibrium).
  7. We already heard Varela point out that a given dimension in a holarchy is internal to its seniors and external to its
juniors—that’s the same as saying the cosmos is internal to the bios and the bios is external to the cosmos: literally, out of the
physical world: transcends and includes.

  8. Jantsch, Self-organizing universe, p. 157.
  9. Quoted in Koestler, Ghost in the machine, pp. 277–78.
10. Ibid., p. 279.
11. Ibid., p. 283.
12. Jantsch, Self-organizing universe, p. 167.
13. Ibid., p. 168.
14. Ibid., p. 169.
15. In Jantsch and Waddington, Evolution and consciousness, p. 173.
16. And notice that these social holons become larger, not smaller, in physical size, because once on a new level, that level

expands up to its sustainable limits.

CHAPTER 4. A VIEW FROM WITHIN

  1. Teilhard, Phenomenon of man, p. 57.
  2. My own claim, however, is that the distinction interior/exterior is not an emergent quality, but rather exists from the first
moment a boundary is drawn; exists, that is, from the moment of creation. What most panpsychists mean by consciousness or
mind is not what I mean by consciousness, which is depth. Because consciousness is depth, it is itself literally unqualifiable. It is
depth, not any particular, qualifiable level of depth (such as sensation or impulse or perception or intention)—those are all forms
of consciousness, not consciousness as such.

In other words, depth isn’t a quality, like sensation or impulse or idea, but a relationship (or opening) among holons. Thus, I
have never been satisfied with any of the panpsychical theories, because they qualify depth with particular manifestations of
depth (such as sensations or feelings or intentions), and these do not exist throughout the holarchy of being, but emerge only at
particular levels of depth, whereas depth itself is present from the start (or wherever there is a boundary). I am a pan-depthist,
not a pan-psychist, since the psyche itself emerges only at a particular level of depth.

This is why I keep saying that I don’t really care how far down the reader wishes to push “consciousness,” and why I’m not
really concerned with whether plants have sensations, etc., because by “consciousness” most people mean some favorite form of
consciousness (sensations or intentions or desire, etc.), and none of those go all the way down. But depth does go all the way
down, and depth is unqualifiable.

When I say that consciousness or depth is unqualifiable, I mean, in a strong sense, to evoke the Mahayana Buddhist notion of
shunyata, or pure Emptiness, and for the moment I am further following the Yogachara Buddhist notion that pure Emptiness and
pure Consciousness are synonymous. Consciousness is not a thing or a process—we can just as well, with William James, deny
that it even exists, because it is ultimately Emptiness, the opening or clearing in which the form of beings manifest themselves,
and not any particular manifestation itself, a type of Zen reconstruction of Heidegger that dispenses with Dasein per se and de-
anthropocentrizes depth. The Being of beings is depth, which, being unqualifiable as such,
is finally Emptiness as such
(consciousness as such); but since Dasein does participate self-reflexively in depth, Dasein can realize Emptiness (I will be
returning to this topic as the story unfolds into the transpersonal domains).

  3. Teilhard, Phenomenon of man, p. 60, note 1.
  4. The interiority of one stage is taken into the interiority of the next and thus becomes an external

form within that

interiority, a three-dimensional-chess detail that we will get to later.

  5. Most systems theorists, that is, absolutize “B”—absolutize living systems (or the biosphere). As Habermas tellingly points
out, they are involved, not in metaphysics (absolutizing A), but metabiology (absolutizing B). It is with this metabiology that they
then attempt to explain cultural evolution (Luhmann’s approach being by far the most sophisticated), but they leave out precisely
those things that make culture culture and not merely life.

Many ecotheorists further take this metabiological absolutizing and not only attempt to explain culture with its terms, but also
necessarily see culture as a lamentable deviation from those terms: all conclusions guaranteed by the prior absolutizing. We will
return to this topic in later chapters, when we trace the rise of this metabiological absolutizing back to its source in the
Enlightenment paradigm.

  6. Jantsch, Self-organizing universe, p. 56.
  7. Sheldrake, Presence of the past, p. 105.
  8. Murphy, Future of the body, p. 27.
  9. See especially The Philosophical discourse of modernity, Communication and the evolution of society, and The theory of
communicative action. After giving Habermas’s views, I will sometimes translate them into the more familiar terms that we have
been using, without, at that point, implying that Habermas would necessarily agree with all subsequent discussion; in any event,
Habermas’s own views will be clearly indicated.

10. Wuthnow et al., Cultural analysis, pp. 1, 3, 4, 2.
11. Ibid., pp. 7, 6.
12. As we will see, Foucault’s archaeological method simply focused on the behavior of serious speech acts (discourse-objects)
in a discursive formation. Not only did he bracket the truth of these statements (the standard phenomenological bracketing), he
bracketed, or attempted to bracket, the meaning of the statements as well; and then he simply described, in a distantiated
stance, the behavior of these discursive formations, much as one would describe the behavior of gas particles or an ant colony.
He then sought the rules of rarefication (transformation) that governed the systematic discursive formation itself, a sort of
existential structuralism.

It wasn’t that this approach was simply wrong, but that it depended upon factors that Foucault failed to take into account, not
the least of which was that serious speech acts could not themselves be identified for study without at least a rudimentary grasp
of their meaning (their interiors). Some sort of hermeneutics or interpretive measure had to be brought into the study alongside
of the archaeological “quasi-structuralism”: the detached study of exterior linguistic formations had to be supplemented with an
interior understanding of their meaning, and thus Foucault’s archaeology gave way to his more balanced “interpretive analytics.”
The reasons for this will become clearer as the narrative proceeds.

13. As I already briefly suggested, to the extent that we recognize that holons have an interior, and to the extent that all holons
exist by virtue of relational exchange with same-depth holons, then to say that a group of holons share a common physical space
(which everybody accepts) is also to say that they share a common interior space.

“Worldview” is too pan-psychic and suggests that, for example, cells share a developed cognitive map of the external world,
which is a bit much (although Varela’s biological cognition comes close, and I am comfortable with the way he presents it). But for
most purposes, I will usually adopt the more general term “worldspace,” which means the sum total of stimuli that can be

responded to (i.e., that have actual meaning or impact or registration). This cannot be determined by a mere empirical analysis of
action systems, because we all already exist in the same physical universe, so physical parameters alone cannot explain the
differences. Worldspaces are a priori to physical parameters (but not ultimately a priori to awareness, as we will see).

In other words, worldspace, as I use the term, does not have the ordinary panpsychic connotations or implications. Typical
panpsychism confuses consciousness with a particular level of consciousness (perception or intention or feeling) and then is
forced to push that “consciousness” all the way down. I am completely uninterested in that approach. Do atoms possess an
actual prehension (Whitehead) or perception (Leibniz)? I don’t know; that seems a bit much. But they do possess depth, and
therefore they do share a common depth. And a common depth is a worldspace, a worldspace created/disclosed by a particular
degree of shared depth. (I will continue to use Whitehead’s “prehension,” but only in this considerably changed context.)

I earlier noted that a sign is any aspect of reality that represents another, to another. So that all holons, existing by virtue of a
network of relationships with other holons—all holons are signs. That is, the regime of any holon translates only a particular
range of
registers only a circumscribed band of stimuli); the band of common translatable signs is a holon’s
worldspace. (I will in a moment add the crucial qualification that the meaning of “registerable signs” therefore implies that the
signs are in fact codetermined by the registration, and that codetermination is what I mean by a worldspace proper.)

signs

(it

Likewise, if a holon is to enter a deeper worldspace, it will have to transform, not merely translate, and this transformation
opens it to an entirely deeper and wider range of signs: a new world, a new worldspace, within which it will then translate
according to its own regime, or basic self-organizing principles, in structural coupling (agency-in-communion).

With reference to Varela’s enactive problematic, a holon’s agency enacts a worldspace (brings forth a domain of distinctions),
and does so relatively autonomously, with the added understanding that a holon’s agency is partly a result of its historical
“structural couplings” with the appropriate milieu. Agency as agency-in-communion thus enacts a worldspace codetermined by
subject and object.

Varela, Thompson, and Rosch: “Emergent states [are] constrained by a history of coupling with an appropriate world. By
enriching our account to include this dimension of structural coupling [codetermining communion], we can begin to appreciate
the capacity of a complex system to enact a world. . . . The result is that over time this coupling selects or enacts from a world of
randomness a domain of distinctions. In other words, on the basis of its autonomy the system selects or enacts a domain of
significance” (Embodied mind, pp. 151, 155–56).

Thus, as I earlier mentioned, a worldspace is not simply pregiven and then merely represented via a correspondence of
agency with its allegedly separable communions (other agencies). Rather, the coherency of its agency (autonomy), structurally
coupled with other communing agencies, enacts a worldspace mutually codetermined. Using a cellular automata (named Bittorio)
as an example: “We can say that a minimal kind of interpretation is involved, where interpretation is understood widely to mean
the enactment of a domain of distinctions out of a background. Thus Bittorio, on the basis of its autonomy (closure), performs an
interpretation in the sense that it selects or brings forth a domain of significance out of the background of its random milieu. . . .
These regularities constitute what we could call Bittorio’s world [worldspace]. It should be apparent that this world is not
pregiven and then recovered through a representation. . . . Bittorio provides, then, a paradigm for how closure [agency] and
coupling [communion] suffice to bring forth a world of relevance [a worldspace] for a system [a holon]” (p. 155). (For more on the
enactive paradigm, see notes 49 and 52 for chapter 2; note 43 below; and note 1 for chapter 14.)

I will have much to say about the representational paradigm later in chapter 13 (and throughout the book), and its relation to
interpretation. Indeed, much of the historical portion of this book is an examination of the rise (and eventual dominance) of the
representation (or reflection) paradigm (e.g., chap. 12: The Collapse of the Kosmos); we will begin this examination later in this
chapter under the heading “The Fundamental Enlightenment Paradigm.”

Worldspace, as I use the term, also has a rich philosophical background, beginning most notably with Leibniz and Kant, and
running through the hermeneuticists to Nietzsche, Heidegger, Gebser, Foucault, Gadamer, Piaget, Habermas, the structuralists,
etc. (as will become apparent later in this chapter). My own position can be succinctly summarized: the agency of each holon
establishes an opening or clearing in which similar-depthed holons can manifest to each other, for each other: agency-in-
communion (all the way down). These points will become clearer as we proceed.

One last note: in previous works I used the term pleromatic for the physical worldspace, or the sum total of stimuli the
physical world can enact; protoplasmic for cellular worldspace; uroboric for reptilian; typhonic for mammalian (limbic) . . .
which then runs into magic, mythic, and mental . . . and then the higher or transpersonal worldspaces. I will continue to use that
terminology here.

14. See Wilber, Eye to eye, chapter 2.
15. For Foucault, see notes 12, 17, 23, and 28, this chapter.
16. Donald Rothberg gives an excellent short summary of what amounts to the Right- and Left-Hand paths: “Contemporary
epistemology generally recognizes two main interrelated forms of knowledge: (1) naturalistic and (2) interpretive. (Some, of
course, maintain the priority or even the exclusivity of one of the two forms.) Naturalistic inquiry aims at empirical explanation,
conceived of as the development of theories that identify lawful or lawlike regularities and causal connections between variables.

. . . Interpretive inquiry aims at the understanding of meanings, whether subjective or intersubjective. The goal is to understand
the meaning of an individual’s action (e.g., ‘What did that mean to her?’ or ‘What did that mean in that specific context?’); the
often only implicit rules of a group or society (e.g., ‘What implicit and explicit rules do we follow in social interaction as students,
as co-workers, or as husband and wife?’); and the implicit or explicit meanings of texts and other expressions of human creative
activities. . . . Such meanings cannot be reduced to the identification of causal connections and require accounts making use of
intentional language rather than simply descriptive language.” Rothberg, “Contemporary epistemology,” in Forman, Problem of
pure consciousness, pp. 175–77.

17. As for its being almost that simple (phenomenologically, that is), take for example Heidegger’s hermeneutics (Left-Hand, or
interior) and Foucault’s archaeology (Right-Hand, or exterior), the latter being a variant of the structural/functional paradigm
applied to linguistic structures, or an attempt to describe discursive structures “purely” from the outside. Dreyfus and Rabinow:
“This devotion to the description of concrete structures understood as conditions of existence bears a striking similarity to what
Heidegger, in Being and Time, calls an existential analytic. But there is an important difference. For although both Heidegger and
Foucault attempt to . . . relate the ‘factical’ principles which structure the space [worldspace] governing the emergence of objects
and subjects, Heidegger’s method is hermeneutic or
internal, whereas Foucault’s is archaeological or external. Foucault is
explicitly rejecting both Husserlian phenomenology and Heideggerian hermeneutics when he opposes to the exegetical account
the exteriority of the archaeological attitude” (Michel Foucault, p. 57; my italics).

Foucault himself stated that the archaeologist isolates statements “in order to analyze them in an exteriority. . . . Perhaps we
should speak of ‘neutrality’ rather than exteriority; but even this word implies rather too easily a suspension of belief, whereas it
is a question of rediscovering that outside in which, in their deployed space, enunciative events are distributed” (pp. 57, 51; my
italics).

In more detail: “Foucault and the hermeneuticists agree that practices ‘free’ objects and subjects by setting up what Heidegger
calls a ‘clearing’ [worldspace],
in which only certain objects, subjects, or possibilities for actions can be identified and
individuated. They also agree that neither the primary relations of physical and social causality, nor the secondary relations of
intentional mental causality can account for the way practices free entities. But they differ fundamentally in their account of how
this freeing works. According to the hermeneuticists, who describe the phenomenon from the inside [Left-Hand], nondiscursive
practices ‘govern’ human action by setting up a horizon of intelligibility in which only certain discursive practices and their objects
and subjects make sense. Foucault, the archaeologist looking from outside [Right-Hand], rejects this appeal to meaning. He
contends that, viewed with external neutrality, the discursive practices themselves provide a meaningless space of rule-governed
transformations in which statements, subjects, objects, concepts and so forth are taken by those involved to be meaningful. . . .
The archaeologist studies mute statements and thus avoids becoming involved in the serious search for truth and meaning he
describes” (pp. 79, 85, my italics).

These are all familiar ploys from the Left-Hand and Right-Hand paths. Foucault’s exterior approach, his bracketing of truth and
meaning, his confinement to “mute” statements (monological), his “happy positivism”—these are all maneuvers of the Right-
Hand path, applied not to the bone-crunching concreteness of physical-social realities but to the exterior, material, archaeological
remnants of discursive practices: language looked at from the outside as a rule-governed system. (Even into his genealogy phase,
“Genealogy avoids the search for depth. Instead, it seeks the surfaces of events . . . ,” p. 106).

Foucault’s archaeology and genealogy are legitimate endeavors, but, as he soon came to realize, they cannot stand alone. In
fact, that approach, by itself, is perfectly contradictory: since it brackets truth (truth is merely something so labeled in a discursive
system, or so employed in service of power), then this approach cannot itself claim that what it is saying is true. It hovers above
the ground with no reason to be taken seriously. Rather, Foucault came to see that it has to be supplemented with Left-Hand
approaches and a more balanced overview, including not only nondiscursive social practices but also hermeneutic interiors (or, at
the least, a better interpretation of interpretation). Dreyfus and Rabinow: “What Foucault offers in The History of Sexuality is an
incisive example of what a better interpretation looks like.” As Gilles Deleuze would remark, Foucault came to “thinking of the
past as it is condensed on the inside.” Dreyfus and Rabinow conclude that Foucault’s approach might be called “interpretive
analytics,” which seems fine, though they do note, with many critics, that while Foucault’s work was immensely suggestive in this
area, he nonetheless “owes us an interpretive description of his own right way to do interpretation. He has not provided us one
yet” (p. 183). Alas, his death removed that possibility.

18. Subtle reductionism reduces Left-Hand to Right-Hand dimensions; it often further reduces the Upper Right to the Lower
Right, and emphasizes purely the holistic system over individuals; systems theory does indeed often do this, and most New Age
paradigms and ecotheorists follow this version of subtle reductionism.

19. Habermas, Philosophical discourse, pp. 363, 367.
20. Taylor, Hegel, pp. 10, 22, and Sources of the self, p. 233.
21. Essay on man.
22. Lovejoy, The great chain, p. 211.
23. As we noted, in Foucault’s earlier work, especially the archaeology, he bracketed both truth and meaning (“double

phenomenology”), and he consequently was himself disdainful of anything resembling “depth” languages (I actually agree with
many of his conclusions, but often for very different reasons, as we will see). His double bracketing (“a phenomenology to end
phenomenology”) therefore was excluded from depth and interpretation from the start: just the exteriors. Nonetheless, the
sciences that he saw as beginning to escape the “Age of Man” and “humanism” were precisely those sciences that began to
reintroduce the notion of depth (psychoanalysis, ethnology, linguistics). And when Foucault later moved from archaeology and
genealogy to ethics, he himself began a more judicious use of “understanding from the inside,” or a reconstructed hermeneutics
(“interpretive analytics”).

But even when Foucault was rejecting depth, as a methodological Right-Hand ploy, he nonetheless had his own versions of it
(or else he couldn’t have formed any sort of judgments in the first place). He himself describes his approach thus: “Whereas the
interpreter is obliged to go to the depths of things, like an excavator, the moment of interpretation [his genealogy] is like an
overview, from higher and higher up, which allows the depth to be laid out in front of him in more and more profound visibility;
depth is resituated as an absolutely superficial secret” (“Nietzsche, Freud, Marx”).

What Foucault is here calling “height” is a version of what I am calling depth, and what he derisively calls depth is indeed rather
shallow and superficial, just as he claims. Freud’s “depth psychology,” for example, digs “down” to the libido: a very fundamental,
but not very significant, aspect of the human being—it is very superficial, very shallow (chapter 13). That human beings would
spend their lives looking into their ids and feel something incredibly significant was afoot, this was for Foucault laughable, and
who cannot agree? There were higher (deeper) views available.

As we will see later, the languages of the centaur level are preeminently the languages of depth (and dialectics). The
languages of the rational-ego are the languages of representation, monological explanation, and the understanding (cf. Vernunft
vs. Verstand). My thesis will be that one legitimate way to read Foucault’s early work is that the Enlightenment and the
subsequent Age of Man (“dehumanizing humanism”) was the widespread emergence of the egoic-rational mode out of the
mythic-membership mode, which brought many genuine benefits, but, captured by what Hegel called a “vanity of the
understanding” (or empiric-analytic and monological thought), it was committed to a flattening and leveling of qualitative
distinctions (and the retroflection of that flatland mode upon the subject itself produced the more brutalizing aspects of the
“sciences of man”). The subsequent emergence of the centaur, with its vision-logic (dialectics of depth), was the more mature
reason (Vernunft) in intersubjective communicative exchange (dialogical, not just monological), and this opening of dialogical and
depth-understanding marked the beginning of the “end of man.”

This also brings Foucault’s accounts more into line with those of Habermas and Taylor, as we will see in chapters 12 and 13.
Incidentally, beyond the centaur, the languages of depth have less and less applicability, giving way to languages of vision and
vibration (psychic), then languages of archetype and illumination (subtle), then languages of emptiness and dream (causal), then
languages of extraordinary ordinariness (nondual), all of which we will examine later (see note 58 for chap. 8 for an extended
discussion). This present volume is intentionally written in the centaur-level language of depth.

24. It might be obvious that

the mind/body, or mind/brain, or
consciousness/form distinction. It is not a rigid duality, in my system, because they mutually interact; nor is it a final duality,
because in the transpersonal domains, it becomes obvious that “form is not other than emptiness [consciousness], emptiness is
not other than form.” We will return to this important point later and look at various transpersonal solutions, from Plotinus to
Aurobindo to Mahayana Buddhism.

the Left-Hand/Right-Hand is another version of

Likewise, the linguistic signifiers (or the material components of a sign, the written symbol or the physical air vibrations of
the spoken word) are all Right-Hand components, whereas the signifieds (the interior meanings that a person associates with a
word) are all Left-Hand occasions, and definitely, à la deconstruction, signifiers and signifieds slide all over each other—yet
another version of the mind/body “interaction” (and another version of exteriors being enveloped in development).

At the same time, postmodernism’s anxious attempt to supplant modernity’s program does not succeed in precisely the area
that it imagines it does. There is, in the postmodern poststructuralists, a barely disguised attempt to shift emphasis from the
interior signified to the material signifier, coupled with the notion that signifiers are free to alight pretty much wherever they
want (subject only to shifting paradigms of power and discursive practices). We saw that the significant insight of the postmodern
poststructuralists was that meaning is context-dependent and contexts are boundless. But that has quickly degenerated into the
assertion of the primacy of the material signifier as viewed exteriorly. This merely exterior, Right-Hand reductionism runs from
Foucault’s archaeology to Derrida’s grammatology, and as such, as a subtle reductionism, is precisely heir to the Enlightenment
paradigm. (Habermas reaches the same conclusion with a similar analysis, seeing both of them as infected with remnants of the
Enlightenment philosophy of the subject).

In Habermas, the Left-Hand and the Right-Hand appear, among other places, as the distinction between linguistically
generated intersubjectivity (Left) and self-referentially closed systems (Right), which, he says, “are now the catchwords for a
controversy that will take the place of the discredited [form of] the mind-body problematic” (Philosophical discourse, p. 385).

As for the mind/body problem itself, I will later argue that its precise nature cannot be solved, only (dis)solved in contemplative
I refer to my position as

awareness, where emptiness and form disclose their ultimate relationship.

In the meantime,

“interactionist,” not so much because I believe that position really solves anything, but as a way to disavow the other “solutions”
(identity, parallel, dualist, preestablished) that, in my opinion, have even worse difficulties.

As noted, my use of “interactionism” or “codetermination” is in some ways quite sympathetic with Varela’s “enaction,” but

also differs on a few points, as we will see (note 43 below; note 1 for chap. 14).

25. The collapsing of Left to Right means that interior-and-exterior is collapsed into and confused with physical inside-and-
outside (not to mention better-and-worse collapsing into bigger-and-smaller). This collapse fails to grasp the fact that something
can be simultaneously “inside” the skin boundary and still an “exterior” dimension. The within or actual
interior of the brain is
not inside the brain. Inside the brain is just more brain physiology. Empirically examine the brain all you want, with microscopes,
EEG, etc., and you will still only have more of the insides of the brain, more inside surfaces, and not the interior or the within of
the brain, which is depth or consciousness (and which you can find only by talking to me and interpreting what I say). And the
brain itself is exterior to consciousness, it is another (potential) form in consciousness. Not inside but interior to the brain is
consciousness, or depth, or the within, and the brain is exterior to that within, to that interior.

In other words, consciousness is not inside the brain, and not outside it either. It cuts at right angles to all that, and moves in
the dimension of interiority, which is not found or measured in terms of physical form, and therefore moves wherever it likes
without ever leaving the brain because it was never in the brain to begin with (and never apart from it either). How else explain,
for example, the phenomenon of individual and group identity? If I (consciousness) am merely my brain, how is it that
psychological development of identity moves from a bodyego to an egocentric to a sociocentric to a worldcentric stance? How
could that happen if consciousness were simply in the brain? Forms of identity transcend the skin boundary in dozens of
profoundly important ways, which an account that gives primacy to exteriors cannot even begin to adequately frame. Out-of-the-
body experiences are some of the least surprising (and least interesting) things that consciousness can do, and can do precisely
because it is not inside or outside the brain (the insides and outsides of the brain are in consciousness).

In note 4 above I mentioned that “the interiority of one stage is taken into the interiority of the next, and thus becomes an
external
form within that interiority, a three-dimensional-chess detail that we will get to later.” The three-dimensional part
involves differentiating between several different axes of both translation and transformation, so that both the insides and
outsides of a lower level are, to a senior level, enveloped in its own interiority, and thus, conversely, the senior level appears
“external” to its components and “internal” to its successors.

Language is obviously a real problem here, because we are actually discussing three axes, all of which involve being “in” and
being “out.” Call them inside/outside, internal/external, and interior/exterior. On a flatland ontology, you simply have inside and
outside a boundary. But if several holons transformatively join together—say, many cells into an organism—then the inside and
the outside of each of the cells are now all
internal to the organism (all are inside the organism, except not on the same level of
insides as the original cells, which is why I call this “internal,” and why the organism, to the cells, appears external—Varela’s
point).

But all of that is still a series of exterior forms—not outside, and not external, but exterior to the interiority that alongside
all that, at each point, is consciousness. And consciousness does not enfold previous interiors in terms of size (unlike the cell
which actually and physically contains the molecules, or the organism which actually contains the cells); rather, consciousness
enfolds previous interior intentions or prehensions, which exist alongside all those exteriors. As such, the various consciousness
structures themselves also have insides and outsides and internals and externals—for example, something is “inside” a mental
structure, not in terms of spatial enclosure, but in terms of whether it follows the deep structure or the regime or the codon of
the mental structure (much as you are in a checkers game, not if you are physically inside anything, but if you are following the
rules of the game). When two interior structures are brought together via transformation, then they are both internal to the new
superstructure, and the superstructure appears external to them, and so on.

This is why I think it is such a terrible mistake to view consciousness as an emergent quality, instead of seeing it as depth, itself
unqualifiable. If we think that consciousness is a specific quality, then we have only two major choices in how to situate it: (1)
define the quality that consciousness is supposed to be (feeling, intention, perception, or whatever) and then push that quality all
the way down to atoms. This is the standard panpsychic approach, which I find unacceptable (even though, for convenience, I
sometimes resort to that terminology). But even less acceptable is: (2) define consciousness as an emergent quality, and then
pick the point in evolution that we think it is supposed to have jumped out and emerged (and haggle endlessly over terms: Do
apes have self-consciousness or just rudimentary consciousness? Do the shrimp we boil for dinner really have feelings?).

But consciousness is not an emergent quality, because the Left-Hand dimension does not emerge from the Right-Hand
dimension. That is, the interior does not emerge from the exterior; obviously, they both emerge together, hand in hand, with the
first boundary creating a universe, from the very first differentiation of the Kosmos into an inside and an outside (which is, at the
first boundary, an interior and an exterior). The Left-Hand dimension does not emerge from the Right-Hand dimension, but rather
goes with it, as the within, the interior of the exterior, at every stage. It is the interior depth of every stage, and not something
that surprisingly pops out at some bizarre stage down the line. Forms of consciousness do indeed emerge (as forms of matter
do), but consciousness itself is simply alongside all along, as the interior of whatever form is there (from the moment of

creation). Because surfaces are surfaces of depth, forms are forms of consciousness, and the interior and exterior, as the
Buddhists have it, are coemergent from the start, and not something leaping into being somewhere down the road.

Put differently, consciousness is the openness (or Emptiness) of the holon’s regime—an openness

itself

that is not an

emergent quality, but what allows qualities to emerge (as the various regimes and worldspaces).

And finally, the exteriors can enter consciousness: the interior embraces the exterior (and never vice versa). Leibniz’s view was
quite similar to this “3-D chess” (which is what makes him such demanding reading), except he opted out of the actual relation
between interior and exterior with a preestablished harmony (but, I might add, that is no worse than most other alternative
solutions). I’ll return to all this when we suggest the contemplative (dis)solution of the mind-body problem.

26. I am not saying behaviorism is wrong; I am saying it is an accurate study of only the Upper-Right quadrant; it faithfully

reports everything it sees there, and what it sees is real enough. It’s just one-fourth of the story, more or less.

Likewise, medical psychiatry is the study of pharmacological intervention in the Upper-Right quadrant. What the psychoanalyst
(UL) sees as rage at the abandoning father converted into depression and treatable with talk, medical psychiatry sees as a
problem with serotonin uptake at the neural synapses and treatable with Prozac. Both are accurate enough in their quadrant (we
will return to this topic throughout this volume).

27. Also known as the reflection paradigm or the representation paradigm, whose historical rise we will trace in chapters 12
and 13. Propositional truth is generally a Right-Hand path, as indicated, but often it is confined to the Upper Right, with functional
fit the criteria for the Lower Right (as I will explain in the text), and there it vies with the production paradigm (which we will also
trace in chapters 12 and 13).

Also, since the objective stance can be taken with regard to any of the quadrants, propositional truth has its important
applications in the Left-Hand dimensions; the point is that it does not exhaust those domains nor capture what is essential and
defining for those Left-Hand dimensions, as we will see.

28. And if we look at the research in each of the four quadrants, we find that each of them has a “surface” and a “deep”
dimension. Or, using “truth” in the broadest sense, each quadrant has a surface truth and a deep truth (although, as we will see,
the accounts vary as to precisely what constitutes the truth in each).

We might start with the general Left-Hand and Right-Hand dimensions (and subdivide them into upper and lower, or individual

and social, as we proceed):

Left-Hand hermeneutics and Right-Hand structural/functionalism both recognize a surface and a deep dimension (or
manifest and latent), the former being mostly conscious and the latter being mostly unconscious (although the unconscious or
hidden or latent dimension can be brought into awareness through special means, as we will see).

In hermeneutics this “surface” and “deep” interpretation was most carefully presented by Heidegger (in Divisions I and II of
Being and time). A surface interpretation is an interpretation that cultural natives might not be fully conscious of in day-to-day
living (or in their personal life), but if you point it out to them, they would usually recognize it and respond with “That’s right,
that’s just what that means.” This “hermeneutics of the everyday” is somehow known (either consciously or preconsciously) but
not necessarily articulated; and the surface layer of hermeneutics deals with articulating these common interpretations (or
making manifest the various aspects of the cultural background that support the meaning in the everyday practices; the
background cannot be made fully manifest or intellectually and discursively articulated in an exhaustive fashion, however,
because much of the background is nondiscursive and therefore cannot, à la Husserl, be conceptually exposed). This
“hermeneutics of the everyday” has been fruitfully taken up by such theorists as Garfinkel, Geertz, Kuhn, and Taylor. It simply
seeks to articulate and explain the common meanings of cultural practices via a sympathetic communion or participant-observer
inquiry.

Deep hermeneutics, on the other hand, attempts to dig beneath surface interpretations (beneath the hermeneutics of the
everyday), because deep hermeneutics suspects that our everyday understandings and interpretations might in fact be quite
distorted, partial, or deluded; and might (as Heidegger suggested) actually be motivated to hide the truth, to obscure or cover up
deeper (and more frightening) truths. “The hermeneutics of suspicion” (as Ricoeur called these various approaches) therefore
seeks to dig beneath the surface and expose deeper interpretive truths and meanings.

And various deep truths have in fact been offered: underneath the surface and everyday consciousness lies Freudian libido,

Marxist class struggle, Heidegger’s groundlessness, Gadamer’s tradition-carried Being, Nietzsche’s power, and so on.

In each of these cases, our common everyday meanings and truths and interpretations (which are all more or less conscious)
are nonetheless said to be often designed precisely to hide or obscure or distort the deeper and more painful truths lurking
beneath the surface (truths which thus tend to remain unconscious or deeply hidden: they do not just fall into the unconscious,
they are pushed there. What we might call a dynamic psychological pain barrier—a repression barrier of some sort or
another—seals these disturbing truths from easy awareness, and, according to these theorists, lifting this barrier is difficult,
painful, shocking, and deeply disturbing).

In each of these cases of deep hermeneutics, the cultural native must confirm the deeper truth, once it is dug up, by
acknowledging it, and this journey is not likely to happen without the help of a professional guide, so to speak, who has made it

his or her business to travel that deep path. The cultural native, in fact, has a great deal of
resistance to the deeper truth
(because of the pain barrier), and much of the everyday interpretations and practices were in fact generated precisely to hide this
deep and often painful truth. However, deep hermeneutics maintains that once the person loosens the repression barrier,
exposes this deeper truth, and acknowledges it, then a certain liberation is gained, a liberation from the distortions, lies, and
delusions that were constructed to hide the truth.

Deep hermeneutics is obviously a tricky venture: many of the “deep truths” offered to humanity have actually been deep
ideologies and profound prejudices designed primarily to contort others’ awareness to conform to one’s own power drives. We
have seen what the “deep truths” of Marxism have done to the human spirit, and what Freud’s deeply reductionistic “truths”
managed to destroy. Both Marx and Freud, we may grant, were on to some sort of deeper and very important truths: but are
these truths the whole truth, so to speak? And how does one know when a deeper truth is indeed true but partial? And when
does shoving a partial truth down someone’s throat—under the guise of helping them to “de-repress”—when does that step over
the line and become itself a new form of repression? When does the partialness of the cure begin to repress the rest of
reality?

Deep hermeneutics, in other words, faces two extremely delicate problems: First, is the proposed deeper truth really true? And
second: is this deeper truth the only truth? Or is it itself a partial truth hiding yet deeper disclosures? How do we know when to
stop?

Using Freud as an acknowledged example, the first problem is something like: does the libido exist? Is Freud’s deep truth really
true? In very general terms, do cultural and conscious ideas often hide, distort, or repress unconscious emotional-sexual drives?
Most psychotherapeutic theorists would acknowledge that that is often the case; in various ways, people can and do become out
of touch with their deeper feelings and drives and therefore express these drives in less than straightforward ways. In other
words, Freud’s deeper truth is more or less true: there is something like the libido, and it can be repressed/distorted in ordinary
life, causing often painful emotional disturbances. And lifting the repression barrier (however it is conceived) can indeed help
people get in touch with these deeper feelings and express them more adequately, thus liberating them from the constrictions of
distorted emotions.

But the second problem is: granted there is some sort of unconscious, is the libido all we will ever find down there? Is Freud’s
deep truth—which, we have already acknowledged, is indeed a truth—is it the whole truth? Is my psychological anguish due
solely or even primarily to repressing the libido? Might there not be other truths that, when denied or repressed or obscured,
would cause even greater psychic anguish? What if the deeper truth I am distorting involves Jung’s collective unconscious and not
just my personal id? What if it involves Marx’s social unconscious, and the society itself is rather sick and maladjusted? Lifting the
repression in that case would involve not psychoanalysis but political revolution. What if the deeper truth is Heidegger’s utter
groundlessness, where all of these other truths are desperate attempts to fix and solidify that which is shifting and shapeless?
Further yet, what if the deeper truth is Hegel’s Spirit, and I cannot de-repress until I find God?

As I suggested in chapter 2, each of these theorists, at their best, is trying to point to a larger context that, when discovered
and acknowledged, helps liberate us from a narrower and shallower imprisonment. We are all holons within holons within holons
forever, and each of these theorists helps orient us to deeper and larger engagements, therein to find deeper and wider meanings
and liberations. But each of those theorists tended to go from solving the first problem to failing the second. That is, after
demonstrating that their newly discovered deep truth was in fact true (and I personally believe each of them sufficiently
demonstrated that), they went on to claim that other deep truths were in fact distortions of
their deep truth: that other
“deep” truths were really just surface truths that their analysis should have ended forever.

Thus their partial truths, promoted to the whole truth, stepped over the line and into a new form of repression of the rest of
the Kosmos. It is one thing to say that material-economic conditions are formative for many cultural and spiritual endeavors;
quite another to say that God is nothing but an excuse for material oppression. It is one thing to say that repressed libido can
power a fanatic belief in Spirit; quite another to say that Spirit is simply repressed libido.

But if you believe that Spirit per se is indeed repressed libido, then a client’s belief in Spirit must be interpreted as part of the
defense mechanisms and repression barriers that are hiding the deeper truth of sexual lust. Hegel’s deeper truth is instantly
interpreted as a surface truth that is hiding the real deep truth of libido.

And so the battle of partial truths would go, solving the first problem but failing miserably at the second. That many of these
theorists favored their own deeper context, usually to the exclusion of others’, condemns their partiality, but not the deep
hermeneutic project itself, nor the truth of the partial truths.

But indeed, the misuses of deep hermeneutics are legion (“I know what you really need”), and the many successes of these
theorists—and their many failures—stand as sharp lessons on this delicate journey. Surfaces can be seen but depths must be
interpreted, and in that interpretation, you and I can be mistaken, and thus some sort of the hermeneutics of suspicion will
always accompany us into the depths.

Turning now to the Right-Hand dimensions (moving from “What does it mean?” to “What does it do?”): in structural-
functionalism (e.g., Parsons), the distinction between surface and deep usually shows up as “manifest” function (what the cultural

natives say they are doing) and “latent” function (what the researcher/authority discovers the “real” function to be in terms of
social systems and functional fit, a function unknown and unconscious to the natives). This, too, is a useful and legitimate (if
partial) inquiry (a Right-Hand approach that depends upon an objective, distancing stance and a relatively detached observer).

And, since we are all holons within holons within holons forever, the structural-functionalist approach runs into the same types
of “limit” problems or “boundary” problems as the hermeneutic or Left-Hand approach, namely, how do you know when to stop?
Granted individual behavior is to some important extent determined by the wider social holon. But by the same logic, what about
the social holon itself? It is set in numerous contexts within numerous other contexts . . . forever.

Thus, structural-functional accounts are always drifting into wider contexts: the individual is set in a family which sets certain
broad parameters; the family is set in a subculture; the subculture is set in a larger culture; the culture is set in a community of
cultures, which are set in larger geopolitical blocks, which . . .

Consequently (and just as in the hermeneutic approach), the boundaries that are set are often simply pragmatic. I will
arbitrarily set the boundaries of my investigation at the border of the family, or the border of the town, or the village, or the
nation . . . , and simply pick up the story at that point (just as the hermeneutic therapist might say, “Granted society is sick. But
you, my client, have come to me for help, and since we can’t fix society right now, let’s just work with you”).

Although I will not, in this summary endnote, go into details, we might simply note that structural-functionalism (in any of its
forms) therefore faces the same two delicate problems in dealing with its own versions of surface and deep: first, is the deep
functional truth (the latent truth of the particular functional fit) really true? And second, is it the whole truth? (Or is it the most
important context for the particular problem addressed? I’ll return to this in a moment.)

Here, then, is a brief summary of the types of “unconscious truths” found in each of the four quadrants and dealt with by these

various approaches:

In the Left-Hand dimensions (“What does it mean?”), we have surface, everyday meanings and interpretations, which can be
understood and articulated by the “hermeneutics of the everyday.” The meanings of my everyday reality depend upon a whole
series of background contexts: both unarticulated foreknowledge and nondiscursive cultural practices, some of which are
conscious and some of which are not directly conscious (but could easily become conscious if pointed out to me, although some
of the overall background simply shades away into inaccessibility). This is true both individually (UL) and collectively (LL).

But beneath the everyday interpretations there are various types of deeper truths, deeper realities, deeper meanings, that the
everyday interpretations often attempt to cover up, obscure, or distort. These deeper meanings are dynamically resisted,
because their acknowledgment would involve some sort of deep pain or shocking recognition. Both cultural practices at large (LL)
and my own personal consciousness (UL) can contain repressions or obscurations of these deeper meanings (e.g., there is mass
hysteria and collective collusion just as often as individual repression, and indeed, the two are often conjoined: cultural
repression is internalized as part of the individual superego, which is often the bridge for various Freudian/Marxist integrative
theories).

These deeper but painful meanings can be brought to light by the “hermeneutics of suspicion,” in which an authority who has
traveled the deep path can help the individual (and possibly the society) relax the particular repression barrier and acknowledge
the deeper truth hidden and obscured by the hermeneutics of the everyday. Contacting the deeper meaning is a liberation from
the false and distorted surface meaning, and this liberation is experienced as type of freedom from a prior suffering or constraint.
In the Right-Hand dimensions (“What does it do?,” or general structural-functionalism), we have surface or manifest meaning,
which is simply whatever it is that the cultural natives say they are doing. But the social scientist finds that the everyday practices
and meanings are actually serving a deeper function (the latent function), a function unknown to the cultural natives, but a
function that the scientist can discover.

But notice that, according to the structural-functionalist, the cultural natives are not repressing this deeper truth (the truth of
functional fit); they are simply unaware of it. This “functional unconscious” is simply not yet known; it is not a prior knowledge
that was once in awareness and then repressed and resisted and rendered unconscious. Any cultural native can pick up this
knowledge by a simple study of social systems theory.

All of which is fine. But the reason that there are no theories of repression in the exclusive Right-Hand paths is that there is no
consciousness in the Right-Hand dimensions (no irreducible interiors), and thus there is nothing to institute the repression in the
first place (there is no interior repression because there are no interiors, period). In the Right-Hand path, there is simply the
knowledge of how objects work or lack of that knowledge (and that is what “unconscious” means here: you simply lack the
knowledge but you could easily gain it), but there are no real subjects that could repress anything. The Right-Hand path is just
an objective description of how objective exteriors function, and thus no “black box” problems arise. The only “problems” are
caused, not by a battle in the interior depths, but by a simple lack of the objective knowledge that the natural social scientist will
be glad to give you if you simply ask.

On this Right-Hand path, we have the division into Upper and Lower (individual and collective). I have just described the Lower
Right, the social systems theory with its manifest meaning (anything interior: consciousness, values, repressions, etc.) and its
latent function (the foundational or real reality of functional fit).

In the Upper Right, we have the exteriorly observed functions of the individual: brain physiology, cognitive science,
neuroscience, etc. Here, too, there is no real consciousness: only the computational mind, or mindless neurotransmitters, or
fireworks at the synapses. All of this is totally unconscious to typical cultural natives, in two senses: we can never really directly
experience neurotransmitters per se (nor the computational processes), but we can become aware of them theoretically if we
just study neuroscience (we can remove the unconsciousness in that sense: we can gain the objective theoretical awareness of
the nonconscious processes, just as we can gain scientific knowledge of subcellular biochemical processes, and so on).

And thus here, too, in the Upper Right, there are no theories of repression, or resistance to the truth, because there is no
consciousness to resist anything. There are only completely nonconscious processes scurrying about, intent on carrying out their
primary task, which is to create the illusion of consciousness being aware of any of this.

Once you have swallowed that foundational nonsense (consciousness is the illusion that pronounces itself an illusion, which is
an awful lot of friskiness for a ghost)—once you have swallowed that (once you have ignored the entire Left Hand of the Kosmos),
then once again, as with any Right-Hand path, there are no more problems to solve, except to continue to discover more
objective facts, more mindless objects, more exterior functions.

The only “problems” here are thus problems of technical know-how. If life is meaningless, we have a serotonin functional

deficiency, and so forth (numerous examples of this are given in the text).

So the “unconscious” in the Upper Right means, to begin with, any of the physiological/computational processes of the physical
brain, processes that we are normally not aware of (and that we can never directly experience per se), but processes and
functions we can know about through a study, not of our introspected mind, but of objective brain theory. And no doubt, those
processes are indeed there, and indeed can be disclosed in empiric-analytic research and formal theorizing.

But “unconscious” also takes on the same general and sweeping sense as in any Right-Hand path, namely, all of our interior
problems are caused by a lack of knowledge of exteriors. We are “unconscious” in the sense that we don’t yet know enough
technical and objective facts to settle the issue and solve all the problems. And as soon as we know all the objective facts, that
will solve all our problems. While that is certainly true for the exterior functions of holons, it is suicidal for the interior dimensions.
(Not to mention self-deconstructing: all of our problems come down to the fact that we are not conscious of the fact that there is
no consciousness, which is all the Right Hand can tell us.)

Finally, there are the approaches that look at the Left-Hand or interior dimensions using some of the tools and the objective-
like stance of the Right-Hand or exterior paths. And they do so because they are based on a careful analysis of individual and
cultural interiors as they become manifest in exterior behavior or linguistic form: e.g., they will look at the structure of material
signifiers, or written forms, or spoken behavior, not with a view to reducing the interior to these exteriors (although this is
sometimes done, unfortunately), but in an attempt to reconstruct the interior pattern or structure that gives rise to, or supports,
the exterior behavior. (Thus, for example, when I use formop, which is an exterior description of the form of a particular mental
structure, I mean not only that structure described in an exterior fashion, but also, and especially, the interior lived experience
and actual awareness that occurs within that structure, which is why it is listed in the Upper-Left quadrant.)

For the general structural approach (including its much modified forms in Piaget, Kohlberg, Foucault, Habermas, and aspects of
my own work), there are surface structures known to the cultural natives, and deep structures discovered by systematic analysis
among various sets of surface structures. (I am using these terms—surface and deep—in a general sense, and not, for example,
in the very narrow and specific sense given them by Chomsky, a use he now finds too narrow.)

The deep structures themselves, like any external-descriptive structure, are not repressed, but are simply not known to most
individuals; they could easily be recognized if pointed out. The various surface structures, however, can indeed be dynamically
repressed or otherwise submerged: for example, one does not repress the overall capacity for images, but one can repress
particular images—and that is the repressed or submerged unconscious (hermeneutically recovered). But the
structural
unconscious
refers instead to the deep pattern displayed by all the various surface structures within that pattern, and it is
unconscious not because it is repressed but simply not yet known.

Thus, a surface structure is what the cultural natives consciously recognize, and a deep structure is a (usually universal, but at
any rate nonindividual) pattern that is common to different surface structures (but not consciously known to the individual
surface structures themselves, although this can be pointed out).

Researchers readily acknowledge that each of these deep structures is itself set in contexts of other deep structures, against
which they themselves might be surface. Thus, for example, Jane Loevinger will state that cognitive structures are the deep
structures against which interpersonal structures are surface; interpersonal structures in turn are the deep structures against
which moral structures are surface, and so on. I tend to avoid this particular usage because it can imply that moral structures are
only local; but the general point is simply that to say a structure is deep is not to deny its own contexts.

This structural unconscious (the deep pattern followed by the individual surface structures) is indeed normally unconscious
because it does not typically or directly enter into the immediate awareness of the cultural natives, even though they are in fact
following it (just as most natives can speak the particular language without being able to articulate the actual rules of grammar
governing the usage). This is why various structural approaches move beyond a simple phenomenology of immediate experience

and also attempt to analyze, in a Right-Hand fashion, the patterns or forms or rules that the various immediate experiences
display (rules that themselves do not appear to ordinary experience).

This, for example, was Piaget’s charge against Husserl and traditional phenomenology—various phenomena follow patterns
that do not themselves show up as phenomena (much as the rules of a card game do not appear on any of the cards). The
subjective space in which experienced phenomena arise is itself constructed and follows patterns that do not ordinarily show up
in naive (or even bracketed) experience; and further, the subjective space itself develops only via intersubjective patterns of
dialogical and interpretive cognitions, none of which show up in a simple phenomenology of immediate lived experience. (See
note 17 for chapter 14.)

The existence of these ordinarily hidden patterns (in various forms) is one of the enduring contributions of structural linguistics
(de Saussure), structuralism (Lévi-Strauss), neostructuralism or archaeology (Foucault), genetic structuralism (Piaget), and
hermeneutic and developmental structuralism (Habermas). And this structural unconscious can become conscious in the sense
that any native can study and learn the patterns “behind” or “beneath” conscious experience.

To summarize this overall discussion in a paragraph: the various types of “unconscious” refer to the various validity claims in
each of the four quadrants, and to the presence or lack of valid awareness that can infect each of the quadrants in its own quite
different ways: lack of awareness of deeper propositional truths (UR), deeper functional fits (LR), deeper cultural meanings (LL),
deeper truthfulness or sincerity (UR). All of which ultimately rest on the fact that we are contexts within contexts, holons within
holons, forever. . . .

And, of course, I believe all of those approaches have something important to tell us; they become ridiculous only when they

try to corner the market on the hidden dimension.

29. And I will, of course, have a great deal of empirical “evidence” to “support” this contention that consciousness simply is
fundamental brain physiology. If you challenge me, I will simply say, “Well then, where is your empirical evidence?,” thus
covertly slipping in an empirical or monological test for that which is, by definition, nonempirical or dialogical, a sneaky move that
converts “nonempirical” to “nonexistent” (and never mind that the position itself is perfectly self-contradictory, as we saw in
chapter 1—it is a qualitative distinction that denies the existence of qualitative distinctions. How can a brain that doesn’t involve
values produce a researcher that does? To say that values emerge from brain states is to say they cannot be reduced to, or
accounted for, or explained by them—which is then promptly denied by a demand for empirical evidence).

30. Technically, the interior and exterior holarchies of depth and span were collapsed into only the exterior holarchies of depth

and span.

In other words, holarchies were still recognized: the Upper-Right and Lower-Right domains are both holarchical, and this was
not denied; and these Right-Hand holarchies, like all holarchies, technically possessed both a depth and a span—but no interiors
(no interior depth or span). Rather, the only holarchies acknowledged were holarchies of empirical/positivistic exteriors, of
surfaces that could be seen empirically with the senses or their instrumental extensions, and thus any values (any Left-Hand
correlates) were automatically excluded. Since the interior dimensions were denied, there were no holarchies of qualitative
distinctions, of value, of consciousness, of goods or hypergoods (Left Hand or interior); no transformations of consciousness
required to get at the truth, and no truth other than what could be analytically formulated around empirical, value-free data.

Thus, even though the Right-Hand path acknowledges holarchies with depth and span, the depths of these Right-Hand
holarchies all have the same value, namely, nothing (that is, they are “value-free” surfaces). And thus, from the view of the
interior and Left-Hand path, all of the “empirical depth” of exterior holarchies are no more than variations on the same span
(namely, empirical or functional).

Thus, when interior depths (of “I” and “we”) were reduced to their correlates in exterior depths of “its” (e.g., values reduced to
limbic system signals), then depth itself (of any sort) was severed from its intrinsic connection to consciousness. Greater depth no
longer meant greater consciousness, only greater physical complexity. No longer was there a Kosmos where conceptual values
transcended and included emotional values which transcended and included drives, but simply a cosmos where the neocortex
physically enwrapped a limbic system which physically enwrapped a brain stem. Depth no longer means deepening awareness, it
means more complex matter. Holistic matter, to be sure, but “its” none the same. And matter does become more complex—but
only as a correlate of increasing depth and consciousness, all of which was conveniently ignored.

When addition #1 says that depth is synonymous with consciousness, it doesn’t specify whether in an individual that is Left-
Hand depth or Right-Hand depth, because the point is that they are isomorphic: more of one is more of the other in homologous
ways. But with the collapse of the Kosmos into the Right-Hand cosmos, exterior depth no longer had a correlate in interior depth
(or consciousness), and thus the intrinsic
connection between increasing consciousness, increasing depth, and increasing
physical complexification became severed at a fundamental level. The flatland world of holistic “its” had no room for holistic “I’s”
and “we’s,” and the worldview of scientific materialism began its long and imperial career.

(Even though all four quadrants are holarchies with depth and span, I often use “depth” to mean “interior depth” or
consciousness precisely because of the intrinsic correlation between consciousness and depth in any natural holarchy: more
physical depth in the Right-Hand means more consciousness depth in the Left-Hand. With the collapse of the Kosmos, “depth”

often came to mean something merely “inside” the person, associated derogatorily only with interiors and subjectivity, and all
three were denied irreducible reality.)

All of these distinctions are examined in detail in chapter 12; this is meant as a short introduction to this general topic of “the

fundamental Enlightenment paradigm.” Its more precise dimensions are outlined in chapters 12 and 13.

31. Charles Taylor: “Final causes and the related vision of the universe as a meaningful order of qualitatively differentiated
levels [holarchical Kosmos] gave way first to a . . . vision of mathematical order, and then finally to the ‘modern’ view of a world of
[quantitative] relations to be mapped by empirical observation” (Hegel, p. 4).

As for the reduction of the Left Hand to the Right Hand, which was the fundamental Enlightenment paradigm, generating both
a self-defining disengaged subject and a holistic natural worldview (or systems theory), Habermas sees this in terms of the
“philosophy of the subject” that easily slid into a systems approach, because the “self-organizing system,” with a few
adjustments, simply replaced the “self-defining subject” (the two poles of the Enlightenment paradigm). Systems theory is, he
says, “an ingenious continuation of a tradition that has left a strong imprint upon the self-understanding of early modernity in
Europe. The cognitive-instrumental one-sidedness of cultural and societal rationalization was expressed in philosophical attempts
to establish an objectivistic [it-language] self-understanding of human beings and their world” (Philosophical discourse, p. 384).

This flatland approach was initially, he points out, painted in physicalistic and mechanistic terms, but these were quickly
replaced with biologizing
systems theory (i.e., metabiology replaced metaphysics). “To the extent that systems theory
penetrates into the lifeworld, introducing into it a metabiological perspective from which it then learns to understand itself as a
system in an environment-with-other-systems-in-an-environment, to that extent there is an objectifying effect. In this way,
subject-centered reason is replaced by systems rationality . . .” (p. 385).

Taylor’s version is similar,

in the sense that the multileveled Kosmos of qualitative distinctions was collapsed, by the
“disengaged subject,” into “interlocking orders of being” quantitatively and empirically representable, a grid through which
value and constitutive goods necessarily slip. And he then proceeds, as saw in chapter 1, to show that the very belief in this
systems view is self-contradictory.

32. In short, the fundamental Enlightenment paradigm, which was the reduction of the Kosmos to the Right-Hand path, had
two poles: the disengaged subject and the flatland network-world. The flatland world itself had two warring camps: atomism (or
gross reductionism) and holism (subtle reductionism). For all of its positive contributions, which I will heavily emphasize later,
Enlightenment thought was nonetheless a series of bizarre oscillations between these two poles and two camps (we see a version
of these oscillations in Foucault’s aporias). This is the main topic of chapters 12 and 13.

As for the reduction of subjective and intersubjective to exterior functional fit, Habermas is a particularly vocal critic. It is a
massive reductionism, he says, that collapses truth and meaning into functional capacity, and reduces intersubjectivity to rather
crass egocentrism. “Systems theory lets cognitive acts, even its own, meld into the system’s achievement of mastering
complexity. Reason as specified in relation to being, thought, or proposition is replaced by the self-enhancing self-maintenance of
the system. . . . Functionalist reason expresses itself in the ironic self-denial of a reason shrunk down to the reduction of
complexity—‘shrunk down’ because the metabiological frame of reference does not go beyond the logocentric limitations of
metaphysics. . . . With a concept of meaning conceived in functionalist terms, the internal connection between meaning and
validity dissolves. The same thing happens with Foucault [in his archaeology, which, as we saw, was basically a structural-
functionalism]: The interest in truth (and validity in general) is restricted to the effects of holding-something-as-true”
(Philosophical discourse, pp. 371–73). This is what I meant when I said that structural-functionalism collapses propositional truth
and intersubjective understanding to interobjective fit or functional fit, and ironically dissolves its own truth status into
monological mesh.

The conversion of interior depth to functional fit also collapses any chance of genuine intersubjective understanding and
communion, because without degrees of depth, you cannot unite isolated elements. “Thus,” says Habermas, “no common
denominator can be built up among different psychic systems, unless it be an autocatalytically emergent social system, which is
immediately locked again within its own systemic perspectives and draws back into its own egocentric observational standpoints”
(p. 381). Again and again Habermas hits the egocentrism of the systems perspective, which also makes sense when we
understand that the systems view was the other pole of the self-defining and self-glorifying underside of the fundamental
Enlightenment paradigm, a remnant of the philosophy of the subject.

The egocentrism of the systems approach can be seen in some of the “ecological/holistic” theories that today call themselves
“new paradigm.” These theories maintain that (1) each of us is an integral part of the Whole System, strands in the overall Web of
Life; and (2) we are to find our liberation by an identification with the Whole System that would (3) simultaneously be a Self-
realization.

But according to systems theory, no part is ever, or can ever be, aware of the whole. The only thing that is aware of the whole
is the actual regime of a holon, its “regnant nexus” (Whitehead) or “dominant monad” or nucleus of awareness. The only way for
all three of the above-listed tenets to be true is if an individual human being were in fact the dominant monad of the entire
Kosmos—and out comes the egocentrism (and anthropocentrism) of the systems theory view.

I believe there is indeed such a thing as Kosmic consciousness, or mystical awareness (as we will see in chapter 8); my point is

that it cannot be gracefully explained by systems theory, which covers only the LR quadrant.

33. This is Charlene Spretnak’s summary of Berman’s position. See Spretnak, States of grace, p. 298.
34. Habermas points out that the three basic modes of rationality (cognitive, moral, aesthetic) result from the intersection of
the three basic attitudes (objectivating, normative, expressive) applied to the three domains (objective, social, subjective). In very
simplified terms, this means that each of the Big Three domains can be studied with the “attitudes” of the others (e.g., the
subjective domain can be studied objectively, although not captured objectively without remainder).

I agree with this general position. And, indeed, this volume is vision-logic used in its objectifying mode, presenting a
propositional map of the various quadrants and domains. This is not merely propositional or positivistic, however, because parts
of the map explain the parts that cannot be merely represented on the map itself (e.g.,
it is propositionally true that
intersubjective understanding is not merely propositional).

35. Taylor, Sources of the self, p. 105. Taylor refers to the cultural worldspace as the “common space” of the moral good we

collectively inhabit, a “conception of the human good as something realized between people rather than simply within them.”

36. Habermas, Philosophical discourse, pp. 313–14.
37. Ibid., p. 313.
38. And its converse, the production paradigm (e.g., Marx). In the reflection paradigm, disengaged thought reflects the cosmos
in an attempt to construct, out of its own disengaged devices, a correct “map.” In the production paradigm, the material cosmos
constructs thought as a superstructure to its own production.

39. Cf. Rorty’s Philosophy and the mirror of nature. However, I agree with Habermas’s sharp criticism of Rorty’s overall stance:
the fact that cultural values and “truths” are not reducible to reflections of “unchanging” nature (truth is not reducible to a
merely representational correspondence with an unvarying and pregiven objectivistic world) does not mean that cultural
productions are shifting conversations with no validity claims of their own. There are better ways to steer a path between
mindless objectivism and objectless subjectivism.

40. This reductionism is particularly (and I think altogether apropriately) excoriated by Taylor in Sources of the self.
41. Typically, the “purest” reflection paradigm is positivism, and the “purest” form of functional fit is structural-functionalism.
For pure positivism, the only things that are real are physical objects and numbers (Quine), and a pure propositional truth is thus
a mathematical assertion referring finally to individual physical objects (all propositions refer ultimately to UR alone; numbers are
allowed to be real in order to have something with which to assert, or point to, or signify physical objects). This is pure Upper-
Right reductionism, as are the more typical (but less rigorous) forms of empiricism.

In functional fit, all reality is finally reduced to LR terms (the social system), and so all other validity claims (from propositional
truth to cultural meaning to personal
integrity) are judged ultimately in terms of their capacity to serve the autopoietic
functioning of the social system. In other words, all other truth claims are, at best, given a “manifest value,” while the “latent
value,” the real value, is functional fit. This is pure Lower-Right reductionism. All qualitative distinctions are reduced to terms of
expediency and efficiency; nothing is “true,” because all that enters the equation is usefulness.

In order to escape the performative contradiction that results when functional fit is itself claimed to be true, many functional-
fit theorists have taken the only route left open to them: they claim their theories are themselves the way the system is
preserving itself: the theorists themselves are merely manifest functions of the real latent drive of the system to autopoietically
self-maintain: the theory of functional fit thus functionally fits (and here they rest their argument).

This finally leads to the implicitly reactionary stance of these theorists: no holon is better or worse, only efficient or not. In
these theories, there is no reason to get rid of Nazis: they are very efficient, very functionally fitting, very expedient. If Stalin’s
regime is working adequately, then it is valid, and who are we to question the murder of twenty million Ukrainians? It works!

But this is just the endgame of describing exteriors, where no values and no qualitative distinctions can ever be found.
42. That medical psychiatry, attempting to be “scientific” (Right Hand), often falls into “adaptation” as the criterion of mental
health can be seen all the way back to Heinz Hartmann, generally regarded as the grandfather of both object relations theory and
ego/self psychology, as was indicated in the title of his masterpiece, Ego psychology and the problem of adaptation. “We call a
man well-adapted if his productivity, his ability to enjoy life, and his mental equilibrium are undisturbed . . . and we ascribe failure
to lack of adaptation.” In other words, behavioral and functional fit (the Right-Hand path), with no inquiry as to whether the social
situation is worth fitting into or not. If housewives’ lives are dreary and meaningless, the prescription is thus not more cultural
rights, but more Valium.

Harry Guntrip, in his much-admired Psychoanalytic theory, therapy, and the self, fought a valiant (but losing) battle against
just such reductionism in psychiatry. Adaptation, says Guntrip, is altogether inadequate as a measure of “mental health,” largely
because it is, he points out, based solely on biological factors, and not on specifically human values (I would amend that more
broadly to say, the one is Right Hand, the other is Left Hand—naturalistic versus hermeneutic—but the general point is quite
similar). A frog doesn’t question whether the environment that it must adapt to is a worthy environment: it adapts or dies. And
thus, when this biological adaptation is made into the criterion of human mental health, then likewise the worthiness of the

culture is not profoundtaly questioned: you are happy and healthy if you fit in, and sick and disturbed if you do not. Adaptation
covertly buys the values it is supposed to adapt to, and thus reduces the Left-Hand to Right-Hand functional fit.

But, protests Guntrip, “The ego must be more than just an organ of adaptation. This would aim not [just] at physical survival
but at preserving the integrity of the person and the defense of his values”—both Left-Hand qualities. Then, in a beautiful
phrase that captures the essence of the difference between exterior and interior approaches, Guntrip says that “in studying
human living, ‘adaptation’ is replaced by a higher concept, that of a meaningful relationship in terms of values” (his italics).

Thus, according to Guntrip, adaptation has an important but limited use (e.g., Right-Hand), but more significant are both
personal integrity/values (Upper Left) and mutual understanding in meaningful relationships (Lower Left). “Adaptation, strictly
speaking, can only express one-sided fitting in
[functional fit]. But personal relations involve mutual self-fulfillment in
communication and shared experience.” And the disaster, he says, is that when psychoanalysis (or psychiatry in general) is
reduced to mere adaptation, its true essence is lost: “Psychoanalysis is then treated as being about the human organism adapting
to the structure of the external world [UR adapting to LR], instead of being about the human psyche realizing its inherent
potential for unique individuality as a person relating to other persons [UL relating to LL].”

Guntrip even spots the fact that the difference between the Left- and Right-Hand paths involves values versus action terms, or
being versus doing: “Psychoanalysis has to understand the person, the unique individual as he or she lives and grows in complex
meaningful relationships with other persons who are at the same time growing in their relationships with them. This involves that
being is more fundamental than doing, quality more fundamental than activity, that the reality of what a man does is determined
by what he is, as when a middle-aged woman on a British television program said, ‘I plunged early into marriage and motherhood,
trying to substitute doing for being.’ In this lies the difference between adapting and relating . . .” (!).

He finishes with a wonderful reminder: “Adaptation is one-sided [monological] and is certainly a matter of action. But personal
relations are essentially two-sided [dialogical understanding versus monological action]; they are mutual by reason of being
personal, and not a matter of mutual adaptation merely, but of mutual appreciation, communication, sharing, and of each being
for the other” (all quotes from pp. 105–12).

Let me repeat that I myself am not arguing for the primacy of any quadrant over the others; I am arguing against the reduction
of any quadrant to the others. Medical psychiatry and brain physiology, and behaviorism and adaptation, are crucially important;
it is just that certain violent forms of aggression result when one quadrant is reduced to another.

43. That this differentiation went too far into dissociation is a topic we will discuss in chapters 12 and 13. That is, the story of
the fundamental Enlightenment paradigm (the reduction of the Kosmos to the Right-Hand path: the entire Left-Hand dimensions
were simply taken for granted, and consciousness was assumed to be a punctual, disengaged subject staring out
unproblematically and transparently at a pregiven world, and the job of this disengaged subject was to reflect, represent,
describe, categorize, and analyze the objective, pregiven world) could occur because the noosphere had finally differentiated
from the biosphere, a differentiation that went too far into dissociation (Hegel’s “vanity of the understanding,” Taylor’s “monster
of arrested development”), so that the dissociated noosphere was merely the disengaged and self-defining subject staring at,
hovering over, divorced from, the holistic flatland of the natural world. The fundamental Hegelian project was the healing of this
“diremption” or divorce.

And, I will argue, the healing of that diremption is still the good, and the true, and the beautiful aspect of the post-

Enlightenment (“postmodern”) endeavor.

In the meantime, the dominant epistemological paradigms (especially in Anglo-Saxon countries) remain firmly committed to
some form of exclusive embeddedness in the Right-Hand dimensions of the Kosmos, still
following the fundamental
Enlightenment paradigm—either in the form of a simple representation or reflection paradigm, or, at a slightly more
sophisticated level, some form of connectionism, wholism, emergentism, dynamical systems theory—both thoroughly grounded
in Right-Hand reductionism.

We can take, as a prime example, the rising field of cognitive science. In the history of this increasingly influential field, we can
see the move from a simple representational paradigm to an emergence/connectionist paradigm (both nonetheless thoroughly
Right-Handed), with a recent struggle to begin integrating the Right and Left dimensions in the fledgling enactive paradigm.

Indeed, just that historical progression (representationism to connectionism to en-activism) is traced in The embodied mind:
Cognitive science and human experience, by Varela, Thompson, and Rosch. “We begin,” they say, “with the center or core of
cognitive science, known generally as cognitivism. The central tool and guiding metaphor of cognitivism is the digital computer. A
computer is a physical device built in such a way that a particular set of its physical changes can be interpreted as computations. A
computation is an operation performed or carried out on symbols, that is, on elements that represent what they stand for. . . .
Simplifying for the moment, we can say that cognitivism consists in the hypothesis that cognition is mental representation: the
representation of a pregiven world by a pregiven mind” (pp. 8–9).

Thus, in cognitivism “we then have a full-fledged theory that says (1) the world is pregiven; (2) our cognition is of this world . . .
, and (3) the way in which we cognize this pregiven world is to represent its features and then act on the basis of these
representations” (p. 135).

That, of course,

is the fundamental Enlightenment paradigm. Varela et al. thus point out that, contrary to Rorty’s conclusion,
cognitivism does indeed continue the “mirror of nature” notion. “Contrary [to Rorty], a crucial feature of the [representational]
image remains alive in contemporary cognitive science—the idea of a world or environment with extrinsic, pregiven features that
are recovered through a process of representation.
cognitivism is the strongest statement yet of the
representational view of the mind inaugurated by Descartes and Locke [the history of which we will examine in detail in chapters
12 and 13; my italics]. Jerry Fodor, one of cognitivism’s leading and most eloquent exponents, goes so far as to say that the only
respect in which cognitivism is a major advance over eighteenth- and nineteenth-century representationism is in its use of the
computer as a model of mind” (p. 138).

In some ways

And, indeed, the same representationism is the primary paradigm in neurophysiology, as I previously indicated, and as Varela
et al. point out: “The basic idea that the brain is an information-processing device that responds selectively to features of the
environment remains as the dominant core of modern neuroscience and in the public’s understanding” (p. 44).

Although the representational/computational paradigm can handle many facets of cognition (much of our knowledge, after all,
is indeed representational after the fact, even if that is not the whole story—or even the most basic story), nonetheless,
recalcitrant problems with its overall adequacy has lead to two major alternative accounts of cognition. “The first alternative,
which we call emergence, is typically referred to as connectionism. This name is derived from the idea that many cognitive tasks
(such as vision and memory) seem to be handled best by systems made up of many simple components, which, when connected
by the appropriate rules, give rise to global behavior corresponding to the desired task. Connectionist models generally trade
localized, symbolic processing for distributed operations (ones that extend over an entire network of components) and so result
in the emergence of global properties resilient to local malfunction” (p. 8).

Related to this approach is the more sophisticated version of “the society of mind” (Minsky)—mind as a society of agents and
subagents. “The agent motifs are fairly complex processes. Each of these may be thought of as composed of subagents, or more
accurately as themselves agencies composed of agents. The task, then, is to organize the agents who operate in these specific
domains into effective larger systems or ‘agencies,’ and these agencies in turn into higher-level systems. In doing so, mind
emerges as a kind of society” (a holonic view, although “self” and “consciousness” remain problematic, as we will see). “The
model of the mind as a society of numerous agents is intended to encompass a multiplicity of approaches to the study of
cognition, ranging from distributed, self-organizing networks to the classical, cognitivist conception of localized, serial symbolic
processing” (pp. 116, 106).

But the crucial point is that these approaches (cognitivist, connectionist, society of agents) all remain firmly rooted in Right-
Hand reductionism (as Varela et al. point out in their own terms). The connectionist and society models, in fact, are prime
examples of subtle reductionism: in championing emergence, networks, global properties, holarchies, and so forth, they loudly
battle the gross reductionism of simple atomistic representationism—only to ensconce their own subtle reductionism in a way
that makes it all the harder to spot (and thus doubly reinforces the primary problem).

But Varela and company are clearly on to them: the connectionist model simply replaces symbol with global state, which then
itself represents the pregiven world: “For connectionists a representation consists in the correspondence between such an
emergent global state and properties of the world” (p. 8). Thus, nothing fundamental has changed in this “blindness deeply
entrenched in our Western tradition and recently reinforced by cognitivism. Thus even when the very ideas of representation and
information processing change considerably, as they do in the study of connectionist networks, self-organization, and emergent
properties, some form of the realist assumption remains. In cognitivism, the realism is at least explicit and defended; in the
emergence approach, however,
it often becomes simply tacit and unquestioned [always the great problem with subtle
reductionism]. This unreflective stance is one of the greatest dangers facing the field of cognitive science; it limits the range of
theories and ideas and so prevents a broader vision and future for the field” (p. 133). Not to mention the society at large.

Nowhere can the unpleasant effects of this subtle reductionism be better seen than in the cognitive science approach to
consciousness itself (or simply lived experience in general). From the field that claims to be the final authority on such matters,
what we learn about consciousness and lived experience is this: basically,
it doesn’t exist. Or, as Jackendoff words it,
“consciousness is not good for anything” (Varela et al., p. 108).

Jackendoff’s particular cognitive model postulates (as most forms of cognitive science do, although in rather different ways) a
“computational mind” embedded in some largely unspecified fashion in the brain’s physical structure, and this computational
mind, which operates completely nonconsciously, performs all the required functions of cognition. Consciousness or awareness
or personal lived experience is thus viewed as a puzzling (ultimately unnecessary) epiphenomenon, projection, or causal result of
the nonconscious computational mind. “The actual [cognitive] subsystems,” as Dennett puts it, “are deemed to be unproblematic
nonconscious bits of organic machinery, as utterly lacking in point of view or inner life as a kidney or kneecap” (Varela et al., p.
50).

The result is that, although consciousness is viewed as the effect/projection of nonconscious processes, nonetheless
cognitivism, says Jackendoff, “offers no explication of what a conscious experience is. . . . leaving totally opaque the means by
which these effects come about” (Varela et al., pp. 52, 231).

But then, what else is new? There is no consciousness, awareness, or lived experience anywhere in the Right-Hand,
objectivistic dimensions—which register only the exterior forms of interior consciousness—and thus if you look at the Kosmos
only in an objectivating, exterior, monological/computational fashion, you will never find a subjective lived experience anyway.
Far from being “an empirical discovery of no small importance,” it is a discovery of no big deal: it is absolutely an a priori
fait
accompli of the representational/computational paradigm.

I am not saying there isn’t a computational mind (just as I am not denying the existence of neurotransmitters); but the fact that
consciousness can’t be found in either of them (or in kidneys or kneecaps) is a forgone conclusion, not a dramatic new discovery.
Such approaches purport to be “consciousness explained,” whereas they are “consciousness explained away”: they take a sphere,
cut it into circles, and say, “See! No sphere.”

“Consciousness is not good for anything.” Such a strange stance. Jackendoff’s theory of the computational mind leads him to
the mental conclusion, which he directly experiences in his own consciousness, that his consciousness is a puzzling and ultimately
unnecessary byproduct of his nonconscious computational mind. The theory may or may not be true. But either way, does the
theory actually change anything in Jackendoff’s real life? Does he love his friends and mates any the less? Treat his kids any
differently? Wish or will or hope any less? And what if the theory is eventually shown to be completely wrong? Will anything
about his own consciousness be experienced any differently at all? Does the theory change or alter anything in his lived, actual
experience? Why, based on Jackendoff’s real life, and if we are forced to choose, then we would have to come to the real
conclusion: “The computational theory is not good for anything.” (Since, about consciousness, it changes nothing, and it is only in
consciousness that changes count, i.e., have value.)

To his credit, Jackendoff is quite sensitive to these issues, and his approach is one attempt to wrestle with the “interaction” of
the phenomenological mind (lived experienced) and the computational mind (nonconscious mental mechanism) and the physical
body-brain structure—but still locked within the representational paradigm, which ensures the failure of that particular synthesis
from the outset. And it is exactly these types of difficulties that led Varela et al. to propose the enactive paradigm of cognition.

As I would word it, the enactive paradigm is a direct and explicitly stated attempt to integrate Left- and Right-Hand approaches
to cognition, uniting lived experience and theoretical formulations. “We wish to emphasize the deep tension in our present world
between science and experience. In our present world, science is so dominant that we give it the authority to explain even when
it denies what is most immediate and direct—our everyday, immediate experience” (p. 12).

And yet, “when it is cognition or mind that is being examined, the dismissal of experience becomes untenable, even
paradoxical”—becomes, actually, the performative contradiction inherent in all Right-Hand reductionisms, a sawing-off of the
branch on which one is happily perched.

How to heal this rift between experience and science (Left and Right) is thus paramount. “The tension comes to the surface
especially in cognitive science because cognitive science stands at the crossroads where the natural sciences and the human
sciences meet. Cognitive science is therefore Janus-faced, for it looks down both roads at once: One of its faces is turned toward
nature and sees cognitive processes as behavior [standard Right-Hand approach]. The other is turned toward the human world, or
what phenomenologists call the lifeworld, and sees cognition as experience [Left Hand]” (p. 13).

It is the mutual codetermination of Left and Right, or their “fundamental circularity,” that is the core of the enactive paradigm.
“In such an approach, then, perception is not simply embedded within and constrained by the surrounding world; it also
contributes to the enactment of this surrounding world. Thus as Merleau-Ponty notes, the organism both initiates and is shaped
by the environment. Merleau-Ponty clearly recognized, then, that we must see the organism and environment as bound together
in reciprocal specification and selection” (p. 174).

Although many phenomenological, hermeneutical, and existential approaches have emphasized the importance of the
immediate lifeworld (UL)—and the authors specifically recognize the value of their contributions—nonetheless there is a
tendency in many of these writers to drift merely into theoretical and objectivist discourse about
the lived lifeworld: they
“attempted to grasp the immediacy of our unreflective experience and tried to give voice to it in conscious reflection. But
precisely by being a theoretical activity after the fact, it could not recapture the richness of experience; it could be only a
discourse about that experience” (p. 19).

And thus, although the enactive paradigm is sympathetic to many of the lifeworld theorists, it seeks to remain much closer to
the lived experience itself, and let
that experience unfold in an open-ended fashion, especially through such
experimental/investigative techniques as mindfulness/awareness training, which, we might say, is not an attempt to introspect
and categorize awareness (theoretical analysis), but rather a direct approach to simply experiencing experience (a type of
experiential analysis). Thus, “if science is to continue to maintain its position of de facto authority in a responsible and
enlightened manner, then it must enlarge its horizon to include mindful, open-ended analyses of experience, such as the one
evoked here” (p. 81).

I am in substantial agreement with this important work. However, since it broaches the topics of meditation, contemplation,
and mindfulness/awareness training, I will reserve my final comments (and my few disagreements) until after these topics have
been introduced in the text. See note 1 for chap. 14.

In the meantime, for a summary of structural coupling, the proposed process of linkage in circularity, see note 13 above.
44. We should note that Habermas is discussing the interrelations between the Upper Left (I), Lower Left (we), and Right Half
(it), so he uses terminology from all three. But he is particularly, at this point, focusing on the correlations between the individual
structures of consciousness (UL)—such as individual cognition, individual moral development, and individual identity—and the
cultural structures (LL), such as collective morality, worldviews, and group identities. But both of these also become embedded in,
and interact with, the concrete, material, social institutions and physical forms (LR).

In this section, and in the next chapter, we will particularly be looking at the correlations (“homologies”) between the
individual structures of consciousness (UL) and the cultural structures, worldviews, and collective identities (LL). (In volume 2 of
this series, we will look more closely at their interrelation with the material-institutional forms, forces of production, modes of
technology, and so on—the LR).

45. Habermas, Communication and the evolution of society, pp. 98–99.
46. Ibid., p. 99. My italics.
47. Ibid.
48. Isaac Asimov, New guide to science (New York: Basic Books, 1984), p. 771.
49. Arieti, Intrapsychic self, p. 6.
50. Jantsch, Self-organizing universe, p. 150.
51. Up from Eden and The Atman project are two books that cover the micro and macro branch of human evolution in,
respectively, phylogeny and ontogeny. The center of both books is (1) a sequence of developmental stages or structures (holons)
in the evolution of consciousness; (2) a developmental logic internally explaining and partially driving the unfolding of those
stages (a version of the twenty tenets); and (3) a dynamic of Spirit-telos and Spirit-substitutes. Quite secondarily those stages
were assigned actual dates of emergence based on available evidence. This is “secondary” because, in all developmental
sequences, the nature and sequence of the abstract stages are not altered by the actual times that they appear, because these
times may vary from person to person and from culture to culture. Thus, for example, in the sequence oral-anal-phallic, the
sequence itself is universal but the precise time schedule can vary. The fourth central claim of those books is that (4) there are
homologous structures in onto and phylo development (except, of course, for the earliest stages; since they are prehuman, there
were never any human societies evidencing those).

I have continued to refine and revise the actual dates of emergence in both onto and phylo development (as well as their
general correlations). In Eden I had underestimated the cognitive complexity required for magic and mythic productions, and I
corrected this in Eye to eye, where the correlations are as I am presenting them here (e.g., preoperational/magic, concrete
operational/mythic, and so on); these readjustments were reflected in Transformations of consciousness. But the stages
themselves, and their sequence, and their dynamic remain essentially the same, which is why I still stand strongly behind the
main conclusions of those early books; indeed, subsequent research has made them even more, not less, plausible. [See Integral
Psychology.]

In Winkelman’s (1990) review of Up from Eden, he misses the first three essential points and instead argues about dates, an
argument that, where it is not simply wrong,
and
Transformations. He further takes an essentially synchronic structuralist view, which is now almost universally acknowledged to
be unable to account for development at all (see note 26 for chap. 1). He states that the use of onto/phylo parallels is completely
outmoded and nobody is using that anymore, overlooking, for example, the extensive evidence collected and presented by
Habermas, Sheldrake, etc. He collapses all validity claims to functional fit. And he conducts his overall attack from within a
performative contradiction that dissolves his own position; he claims a substantive stance that itself is merely rhetorical.

is irrelevant, because I had already readjusted them in Eye to eye

For a critique of Winkelman’s position as being essentially a reductionistic collapse of all validity claims to functional fit, see

note 26 for chapter 5.

52. Neither Habermas nor I started with the assumption of onto/phylo parallels. It is rather our conclusion after an analysis
of the structures of self, morality, notions of causality, types of cognition, and so on, that emerge at various stages of
development. As Rothberg (1990) pointed out, both Habermas and I are following a reconstructive science, which means a
reconstructing of the structures of consciousness
they have emerged in a population large enough to study
empirically/phenomenologically/dialogically. These are our conclusions, not our assumptions. And the conclusion is that “certain
homologies can be found.”

after

CHAPTER 5. THE EMERGENCE OF HUMAN NATURE

 1. “In the present context we are naturally interested in the question, whether the concept of social

labor adequately
characterizes the form of reproduction of human life. Thus we must specify more exactly what we wish to understand by ‘human
mode of life.’ In the last generation anthropology has gained new knowledge about the long (more than four million years) phase
during which the development from primates to humans, that is, the process of hominization, took place; beginning with a
postulated common ancestor of chimpanzees and humans, the evolution proceeded through homo erectus to homo sapiens. This
hominization was determined by the
[biosphere and
noosphere, or biogenesis and noogenesis; his italics]. On the one hand, during this period of anthropogenesis, there were
changes—based on a long series of mutations [transformations]—in the size of the brain and in important morphological features
[exterior forms].

cooperation of organic and cultural mechanisms of development

“On the other hand, the environments from which the pressure for selection proceeded were no longer determined solely by
natural ecology [by the biosphere], but through the active, adaptive accomplishments of hunting bands of hominids [my italics].
Only at the threshold to homo sapiens did this mixed organic-cultural form of evolution give way to an exclusively social
[cultural] evolution [the all-important differentiation of the noosphere and the biosphere]. The natural mechanism of evolution
came to a standstill. No new species [of humans] arose. Instead, the exogamy that was the basis for the societization of homo
sapiens resulted in a broad, intraspecific dispersion and mixture of the genetic inheritance. This internal differentiation [tenet 12b
in interiors] was the natural basis for a cultural diversification evidenced in a multiplicity of social learning processes. It is
therefore advisable to demarcate the sociocultural stage of development—at which alone social [human sociocultural] evolution
takes place (i.e., society is caught up in evolution [that is, in its own noospheric evolution])—from not only the primate stage—at
which there is still exclusively natural selection (i.e., the species are caught up in evolution [that is, biospheric evolution]—but also
from the hominid stage—at which the two evolutionary mechanisms are working together, the evolution of the brain being the
most important single variable” (Habermas, Communication and the evolution of society, pp. 133–34).

 2. Ibid., p. 134.
 3. Ibid., pp. 134–35.
 4. Ibid., p. 135.
 5. McCarthy’s wording, McCarthy, Critical theory of Jürgen Habermas, p. 238; my italics.
 6. Habermas, Communication, p. 135.
 7. Lenski, Human societies, chap. 7.
 8. Habermas, Communication, pp. 135–36.
 9. Volume 2 deals with the various schools of feminism (liberal, radical, social, Marxist), the masculine and feminine faces of
Spirit, ecofeminism and ecomasculinism (deep ecology), transpersonal ecology, Marxist and techno-economic factors in the
generation of worldviews, and an introduction to currents in postmodern thought, as set in the context of the spectrum overview.
Also: The term sex refers to biological givens and gender to sociocultural roles. Male and female refer to sex, masculine
and feminine to gender. I will not usually distinguish between sex and gender until volume 2. Also, sexual asymmetry, which
simply means sexual differentiation, is sometimes taken to mean “male dominator hierarchy,” and I won’t differentiate that until
volume 2 either.

10. In those horticultural societies that were matrifocal, the Big Three had not yet differentiated; that is, the noosphere had
not yet clearly differentiated from the biosphere, and thus “matrifocality” did not integrate those spheres but simply left them in
undifferentiation or indissociation, which is why they provide no model for today’s world. Women’s power was still biologically
determined, which is no real power at all but the fate of circumstances (all of which I will explore in volume 2).

11. As we will see, the historical forerunners of the women’s movement occurred in precisely those places (such as Greece)

where the noosphere and biosphere had first begun to differentiate clearly (where reason had first begun to emerge).

This means that feminism as an issue would not arise, and could not arise, as a widespread historical movement until the

noosphere finally differentiated from the biosphere—and this is, of course, what in fact happened.

12. Charlene Spretnak’s States of grace, as only one of many examples, gives an unrelenting history of Woman as Eternal
Victim, which is presumably meant to empower women, but actually and profoundly dissolves the power of women in the very
first step by defining them as primarily molded by an Other. Instead of giving women power by seeing how both men and women
co-created all previous stages of development, these types of approaches scan history for any response, on the part of women,
that does not happen to fit the present-day ideology of the particular feminist, whereupon that response, since it can’t have been
what women “really” wanted, is promptly ascribed to male oppression, thus subtracting it from the women.

Thus, in all these approaches, the very attempt to liberate women disempowers them by definition. These approaches are not

insulting to men; they are profoundly insulting to women.

Women do not have to take back their power because they never gave it away; they co-selected, with men, the best possible

societal arrangements under the extremely difficult environmental and social conditions of the time (the average life span of
individuals in the eulogized horticultural societies, for example, was twenty-five years [Lenski]). As we will see in volume 2, there
is now an entirely new wave of feminist research that has relocated and rediscovered female power in the patriarchy, research
that demonstrates that female power was indeed a strong, conscious, intelligent co-creator of the patriarchy, a co-creator of that
(and every) stage of human development.

With the differentiation of the noosphere and the biosphere, female power could now be deployed in completely novel and
emergent ways; this was not a recovery or exhumation of lost power but the deployment of the same power in new and
unprecedented ways. Victim feminists, on the other hand, are indeed caught in unending rounds of disempowerment, trying to
“take back” their power by first giving it away.

This trading of real power for the pale substitute of extorted guilt is beginning to boomerang badly on the victim feminists, who
are still having a difficult time assuming co-responsibility for their own history and their own choices. But the lesson of evolution
is that most of today’s problems are the result, not of something good yesterday that has been lost, but of something good
tomorrow still struggling to emerge. Many victim feminists don’t want to assume co-responsibility for their state because that
state is still “mean” in many ways; but the cure for the meanness lies not in a recovery of a yesterday fashioned by an ideology of
blame, but in an uncovery of tomorrow fought for in the face of recalcitrant emergence. The “enemy” is not something men did
to women yesterday, but something that not-yet-enough evolution has done to them both.

13. Patriarchy has two rather different meanings in feminist literature. (1) For many radical feminists, patriarchy (as male
domination) has been present from day one, from literally the beginning of the human race (Alison Jaggar takes this view);
women who don’t feel dominated have been brainwashed to accept their condition. (2) For the ecofeminists, who feel that
horticultural societies dominated by the Great Mother were in many ways ideal (Gimbutas, Eisler), the patriarchy refers to the
shift from matrifocal (or equifocal) to patrifocal modes, and thus has been with us for the last five thousand years or so.

Patriarchy 1 is, in effect, the familization of the male via the role of the father, and that indeed has been with us from day one;
that was not avoidable. Patriarchy 2 occurred across the globe as horticulture gave way to plow and horse societies, which
selected for physical strength/mobility; nor was that avoidable either, except by developmental arrest (which is precisely the
societies eulogized by ecofeminists). In none of these societies were the noosphere and biosphere integrated; they were simply
undifferentiated, which is why they are no role models at all, despite the rhetorical use to which they have been put.

14. Habermas, Communication, pp. 104, 121.
15. This type of cognition as “simple representation” is, of course, the cognition still favored by empiricist theories of knowing.
Being “close to the body,” or “close to sensations,” it is a cognition that registers mostly surfaces and exteriors, and so it is
naturally the cognition favored by the reflection paradigm (monological, representational). But empiricist theories themselves
are actually making massive use of formal operational space, whose mechanisms, being not empirically obvious, are simply
ignored (or rather, implicitly assumed even as the theory denies their existence).

16. McCarthy, Critical theory, p. 250.
17. This doesn’t mean magic doesn’t serve crucially important functions. In its cultural capacity (LL) it is the center of cultural
meaning and value, and in its social capacity (LR), the locus of social integration. Radical egalitarians who object to the term
“magical” imagine that the term somehow denies all these important functions.

18. Habermas, Communication, pp. 111–12.
19. Eisler, The Gaia tradition, in Diamond & Orenstein, Reweaving the world, p. 32.
20. Dubos, A god within, quoted in Novak, Tao how?. Novak’s article is highly recommended.
21. Roszak, Voice of the earth, pp. 226, 69. This book is discussed at length in note 32 for chapter 13.
22. Habermas, Communication, p. 162. Habermas and his associates are referring to tribal societies the way they first existed,
not necessarily how they exist now. As Roszak points out, “As anthropologists warn us,
it is always risky to infer from
contemporary to prehistoric tribal groups. Existing tribal societies have experienced as much history as the rest of the human race
. . .” (Voice of the earth, p. 77).

Thus, when members of tribal or indigenous societies existing today are given Piaget’s test of cognitive development, they
show a capacity for formal operational thinking, just like anybody else. But the point, as Habermas demonstrates, is that the first
tribal societies as a whole did not evidence formal operational cognition in any of their actual, social structures: not in legal
codes, not in conflict resolution, not in arbitration, not in modes of group or collective identity, not in worldviews, and so on.
Whether some individuals did (or did not) reach formal operational in those societies is beside the central point, which is that the
basic organizing principles of the primal societies themselves did not evidence formal operational, but rather followed the
primary structures of preoperational cognition (and preconventional dispute arbitration, etc.). Some individuals developed above,
some below, that average level, but the basic average level was clearly preoperational and preconventional in many fundamental
ways—such is the conclusion of this line of research put forward by Habermas and associates (similar types of arguments are put
forward by Gebser, Campbell, Piaget, Kohlberg, Bellah, Lenski, etc.). It is the tribal structure, not particular tribal members, that is
being addressed.

At the same time, both Habermas and I believe that at least some individuals in foraging societies developed the capacity for
rationality; and I believe some went even further into the transrational (namely, the shamans), if not as a permanent adaptation,
then as a peak experience or altered state. We will discuss these transrational realms in chapter 8. [See Integral Psychology.]

23. Habermas, Communication, p. 161.
24. Ibid., p. 112.
25. Ibid., p. 104.
When Gary Snyder made the remark, much admired in certain ecological circles, that when humans invented gods and
goddesses of an “otherworldly” nature, all of humanity’s troubles began, he betrayed the ecomasculinist preference for a
reinterpreted tribalism. There was no way for tribal social organization to move beyond isolationism without finding a source of
commonalities beyond kinship, and this the mythic motifs provided. Lenski reports that most foraging tribes had a carrying
capacity of about forty people, and these tribal units could not be integrated into larger conventional sociocentric collectives
without the transcendental power of a common mythic ancestry and group identity that extended beyond the limited bonds of
kinship unions. Far from being “global,” tribal consciousness is considerably fragmented when it comes to modes of
intersubjective bonding and unification (see also note 26 below).

26. Detailed evidence for these correlations is presented in Up from Eden.
As for the nature of the shamanic vision, the only book I can unreservedly recommend is Walsh’s The spirit of shamanism, an
excellent overview of this tricky and difficult topic. Walsh is one of the leading lights of the transpersonal movement, and his
balanced and sane overview, decisive in many ways, is a major contribution to the field. Walsh’s presentation is valuable because
it manages both to acknowledge the pioneering spiritual insights of shamanism and simultaneously set it in a larger perspective,
an accomplishment which rightly earned it the praise of most scholars.

In the course of Walsh’s succinct but comprehensive presentation, he points out that the shamanic journey (a general
phenomenon that is perhaps the central and most defining characteristic of the complex of shamanic practices) has usually been
assumed to be simply the same general state as yogic, Buddhist, mystical, or even schizophrenic states. Walsh first presents a
“horizontal” analysis of various factors (such as degree of conscious control, awareness of environment, concentration, ability to
communicate, identity, and arousal), all of which, taken together, quite clearly differentiate the shamanic journey from yogic,
Buddhist, mystical, and schizophrenic states (which are also quite clearly differentiated from each other). “This approach,” he
points out, “allows us to move from unidimensional comparisons to multidimensional comparisons and to distinguish between
states with greater sensitivity.”

Walsh doesn’t stop there. Having clearly differentiated the shamanic state in his horizontal grid, he then applies a “vertical” or
developmental grid, using standard and well-accepted criteria for developmental stages in general. His conclusion is that of the
three major spiritual stages of development (subtle, causal, and nondual, each of which we will investigate in chapter 8),
“shamans were perhaps the earliest masters of the subtle realm.” He acknowledges that a few shamans very likely transcended
their own path and disclosed causal and nondual occasions, but the central and most defining characteristics of shamanism seem
to be quite clearly subtle-level phenomena.

Since many forms of yogic and Buddhist meditation—by the same criteria—reach beyond the subtle and into causal and
nondual states, Walsh’s clear implication is that these contemplative endeavors (and others like them) are in some ways more
advanced (or more disclosing of greater depth) than the typical shamanic journey, and this “ranking” riled a few cultural
relativists, on the one hand, and some shamanic advocates, on the other.

Representing the cultural relativists, Winkelman (1993) advanced the reasons that no stance can be intrinsically superior to
another (except, of course, his stance, which is claimed to be intrinsically superior to the alternatives). Winkelman takes the
stance that it is universally true that there are no universally true stances.

Having thus exempted his own position from the criticism he levels at others, Winkelman then proceeds to give the standard
functionalist analysis of social systems, and concludes—as all functionalist accounts must—that if a sociocultural practice is
adaptive—that is, if it possesses functional fit—then it cannot be judged inferior to any other production, because it fits just as it
is (and thus, he says, the yogic systems would not have worked in shamanic cultures, and therefore the yogic systems cannot be
said to be “deeper” or “more advanced” or any such qualitative distinction).

But nobody is claiming that the yogic (or Buddhist or contemplative) systems would fit into shamanic cultures (in fact, they
would not; among numerous reasons, the base of the shamanic cultures was preconventional, with a scarce resource of power,
whereas the base of the cultures of the contemplative traditions was conventional with beginning postconventional, whose
scarce resources were legal membership and beginning self-recognition).

Thus, Winkelman’s conclusion, when it comes solely to functional fit, is quite right (and both Walsh and I have long agreed
with that conclusion, as far as it goes); the point is, it is quite irrelevant as well for the central issue. Winkelman’s purely Right-
Hand approach (Lower-Right, to be specific) reduces all validity claims (of truth, truthfulness, cultural meaning, and functional
fit)—reduces all of those to functional fit and monological systems markers (reduces all Left-Hand dimensions to Lower-Right
terms), and so of course his approach cannot spot qualitative distinctions in the first place (which is why he must implicitly bury

his own value ranking in a stance that explicitly denies its own possibility—the standard performative contradiction in all merely
Right-Hand paths).

Functional fit, as we have seen, recognizes only one validity claim: does the system work or not? Is it functioning adequately in
its environment? Is it adaptive? Is it pragmatically functional? Does it work? And to this single, monological validity claim,
functional fit has only one answer: yes, it is working, or no, it is not.
If it is working (in its own way, in its own place), then that
ends the discussion
about values, about which system is higher or lower, deeper or shallower, better or worse, more
encompassing or less encompassing. If it is working well, then it is as good as any other system, and who are we to go judging
further?

Never mind that that judgment of universal pluralism is itself a judgment that ranks its own stance as better than narrow
ethnocentrism—and rightly so!, except that, since this functional relativistic stance collapses all Left-Hand qualitative distinctions
(including those that allow its own stance) into Right-Hand functionalist markers, then it cannot even account for the truth or
goodness of its own stance, and thus it thoroughly exempts itself
from any open discussion and evaluation of qualitative
distinctions, of the Left-Hand dimensions in general (it makes a poorly-thought-out Left-Hand judgment that denies the
significance of the Left-Hand in toto).

As Taylor put it, this stance therefore buries its own tracks, and then spends its time denouncing all those who do not likewise
conceal their own position. It is a value ranking (partly correct in my opinion) that nonetheless obstinately and officially denies
all value ranking, and the only way it can do so is by refusing to acknowledge its own now hidden value ranking (it claims all
values are equivalent if they functionally fit: but if all values were really equivalent, then tolerant pluralism could in no way be
any better than narrow-minded ethnocentrism and racism:
deeper and prior value
judgment—correct in my opinion—upon which its pluralistic tolerance necessarily rests), and this deep obfuscation then allows it
to collapse all values into functional fit, whereupon it runs smack into its own absurdities: if it works for the Nazis, who are we
to judge? Auschwitz, all agree, worked quite efficiently, and by Winkleman’s stated criteria, we can make no further judgments.

this position misses

its own

Thus, the bulk of Winkelman’s critique reduces all values and all validities to functional fit. His functional analysis is accurate
enough, as far as it goes; it is just, as I indicated, extremely partial. His analysis tells us that, in the Lower-Right quadrant,
shamanism was perfectly adapted to (and functionally fit) the societies that grounded it, and thus it cannot, in those terms, be
judged inferior—and that is certainly true. By the criteria of
(legitimacy), the yogic/contemplative system was
indeed neither better nor worse than the shamanic (actually, we all agree it would have been worse: it would not have fit).

functional fit

Nobody (not Walsh, not I) has ever claimed otherwise.
But by virtually any criteria from the Left-Hand dimensions

(developmental unfolding of structural potentials that display
deeper and wider qualitative shifts), the typical shamanic journey was a pioneering engagement that would nevertheless be
deepened and widened in the contemplative endeavors that would build upon it in subsequent spiritual evolution, an evolution
that would lead from subtle to causal to nondual disclosures (all of which will be discussed in chapter 8). [See also Integral
Psychology.]

Winkelman himself gives an example of what he considers to be his major point. A cigarette lighter, he says, may be more
advanced than a simple flint, but there are times when the flint is more practically useful, so that neither lighter nor flint can be
intrinsically better, since if they fit their practical/adaptive function, they are equally satisfactory. That, of course, is the simple
functional fit argument, and we have already seen that Walsh (and I) have accepted that truism from the start. Let us therefore
complete the analogy and note the other (and neglected) fact of Winkelman’s own analogy: as he says, the lighter is
technologically more advanced. The lighter includes a flint, plus other more sophisticated cognitive/technical discoveries (it
includes, for example, a wheel, which early foraging societies had not discovered).

Thus Winkelman’s main analogy, with which he ends his critique, points to these two facts: there are circumstances where
both the flint and the lighter were equally appropriate, or possessed equal functional fit; and the lighter is nonetheless more
cognitively and technically advanced. Winkelman’s analysis covers only the former; Walsh’s analysis covers both; and thus
Walsh’s presentation supersedes the rather narrow functionalist endeavor.

Winkelman smuggles his own values into his analysis by claiming (quite rightly, I believe) that worldcentric perspectivism “has
advantages in providing multiple perspectives which are more encompassing and complete”—an altogether correct stance that
he must nonetheless officially deny, since most of the ethnocentric cultures he studies do not possess a worldcentric pluralism,
and thus he would have to admit that his (modern, Western) stance is superior to ethnocentric narrowness (and this he is not
allowed to do by his official stance that no cross-cultural universal judgments of intrinsic merit are possible). See note 26 to chap.
1, p. 554.

Many approaches to shamanism assume that there are, basically, ordinary reality on the one hand and “mysticism” (or
nonordinary reality) on the other. This simplistic distinction (ordinary vs. nonordinary) allowed Gary Doore, for example, to state
that “shamans, yogis and Buddhists alike are accessing the same state of consciousness,” and Holger Kalweit to state that the
shaman “experiences existential unity—the samadhi of the Hindus or what Western spiritualists and mystics call enlightenment,
illumination, unio mystica.” But, as Walsh points out, “These claims seem to be based on relatively superficial similarities.”

Walsh’s multidimensional grid analysis (both horizontal and vertical) has irrevocably shattered that simplistic approach. It is
simply impossible to look at all of his variables (which differ considerably among the various states) and not be impressed with
the gross and subtle differences among these states. Further, armed with this finer analysis, it is impossible not to spot
developmental factors in the unfolding of these states themselves: like everything else in the Kosmos, they seem to grow and
evolve: the acorn does not show up as a fully formed oak on the spot. And Walsh’s horizontal and vertical analyses, while
preliminary by his own accounts, have nonetheless advanced the field enormously.

The second criticism of Walsh’s analysis came from those theorists who view shamanism as accessing the same qualitative
levels of depth disclosure as the subsequent contemplative systems. But by the finer analysis that Walsh gives, it now seems likely
that the typical shamanic journey was a pioneering breakthrough into the transpersonal/spiritual domain, a breakthrough that
disclosed levels of depth undreamt of in the conventional world, and a depth that subsequent contemplative endeavors would
deepen and extend: building upon the spiritual disclosures of the great shamanic voyagers, and standing thus on the shoulders of
giants, they would subsequently probe even further into the extraordinary depths of the great Beyond.

27. The “mythic-rational” structure is a specific term for late concrete operational, but I also use it, in a general sense, to refer

to the rationalization of any of the mythic structures.

28. Habermas, Communication, pp. 112–13.
29. Ibid., p. 105.
30. Ibid.
31. Ibid., p. 114.
32. The few women’s movements that briefly emerged in earlier societies, such as in Greece, emerged in precisely those places
where rationality had also precociously emerged, and where ego identities were also tentatively emerging from role identities.
But since the differentiation of the biosphere and the noosphere was not fully complete, the biospheric identities eventually
sucked these movements out of the noosphere and back into the bodily or biological determinants.

And, as I earlier mentioned, in the horticultural societies where women were a large portion of the productive work force, a
type of egalitarian arrangement was indeed at work, but this was secured not by stable legal and noospheric determinants, but
simply by biospheric contingencies. The hoe placed power in women’s hands, just as the plow would remove it. The biosphere
and noosphere had not been differentiated in these societies, and thus the social determinants always reverted to biospheric
selection in times of stress, defense, or turmoil. In no case were they models of what an egalitarian and differentiated/integrated
society would look like. (All of this is covered in great detail in volume 2).

Also, as we will see in volume 2, the role of industrialization (the historical LR correlate of UL egoic-rationality) was
instrumental in liberating human labor (and the female) from the determinants of the biosphere (and could go too far into
dissociation or eco-crisis). I am in no way ignoring industrialization or the LR quadrant; they are the main focus of volume 2.

As I will point out in the text, I think many ecofeminists feel they have to be able to point to a past society where women were
“equal” in order to show that such equality is a possibility of the human condition. But my point is that the possibility is an
emergence, not a resurrection. And if we take the resurrection model—that a past glory was lost and needs to be regained—then
we have to get into the blame game: the nasty men had to have taken it away, and the women have to have been stupider and/or
weaker to have let it happen. The resurrection (or Romantic) model necessitates the pigification of males and the sheepification
of females, whereas the emergence (or growth) model portrays both males and females as essentially co-creative.

33. There were, of course, many forerunners to feminism throughout history (in Europe, Greece, India, northern Africa, etc.);
one might particularly mention Christine de Pisan’s Book of the cities of ladies. Nonetheless, as Riane Eisler points out, “Feminism
as a modern ideology did not emerge until the middle of the nineteenth century” (Chalice, p. 165). We will return to the
emergence of the women’s movement in chapter 11.

Cf. Elise Boulding, The underside of history; Sheila Rowbotham, Women, resistance and revolution; Marilyn French, Beyond
power: On women, men, and morals; Susan M. Stuard (ed.), Women in medieval society; Nawal El Sadawii, The hidden face of
Eve: Women in the Arab world; Nancy Cott and Elizabeth Pleck (eds.), A heritage of her own; Gerda Lerner, The majority finds its
past: Placing women in history; La Frances Rodgers-Rose (ed.), The black woman; Martha Vicinus (ed.), Suffer and be still:
Women in the Victorian age; Jeanne Achterberg, Woman as healer.

34. This claim of a special connection between woman, nature (earth), and body is examined in detail in volume 2. The claim
itself has been put forward in a strong and positive light by many radical feminists and ecofeminists, and equally condemned by
many liberal feminists. The difficulty, as I see it, is that if we are going to make that claim, then how can it be done without
simultaneously “pigeonholing” women or simply relegating them to the emotional/feeling domain? In other words, a way has to
be found to preserve and negate the claim. I believe this can be done, and volume 2 explores this possibility.

For the moment, we have the following (quite different) stances toward the “special connection” between woman, nature, and
body: the special connection (1) actually exists, (2) was claimed to exist by some women for positive value, (3) was claimed to
exist by some men as a prelude to oppressing that entire sphere. Any of those versions of the “special connection” will suffice for
my comments in the text; my own specific opinion, and the actual details, are covered in volume 2.

35. Habermas, Communication, p. 114.
36. Ibid., p. 197.
37. Gebser’s Ever-Present Origin is now available in English (see bibliography). I have taken all quotes in this section from
Feuerstein, Structures of consciousness, which is by far the best presentation of Gebser’s work. Feuerstein also correlates
Gebser’s stages with my own.

38. All quotes from Feuerstein, Structures of consciousness. [For the precise details of vision-logic and its postformal substages,

see Integral Psychology.]

39. Several terms in the Lower-Left are carried over from Up from Eden and Eye to eye: pleromatic (physical/material),
uroboric (reptilian/brain stem), and typhonic (paleomammalian/limbic), although these are all used in a very general sense (both
here and in Eden), to indicate worldviews where these elements, although by no means the sole determinant, loom large in its
primary concerns, often defining its most general atmosphere (and sometimes its most scarce resource). And the “archaic,” as
indicated in the text, is a catchall phrase for any or all structures prior the emergence of concepts (and sometimes, as with Jung,
to refer to any of the “inherited” or “archetypal” early concepts, images, mythic forms, etc.).

As I have previously indicated, if the reader does not feel comfortable extending “consciousness” (or prehension of any sort) to
any “lower” holons—and consequently does not believe that they share any sort of common worldspaces—then one can
interpret the entire Lower-Left quadrant merely as the ontogenetic unfolding of today’s human being: it starts out as a single-
celled zygote (protoplasmic), which itself embraces and enfolds molecules, atoms, and subatomic particles (pleromatic); and it
then develops through differentiated life functions (vegetative) and into a reptilian brain stem (uroboric, complete with gill slits),
and a paleomammalian limbic system (typhonic), and a slowly unfolding neocortex/neurosystem, with its worldviews then
developing from archaic to magic to mythic to rational.

My point is that these two interpretations (human ontogeny and worldspaces of previous holons) are fundamentally saying the
same thing. Even bifurcating dissipative structures show “systems memory” of the path of their buildup (because they retreat
along that path when they dissolve, as we saw in chapter 2). That human beings would possess such systems memory seems not
even a little surprising (memory stored in brain cells is not the only memory the Kosmos has generated!). The previous
worldspaces are enfolded in us, precisely as our ancestral systems pathways.

I am by no means basing my argument on the following example, but it is illustrative that human beings given such
conventional-reality-blowing drugs as LSD often report memories not only of their own birth, but “memories” of plant and animal
identification, even atomic resonance: the worldspaces are there, enfolded in us, subholons in our own makeup, speaking to us
still from the depths of our own Kosmic family photo album.

40. The Upper-Right quadrant is also meant to include and imply the possibility of the existence of subtler bio-energies that
numerous researchers (from William Tiller to Hiroshi Motoyama) feel are holarchically enveloping the bodymind. But these
energies are still exterior and can be monologically perceived with appropriate equipment (or subtler senses), and thus belong
to this quadrant (although they would have various correlates in the other quadrants as well, as all holons do).

Likewise, I would like to point to the work of Da Avabhasa, who has outlined several stages of the growth and development of
human consciousness (which we will explore in chapter 8); without reducing these stages to bodily components, he nonetheless
points out that all of them have bodily correlates (even the supra-individual causal Witness has its bodily correlate in the heart
region on the right). All of these bodily correlates are Upper-Right quadrant, and reinforce my central point: every holon (no
matter how transcendental) has these four quadrants, these four correlates.

Finally, I would like especially to single out the work of Michael Murphy, whose book The future of the body is a magnificent
study of the bodily correlates of a transforming and evolving consciousness—yet more evidence that all manifest holons
anywhere possess the four quadrants. Murphy almost single-handedly has been representing the great importance of the Upper-
Right quadrant in human transformation (without merely reducing human evolution to the Upper Right).

In volume 2 we will return to this topic of the interaction between the UR and UL quadrants in both conventional and higher
development. We see this interaction not only in such fields as medical psychiatry (where the role of neurotransmitters in normal
functioning and mental illness is becoming more obvious) but also in such “mystical” areas as psychedelics and the newly
developing “brain/mind machines” capable of inducing a broad range of “meditative” states. Exactly what all this means will be
examined in detail.

41. Nonetheless, Marx’s own writings are not quite as reductionistic as they are often made out to be, nor as reductionistic as
they often became in practice. In volume 2, the more subtle aspects of historical materialism are examined and set in the context
of evolving and developing worldviews. The great strength of the Marxist system on the whole, was that it kept alive a
developmental scheme of human evolution, and this is why so many serious (and nonreductionistic) theorists, from Lenski to
Habermas, have returned to it time and again for useful insights (all of which, as I said, is examined at length in volume 2).

42. An example of which is Habermas’s work on unrestrained communicative exchange, which alone can secure unforced
agreement on any of these issues in the first place. We will return, in chapters 12, 13, and 14, to the failure of most of the
ecophilosophies to deal nonreductionistically with the noosphere and its distributions and distortions.

43. That is, the overall movement of cultural transformation is from the Upper-Left of individual cognitive potential to the
Lower-Left of collective worldview, at first marginalized, but finally embedded in Lower-Right social institutions, at which point
these basic institutions automatically help reproduce the worldview (LL) and socialize the individual (UL and UR) in succeeding
generations, acting as “pacers of transformation”—a transformation first started or begun in a moment of individual creative
emergence and transcendence. This process is discussed in much detail in volume 2.

44. The great “world religions” (Hinduism, Buddhism, Christianity, Islam, etc.) that still exist today (and which we will examine
beginning in chapter 7) all arose in the general era of mythic-imperialism, and all of them remain clothed to some degree in
surface structures
(and ethics) that are two major technological epochs behind the times. None of those religions (nor the
previous tribal religions) arose from within a global culture, and thus none of them can (or will) speak to the rising world culture,
however important their specific spiritual practices are (and will remain).

Rather, as a global culture is created, and as its surface structures begin to be part of a common language, then from within
that global culture will arise the new religion(s), speaking in part this global language, working within this common discourse, and
pointing as well beyond it. The era when one specific religion (say, Christianity or Buddhism) could move into a new territory and
simply convert it (by force of arms or force of truthful persuasion) has long gone. That the new religion(s) will have roots in the
previous religions I do not doubt; that they will simply come from any of them I do not believe.

The tribal Earth religions arose within a worldview of magical indissociation and upon a techno-economic base of wooden club
and spear (with scarce resource of power), and bound together only kinship lineages. The great world religions arose within a
worldview of mythic and mythic-rational, and upon a techno-economic base of horse and plow (herding/agrarian)—with scarce
resource of membership and thus with corresponding (and very rigid) hierarchies of power, membership, wealth, and access to
the Divine. The specific moral injunctions in these religions are thus often (and still) bound to surface structures that simply make
little (if any) sense in today’s world: don’t eat pork, don’t eat with your right hand, don’t sleep on wool, don’t allow women in the
temple. . . .

However much the esoteric or mystical components of those religions did indeed penetrate beyond such outward exoteric
forms, nonetheless there are limits to just how far out of one’s skin one can jump. Moving from the agrarian to the modern, and
from the modern to the postmodern: there is too much ground to make up, and too much distance to travel, for the traditional
contemplative endeavors to cover on their own (and too much dross that needs to jettisoned without being condemned as a
sinner).

No, the new global religion(s) will come from within the new global culture and will not be anything simply grafted on from the
past. The new global religion(s) will be at home in contemplative awareness, but awareness that also speaks naturally and
natively a digital language of the silicon chip, and sees itself as clearly in virtual reality as in the play of the wind and rain; its global
perspective and universal pluralism will be taken for granted, and Spirit will move through circuits of fiber optics as well as
through flesh and blood; and all of that will be natural, and normal, and alive: and from within that global network the new voices
of transcendence will begin to attract those sensitive to the Divine. From within the informational neural network of a global
commons will come the voices indicating liberation.

The various New Age movements claim to herald such a worldwide consciousness revolution. But, as this book will make
obvious, I think, these movements are insufficient: they lack any sustained vision-logic of both exterior and interior dimensions,
they lack a consistent technology of access to higher interior dimensions, they lack a means (and even a theory) of social
institutionalization (in other words, they lack an all-four-quadrant analysis and engagement). Moreover, most New Age and new
paradigm approaches, despite their claims to be post-Cartesian, are simply extending the types of phenomena described as
possible in the Cartesian world; they do not decisively challenge the fundamental Enlightenment paradigm. (We will be returning
to this topic frequently throughout the book.)

As such, most of these New Age movements do not engage the rational worldview in a way that can transcend and include it;
rather, many of them end up regressing to various forms of mythic-imperialism (and even tribal magic). These movements put a
premium on a self-actualization that all too often reverts to magical egoism; and this magical narcissism is worked into a
mythology of world transformation that barely conceals its imperialistic thrust.

45. Habermas, Communication, pp. 164–65.
46. Ibid., pp. 165–6.
47. For an interesting discussion of these themes, see Laszlo’s The choice: Evolution or extinction? As usual, Laszlo’s
presentation is admirably straightforward and to the point, and we can all applaud when Laszlo says (p. 109) that “the culture of
interexistence [which he advocates] has an inclusive logic: It is you and I, they and we. It replaces the logic of egotism and
exclusion, which says me or you, we or they. The new logic can enable people and societies to play postive sum win-win games.
. . . The great advantage of the culture of interexistence is that, with its inclusive logic, it could harmonize the current forms and
facets of diversity.”

It could indeed; the “inclusive logic” is vision-logic. But Laszlo is silent on the interior stages leading up to this vision-logic, and
thus the crucial steps necessary for the “great solution” remain obscure. Laszlo is quite right, I believe, when he says, “Though

these factors are subjective and cultural [Left Hand] rather than objective and physical [Right Hand], we must not ignore them nor
underestimate their import. The more a person is developed (not, of course, merely in the economic sense, but in the sense of
being a mature and responsible citizen), the more his or her society has a chance to develop” (pp. 140–41).

But about this “more developed,” we hear nothing more. I am very sympathetic with Laszlo’s general presentation in The
choice (in particular, his emphasis on the Left-Hand dimension is in sharp contrast with his previous and almost exclusive
emphasis on Right-Hand systems theory, even if he continues to frame his thoughts in objectivistic and systems holism; and I
entirely support his notion of “modernization, not Westernization”). But without a clearer understanding of the actual stages of
personal (UL) and cultural (LL) transformation that result in a pluralistic worldcentric awareness capable of “interexistence,”
Laszlo’s call for “education,” “communication,” and “more information” remains unfulfilled.

48. For a particularly chilling account of this retribalization and its growing influence in the immediate future, see Robert
Kaplan’s “The coming anarchy” in the February 1994 Atlantic. Kaplan also sees the world heading toward globalization, but with
an extended transition period of retribalization: “Whereas the distant future will probably see the emergence of a racially hybrid,
globalized man, the coming decades will see us more aware of our differences than of our similarities.”

Kaplan ties his thesis to the work of Van Creveld’s Transformation of war, Homer-Dixon’s environmental studies, and
Huntington’s thoughts on culture clash: Under various intense environmental and demographic stresses, numerous state
mechanisms of governance will fragment into ethnic tribal bands. And, Kaplan points out (quoting Van Creveld), future “armed
conflict will have more in common with the struggles of primitive tribes than with large-scale conventional war” (i.e., regression
to tribal warfare prior to the state warfare about which von Clausewitz theorized).

But war because, unless restrained, a large number of humans love the thrill of battle (men to fight, women to offer up sons
and husbands to the glory of the battle). Van Creveld’s book begins “by demolishing the notion that men don’t like to fight.” As
Van Creveld points out, “Throughout history, for every person who has expressed his horror of war there is another who found in
it the most marvelous of all the experiences that are vouchsafed to man, even to the point that he later spent a lifetime boring his
descendents by recounting his exploits.” And with extremely acute insight, Van Creveld knows exactly why: “By compelling the
senses to focus themselves on the here and now, battle can cause a man to take his leave of them.”

And thus, Kaplan points out, “As anybody who has had experience with Chetniks in Serbia, technicals in Somalia, Tontons
Macoutes in Haiti, or soldiers in Sierra Leone can tell you, in places where the Western Enlightenment has not penetrated and
where there has always been mass poverty, people find liberation in violence.” And “only when people attain a certain economic,
educational, and cultural standard is this trait tranquilized.”

As tribalized warfare increases: “Because the radius of trust within tribal societies is narrowed to one’s immediate family and
guerilla comrades [largely preconventional and egocentric], then truces arranged with one commander may be broken
immediately by another.” Likewise, “when cultures [ethnicities], rather than states, fight, then cultural and religious monuments
are weapons of war, making them fair game.”

I deny the possibility of none of that; it is altogether consistent with regression downward along the same broad lines of
previous transformation upward. “Tribalization” in today’s world is “bad,” where previously (and prehistorically) it was the norm
(was “good”), precisely because it is now regressive: it now moves below the horizon of universal perspectivism, whereas
previously it was simply struggling to get up to it.

And that regression infects not just social movements, it is becoming rampant in many types of “new paradigms,” from tribal
“eco-wisdom” to magical and mythical New Age imperialisms, to biocentric and ecocentric immersion in precisely the sphere that
cannot itself take universal perspectivism. All of these, of course, are sincerely offered as “global” salvation, but most of them are
simply splinters of a widespread, regressive retribalization.

CHAPTER 6. MAGIC, MYTH, AND BEYOND

 1. As we will see in much greater detail in chapter 8, Spirit is not merely or even especially the summit of the scale of
evolution, or some sort of Divine omega point (although that is part of the story). Spirit is preeminently the empty Ground, or
groundless Emptiness, fully present at each and every stage of evolution, as the openness in which the particular stage unfolds, as
well as the substance of that which is unfolded. Spirit transcends and includes the world: transcends, in the sense that it is prior
to the world, prior to the Big Bang, prior to any manifestation; includes, in the sense that the world is not other to Spirit, form is
not other to Emptiness. Manifestation is not “apart from” Spirit but an activity of Spirit: the evolving Kosmos is Spirit-in-action.

Many ecophilosophers, with a preference for a God that can be seen with their empirical eyes, attempt to deny any
transcendental aspect to Spirit and paint it instead in totally immanent terms, and thus completely confuse finite and infinite, or
confuse the Formless with any merely passing and finite form (confuse the Nirmanakaya and Dharmakaya). They often point to
Spinoza as supporting this position, which is incredible. Spinoza maintained that Spirit has infinite dimensions, only two of which
we can know (extension and thought), so that Spirit infinitely transcends yet utterly includes the manifest world—a version of
the position I am presenting here.

On the other hand, those who emphasize only transcendence or only immanence are extremely dualistic and divisive in their
ontology, which therefore often degenerates into ideology. The only-immanence stance is now quite popular; it fits well with the
common ecomasculinist preference for tribalisms and the common ecofeminist preference for horticulture: empirical
indissociation mistaken for transcendence-and-inclusion.

 2. Technically, preop and conop are one broad stage, but it is customary to treat them separately since many of their

characteristics are quite different. The ages of emergence are simply averages.

 3. Blanck and Blanck introduced the term fulcrum of development to refer to the separation-individuation of the infant’s self
from the emotional (m)other, based especially on the pioneering work of Margaret Mahler. In Wilber et al., Transformations of
consciousness, I suggested that this fulcrum was but one of numerous quite distinct fulcrums, each representing a qualitatively
new and distinct differentiation/integration (or transcendence-and-inclusion). Each of these fulcrums (and I generally outline nine
or ten of the most important fulcrums) establishes a new, important, and very different type of self boundary. A failure to grasp
these different boundaries (and their very different functions) leads to what I have called the single-boundary fallacy, a fallacy
that has hobbled many psychological theories and most mystical/psychological theories (as we will see in subsequent chapters;
see, for example, note 32 for chap. 13; and note 17 for chapter 14). For students of this approach the technical correlations are as
follows:

The first fulcrum (F-1) covers the early sensorimotor period (0–1 yr), beginning with the initial primary indissociation or
“protoplasmic consciousness,” whose worldview is “archaic,” and is resolved with the first differentiation of the physical self from
the physical environment (“hatching”), and is finally consolidated with the attainment of physical object constancy (around 18
months, at which point the second fulcrum is under way). F-1 is particularly concerned with the establishment of physical
boundaries (the physical self differentiated from physical objects).

The second fulcrum (F-2), the phantasmic-emotional, covers the late sensorimotor period and the beginning of preop (1–3 yrs),
and begins with an initial indissociation of emotional self and emotional objects (“archaic-magic”), and is resolved with the
general attainment of emotional or libidinal object constancy (24–36 months; differentiation of emotional self and other, the
establishment of emotional boundaries).

The third fulcrum (F-3) begins with the initial indissociation of mental signs and referents (and mind-body indissociation),
covers the preop period (2–7 yrs), and is resolved with the emergence of conceptual object constancy (5–7 yrs, the establishment
of conceptual self boundaries). This period is divided, with Piaget, into early preop (2–4 yrs), governed by images and symbols
(with a worldview of “magic”), and late preop (4–7 yrs), governed by concepts (with a worldview of “magic-mythic”).

The next three fulcrums (F-4, F-5, and F-6) refer to the differentiation/integrations that occur during conop, formop, and vision-
logic (which we will explore later in this chapter). The worldviews of conop are divided into mythic and mythic-rational; formop
into rational and rational-existential; and vision-logic into existential and existential-psychic, all of which we will investigate later.
Higher or transpersonal fulcrums (F-7 through F-9) will be dealt with in chapters 7 and 8.

Fulcrums, in other words, refers to the self-stages and their differentiation/integration as they negotiate the basic waves or
levels of consciousness development (which themselves are unfolding developmentally, and are necessary but not sufficient for
self-stages). Worldviews (archaic, magic, magic-mythic, mythic, etc.) refers to the cognitive map of the world created at each
basic level or wave (both individually and collectively).

Neither Piaget nor the psychoanalytic developmentalists (such as Mahler) explicitly distinguish the first and second fulcrums,
but rather they treat them together as one general process of differentiation (separation-individuation). Nonetheless, their own
data clearly suggest that these are two very different stages or fulcrums of self development, the first referring to the
differentiation of the physical self and physical environment (a physical boundary), the second to the differentiation of the
emotional self and emotional environment (an emotional boundary). Before infants have negotiated the first fulcrum, they are
immersed in protoplasmic indissociation; after the first fulcrum, they can clearly differentiate physical self and other, and clearly
ground themselves in physical constancies, but they are then in the initial stages of the second fulcrum, marked by emotional
indissociation (a lack of differentiation between emotions of self and emotions of other). It is the preponderance of such
indissociations and “adherences” in both fulcrums that lead these researchers to treat the first two fulcrums as being quite
similar, but the statements of both of these researchers make it very clear that they recognize two different movements here,
with, among other things, different possible pathologies (psychotic and borderline). Other researchers, such as Kernberg,
explicitly recognize these different stages. But all orthodox researchers stop their research at either the fifth or sixth fulcrum, and
ignore the transpersonal fulcrums (7–9).

Likewise, at the other end of the spectrum, there is a large body of (very controversial) theory and evidence for the
intrauterine state and the birth process (and birth trauma). Without entering into the intricacies of this debate, I have simply
allowed that some of this prenatal research might be genuine, and I have referred to the whole period from conception to birth
as fulcrum-0.

This fulcrum follows the same general features as any other fulcrum, namely: (1) an initial state of undifferentiation or
indissociation, (2) a period of intense and often difficult differentiation (in this case, the birth process/trauma itself), and (3) a

period of postdifferentiation consolidation and integration (in this case, postuterine), in preparation for the next fulcrum or round
of differentiation/integration (in this case, F-1).

And, as always, a developmental malformation at any of the specific subphases of a fulcrum (subphase 1, 2, or 3; i.e., a
malformation or disruption at the indissociation, differentiation, or integration subphase) can result in very specific pathologies
that correspond with the characteristics of that subphase formation (and malformation). (All of these general features of a
fulcrum are examined in detail in Transformations of consciousness, chaps. 3, 4, and 5).

In the case of F-0, a fixation at the fusion/indissociation subphase might predispose an individual to “somatic mystical” fusion
with the world; a disruption at the differentiation subphase might dispose the individual to “hellish no-exit” vital shock, intense
sadomasochistic activity,
involutional depression; and fixation to the integration stage might lead to delusional messianic
complexes (to give only a brief, random sampling of possible pathologies at these subphases of F-0; I will return to this research in
a moment).

Likewise, the formations (and malformations) at this F-0 would, as is the case with all structuration, incline (but not cause)
subsequent development to tilt in the same direction: the birth trauma, for example, could infect (and malform) subsequent
development with its own pathological scars. Thus, a person with profound “no-exit” differentiation subphase malformation
might hit subsequent developmental fulcrums with a strong predisposition to tilt those fulcrums in the direction of depression,
withdrawal, inhibitions, etc. So that, in general, a fulcrum formation (and malformation) would, rather like a grain of sand in the
formation of a pearl, dint or “crinkle” subsequent developmental layers, forming a “complex” of similar, layered malformations,
the core of which might indeed reach back to a particular F-0 subphase.

In this regard, the research of Stanislav Grof has led him to postulate three broad “realms of the human unconscious,” which
he refers to as Freudian or biographical (or the individual unconscious), Rankian or existential (the psychological matrices laid
down by the actual process of birth and the birth trauma), and the transpersonal domains (which involve collective, supra-
individual archetypes, experiences, insights, etc.). Grof maintains that in several instances of intense stress (especially physically
or drug-induced), the individual tends to regress through the Freudian or biographical stages (experiencing individual
psychodynamic material) to the Rankian birth stages (reexperiencing the actual birth trauma in its several major substages), then
occasionally entering the transpersonal domains (experiencing a broad range of mystical, collective, archetypal, supra-individual,
transegoic phenomena).

Grof places particular emphasis on the second broad realm, the Rankian/birth matrices. These “basic perinatal matrices”
(BPMs) follow essentially the fulcrum-0 subphases as I briefly outlined them: BPM I is subphase 1, or the oceanic indissociation
state, both in its undisturbed and disturbed states. BPM II is the beginning of subphase 2, or the differentiation process, with an
intensification of “cosmic engulfment” and “no-exit” hellish pressure, etc. BPM III is the latter stage of subphase 2, with the
beginning of
the expulsion from the womb, an intensification of “volcanic” pleasure/pain, dismemberment distress,
ecstatic/masochistic, etc. And BPM IV is subphase 3, the postbirth, postpartum neonatal state, which must integrate its newly
separate bodily being apart from the uterus (although this self-sense still cannot stably distinguish its own self-boundaries from
the those of the physical world around it: it is now beginning F-1).

Grof has also presented putative evidence (still quite controversial) that these basic perinatal matrices form a latticework grid
upon which subsequent psychological development will unfold. All I would like to point out is that his BPMs (and the subsequent
COEX systems—or “systems of condensed experience”) are not incompatible with the model presented here (the subphases of F-
0 and the standard pattern of subsequent developmental influence). Should research support Grof’s model, its specific stages can
be accommodated.

Theorists have often noted that Grof’s map and my own share some common features but do not match up, as it were, on the
chronological aspects (or the “sequence” of the unconscious disclosures). But this is simply because Grof’s map is recovered from
a regressive series of patterns: under drug or stress induction, individuals regress from ordinary ego to Freudian (and childhood)
traumas (or recovery of biographical material), and from there continue regression into birth trauma and intrauterine states; at
which point they may cease identifying with the physical bodymind altogether and thus fall into transpersonal, supra-individual
states. Grof’s typical “sequence” is thus: everyday ego, Freudian, birth, transpersonal.

My map, on the other hand, is based primarily on broad-scale growth and development patterns, and thus it runs in the other
direction, so to speak, but covers the same general territory: my “sequence” is birth trauma to Freudian to ordinary ego to
transpersonal (since these cover the order in which these domains actually enter awareness as a stable adaptation and not as a
temporary experience). However, using my map, if typical individuals at the ordinary ego indeed begin to regress, this map would
predict the same general sequence as the Grof map: it would predict ego, Freudian, birth, transpersonal.

There are, however, a few important differences. Between the ego and the transpersonal (in the direction of growth, not
regression) I place the general existential (centaur) level (F-6), and this is not at all to be confused with Grof’s “existential”
perinatal matrices (subphase 2 of F-0), although they often “intermix,” so to speak. In Grof’s standard “sequence,” the BPM
separate the individual and the transpersonal, whereas in the growth and development sequence, the “dividing line,” as it were,
is the centaur (as we will see in subsequent chapters). This has led some theorists to attempt to simply equate the BPM and the

centaur, and this will not do: the centaur is the entrace to the transpersonal through the front door, the BPM, through the back
door, so to speak.

Some “existential crises” might indeed reactivate a perinatal matrix (or vice versa), as Grof maintains, but the general
existential crisis of F-6 is caused, not by the separation of mother and infant, but by the separation of subject and object, which
will occur after even the most idyllic of birth circumstances, and this existential crisis cannot be alleviated by regression to birth
experiences, but only by the undoing or transcending of the gross subject/object duality, and although this transcendence might
happen as a byproduct of the experienced birth regression, the transcendence itself is not caused by that regression nor is that
regression necessary for that transcendence. [See The eye of spirit, chap. 7, for an extensive critique of Grof’s model.]

I will return to these issues (and to Grof’s work) after the transpersonal dimensions have been introduced in the text, and

pinpoint a few more of our agreements as well as our differences. See note 17 for chap. 14.

 4. I am giving, in this chapter, the development of the Upper-Left quadrant; each development in this quadrant will have
correlates in the other three quadrants. The other individual quadrant, the Upper Right, consists particularly of the correlative
changes in brain physiology as each of the interior (Piagetian, Freudian, Jungian) stages is negotiated, and in some cases, the
physiological component can be dominant. Strong (sometimes conclusive) evidence has been found for genetic predispositions in
psychoses, manic-depression, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and various phobias (with other dysfunctions, no doubt, to follow).
In theses cases, genetics loads the gun, development pulls the trigger. A genetic predisposition tilts the outcome of a particular
fulcrum toward pathology, and that genetic factor is often the major factor in the syndrome; nonetheless, since not everybody
with the gene(s) for, say, manic-depression develops the syndrome, developmental factors still come into play.

Likewise, these syndromes (and many others) can be treated with medication. That is exactly part of the Right-Hand path. But
what that medical approach (in and by itself) does not do is further a person’s self-understanding: it does not help a person
interpret their own depth and thus come to some form of self-clarity and self-insight and self-responsibility (all of those are the
Left-Hand path). I am a strong supporter of both paths, judiciously balanced.

Most mental health workers intuitively understand that both paths (medication and therapy) are useful and important, but
there is a constant tension between the two as to which is “really real” and most important. My point is that neither one can be
reduced to the other, and a thus judicious balance is not just a pragmatic concession but a theoretical necessity.

Likewise, these individual developments unfold in correlation with (and in the context of) the social and cultural holons of the
individual. Cultural meanings (LL) and social institutions (LR) powerfully interact with the unfoldment of individual patterns
(mediated principally through the family structure). This shows why “adaptation to conventional reality” is not a very good
yardstick of mental health, because the society itself might be “sick.” Cultural meanings that flagrantly violate the fabric of the
Kosmos (from Nazism to Serbian ethnic cleansing) are nothing that one would particularly want to adapt to in the first place;
likewise, alienated and alienating techno-economic infrastructures (from actual slavery to slave wages) place a severe strain on
the individual holon and its development. To say that in the modern world slavery disrupts brain chemistry, devastates self-
esteem, embodies sick cultural meanings, and is a dehumanizing institution—is to say the same thing; they are four quadrants of
the same holon (once the world soul has reached a collective level of rational pluralism; in mythic structures, slavery is the
normative rule).

Thus, all four quadrants are crucially important in the development of the “individual.” That I am centering, in this chapter, on

the Upper-Left quadrant does not mean that I am in any way privileging this quadrant.

Finally, “mental health” can be defined as “adaptation to reality” if, and only if, we have an adequate definition of reality in the
first place. Conventional reality will never do as a yardstick, as we said, because adaptation to being a happy Nazi is no mental
health at all. The very definition of mental health is thus inescapably philosophical to the core (which is something medical
practitioners and Right-Hand path specialists simply do not want to get involved with).

But pursuing this inescapable line of thought brings us to a very Platonic conclusion: mental health is attunement with the
Kosmos—a Kosmos that includes matter, body, mind, soul, and spirit. Anything less than that attunement is pathological. A
culture that has less than that attunement is a sick culture. If Plato, Plotinus, and the vast majority of the world’s philosopher-
sages are right, and all these dimensions (matter, body, mind, soul, spirit) are available to men and women, then not honoring
them would be tantamount to malnutrition—which, by any other name, is an illness.
 5. P. 132. All quotations are from The essential Piaget unless indicated otherwise.
 6. Quoted in Flavell, p. 285.
 7. Pp. 132–33.
 8. Pp. 134–35.
 9. P. 151.
10. Pp. 151–52.
11. Pp. 139–40.
12. These two figures of speech, based on similar agency (metaphor) and similar communion (metonym)—or simply similarity
(agency) and contiguity (communion)—are, as linguists have pointed out, the most basic holons of linguistic communication

(along with a hybrid, synecdoche, which substitutes parts for wholes).

Interestingly, these two basic figures of linguistic cognition (agency and communion) are so fundamental that Jakobson found,
in the two major forms of childhood aphasia (loss of power to understand speech), that in one the child looses the capacity to
understand metaphor but grasps metonym quite well, whereas in the other the child cannot understand metonym but perfectly
grasps metaphor. Jakobson actually called them “similarity disorder” and “contiguity disorder”—in other words, agency disorder
and communion disorder. “As a result it becomes possible to propose that human language in fact does exist in terms of the two
fundamental dimensions [of agency and communion], and that these dimensions crystallize into the rhetorical devices on which
poetry characteristically and preeminently draws. Both metaphor and metonymy can be subdivided into other figures (simile is a
type of metaphor; synecdoche is a type of metonymy) but the distinction between the two modes remains fundamental, because
it is a product of the fundamental modes of language itself: it is how language works” (Hawkes, Structuralism and semiotics, pp.
78–79).

Given that, for Freud, the primary-process cognition operates primarily with metaphor and metonym, and given that neurosis
is basically a failure to outgrow the primary process in certain important ways, it is a small step to Lacan’s formulations, under the
banner of structuralism, in which symptom is a metaphor and desire a metonym.

Likewise, the extremely fundamental nature of metaphor and metonym have allowed certain postmodern poststructuralists,
particularly the deconstructionists, to play fast and loose with all higher and more significant cognitions. To say that all higher
thought is based on metaphor and metonym is one thing; to say it is nothing more than metaphor and metonym is profoundly
reductionistic, and serves mainly the purpose, in these antitheoreticians, of leveling the distinctions between science and poetry,
on the one hand, and philosophy and literature, on the other. They simply claim there are no significant differences between
those endeavors (and particularly no difference between science and poetry), which nonetheless does not prevent them, when
they become ill, from running to a doctor and not the local poetry reading.

More developed and more significant cognitive holons will place restraints on contexts of metaphor and metonym in order to
decrease egocentrism and expand the network of mutual understanding and reciprocity via intersubjective exchange. Metaphor
and metonym remain the roots, but are not the branches.

And at this point in our narrative of ontogenetic development, we are at the point where only the roots have emerged.
Incidentally, the actual meanings of the various terms that different authors use—condensation, displacement,

juxtaposition,
syncretism, etc.—sometimes vary, depending on the theoretical perspective they adopt. Condensation thus refers sometimes to
metaphor and sometimes to metonym; likewise syncretism. But the two main figures, agency and communion, are the same.

Thus, as Lacan uses the words, displacement is a metonymy that marks the nature of the subject’s desire, which is primarily a
lack; condensation is a metaphor that traces the repressed meaning of desire through sliding chains of signification, found in
symptoms. Same fundamental figures of speech (metaphor and metonym), which I accept, but tied to a “single boundary” theory
of “lack” that I reject entirely (see note 32 for chap. 13, for a critique of the single-boundary theory).

13. Pp. 140, 152.
14. P. 146.
15. Piaget describes this shift as follows: “During the first stage [up through magic], all the explanations given are psychological,
phenomenistic, finalistic, and magical. During the second stage [magic-mythic] the explanations are artificialist, animistic, and
dynamic, and the magical forms tends to diminish” (p. 143).

16. Cowan, Piaget with feeling, p. 168.
17. Freud, An outline of psychoanalysis.
18. Ibid.; Frey-Rohn, From Freud to Jung.
19. Campbell, Primitive mythology, pp. 86–87.
20. Since images are the first forms or first holons in the noosphere, and since mammals, starting perhaps with horses, also
form images, these animals are also starting to exist in the noosphere. Jantsch believes this begins, indeed, with horses, and from
that point on, as he notes, the merely ecological symmetry is broken forever, because images may, or may not, accurately reflect
the biosphere. With the emergence of images there is a “symmetry break,” a break that, in humans, is dangerously out of control.
But again, the cure is not regression but integration.

21. Since this entire third fulcrum is still close to magical cognition, every neurotic symptom, Freud would point out, contains
displacement and condensation, or metaphor and metonym. As Ferenczi put it, every neurotic symptom is an unconscious belief
in magic.

22. Op. cit., p. 222.
23. The client comes in fully aware of the cognitive maps (“I’m rotten to the core, I never succeed at anything,” etc.); the maps
just happen to be wrong and distorted. Thus most cognitive therapists do not do much digging into actual past history, but rather
attack the false maps head on in the present.

This head-on attack does not work as well with the more primitive libidinal holons aimed at by uncovering therapies (fulcrum-
3 therapies, such as psychoanalysis), because in those cases the client is not already aware of the material that needs to be

addressed; directly confronting the client with shadow material tends to increase the resistance to it. The “deeper” one probes,
the longer and more delicate the process.

Most people can benefit so immediately and so greatly from simple cognitive and interpersonal therapy (fulcrum-4 therapies),
that these and similar-type therapies are rapidly replacing the more arduous uncovering techniques. This does not lessen the
importance of fulcrum-3 therapies in the least; but pragmatically, they are losing ground; the time and expense make them
prohibitive for most people. (Not to mention the fact that in America, many of the things classical psychoanalysis considered
pathologies are now considered virtues: narcissistic self-promotion, immediate gratification, impulsive acting out, etc., with
cognitive therapy brought in to help one achieve these “spontaneities” without feeling any guilt, a rather interesting alliance.)

Finally, fulcrum-2 therapies are referred to as “structure building” therapies (to differentiate them from F-3 uncovering
therapies). The pathology with F-2 is not repression, but the fact that the self is not strong enough to repress in the first place.
There is no “uncovering” the shadow or “digging it up”: because there isn’t much of a self-structure, there isn’t much of a
shadow. Therapy involves instead a strengthening of the ego so that it can “get up” to repression!—involves the differentiation of
self and object representations and the strengthening of boundaries.

And, as I have argued in Transformations, meditation is not primarily a structure-building technique, nor an uncovering
technique, nor a script-rewriting technique, although all of those things might come into play with meditation. But in itself,
meditation is fundamentally a further growth and unfolding of structural potentials. If there is any “uncovering,” it is an
uncovering of tomorrow, not yesterday; an uncovering of eternity, not infancy. See The Atman Project in Volume Two of the
Collected Works.

24. Accordingly, we could accurately speak of a spectrum or continuum of “ego” states or “self” states or “I” states, each of
which is a transcendence of its predecessor, and thus each of which can correctly be defined as being either “pre-egoic” or
“transegoic” depending on whether it is being compared to its successor or its predecessor (that is, the ego or self of one stage is
“trans” the ego of the previous stage and “pre” the ego of the next stage), and this continues until all egos are transcended in
pure Ego, or until Atman dissolves in Brahman. Although that is a technically correct usage, it confuses almost everybody, because
it counters both the orthodox and the New Age usages. So I will follow the usage I outline in the next paragraph in the text.

25. The ego as the actual organizing process of the psyche I refer to as “the self-system.” It is present at all stages of growth,
except the extreme limits. It is, for example, the self-system (or simply the “self”) that navigates, at each stage of growth,
between the “four forces” of self-preservation, self-adaptation, self-transcendence, and self-regression.

Thus, the self-system in the early stages is pre-egoic, in the middle stages egoic, and in the transpersonal stages trans-egoic,
where it converges on the Self, which opens into pure Emptiness. The self-system, in other words, is the regime or codon of the
interior human holon, and like all regimes, it is the opening or clearing in which correlative holons can manifest: it is Emptiness
looking out through a separate self until that self simply reverts to Emptiness per se.

26. By “pure Self” I do not mean disembodied or nonsituated.

It is not a hyperagentic autonomy disconnected from
manifestation, but the Source and Suchness of manifestation, appearing as Buddha-Dharma-Sangha (I, it, we)—all of which we
will discuss later in detail.

27. Op cit., p. 270. The notion that rationality is “linear” and therefore “anti-ecological” is a cornerstone of many “new
paradigm” notions, and nothing could be further from the truth. What these theories actually mean by “rationality” is any theory
that disagrees with their rationality.

28. Ibid.
29. [See Integral psychology, in Volume Four of the Collected Works.] The way Kohlberg defined postconventional was
relative to the conventional stages, which were grounded in late conop and early formop. Anything beyond those stages were
thus “postconventional.” When Kohlberg added a seventh stage,
that stage was thus “post-
postconventional,” and even higher stages would be post-post-post. All of
these “posts” simply come from taking
conventional/conop as the reference point. If we take formop as the reference point, then the higher stages are simply
postrational, or transrational, or transpersonal. Purely a matter of semantics.

the universal-spiritual,

30. Campbell, Primitive mythology, pp. 84–85.
31. Ibid., p. 27.
32. Ibid., p. 28.
33. Piaget demonstrated, and Campbell acknowledges in another context, that the capacity to understand “what if” and “as if”
statements emerges only with formop. Concrete operational, as its name implies, is too concrete-literal to frame possible worlds
and hypothetical worlds; which is why, indeed, myths—generated by concrete operations—are taken so concretely, so literally,
as empirical truths, and not as as-if or hypothetical possibilities used metaphorically or symbolically. This is why science (or the
extensive framing of hypothetical possibilities checked against real world evidence) does not emerge in the mythological
worldview.

34. Campbell, Creative mythology, p. 630.
35. Ibid., p. 4.

36. Campbell, Primitive mythology, p. 18.
37. All quotes from Creative mythology, pp. 4–6, 609–23.
38. The magical worldview can be instantly reconstituted whenever conop fails and regression to preop occurs (since holons
regress downward along the same lines evolution progressed upwardly—tenet 2d). It is not, in my view, that the magical
structure itself remains present but unconscious; this is true only if there is fixation to parts of that exclusivity structure: those
repressed or alienated pockets of consciousness indeed remain fully magical, and this constitutes part of their pathology (which is
why these types of neurotic symptoms are “an unconscious belief in magic”). The preop structures remain fully present and
active, but now as sub-holons in conop; but the exclusivity structure itself (magic) is, barring fixation,
replaced by the new
exclusivity structure (namely, mythic).

This formulation, I believe, handles some very recalcitrant problems about what one can “find” in the unconscious. See

Transformations of consciousness.

39. The same thing happens with moral development. In this briefest terms: preop underpins a preconventional (egocentric)
morality, conop underpins a conventional (sociocentric) morality, and formop underpins a postconventional (worldcentric)
morality. A person at formop has complete and simultaneous access to the structures of conop (roles, rules) and the structures of
preop (images, symbols, and concepts), and indeed, formop includes all of those as necessary components in its own makeup. But
a person at postconventional morality does not have simultaneous access to all the previous stages of moral development,
because these were generated by the exclusive identification with a lower stage, and when a higher identity emerges, the lower
one must be released and replaced. You cannot genuinely be acting with a postconventional/global perspective and a
preconventional/egocentric perspective at the same time.

40. From Freud to Jung; Frey-Rohn’s excellent book contains several lengthy and perceptive discussions of this theme (loaded,

on occasion, with elevationist interpretations).

41. Jung also came to include any typical, common structures—such as the shadow, the persona, and the ego—as being
archetypal. These structures, these basic imprints, are also collectively inherited. This, too, is fine; and this, too, has nothing to do
with transpersonal (see notes 44 and 45 below).

42. Jung, Archetypes of the collective unconscious, p. 173.
43. Spirituality can be expressed through those—or any other—forms, but those forms are not its source. [See The eye of

spirit for a full discussion of Jungian archetypes.]

44. In Sheldrake’s morphic resonance theory, an archetype is viewed as a past form that constant repetition has reinforced,
and which reaches out, therefore, to guide the formative process of subsequent similar holons. The more one holon is repeated,
then the more “archetypal” and powerful it is.

Thus, the number of “mother encounters” is enormous since every human being ever in existence had that encounter, and
thus the sum total resonance from that “archetype” is indeed profound (and so on with the birth archetype, the father
arachetype, the shadow archetype, etc.).

I agree with all that. My point is that, compared with the number of mother or father encounters, the number of genuine
mystical encounters is pitifully small. These past mystics have indeed set up a certain holonic resonance for all of us who follow.
But as probably the rarest and least common experience of humanity, it would be the weakest and least powerful archetype
of all—if explained only by that theory (or any version of Jungian inheritance theory). But when real Spirit descends, it blasts to
smithereens the mother archetype, the father archetype, and every other itty bitty finite archetype—it is coming from the other
direction with the force of infinity, and not some merely past and finite evolutionary habit.

The more anybody “plugs into” the higher, transcendental, and actual archetypes, lying now as structural potentials, the easier
it is for subsequent individuals to likewise “plug in”; and that is what the great past heroes of the transpersonal have done. But
what
they were plugging into was not more past common and typical and repetitive patterns, but future and higher
possibilities. They inherited the future, not the past.

Sheldrake acknowledges this by pointing out that morphic resonance does not account, and is not meant to account, for
creative emergence—but in the creative emergence often lies Spirit. The creative emergence is from the structural potential of
the higher and future; morphic resonance is from the past and is established only after it creatively emerges in the first place.
After a morphic field has emerged, it then acts as an omega point (up to its own level of depth) for subsequent and similar-depth
holons: it is a past actual acting as a future perfect for similar development.

45. There are collective prepersonal, collective personal, and collective transpersonal structures, just as we all collectively

inherit ten toes, two lungs, etc. Collective is not necessarily transpersonal.

Further, as I pointed out in Eye to eye, the basic structures of human consciousness are collectively inherited potentials, but
that does not mean the potentials were manifest in the past. The human neocortex, for example, possesses the potential for
rationality or hypothetico-deductive thought, but the neocortex, which emerged in today’s form about fifty thousand years ago,
did not emerge with rational thought in full blossom. When the neocortex first emerged, it carried the structural potential for
logic, but the logic itself was not an inheritance from the past; it was a future potential acting as an omega point of mutual

understanding drawing culture forward and upward. Just so with the spiritual potentials of the human structure; we inherit the
potential, which in any epoch has, so far, been manifested in the very few, and which therefore continues to exert, as a higher
and wider context, an omega pull on each of us.

CHAPTER 7. THE FARTHER REACHES OF HUMAN NATURE

 1. Blanck and Blanck, Ego psychology.
 2. Piaget, The essential Piaget, p. 133.
 3. Gardner, Quest for mind, p. 63.
 4. Ibid., p. 64.
 5. Cowan, Piaget, p. 275.
 6. Fowler’s empirical and phenomenological research, executed as a reconstructive science, found that individuals moved
through six or seven major stages of the development of spiritual faith (or spiritual orientation); and his findings match very
closely aspects of the map I am here presenting.

Briefly: stage 0 is “preverbal undifferentiated” (our archaic), and stage 1 Fowler calls “projective, magical” (our magical), which

he also correlates with preop.

Stage 2 he calls “mythic-literal,” correlated with early conop, where faith extends to “those like us.” Stage 3 is “conventional,”
which involves “mutual role taking” and “conformity to class norms and interests,” late conop and early formop (stages 2 and 3
being our mythic and mythic-rational, respectively, with both stages being our overall mythic-membership).

Stage 4 is “individual-reflexive,” as “dichotomizing formop” (and the ego) emerges, and involves “reflexive relativism” and
“self-ratified ideological perspective”. Stage 5 is “conjunctive faith,” as “dialectical formop” emerges and begins to “include
groups, classes, and traditions other than one’s own”; this involves “dialectical joining of judgement-experience processes with
reflective claims of others and of various expressions of cumulative human wisdom.” (Postconventional, universal rationality and
universal pluralism, mature ego, beginning of worldcentric orientation.)

Stage 6 is “universalizing,” which is “informed by the experiences and truths of previous stages” (centauric integration of
previous stages, which Fowler also calls “unitive actuality” and “unification of reality mediated by symbols and the self”—that is,
the integrated centauric self). This self is “purified of egoic striving, and linked by disciplined intuition to the principle of being,”
involving a “commonwealth of being” and a “trans-class awareness and identification,” correlated with “synthetic formop” (our
vision-logic, the fruition of the worldcentric orientation, and the beginning of transpersonal intuition; the higher contemplative
stages themselves were not investigated by Fowler, given their rarity, but the fit up to that point is quite close, often exact).
Fowler, Stages of faith.

 7. Broughton’s original research, a doctoral dissertation at Harvard, is summarized in Loevinger’s Ego development. All quotes,

unless otherwise indicated, are from Loevinger’s summary. All italics are mine.

 8. The self could theoretically be reduced to its components, it was believed, precisely because the world was mistaken as a
great interlocking empirical order (flatland holism), so that the subjective self, as a strand in the wonderful web and the
relativistic system, had to be spliced into (and thus reduced to) an empirically observable occasion.

Most Anglo-Saxon psychology, starting with John Locke, took this cynical misstep as an actual paradigm of the human sciences.
When the Kosmos was reduced to the cosmos, then the self, as self, was cut out of the picture. The self was merely a cybernetic
cog in the display, reducible to its present experiences (behaviorism), and thus ultimately
from any sort of
transcendental bond with other selves. No strand in the web is ever aware of the whole web, which is why empirical holism ends
up divisive, dualistic, and isolationist.

isolated

 9. The differentiation from (and integration of) (1) the physical environment, (2) the emotional-libidinal biosphere, (3) the
(early) mind from the body, (4) sociocentrism from egocentrism, (5) the rational-ego from sociocentrism, and (6) the centaur from
the ego. Each is a deeper identity with a wider embrace.

10. In A sociable God, I distinguished between the legitimacy and the authenticity of a spiritual engagement. Legitimacy is a
measure of the degree that a spiritual engagement facilitates translation, and authenticity is a measure of the degree that it
facilitates transformation. Mythic-religions often demonstrated a very high degree of legitimacy, for reasons explained in the last
chapter, but were not very profound on the authenticity scale. Reason is more authentic than myth, but often faces its own
intense legitimation crises, especially when confined within the borders of nations. The transpersonal domain is, in turn, more
authentic than reason, and usually faces even more difficult legitimation, at least in the modern Western world.

11. Both the Left- and Right-Hand dimensions start from immediate apprehension or immediate experience, and that
immediate experience, as William James explained, is properly called a datum, whether it occurs “internally” or “externally.” Even
if the data themselves are mediated by other factors (culture, mental sets, instruments, etc.), nonetheless at the moment of
awareness, the immediacy of the experience is the pure datum in that occasion. Whether I am perceiving a tree “out there” or a
desire for food “in here,” they are both, at the moment of awareness, conveyed to me in pure immediacy (even though that

immediacy may have mediating factors).

The Right-Hand path simply sticks to sensory immediacy, and ties its theorizing to the aspects of holons that can be detected
with the external senses or their extensions: its data are sensory, which always means external senses (it doesn’t even trust
interior senses, since those are “private” and supposedly “not shareable”). Monological and empiric-analytic modes use an
enormous amount of interior, conceptual, a priori cognitions, but eventually this approach ties all of them to the immediacy of
externally perceived exteriors. And, as I said, that can be done, and is an important (if limited) mode of knowledge.

The Left-Hand path starts with the same immediacy of given experience, or immediate apprehension (it is the same immediacy
as the external or Right-Hand dimension, because in the moment of direct apprehension, there is neither subject nor object,
neither Left nor Right, as James explained). But unlike the Right-Hand path, which sticks to the objective/exteriors of holons as
the basic immediacy gives way to subject and object, the Left-Hand path investigates the interior/subjective dimension of that
basic immediacy as it gives way to subject and object.

And that is where and why interpretation enters the Left-Hand scene (and not so much the Right, where the blank stare at
surfaces is most valued). Although in my own interior, I know depth directly by acquaintance (the immediate experience on any
level is known directly, whether that be sensory impulses or archetypal light), nonetheless if you and I are going to share these
experiences, we must communicate our depth to each other. And whereas the external surfaces are “out there” for all to see, the
interior apprehensions can only be shared by communicative exchange which requires that we each interpret what the other is
communicating. And that is why interpretation (hermeneutics) is inescapable for the Left-Hand paths.

The Right-Hand path of course uses interpretation in its own theorizing—it interprets the data—but the data are all ultimately
data that do not respond communicatively or interiorly (the data are just the exterior surfaces, whether that be rocks, brain
chemistry, or suicide rates: they don’t complicate the scene by talking back: no nasty dialogues here).

Thus, what really irks the Right-Hand path about the Left Hand is not that its data aren’t immediate (because they are; it is the
same immediacy that is also the starting point for the Right-Hand path), but rather the necessity for introspection, interiority, and
interpretation, all of which are rejected as not publicly shareable, which is of course nonsense: what the Right-Hand path itself
accepts as data is determined only communicatively.

In short, both the Right- and Left-Hand paths start with the same immediacy of given experience, but the Right Hand sticks to
“external surfaces” that, as objects of investigation, do not have to respond communicatively (it is monological), whereas the Left
Hand goes a step further and investigates those holons that do respond communicatively (dialogically, hermeneutically,
interpretively). The one sticks to surfaces, the other investigates the depths. And since surfaces can be seen, the one asks, “What
does it do?”; but since depth does not sit on the surface, the other must ask “What does it mean?” (“What is under the
surface?”).

In the following discussion (in the text), I am staying primarily with the first immediacy of experience, whether that experience
be sensory experience, mental experience, or spiritual experience. The “three strands of valid knowledge accumulation” that are
discussed refer primarily to the acquisition of immediate data in any domain (sensory, mental, spiritual). The further interpretive
steps taken by the Left-Hand path, and the actual theorizing of the Right-Hand path, also follow these three strands, but as an
additional application, as it were (see Wilber, Eye to eye, for a fuller discussion of this notion).

12. Foucault came to see that both Right-Hand and Left-Hand approaches are necessary. His (early) archaeology of actual
existence was a neostructuralist reworking of the traditional structuralist’s analysis of possible types of experience, but it still
placed emphasis on the exterior surfaces and structures of discursive formations and the transformation rules (of rarefication and
exclusion) that individuated serious speech acts. This neostructuralism avoided—indeed, scorned—any attempt to get at the
interior meaning of the discursive formations. (Indeed, Foucault bracketed not only the truth of linguistic utterances—the
standard phenomenological move—but their meaning as well, which is the ultimate exterior or monological move: you absolutely
never have to talk to the bearers of the linguistic formation because you don’t even care what their utterances mean; this is
simply the endgame of structuralism: just the exteriors of the structures, with no hermeneutic nastiness.)

In his later and more balanced view, the discursive episteme was replaced by the dispositif, or overall context of social
practices (encompassing, as it were, the episteme), whose meaning could still only be seen in the coherence, but whose “insides”
also had to be hermeneutically entered. “This new method,” comment Dreyfus and Rabinow, “combines a type of archaeological
analysis which preserves the distancing effect of structuralism [the exterior, objectifying approach, or the Right-Hand path], and
an interpretive dimension which develops the hermeneutic insight that the investigator is always situated and must understand
the meaning of his cultural practices from within them [the Left-Hand path].” Michel Foucault, p. xii.

13. Even if words are necessary to structure the space that does capture it. That is, I am not saying that the lifeworld and
worldspace are not linguistically structured in large measure; I am saying that specific experiences, themselves linguistically
structured in many ways, are not captured in signifiers without a corresponding lifeworld signified. I am certainly not drawing a
distinction between “the map and the territory,” which is a crude representational-empiricist theory of language. Only the least
significant signifiers represent physical things. In the mind, maps are the territory, and they do not simply represent the exterior
world, they present or create new worlds altogether: language in its world-creating, world-disclosing capacity.

Nor am I a drawing a distinction between words and experience (see also note 16 below). Words are the central experiences
in the noosphere, but those verbal experiences cannot be represented without a common lifeworld. My further point in the text
is that this also needs a developmental notion attached to it, because language is the home of being only if I pack my bags and
move in. Shared lifeworlds mean a shared set not just of structural signifiers but also of developmental signifieds.

As for the meaning of “direct experience” and the possibility of such, see note 16 below.
14. Thus, I can translate a sign correctly (interpret it correctly or meaningfully) only if, among other things, I have previously
transformed to the level of depth that discloses and supports the interior signified. I then exist in a system of relational exchange
of signifiers that resonate at the same level of signified depth (“same-level relational exchange”). Otherwise it’s all Greek to me,
even though I can see perfectly all the physical marks of the written or spoken signifiers.

Just so, all holons are signs, each involved in translating reality (i.e., responding only to what it can register in the first place)
according to its regime or codon set in a common worldspace of similar-depth holons. Outside of its worldspace it does not and
cannot translate: it registers nothing. In other words, holons, as signs, only respond to, and register (translate), a narrow range of
signifiers, via a regime that discloses a same-depth signified worldspace.

15. I have written extensively on this in Eye to eye [and The Marriage of Sense and Soul]. Serious readers will forgive the
shortcuts I take in the text. Also, the three strands of knowledge accumulation are not to be confused with Habermas’s three
validity claims. The validity claims refer to the Big Three (subjective, objective, cultural; or I, it, we). I am maintaining that the
three strands are operative in each of the Big Three validity claims (although they take quite different forms), and their operation
helps assure us that the referent of knowledge is actually in the Kosmos (in a worldspace in the Kosmos), and not just in my
imagination, or my misperception, or whatnot.

16. There is a great deal of semantic and philosophic confusion around the topic of “direct experience,” usually centering on
the question, does it even exist? Isn’t all experience actually mediated by concepts, mental sets, cultural background values, and
so forth? Since all knowledge/experience is situated and mediated, the best we can hope for is a hermeneutic study of individual
pockets of “local knowledge,” and any transcendental claims, of any sort, are largely unwarranted—or so the argument goes.

This has, among many other things, particularly caused turmoil in the comparative study of mystical experiences. Steven Katz
and his colleagues, for example, in a series of articles and books, have made the strong claim that since all experience is
mediated—Katz: “There are NO pure (i.e., unmediated) experiences”—then there can be no commonalities (or cross-cultural
similarities) in mystical experiences. Since each culture and each belief system is different, and these different sets are partly
constitutive of the mystical experience, then there is and can be no common mystical experience, and this also, it is said,
undercuts the mystical claim to valid or universal knowledge.

This overall general approach has come loosely to be called “constructivist”—we don’t receive knowledge of independent
entities, we construct it based on various freeing practices; our basic present experiences are taken up and reworked in a type of
neo-Kantian fashion, so that the final display in consciousness is an inseparable mixture of experience and mental-cultural
molding.

But this approach suffers, ironically, from not being constructivist enough. To begin with, the dichotomy between experience
and construction is a false dichotomy. It is not that there is experience on the one hand and contextual molding on the other.
Every experience is a context; every experience, even simple sensory experience, is always already situated, is always already a
context, is always already a holon. When Derrida says that “nothing is ever simply present,” this is true of every holon. As
Whitehead would have it, every holon is already a prehensive unification of its entire actual universe: nothing is ever simply
present (this is also very similar to the Eastern notion of karma, or the past enfolded in the present). Everything is always already
a context in a context.

And thus, every holon—and therefore every experience—is always already situated, mediated, contextual. It is not that
“original experiences” arrive to be reworked by mental concepts; the original experiences are not original, but a contextual
prehensive mediation of boundless contexts. That mind further contextualizes sensory contexts is neither new nor avoidable.

Everything (every holon) is a mediated context, but contexts touch

It does not require “mystical pure
consciousness” to be in immediate contact with the data of experience. When any point in the mediated chain is known (or
experienced), that knowing or prehending is an immediate event in itself, an immediate “touching.” The touching is not a
touching of something merely present but rather is itself pure Presence (or prehension). If there were only a mere mediation
forever, then nothing would or could ever be known or experienced; there would be nothing to stop the sliding chain from
spinning contextually forever (there is no point that it could enter consciousness).

immediately.

But in any moment of prehension/experience (and in any domain—sensory, mental, spiritual), there is

immediate
apprehension of what is given at the moment, and that immediate apprehension is the datum (which William James correctly
defined as the given pure experience), and that experiential prehension is pure in the sense that when contexts touch, they
touch without further mediation (even if they are always already situated in and as mediated contexts).

At the moment of touch, there is no mediation; if there is mediation, there is no touching. To say everything is merely
mediated is simply a fancy modern twist on pure skepticism, which is profoundly self-contradictory (it says, “I have an

unshakeable foundation belief that foundations are not possible,” which simply allows the skeptic to trash everybody else’s
beliefs while conveniently leaving his own unexamined).

At the moment of touch, in any domain, there is no mediation, only prehension. This is why knowledge (and experience) of any
sort is possible in the first place. That there is a “first place” means that mediation has stopped at some point (the point of
touching). This is why when experience occurs in any domain (sensory, mental, spiritual), it is simply given, it is simply the case, it
simply shows up, even though the experienced and the experiencer are forever situated and contextual. I find myself in
immediate experience of mediated worlds. (And that Immediacy, that pure Presence, that touching, is, as we will see, one way
to view Spirit: immediateness is Spirit’s prehension of the world—and what is prehended is Spirit in the world contextually.)

In short, experience is immediate prehension of whatever mediated contexts are given, and that is why all experience is both
pure (immediate) and contextual (capable of being refined and recontextualized indefinitely). As we will see, this is why
Habermas maintains that all validity claims have both an immanent (culture-bound) and a transcendent (pure) component, and
it is the transcendent component that allows intersubjective communication and learning to occur in the first place.

Thus, even Katz, as he ponders the “mediated nature of all experience” comes to a point where that notion itself, and his
knowing of it, are not mediated. At some point in the mediation chain, the datum per se enters his consciousness directly, he
directly touches the notion, and he says, “I know this” or “I believe this” or “I experience this.” Whatever the space is that allows
Katz to claim that all experience is mediated—that space is somehow free of mediation or he would never be able to make that
statement. To say that all experience is mediated is to stand in a space that is not itself mediated. Put differently, if everything is
only mediated, he would have no way to know it. The mediating chain would never stop long enough for him to touch it; it would
have no point of entry to his awareness: if the self were merely situated, it would never know it. Even to be able to make the
mistake of saying it is only situated demonstrates that it is not.

This undercuts Katz’s whole line of attack on mysticism, because his attack applies to his own attack: it is self-defeating. That is,
Katz claims that all experience is mediated and that this is true for all cultures, with no exceptions—and thus he is claiming to
be in possession of a nonrelative truth that is true cross-culturally and universally, something that his formal thesis denies is
possible for anybody. He is making universal/transcendental claims about reality which he denies to everybody else, thus hiding
the real issue of how transcendental claims are in fact made, not just in “mystical” experiences but in everyday ordinary
communication.

The question, then, is not whether culture mediates experience in a way that disallows cross-cultural similarities in mystical
experience. The question is whether the unavoidably mediated aspect of all experience invalidates any similarities
in any
experiences at all (mysticism is completely secondary in this regard). In other words, are there any transcendental signifieds at
all? Put differently, is there any chance of identical signification for anybody? Forget mysticism; can individuals from different
cultures (or even the same culture) even talk about anything?

At this point in the argument, Derrida is often called on to support the notion that there are no transcendental signifieds at all
(only sliding chains of signifiers and endless cultural mediation). But this is a misreading of Derrida. We already heard Culler
explain that deconstruction does not disavow propositional truth but simply reminds us of its contextuality. Derrida himself points
out that even if the transcendental signified is situated, “this does not prevent it [the transcendental signified] from functioning,
and even from being indispensable within certain limits. For example, no translation would be possible without it” (Positions, p.
20). In other words, according to Derrida, the fact that we can translate languages to some significant degree means that there
are genuine transcendental signifieds, and if this holds for ordinary experience, there is no reason it shouldn’t hold for other
experiences as well (from science to mysticism). We can translate languages because, even if all contexts are situated, a great
number of contexts are
across cultures. “Context” does not automatically mean “relative” or
“incommensurable.” It often means “common”: hence the existence of real transcendental signifieds. Even Derrida concedes this
elemental fact.

similarly situated

In that similarity—in the existence of those transcendental signifieds—lies the possibility of communication both within
culture, even if mediated by language. This is why Habermas’s validity claims are both immanent
culture and across
(contextual) and transcendent
(common contextual), as McCarthy explains: “If communicative action is our paradigm, the
decentered subject [the intersubjective subject] remains as a participant in social interaction mediated by language. On this
account .
language use is oriented to validity claims, and validity claims can in the end be redeemed only through
intersubjective recognition. . . . The internal relation of meaning to validity means that communication is not only always
‘immanent’—that is, situated, conditioned—but also always ‘transcendent’—that is, geared to validity claims that are meant to
hold beyond any local context and thus can be indefinitely criticized, defended, revised” (Philosophical discourse, p. xvi).

.

.

As Habermas puts it: “Validity claims have a Janus face [they are, of course, holons]. As claims, they transcend any local
context; at the same time, they have to be raised here and now and be de facto recognized. The transcendent moment of
universal validity bursts every provinciality asunder; the obligatory moment of accepted validity claims renders them carriers of a
context-bound everyday practice” (his italics; Philosophical discourse, p. xvii).

This is why, even though we are linguistically situated, the validity claims place us in relation to extralinguistic aspects of

reality (that are not in all ways merely situated). McCarthy: “The [validity] claims to truth, truthfulness, and rightness place the
speaker’s utterance in relation to extralinguistic orders of reality” (Introduction to Habermas, Communication and the evolution
of society, p. xix). In other words, even everyday communication is always situated in aspects of reality that are not merely
culture-bound (or solely provincial).

In my view, these extralinguistic orders (that is, orders that are not merely linguistic, even if linguistically situated) do indeed
refer to the Big Three (I, we, it), as Habermas maintains, but each of those domains can be divided into prepersonal, personal,
and transpersonal components. Or prelinguistic (the sensorimotor worldspace, or eye of flesh), paralinguistic (the noosphere, or
eye of mind), and translinguistic (the theosphere, or eye of contemplation).

But even if we leave aside the transpersonal domain for the moment, Habermas’s point is that each of these various orders
places constraints on our situatedness, prevents the “construction” of the world from being merely arbitrary, and thus allows
learning to occur at all
(if there were “only” the text, there would be nothing to surprise the text, and learning would never
occur).

Those not-merely-arbitrary worldspaces anchor the validity claims of any communicative act, and prevent contexts from
spinning out of control endlessly . . . and meaninglessly. And if these extralinguistic or transcendent (or transcendental signified)
factors function even in common everyday communication and everyday experience (as Habermas maintains and even Derrida
concedes), then we transpersonalists don’t have to defend mysticism as being somehow exceptional and in need of any special
defense in this regard.

Thus, if Katz’s claim were true, not only would it invalidate cross-cultural mystical claims, it would invalidate ordinary and
everyday communication itself, at which point his position turns on itself and thoroughly dissolves its own credibility. Katz’s
position is an amalgam of neo-Kantian aphorisms, pressed into the service of a deconstructive atmosphere of self-contradictory
(and self-congratulatory) rhetoric. It is shot through with aperspectival madness, the dominant form of intellectual confusion for
the postmodern mind.

Beyond that, and looking to the transpersonal, what is most disturbing about Katz’s whole approach is that it is a group of
scholars trying to rationally think through transrational concerns. They are armchair contemplatives, so to speak, and they are
trying to make sweeping pronouncements about spiritual referents without possessing the corresponding developmental
signified. It’s just talk-talk religion, not transformative spirituality. By their own accounts, they just want to study texts, they do
not want to take up the injunctions and the paradigms and do the real science. This is like judging a bakeoff by reading the
recipes.

I will return to Katz’s argument in a note at the end of chapter 8, after we have looked at mystical development, and give a

simpler critique (see note 58 for chap. 8; see also note 32 for chap. 13).

For an excellent discussion of the Katz controversy, see the superb volume edited and contributed to by Robert Forman, The
problem of pure consciousness.
Forman takes the basic approach of centering on one of the most common of mystical
experiences, that of pure contentless consciousness (which I refer to as the causal unmanifest); and the various contributors to
the volume present extensive evidence (empirical, phenomenological, and theoretical) that it is indeed a common, cross-cultural
experience, and that the experience per se is identical wherever it shows up, simply because it is itself formless, and therefore
constructed forms (and cultural differences) do not enter into the actual “experience” itself (“experience” being not quite the
right word, as most contributors point out; the subject/object duality of experiencer/experienced is temporarily dissolved;
further, “pure Consciousness” or “pure Emptiness” is not itself an experience but the ultimate openness in which experiences
arise and pass).

I am in complete agreement with that general approach, but I would like to point out that the “identicalness” problem of
experiences is, once again, not confined to mysticism and its “end-limit” of cessation or unmanifest Emptiness. In Habermas’s
theory of communicative action, for example, the speaker has to assume identical signification or else the conversation never
gets started. Subsequent communication, driven by an omega point of mutual understanding, keeps refining, via validity claims,
the identicality. Once again, there is nothing special about mysticism in this regard.

That different cultures give mystical experiences different interpretations and different tastes, as it were, is true enough (Katz
bizarrely concedes that there is “the mystical reality” that is then culturally molded), but, in itself, this claim is trivial. That charge
applies to any experience, from sunset to food, and if that charge doesn’t invalidate sunsets (it does not), then it doesn’t
invalidate Spirit either. That part of the argument centers merely on the immanent aspect of validity claims, and conveniently
ignores both the transcendent component and the identical signification mandatory for communication in the first place (except,
of course, that Katz’s position
position that there is no
transcendental/universal validity—the standard performative contradiction in the relativist’s position).

assumes transcendental/universal validity for

implicitly

his

And this means we don’t have to defend similarity of types of mystical experience based solely on the strong version of
formlessness. Mystical experiences, of whatever variety, simply face no types of problems that aren’t also found in ordinary
experiences and ordinary communication, and the difficulties in the latter simply cannot be selectively used to invalidate the
former (without simultaneously invalidating the attack itself).

What is special about mysticism is the claim, as I construe it, that development can continue beyond the rational-ego (and
centaur) and into higher/deeper domains of awareness. This approach is doubly immune from Katz’s type of criticism. Even if the
cynical (and deeply confused) version of Katz’s constructivism were true, and no worldviews are similar, types of worldviews are
(and could be). There are levels of mediation, levels of worldviews. And thus the approach is to abstract, at a very deep level, the
deep structures of the various worldviews themselves (this approach is already at work in Piaget, Habermas, Gebser, etc.).

Common deep structures with culturally situated surface structures seem to me to steer a course between “no similarities at
all” and “mostly or only a common core.” At the same time, I am not suggesting that all the contemplative traditions possess all
the stages in the overall map I am presenting; many aim at one stage and make it paradigmatic. Nonetheless, many of the
traditions do possess all of these stages; and, as is the case with all developmental stages, these stages, when they emerge,
emerge in an order than cannot be altered by social conditioning (just as images emerge before concepts and no amount of
reinforcement, in any culture, can reverse that order).

As for the Abyss itself, or pure Emptiness, it is indeed pure identity, and that is why I often refer to the “theosphere” as being
translinguistic: as consciousness approaches unmanifest absorption, all contexts—all holons—are temporarily suspended or
temporarily dissolved (there is then only pure Immediacy or pure Presence, the same pure Presence that apprehends mediated
contexts when they are present); but even that “experience,” contentless itself, awakens to find itself situated in a cultural
context that will partially provide interpretations, but will not totally determine the experience, or else the experience could
never surprise anybody, and it surprises everybody.

Donald Rothberg’s contribution to Forman’s volume is significant. Rothberg’s treatment of Katz is fair and fairly devastating.
(The one point I would interpret differently is his conceptualization, following Brown, of the stages of meditation as a
deconstruction of the previous structures. What is deconstructed is not the previous basic structures but the previous exclusivity
structures; that is, the meditator does not permanently lose the capacity to perceive space, time, self, or individuality; rather,
consciousness is no longer identified exclusively with those structures; again, preserves the structures, negates the partiality.)

17. They become more complicated in some cases (when we form a theory, for example, we run through the three strands
twice, first to generate the data, then to generate and test how the theory—itself a mental datum—fits the other data); and
although it is never a simple one-step-at-a-time process, the same three strands are involved.

Likewise, the same three strands anchor knowledge in both the Right- and Left-Hand paths. In one we check the data, in the
other we check the data and the interpretations of the within of the data, the point being that the interpretations are
themselves mental data that are then subjected to the same three strands. Same essential process, but with different notions
about what we will allow as data (exteriors versus interiors).

In the text, I am centering mainly on the initial data apprehension (whether sensory, mental, or spiritual). In the monological
approaches, the data is, so to speak, taken at face value. No attempt is made to understand it, only report it or describe it. In the
dialogical approaches, the interior depths of the data are approached via interpretation, using the same three general strands
(because the interpretation itself is another datum, subject to the same three strands). In the translogical approaches, the
subjective perceiver and objective data are both pursued to their common or nondual source (guided by the same three strands).
18. Even the dog itself exists only in a particular worldspace; it does not exist in the worldspace of an atom, a molecule, a
cell, or an autistic (primary narcissism) infant; the dog exists in the sensorimotor worldspace. And the as-if dog exists only in the
rational worldspace.

19. Driven by evolutionary telos to mutual understanding and mutual transcendence.
20. Kuhn, Structure of scientific revolutions, 2nd ed., p. 206.
21. Walsh and Vaughan’s Paths beyond ego remains by far the best introduction to, and survey of, the transpersonal field, and

interested readers might start there.

22. See, for example, Eye to eye, Transformations of consciousness, Grace and grit.

CHAPTER 8. THE DEPTHS OF THE DIVINE

 1. P. 99. All quotes, unless otherwise indicated, are from Ralph Waldo Emerson, Selected prose and poetry, ed. R. Cook.
Notice that Emerson handles Habermas’s “identical signification” in a very direct way: it is not that we merely assume identical
signification in order to get the conversation going; it is that on the deepest level we share a common Self or Nature, namely,
God, and that is why the conversation can get going! Habermas’s omega point of mutual understanding, while still true, is
outcontextualized by Emerson’s omega point of mutual identity (and in this Emerson is in a long line of descendants from Plotinus
through Schelling to Emerson, as we will see). For Habermas, the “who” of Dasein is found in the circling of the intersubjective
circle; for Emerson, the “Who” is simply God.

Thus Emerson refers to the Over-Soul as “that common heart of which all sincere conversation is the worship.” Hölderlin: “. . .

we calmly smiled, sensed our own God amidst intimate conversation, in one song of our souls.”

 2. P. 96.

 3. Ibid.
 4. Again, this does not mean that the Self is not situated; it means it is not merely situated. As Spirit manifests, it manifests in
and as the four quadrants, or simply the Big Three—I, it, we. As Spirit/Consciousness evolves into the transpersonal domain, the
Big Three appear as Buddha (the ultimate I), Dharma (the ultimate It), and Sangha (the ultimate We). Many mystics have an
understandable tendency to emphasize the I-strand, where one’s mind and Buddha Mind become, or are realized to be, one Self
(which is no-self individually), and Emerson is no exception in this regard.

But by recognizing that all manifestation is in the form of the four quadrants, this tendency to a certain solipsism is carefully
guarded against. At the same time, the timeless and eternal nature of Spirit can nonetheless be intuited in (or through) any of the
four quadrants (I, it, or we), and Emerson, like so many mystics, is expressing that intuition here in the form of the I-quadrant, as
the Over-self or Over-soul. But inseparable from that, I will maintain, is an “Over-it” and “Over-we,” or higher truth and wider
community.

 5. Pp. 73, 81–82. My italics. In this and a few subsequent quotes I am combining excerpts because they are related by a

common theme.

 6. Pp. 95, 107, 52, 95.
 7. The typical charge against cosmic consciousness—that

it violates

the individual
organism—applies to every other sense of selfness as well. The sense of self-identity is never merely body-bound, except at
fulcrum-2. At every other stage of development, the sense of central self is a set of feelings and preferences within an identity
with the family, or the tribe, or the culture, or a cause, or a nation, or an ideal; it is inextricably bound up with possessions,
friends, relationships, job, a massive set of values—all of which are beyond the boundaries of the body. The very sense of I-ness is
never just the simple sensations this body is feeling, but always (past fulcrum-2) is inextricably bound up with identifications that
violate the boundaries of the body. Every moral impulse I have violates the boundaries of the body; every anticipation of future
action violates the boundaries of the body; every reflexive awareness I have of myself violates the boundaries of the body. The
fact that cosmic consciousness also violates these boundaries is not even a vaguely justifiable criticism. (See the “Single-Boundary
Fallacy” in note 3 for chap. 6, note 32 for chap. 13, and note 17 chap. 14.)

the physical boundaries of

 8. Emerson rarely uses the term World Soul, but it is implicit in his notion of the Over-Soul. I will often use the term, because it
is an important reminder of the community-component (the we) of Spirit’s manifestation. Like the term Over-Soul, the World Soul
always refers to the psychic-level.

Because I am letting these individuals represent the various transpersonal structure/stages, keep in mind that they will be
presenting each stage with their own individual and cultural surface structures. Thus, Emerson tends to speak of the psychic level
in terms of the “Over-Soul”—that does not mean that other persons or other traditions will use those terms (or even have that
experience).

To be more specific: if for the moment we use the term mysticism in a very general sense to mean any form of awareness
beyond the conventional space-time centered on the individual ego/bodymind, then the four general stages of transpersonal or
mystical development (psychic, subtle, causal, and nondual) refer to mystical states that take, as a major part of their referent,
elements in the gross/waking realm, in the subtle/dream realm, in the causal/dreamless, and in the nondual (respectively).

Thus, the psychic level, which is the realm of initial transpersonal or mystical awareness, often involves a great number of
seemingly unrelated phenomena, from various types of actual paranormal cognitions and events (e.g., “astral travel,” out-of-the-
body experiences) to numerous preliminary meditative states; kundalini awakening (especially of the first five chakras); reliving of
birth and pre-birth states; temporary identification with plants, animals, humans, aspects of nature, or even all of nature (nature
mysticism, cosmic consciousness)—to name a very few.

What all of those have in common is that the mystical experience moves beyond ordinary or conventional reality (the
gross/waking realm), but still takes as part of its referent the gross/waking realm. Thus, no matter how extraordinary or “far-
out,” all mystical experiences of the psychic level are still related to gross/waking reality—the experiences still refer, in whole or
part, to elements in the gross/waking realm. Thus, even though “cosmos” technically refers to the physiosphere, I will continue to
use “cosmic consciousness” (and “nature mysticism”) for the psychic level, as a reminder of its gross-realm orientation.

This is why, for example, Da Avabhasa places most kundalini experiences at this level. As he points out (in The paradox of
instruction), the kundalini experiences are still somatically or bodily felt, they are still predominantly registering in the gross body
(or still involve aspects of the gross body); they are subtler energies, to be sure, but energies still oriented to or related to gross
determinants. The same holds for cosmic consciousness (which Avabhasa, Aurobindo, and Plotinus all situate at this psychic
level); however different from kundalini experiences it might be, they both are mystical experiences related in large measure to
gross reality (and the same is true for all forms of paranormal cognitions and activities). This is why, in general terms, all psychic-
level phenomena can be referred to generically as nature (gross-related) mysticism, however much their surface structures vary
dramatically.

Subtle-level mysticism (deity mysticism), on the other hand, has few, if any, referents in the gross realm. The interior
luminosities, sounds, archetypal forms and patterns, extremely subtle bliss currents and cognitions (shabd, nada), have no major

gross-realm referents. The reason is that these subtle archetypal luminous forms are the seed syllables or seed patterns from
which gross-realm phenomena are derived (involutionally); and thus, at this point, there are no gross phenomena to be referred
to in the first place. Pure subtle-level mysticism thus has few actual referents in the gross (natural) world.

This is also why Avabhasa refers to psychic-level mysticism as that of yogis and subtle-level mysticism as that of saints. Most
yogic phenomena are gross-relating (control of bodily functions, leading to bodily awakening of kundalini currents), whereas
saintly phenomena are interior halos of light and sound that have less relation to the gross body. More specifically, according to
the Paradox of instruction—as only one example—the first five chakras are especially gross-oriented (or yogic); the sixth chakra,
which contains numerous sublevels, is the beginning of the subtle (or saintly)—it has few gross-bodily referents—and the seventh
chakra begins to transcend the psychic-subtle dimension altogether and open onto the radiant causal (which Avabhasa refers to
as sagely).

Causal-level mysticism (or pure unmanifest absorption) has no gross or subtle referents; it has no referents at all, except its
own self-existing Emptiness. And nondual mysticism is the identity of Emptiness and all Form, so its referents are whatever is
arising at the moment (the nondual siddha, or spontaneously-so awakened one).

Thus, the four major types of mysticism (nature, deity, formless, nondual) have, as their deep structures, the four major levels
of transpersonal development (psychic, subtle, causal, nondual), which are identified by their predominant
referent (gross,
subtle, causal, nondual). These are easily identifiable deep structures, no matter how much their surface structures vary. The
most variation occurs in the psychic level, and there is a reason for this:

The psychic is on the border between the gross and the subtle states. As such, not only it is the home of all sorts of various
preliminary and initial mystical phenomena (which can be expected to vary considerably from person to person), it is itself the
broad transition state from gross to subtle. As such, it is mysticism, but mysticism with one foot still in the gross. It is gross-
oriented mysticism (and that is what all of these wildly different phenomena have in common, from paranormal to kundalini to
nature mysticism to cosmic consciousness: mysticism, yes, but gross-related, with one foot in each state, and that is why its actual
surface structures can vary so dramatically but still issue from this same general realm, the psychic, the border between gross and
subtle). Thus, the psychic is, and can be, the home of anything from initital meditation experiences to paranormal phenomena,
from out-of-the-body experiences to kundalini awakenings, from a simple state of equanimity to full-blown cosmic consciousness:
they are all the subtle realm breaking into the gross realm at the common border: the psychic.

Further, somebody passing through the psychic (or any other level, for that matter) would not be expected to experience all
of the phenomena that are potentially disclosed at that level, just as somebody passing through the verbal dimensions will not
automatically develop an understanding or experience of every language in existence; nor is it necessary to learn all languages
before one can transcend the verbal. Nor is it necessary to master even a single language (one does not have to be Shakespeare
to transcend the verbal). It is necessary only that the general level be objectified, and this can occur with or without conscious
mastery (just as one can pass through the verbal without ever consciously learning and describing all the rules of grammar).

Thus, for example, in Zen, which aims directly for the causal/nondual, all sorts of psychic/subtle phenomena will arise in
meditation (everybody has some sort of these experiences, however brief), but most are quickly dismissed as makyo, inferior
apprehensions, and the student is urged to pass quickly through them (they are objectified, and thus generically transcended,
and no more is required in that regard). Other traditions value these psychic and subtle phenomena, and cultivate them mightily,
even to the point of mastery and explicit articulation (which is a wonderful contribution). But no stage can be merely and totally
bypassed in full or integral adaptation, a point stressed by Aurobindo, Plotinus, and Avabhasa (to name a very few). Peak
experiences
from any of the higher realms are possible at virtually any point in development (since these higher levels are
structural potentials present from birth), but full adaptation requires solid objectification of these levels, since they themselves
actually embody a series of subjects (a series of selves), and all selves have to die (be made into objects) before the pure Witness
stands forth and then dies itself in Emptiness. Any general stage/level not objectified will remain as a hidden subject (a hidden
self-sense), obscuring no-self or pure nondual awareness.

This is why Aurobindo (and Plotinus and Avabhasa, etc.) is always saying things like: “The spiritual evolution obeys the logic of a
successive unfolding; it can take a new decisive main step only when the previous main step has been sufficiently conquered:
even if certain minor stages can be swallowed up or leaped over by a rapid and brusque ascension, the consciousness has to turn
back to assure itself that the ground passed over is securely annexed to the new condition; a greater or concentrated speed
[which is indeed possible] does not eliminate the steps themselves or the necessity of their successive surmounting” (The life
divine, II, p. 26).

 9. As with so much in development, this is a matter of degree. Every stage of development liberates the Witness from a
previous identification: symbols witness images, concepts witness symbols, rules witness concepts, and so forth. By the time of
the ego, and especially the centaur, this Witness as observing self emerges in consciousness (although present throughout)—we
saw the emergence of the observing self with Broughton’s research, for example—and at the psychic becomes a direct and
powerful experience; this process gains in clarity and intensity all the way to the causal, as we will see (where the Witness finally
dissolves in and as pure Emptiness).

Likewise, Emerson’s own insights and awakenings often pass into the causal and the nondual, but it is a matter of degree, and

his paradigmatic presentation is of the psychic-level Over-Soul.

10. By an “identity with all manifestation,” I mean in this section all gross and gross-reflecting manifestation; nation-nature
mysticism does not generally recognize the subtle or causal dimensions (see note 8 above). It is an identity with all of the waking-
state (gross) realm, and not with the subtle domain nor the deep-sleep (formless) domain.

11. P. 95.
12. Pp. 5–6.
13. Pp. 12–13, 97, 83, 84.
14. Emerson uses the term Reason, by which he means vision-logic (that is, he refers to the German Idealist’s use of Vernunft);
when this vision-logic is “stimulated to more earnest vision,” as he puts it, then that is pure vision itself, which is the characteristic
cognitive mode of the psychic level (as I suggested in Transformations: where centauric vision-logic adds up the integral,
psychic-level vision simply and directly sees the integral); I have used the more common term intuition to cover direct psychic
vision, and Emerson himself says “we denote this primary wisdom as Intuition.”

15. Pp. 24, 36, 25.
16. Many ecophilosophers want to use Nature, with a capital N, to mean the same thing as God or Goddess or Spirit, except
without the “otherworldly” connotation. For them, Nature is spirit-as-this-world, and we don’t need any transcendental aspect
to it. These ecophilosophers (whom I will discuss in great detail in volume 2) maintain that culture is simply another production of
Nature—that all things are in some sense productions of Nature—and Nature is thus the one ground of all that is. Nature is
just another word for Spirit, but a thoroughly immanent Spirit. (In chapter 12, I will further distinguish between Nature, or the
Right-Hand empirical world, and NATURE, or the All. In this note, Nature means NATURE, or the entire Kosmos.)

But this introduces an irreconcilable problem: what is the relation between Nature and nature? That is, between the great
Force that produces All, and the merely biospheric component of the All? These ecophilosophers slip back and forth between
these two very different definitions: Nature (as the All) and nature (as the biosphere), precisely because they want to privilege the
biosphere and make the laws of nature into the laws of Nature.

Thus, on the one hand, they have a brutal dualism: nature is good, culture is (or can be) very bad (because culture can hurt and
despoil nature), and thus we have to get back to nature and heal the planet, etc. But if culture can so wildly deviate from nature,
then culture is obviously not a product of nature, is not something nature itself is doing (unless we wish to define nature as
suicidal, which is rather unbecoming in a god). Culture, then, is not simply nature.

But since nature is also supposed to be the great force underlying All, these theorists then switch to Nature with a big N, and
this Nature is then said to underlie both cultural productions (which are simply a “second nature”) and the natural world as
well.

And the question remains: what then is the relation of nature and Nature? If Nature underlies both nature and culture, then
Nature cannot simply be nature. Because they want to privilege the biosphere (or nature) as against culture, but because they
also want the ecocentric notion to embrace everything (and thus be “spiritual”), they must simultaneously conceive Nature as
being different from culture and as the all-encompassing great Force that includes culture as well. And they simply shift back and
forth between these definitions, between nature and Nature, as suits their purposes. They refer to nature to show how culture is
ruining it (because nature and culture are indeed different), and then they switch to Nature to impose the biocentric solution that
must also include culture in its totalitarian umbrella.

If the biosphere is really God/dess, how could human beings possibly be destroying it? How could human beings actually be

destroying God?

Because these particular ecophilosophers confuse fundamental with significant, they do not see that the ever-widening
ontological circle goes from nature to culture to Spirit, or, if you wish, nature to culture to Nature, where Nature as Spirit is here
correctly used to indicate “transcends and includes.” Culture can indeed destroy segments of the biosphere, precisely because the
biosphere is not Nature but merely nature. And culture, in transcending nature, can repress and dissociate it and indeed harm it
(and since nature is an internal component of the cultural compound individual, then that is purely suicidal). But culture cannot
destroy God or Nature or Spirit, any more than the tail can wag the dog. And further, nature and culture can be healed, never in
nature, but only in Nature (Spirit).

Many of these ecophilosophers point to Spinoza to support their version of “God = Nature,” and here they give a quite
distorted reading. Spinoza maintained that Spirit is radically other to this world, and yet totally and completely embraces this
world as a logical premise embraces all its consequents (his example). Spirit contains an infinite number of attributes, only two of
which show up in “this world.” As Karl Jaspers points out, according to Spinoza “it is a mark of the radical difference between God
and the world that of God’s infinitely many attributes only two are available to us.” This was such a radical cleavage between God
and this world that Hegel, who studied Spinoza carefully, called Spinoza’s system “acosmism”: the world is virtually nonexistent or
illusory.

But Hegel goes a little too far; as Spinoza makes clear, in the two attributes that we can know—thought and extension—God

is fully immanent, and thus, while a pitifully small portion of God is in this world, all of this world is in God (again, the higher
transcends and includes the lower, so that all of the lower is in the higher but not all the higher is in the lower). This has led to the
“popular” view that Spinoza actually said that this finite world itself is God. At no point whatsoever did Spinoza equate the sum
total of finite nature with the whole of Spirit or God; this is utterly contrary to what he was trying to say.

This is why he himself differentiates carefully between Nature (as God or Spirit, natura naturans), which is infinitely
transcendental, and nature (as this world, natura naturata), which is merely immanent. And holding up Spinoza as someone who
equated Nature and nature is suspicious to say the least.

If by Nature (with a big N) these ecophilosophers mean a Reality with infinite attributes that infinitely transcends this world
of nature, but totally pervades it and upholds it, then I agree entirely. For Spinoza, that ultimate Reality is approached and known
in thought, not in sensory extension or nature—a nature sensory experience is for Spinoza an example of what he calls
“mutilated, confused” knowledge, the lowest of his three levels of knowing.

I disagree with Spinoza on how that Reality is known (it is actually known transrationally, a “fourth” level beyond Spinoza’s
three, with which I otherwise agree), but ecophilosophers should realize what tree they’re barking up. Why Spinoza feels that
Spirit totally transcends the world but totally embraces it will become clearer, I believe, later in this chapter.

17. This was Hölderlin’s view as well, as one of his major translators explains: “As the force of All-Unity, Nature is of course not
limited to physical reality, but is present in transcendence (‘Heaven’) and in the historical being of ‘nations’” (Unger, Hölderlin’s
major poetry, p. 109).
18. P. 32. My italics.
19. Or, more precisely, the Over-Soul is a new and higher holon embracing the physiosphere, biosphere, and noosphere as

junior components in its own compound individuality.

20. Schopenhauer, World as will and representation.
21. This was also one of Hegel’s criticisms of Kant, that in Kant’s “autonomy” the external tyrant of heteronomy had been
imperative, whereas authentic morality, issuing from the realization of self-

replaced by the internal tyrant of the categorical
positing Spirit, would be spontaneously expressed as one’s own deepest nature.

Warwick Fox, in Transpersonal ecology, attempts to resurrect this Hegelian notion (following Naess), but he tries to fit it into a
purely flatland ontology, with unpleasant results (which I will examine in volume 2). Although there is much to recommend Fox’s
approach, and certainly much to applaud in its clarity of expression and integrity of intent, it is crippled by a recognition of only
the narrower/wider dimension, and not also the deeper/higher dimension—a legacy of the fundamental Enlightenment
paradigm. And, typical of many ecophilosophers, Fox wants to extend this paradigm to a flatland identification with all flatland
holons.

As for the supersession of omega points from the mutual understanding of the worldcentric perspective (of the ego-centaur)
to the mutual identity of the Over-Soul, see note 1 above. Also, as we will see in the following section, the Over-Soul finds its
own omega in the subtle and causal dimensions.

22. “The foundation of morality.”
23. “The foundation of morality.”
I would like to propose the thesis that the Basic Moral Intuition (BMI)—present at all stages of human growth—is “Protect and
promote the greatest depth for the greatest span.” This BMI represents (is a direct result of) the manifestation of Spirit in the four
quadrants (or simply the Big Three)—the depth in I expanded to include others (we) in a corresponding objective state of affairs
(it). That is, all individuals intuit Spirit, and since Spirit manifests as the Big Three, then the basic spiritual intuition is felt in all
three domains, and thus the basic spiritual intuition (“Honor and actualize Spirit”) shows up as “Promote the greatest depth for
the greatest span,” or so I maintain.

My further claim is that if we take the BMI and apply it to the various worldviews (magic, mythic, rational, psychic, etc.) we can
generate the typical moral stance of those stages, because each stage has the same BMI (because Spirit is one) but a different
definition of self, others, and objects (because Spirit unfolds different depths in the course of its self-evolution).

In the egocentric stance, for example, depth is extended only (or primarily) to the self, and all others are merely (or usually)
extensions of the self (its moral stance has a span of 1, and it promotes and protects the depth in that span only, namely, itself;
this is also the typical hedonistic ethic).

In the sociocentric stance, depth is acknowledged to exist in others, but only those of one’s particular culture (span extends to
all believers in the mythology, and their depth is to be protected and promoted; this is typically the duty ethic). All other
individuals, however, are some version of infidels, who possess no depth, no soul, and thus are not worthy of being protected and
promoted (and, indeed, are often sacrifices to the glory of the culture’s god).

In the worldcentric rational stance, depth is extended to all human beings; span now includes the human race as such. (And, as
a side twist, with the flattening of the Kosmos to the objective natural world or cosmos, depth came to be interpreted merely as a
mono-level happiness, in which case the BMI is unpacked as “Promote the greatest happiness for the greatest numbers,” with no
consideration of different types of happiness or levels of depth that should be extended in the first place. “Better an unhappy

Socrates than a contented pig” cannot be handled in this flatland BMI.) Nonetheless, the rational worldcentric unpacking of the
BMI extends its depth or potential depth to all human beings (if not in equality, then in equal opportunity, regardless of race,
gender, creed), and may begin to extend it to nonhuman beings as well.

In the transpersonal domains, the BMI unfolds as Buddha (I), Dharma (It), and Sangha (We), and the ultimate Sangha is the
community of all sentient beings as such. (But this doesn’t prevent us from making relative distinctions as well. The BMI is to
“protect and promote the greatest depth for the greatest span,” and thus, if we had to choose between killing a mosquito or the
Dalai Lama, we swat the mosquito. Even though both are perfect expressions of the same Self or Buddha Mind, the latter realizes
more depth and thus is to be more protected.) There are variations on this theme in the different stages of the transpersonal
domains, and I will deal with those elsewhere (see note 58 below).

In other words, I believe we all intuit Spirit to one degree or another, and thus we all possess the Basic Moral Intuition; but we
unfold that intuition only at our present level of development. Since Spirit always manifests simultaneously in and as the four
quadrants, then this spiritual intuition is (and would have to be) unpacked according to how each stage of development cognizes
the four quadrants. Putting these horizontal and vertical factors together gives us a multidimensional grid that, as far as I can tell,
can generate all of the major ethical stances that have been advanced.

Further, even within a given level of development, the Basic Moral Intuition is just that, an intuition, not an engraved tablet
with written instructions. It is given form and shape by the surface structures of the culture in which it finds itself, and—precisely
because it is an intuition—individuals within a given stage can legitimately disagree on precisely what depth is, what span should
be included, and what measures should be taken to objectively implement it (I, we, it). (A higher stage would involve a more
authentic unpacking of the BMI, but that stage would still face its own problems of legitimacy on its own level, and so on.)

To give a notorious example from the rational level: Should we or should we not extend the span of what we recognize as
depth to include the fetus? Does “Protect and promote the greatest depth for the greatest span” mean the fetus has a real depth
and thus should be protected? Or is the fetus basically just a potential depth (and thus accorded fewer rights than actual depth)?
Or again, is the depth already present in the mother so much greater than the potential but unrealized depth of the fetus, that
if having the baby would severely impair the mother’s depth according to her, then the “greatest depth for the greatest span”
would actually be facilitated, not hindered, by abortion? (The feminists uniformly take this stance, even if they don’t articulate it
in those terms.)

My point is that reasonable men and women can legitimately disagree on these issues, with each of them attempting to
unpack the BMI as best they can. (Sociocentric or mythic-membership individuals, on the other hand, who believe in the
mythogonic origin of life, feel the fetus is already a fully fledged person and thus has equal depth and needs equal protection;
abortion is murder. Interestingly, this argument would extend only to unborn but potential believers; an unbeliever has no soul,
or, without baptism, is destined for hell, and you are definitely allowed to murder infidels; what really irks them about abortion is
not the loss of human life but the loss of a potential convert; they unreflexively say “all human life” because they automatically
and deeply assume all human life belongs to their God, and theirs alone. A moral dilemma at this stage is: should I kill the killers
of God’s children? And, in fact, one physician has already been murdered in America on precisely these “grounds.” After Dr.
Gunn’s murder, the fundamentalist newsletters indeed had a heated debate about his death: not whether he should have been
killed—that was never questioned—but if it shouldn’t have been done instead by stoning, this being the acceptable biblical death
for such a sinner.)

I will return to the BMI

later (see note 13 for chapter 14). My point for now—and this relates to Emerson and
Schopenhauer—is that expressing the BMI in terms of the “one Self” or “common Over-Soul” is fine, as long as we remember that
is only one aspect of the BMI (namely, the subjective strand) and only one component of a full ethical theory (which would have
to involve all four quadrants). Otherwise we will very soon slide into solipsism and subjective idealism, which plays heavily into
the hyper-agentic, hyper-masculine, disengaged and dangling subject of the fundamental Enlightenment paradigm.

24. Habermas does not recognize any stages (in any domain) higher than mature and differentiated/integrated, decentered,
autonomous communicative reason (vision-logic). Communicative reason is the final omega, the end of history for Habermas. But
the whole point of the transpersonal orientation is that that is an altogether premature closing of the history books.

Likewise, although I have made frequent use of Habermas’s overall theory, we would of course differ on various aspects of that
general framework. Habermas is particularly unclear, it seems to me, on the individual, subjective domain, that of “inner nature”
(including the therapeutic and the aesthetic). On the one hand he states that the three domains are open to rationalization and
cumulative learning; on the other, he states that the inner domain is only particular and not open to universal claims. Rothberg
believes that Habermas would maintain that the form (or structure) of the inner domain evolves (and is universal in that manner),
but the content is individualistic and particular (and not open to universality). If this is so (and it does seem to reflect Habermas’s
general position), it is not that different from my own claim that the deep structures of all domains evolve in a broadly universal
form, but the surface structures are everywhere “particularistic” and dependent upon cultural and personal contingencies (the
inner domain being no different, in this regard, than the external and the social domains; the deep structures of selfhood or
subjectivity evolve in essentially the same framework, and along the same lines, as the it and the we; the “public” nature of the it

and we is actually no more public than the I: the recognition of each domain is set in the same patterns of relational exchange).
To say that the inner/subjective world has features that are idiosyncratic is true but trivial in this regard; what is not trivial is that
the types of subjective space, and the types of data or inward apprehension, evolve in a broad pattern that is as cross-cultural
as the unfolding of types of moral response and types of technical-objective potentials; to say the specific contents vary in one
is to simply say they vary in all. Besides, privileging the it and the we over the I, when it comes to universal validity, ultimately
undercuts the privileging itself.

While I agree with much of Habermas’s critique of the philosophy of the subject—as we will see in detail in chapters 12 and
13—I believe he has tossed the baby with the bathwater in this particular issue. When he says that “nothing can be learned in an
objectivating attitude about inner nature qua subjectivity,” I know what he means—the subject ceases to be a subject precisely at
the moment it is objectified; but the whole point about inner development is that what is embedded-subjectivity at one stage
becomes generally object of awareness at the next, and the higher or contemplative stages of development are exactly ones
where much is learned about inner nature precisely by objectifying it in intense introspective modes, an objectifying that is a
freeing or detachment from the subjective-embeddedness or identification: much is learned about inner nature qua subjectivity
precisely by objectifying it and robbing it of its power to subjectify the world—and further, the claim of the contemplative
traditions is that general maps of this transsubjectifying process of development can be reconstructed, maps that possess a
general or broadly universal character, and these maps, constructed with the warrant of the three strands of valid knowledge
accumulation, are every bit as “public” as any other accumulation. (In chapters 12 and 13, when I criticize the merely objectifying
mode of the fundamental Enlightenment paradigm—the philosophy of the disengaged self or subject—it is a criticism not of
objectifying but of only objectifying: of the failure to see that the subject still exists in patterns of relational exchange with
similarly depthed subjects, which finally anchors not only the we but the I.)

Rothberg discusses many of these topics in an excellent overview, “Rationality and religion in Habermas’s recent work.”
Rothberg’s conclusion that a “reconstructed” Habermasian framework is nonetheless broadly compatible with the
phenomenology of contemplative religion is a conclusion I support. These topics are dealt with in detail in volume 3; in the
meantime, critics might forgive my rather generalized use of Habermas’s framework (likewise, I have based most of my comments
in this volume on Habermas’s work up to, but not including, his recently released magnum, The theory of communicative action,
of which two volumes are now available. My discussion of these is reserved for later publications).

Accordingly, when Charles Taylor complains that Habermas’s framework allows any true spiritual/substantive claims to “slip
through the cracks,” I believe this is true only if the Habermasian framework is not extended into the transpersonal strands of
each of the three domains (each of the four quadrants). At the same time, my major criticism of Taylor is that he is inordinately
fond of magico-mythic syncretisms. Time and again, when he comes to give examples of the ontic logos he feels that modernity
“lost,” he reverts to syncretic/mythic “wholes.” A little more “trans,” and a little less “pre,” would, I believe, allow him to
recognize the value of a “reconstructed” or extended (transpersonal) Habermasian framework.

But Habermas and Taylor are good examples of the impact of an ambivalent modernity on presentday theorists. Although both
theorists are acutely appreciative of the good news/bad news nature of modernity, Habermas exuberantly celebrates “No more
myths!,” and Taylor sadly laments the “No more Ascent!”

25. P. 99. All quotes, unless otherwise indicated, are from Interior castle, trans. E. Peers.
26. Pp. 85, 86.
27. This cessation, which is the single primary transformative state in all of Teresa’s stages, is a glimmer of nirvikalpa
samadhi, or formless absorption. This cessation or suspension (both her terms) is hinted at in the Prayer of Quiet but comes to
the fore at this stage and continues to be the transformative event in the sixth stage as well. This is why she says “the experiences
[of cessation/absorption] of this [5th] mansion and of the next are almost identical” (pp. 106–107).

She therefore describes this state of suspension in the fourth, the fifth, the sixth, and even the seventh stage. Here are several
quotes: “In this state of suspension the faculties are so completely absorbed that we might describe them as dead, and the senses
so as well . . .” (p. 150). “Here we are all asleep, and fast asleep, to the things of the world, and to ourselves (in fact, for the short
time that the condition lasts, the soul is without consciousness and has no power to think, even though it may desire to do so) . .
.” (p. 97). “This is a delectable death; if it still breathes, it does so without realizing it; even if it has any consciousness, neither
hands nor feet can move . . .” (p. 98). “For as long as the soul is in this state, it can neither see nor hear nor understand . . .” (p.
101). “Sometimes it seems doubtful if there is any breath in the body. This lasts only for a short time because, when this profound
suspension lifts a little, the body seems to come partly to itself again, and draws breath, though only to die once more, and, in
doing so, to give fuller life to the soul . . .” (p. 155). (Note the similarity to the Transcendental Meditation phenomenon of
transcendence and breath suspension repeated in slow cycles.)

But as for the soul being “asleep” or “not conscious” in this state of cessation, Teresa finally points out that it is actually that

the soul “is fully awake, while asleep as regards all attachment” (p. 155).

This suspension, absorption, cessation is referred to in Eastern texts as “conditional nirvikalpa samadhi,” or formless awareness
not yet fully established. Each of Teresa’s stages are anchored in a taste of this cessation, and that taste triggers the development

through the psychic and subtle stages with their various visions, raptures, voices, illuminations, and so forth (savikalpa samadhi).

This cessation/absorption is, for Teresa, pure union with God (and the Hindu texts would agree; however, this cessation is
indeed “conditional” because there remain traces of dualism in the perception; if those traces were uprooted, God and soul
would both give way to pure causal Godhead, or jnana samadhi, which we will examine in the next section with Eckhart and
Ramana).

28. P. 101.
29. P. 106.
30. P. 155.
31. Pp. 129, 131. Compare the Buddhist “pseudo-duhkha”; see Transformations.
32. P. 199.
33. Pp. 134, 160. But this does not, she points out, mean that they cannot be communicated, and indeed confirmed, to and
with those who have also had similar experiences. “Nor do I think I shall succeed in describing them in such a way as to be
understood, except by those who have experienced it; for these are influences so delicate and subtle that they proceed from the
very depth of the heart and I know no comparison that I can make which will fit the case” (p. 134)—that is, no signifier will work
unless there is a developmental signified in the listener.

Hence these states are not merely arbitrary in a relative-constructivist sense: the true and the false still obtain: “But I fancy
that even now you will not be satisfied, for you will think that you may be mistaken, and that these interior matters are difficult to
investigate. In reality, what has been said will be sufficient for anyone who has experienced, for there is a great difference
between the false and the true” (p. 100). Habermas is always wanting a simple “Yes or No,” and Teresa would be more than glad
to give it to him.

34. Pp. 149, 152.
35. The high-subtle, with intimations of low-causal. Teresa says that the lesser visions and raptures and illuminations (of the
psychic and low subtle) are the result of the union of aspects of the soul with God, or the union of some faculties of the soul with
God; but this final union is of the “the whole soul and God.”

36. P. 213.
37. Pp. 213–14.
38. See also The Atman project and Transformations of consciousness.
39. P. 87.
40. Ascent of Mount Carmel, chap. 5.
41. Pp. 216, 210.
42. Life divine, pp. 704–705.
43. P. 169.
44. Pp. 218, 217. Unless otherwise indicated, all quotes are from Fox’s new translations, Breakthrough.
45. P. 215.
46. Pp. 104, 178, 242.
47. Pp. 190, 177, 140, 128, 256.
48. Pp. 277, 294, 181.
49. Pp. 298, 309, 301.
50. P. 102. All quotes, unless otherwise indicated, are from Talks with Ramana Maharshi.
51. P. 32.
52. P. 13.
53. Pp. 110, 121.
54. Pp. 53, 93.
55. Pp. 182, 210, 82.
56. Pp. 132, 316.
57. Pp. 317, 316.
58. The Nondual traditions make a series of very fine distinctions here, which at least should be briefly mentioned. And we can

return to Katz and offer a simpler critique of his position.

The manifest All as a totality, the consummate Holon, is saguna Brahman, final-God with form (the low causal). This manifest
All-Unity therefore evolves as All-Form, the summit “application” of the twenty tenets. Pure unmanifest (or high causal) Spirit
(nirguna Brahman) does not evolve or involve or in any way enter or leave the manifest stream, but “underlies” it as a mirror
“underlies” equally all its objects, whatever the state of those objects; it is both the Source of all other levels and their ultimate
Goal (but it is not a summation or addition of manifestation, as is saguna, because it is utterly unmanifest).

Godhead as nondual Suchness (as opposed to unmanifest Source and Goal) is neither manifest nor unmanifest; it is as fully
present in the lowest holon as in the highest holon, and in any manifest or unmanifest state, as the isness or suchness of any

phenomenon.

Roughly: Whitehead’s Primordial Nature of God refers to archetypal patterns in the high subtle prior to gross involution (cf.
“concretion”); Whitehead believes these patterns to be “eternal objects,” but many traditions, such as Mahayana Buddhism (of
Asanga and Vasubandhu), see these archetypal patterns (vasanas in the alayavijnana, high subtle to low causal), as being cosmic
memory-habits, very much like Sheldrake’s view. Whitehead’s Consequent Nature of God is similar to saguna Brahman (high-
subtle to low-causal), the ever-evolving consummate Holon.

But primordial and consequent nature do not cover, or even refer to, the unmanifest Godhead (high causal) or Godhead as

Suchness (ultimate or nondual): Whitehead seems unfamiliar with those domains.

Of course, these types of broad similarities are the types of comparisons Katz and company do not think are theoretically
warranted in any fashion. (We dealt in detail with Katz’s position in note 16 for chap. 7, and I will here give a related but simpler
critique; also, see note 32 for chapter 13 for a discussion of Kant and experience).

Katz’s general pluralistic position is that mystical experience is mediated by cultural/concepts, which are everywhere different,
and thus no mystical experiences are comparable. We saw that if this were true in the strong version that he believes, it would
apply not only to mystical experiences but to everyday ordinary experiences as well, at which point simple communication itself
(and translation between languages) would be impossible; and that, on the contrary, theorists from Habermas to Derrida
maintain that transcendental signifieds anchor signification in ways that prevent interpretive reality from being merely
constructed, since they are significantly anchored in extralinguistic factors.

The mystic’s claim is that, in just the same way, mystical validity claims are anchored in extralinguistic realities that, however
much they are molded by cultural factors, are not merely the product of shifting cultural and provincial-only fashions (the
referents of the transcendental signifiers exist in a worldspace that is disclosed to those with the appropriate developmental
signifieds, even if these are always already culturally situated. Thus, cultural context does not prevent natural science from
making and redeeming universal claims, nor likewise does it prevent mystical science from making and redeeming not-merely-
culture-bound claims).

And indeed, Katz implicitly (and sometimes explicitly) concedes the existence of these transcendental referents (which he calls
“the mystic reality”). Katz: “Thus, for example, the nature of the Christian mystic’s pre-mystical consciousness informs the
mystical consciousness such that he experiences the mystic reality in terms of Jesus, the Trinity, or a personal God, etc., rather
than in terms of the non-personal . . . Buddhist doctrine of nirvana” (my italics; “Language, epistemology and mysticism”).

But how does Katz know that “the mystic reality” even exists, since supposedly nobody has access to it in anything other than
culturally limited and nonuniversal terms? What allows him to make universal/transcendental claims that he denies to everybody
else?

Fact is,

in the back of his mind he recognizes quite obvious cross-cultural commonalities—he recognizes “the mystic
reality”—which he then tries to erase by centering merely on the local cultural contexts, even as he continues to assume the
existence of the mystical reality which alone can anchor his analysis (even though by his formal stance he should be able to
make no universal statements about it at all. The standard performative contradiction).

The recent advance in transpersonal studies is that not only does this mystical reality exist and possess certain not-merely-
cultural transcendental referents (such that cross-cultural commonalities can indeed be recognized, just as Katz in fact does
recognize them), but the “mystical reality” itself unfolds in a developmental and holarchical fashion, and likewise cross-cultural
commonalities can be found in the unfolding as well. Since Katz already recognizes the existence of “the mystical reality,” no
further tools are needed to recognize “stages in the mystical reality.” That is, Katz has already taken the difficult, major, and big
first step: the mystical reality is there. The transpersonal advance has simply refined that step: there are stages in its unfolding,
immanent
that (1) prevent “the mystical consciousness” from being merely
provincial, (2) allow learning to occur in the unfolding (which could not occur if the unfolding were merely textual with nothing
extralinguistic to ground it and correct it), (3) anchor mystical validity claims and make them something more profound than
literary chit-chat and idiosyncratic interpretations, (4) usher one into worldspaces that are deeper disclosures of the Kosmic
terrain, and (5) altogether make Spirit a reality and not simply a poem.

stages anchored in transcendental referents

Take the sequence:
The self experiences an overpowering interior luminosity; self and luminosity merge; self and luminosity disappear into
cessation; cessation gives way to nondual unity with all manifestation. Those are four very distinct types of mystical experience
(they are, in fact, typical of the psychic, subtle, causal, and nondual domains). Those types of experiences can most definitely be
found cross-culturally. Nobody is denying that a Buddhist will interpret the luminosity as the Sambhogakaya, the Christian will
interpret it perhaps as an angel or as Christ himself, a Jungian will interpret it as an archetypal emergence, and so on. This is true
but utterly trivial with regard to the ontological status (and impact) of the referent itself: it applies to all experiences (do you and
I even see that patch of red color in precisely the same way? Who can say? But does this invalidate redness altogether, or mean
that we never have anything in common and thus cannot even communicate our experiences?). To use this argument to
undermine the mystical claim is simply to undermine any transcendental signifieds at all, which is to say: to render any

communicative exchange theoretically impossible.

Just so, significant aspects of “the mystical consciousness” are anchored in referents (“the mystical reality”) that, even if always
culturally situated, are never merely culturally situated, which differentiates them from (1) personal hallucinations, (2) provincial
cultural fictions, (3) idiosyncratic quirks, (4) mythic dogmatisms, (5) bogus power claims (ideology).

Likewise, precisely because “the mystical reality” is there, anchoring a transcendental signifier, this (1) allows learning to occur
vis-à-vis the mystical reality, (2) ensures that learning will unfold, like all learning, in a developmental arc, (3) allows the stages of
that arc to be identified, (4) allows the traditions themselves to spot when a trainee is making a mistake, (5) allows a rational
reconstructive science of the mystical unfolding in abstract terms (deep structures), and (6) frankly acknowledges that Spirit is
there prior to humans and their cultural tinkerings, and is not simply a product of men’s and women’s capacity to make symbols:
Do we create God? or is that just slightly backwards?

Finally, in this regard, I mentioned in note 23 for chap. 4 that different languages are often used with (and seem best to
metaphorically capture) the four major levels of transpersonal awareness. (I mentioned this in connection with Foucault’s tracing
of different discursive structures). Picking up the story with the rational-ego, I would tentatively (and very briefly) outline these
languages as follows.

Rational-ego—the languages of representation and reflection. This is the typically monological representational paradigm that
defined (and defines) the formal operational mind in its reflection on (mostly) exteriors. These languages describe the world as if
it were simply pregiven to the equally pregiven (and disengaged) subject. Various depths are recognized, but these, too, tend to
be described in simple monological terms (empiric-analytic).

Centaur/vision-logic—the languages of depth and development. Vision-logic tends more easily to recognize that beneath the
“obvious” surfaces appearing to “pregiven” reflection, there lurk depths that can be disclosed, both in their exterior forms (e.g.,
neostructuralism) and in interior interpretations (e.g., hermeneutics). This is part of the move that Foucault traced from the
languages of representation to the languages of depth (e. g., psychoanalysis, linguistics). Likewise, depth is generally understood
to have developed—whereas surfaces simply appear, depths tend to unfold or develop or evolve: they are not simply “pregiven.”
The languages of the centaur thus tend to be dialectical, dialogical, network-oriented, developmental (evolutionary in the
broadest sense)—in short, the languages of depth and development. (As I indicated, this volume is intentionally written in these
languages.)

Psychic—the languages of vision and vibration. Vision-logic gives way to direct vision, and the developmental view is
supplemented with a vibratory view, where vibration is used to convey not so much a physicalistic nature as a quality of
intensity of awareness. These languages are most common in kundalini yoga and the early stages of tantric unfolding, but can be
found to some degree in virtually all beginning stages of intense meditation. Since the psychic-level, as we have seen, takes as
part of its referent aspects of the gross domain, vibration (felt bodily vibration) seems best to capture the subtle energies and
consciousness that begin to transcend the gross domain but can still be intensely felt in that domain. But for whatever reasons,
the languages of vision and vibration seem to be used quite often to describe this realm (and its subtle architecture of chakras,
nadis, tigles, etc).

Subtle—the languages of luminosity and archetype. I mean “archetype” in the non-Jungian and more traditional sense (subtle
Kosmic forms or patterns of manifestation, upon which all other patterns are based in involution, as we will see in chapter 9).
Vision gives way to intense luminosities (sometimes audible illuminations and bliss-luminosities), and vibration is supplemented
with a grasp of the subtle forms from which the gross domains radiate or vibrate. The “saintly” domains of interior illuminations
and archetypal deity-forms—extraordinary, awe-inducing, supernatural, out-blazing.

Causal—the languages of emptiness and dream. Luminosity gives way to pure Emptiness, and the entire world of form
(archetypal or otherwise) is seen as a dream (also expressed as a drama or play,
lila). Thus, whenever we hear philosopher-sages
speak of the Abyss, the Void, the Urgrund, the Unborn, the Uncreate (etc.), they almost always also refer to manifestation as the
great dream, the great illusion, the dancing play, the great shimmering image of no final substance. We are in the languages of
emptiness and dream.

Nondual—the languages of the extraordinary ordinary. Emptiness is Form, Form is Emptiness, and therefore the final
realization is not other in the slightest to anything presently arising, and therefore can be directly pointed to with, for example,
this from a Zen Master:

The spring breeze in a tree
Has two different faces:
A southward branch looks warm,
A northward branch looks cool.

That is a perfect pointing to the absolute truth: how obvious, how ordinary. This glass of water is cool, the sun is bright! Hear the

rain on the rooftop? Who is not enlightened?

Where is one’s Original Face? In the universe of One Taste, where else can we point for the absolute truth if not right here?

Where else could it be? The languages of just this.

In all of these languages, notice that, as I have presented them, the two “components” (such as depth and development, or
luminosity and form) refer, in a very general way, to the interior and exterior aspects of the particular level (until these two
become finally not-two or nondual). The interior components refer to the subject-like side: vision-logic (or depth) to vision to
luminosity to Emptiness (pure Witness); and the exterior components to the objective-like or exterior side: development to
vibration to archetype to dream—until final Emptiness and final Dream/Form are not-two: the summer breeze is cool, the birds
are singing loudly.

And notice that, in each of these languages, words work just fine. The signifiers are perfectly adequate.

If you have the
developmental signified, the referent is fairly obvious. If you say to a subtle-level practitioner, “I saw a light a thousand times
brighter than the sun,” that practitioner will know pretty much what you mean, as “pretty much,” for example, as if you said,
“Last night I had an intense orgasm.” That is, in both cases, the words work equally well (or equally poorly), depending upon our
own lived experience as a point of actual reference. I might not know precisely what you mean by “intense orgasm,” but that
applies to all signifiers, and in no way exclusively disarms mystical signifiers. As I said, that applies to “dogginess” as well as
“Buddha-nature,” but this epidemic linguistic slipperiness does not mean dogs and Buddhas are simply linguistic fairy tales.

The analysis of the types of languages of the transpersonal domains is,

I believe, another of the central projects of
postmodernity. Provided, of course, that it is not done as a merely academic endeavor, where a bunch of disengaged
dunderheads attempt to analyze the signifiers without having a clue as to the actual referents.

59. Pp. 67–68, 138, 96, 191, 249.
Let us note the transformations that worldcentric

has undergone. We have seen overall development move from
physiocentric to biocentric to egocentric to ethnocentric to worldcentric—and it is with rationality that the various worldcentric
conceptions first begin to emerge. And what all worldcentric perspectives have in common is that a certain freedom is to be
extended (or made available) to all human beings, regardless of race, color, creed, or gender. All stages at and beyond rationality
are fundamentally worldcentric in nature.

But the types of worldcentric freedoms that are offered unfold in a developmental fashion, and these types of freedom (and

types of morality) are part of the defining characteristics of the higher and transpersonal stages of development.

To pick up the story with rationality and its worldcentric stances, we already saw Habermas, for example, point out that
rationality first demands a legal freedom, then a moral freedom, then a political freedom for all members of a world society (note
the three types of progressive freedom). And that takes us to the global, centauric vision-logic and its moral stance.

Continuing into the transpersonal—into Kohlberg’s stage 7, or universal/spiritual morality (or “post-postconventional”), which
actually contains several stage/levels—we still see a worldcentric orientation, but further freedoms are being offered beyond the
legal or political: namely, spiritual freedoms. The same worldcentric span, but disclosing even further depths.

These progressive depths, we have seen, are psychic, subtle, causal, and nondual: and each of these offers a progressively
deeper and wider type of spiritual freedom—a freedom that results from an identification with a worldspace that, so to speak,
contains more room. They are freedoms from the lesser and more confining spaces, by finding freedom in the deeper and
wider.

Each of these freedoms is thus often simultaneously described as a freedom from and a freedom in: a freedom from the
previous, lesser domain, and a freedom in the new and “roomier” domain (as we will see in a moment). The moral stance of
each of these freedoms thus relates to the type of new freedom that is therefore offered to all beings, worldcentrically (the Basic
Moral Intuition inspires us to extend this new freedom, this new depth, to as many sentient beings as possible—greatest depth
for greatest span—and this marks the new types of moral imperatives that issue from these new depths of freedom).

These increasing spiritual freedoms, and their corresponding moral stances, have been referred to, for example, as yogic,
saintly, sagely, and nondual. These are spiritual freedoms in reference to the gross, subtle, causal, and nondual worldspaces, and
thus in each case, these spiritual freedoms are described as freedom from the limitations of the lesser and freedom in the
expanse of the greater: freedom from the gross in the subtle; freedom from the subtle in the causal; and freedom from the causal
in (and as) the nondual. The lesser freedoms are not lost (just as legal and political freedoms are not denied); they are simply
subsumed in a deeper space that embraces their concerns from a greater perspective.

Thus, to give a few condensed examples: the psychic/subtle disposition is a freedom from the ordinary gross-level fluctuations
of pleasure/pain and sensual-mental desire and frustration (via yogic harnessing of awareness away from sensory immersion); it is
a freedom from gross limitations and freedom in the deeper space of psychic and subtle awareness that moves prior to the
entire gross domain of fluctuating sensory-mental desires and aversions.

Likewise, the causal disposition is a freedom from the limitations of the subtle domain and manifestation in general (samsara);
a freedom from the limitations of an awareness identified with the mechanism of suffering and separation, and a freedom in
the vast expanse of boundless, unmanifest, formless Emptiness that is consciousness as such. Never entering manifestation,

causal freedom is never engulfed by the mechanics of madness and the mathematics of pain: the world of duality and its inherent
lacerations.

The Nondual disposition is a freedom from the extremely subtle limitations of the causal unmanifest (namely, the causal
tension or rarefied fear of manifestation: the tension around the heart of nirvikalpa samadhi that is the final Phobos of sahaj: the
final fear of dissolving the boundary between emptiness and form and thus awakening as all Form, endlessly)—a freedom from
the limitations of the causal and a freedom in (and as) the entire Kosmos of Emptiness and Form, spontaneously so.

These types of new spiritual freedom are thus also frequently described using the various languages as I briefly outlined
them. Thus, vision-logic is a freedom from the limitations of mere representation; subtle-level nada illuminations are free of
gross-bodily-felt vibrations; the causal is a freedom from the illusory dream of all manifestation; the nondual is a freedom from
“stone Buddha” emptiness (to give the briefest examples).

Likewise, these four types of spiritual freedom (psychic, subtle, causal, nondual) are often correlated with Paths of
Renunciation (yogic/psychic), Paths of Purification (subtle to causal), Paths of Transformation (causal to nondual), and Paths of
Spontaneous Self-Liberation (nondual as such)—each with a different moral disposition that reflects the Basic Moral Intuition as
unfolded and interpreted at that new depth.

I will leave the details of those correlations for later publications. All I wish to emphasize here is that the worldcentric
stance—which begins with rationality and marks all stages at and beyond rationality, and which extends freedom to (at least)
the span of all human beings: that stance of worldcentric span itself increasingly discloses more depths, or deeper and deeper
types of freedoms that are to be extended universally via a new moral imperative (and then, not only to humans but all sentient
beings as well).

This is yet another justification for the fact that reason is the great gateway to the beyond. Some individuals (and some
cultures) can indeed “tap into” transpersonal domains, but they funnel the intuitions into prerational structures, into egocentric
or sociocentric/ethnocentric dispositions, which merely serves to reinforce the egocentricity or ethnocentricity: they, and they
alone, now have God on their side, at which point they begin to suspect that there is no other God. Short of worldcentric
rationality, the intuition cannot be seen to operate in all human beings (and eventually, all sentient beings), and thus, short of
worldcentric rationality, all spiritual intuitions, no matter how temporarily authentic, become hijacked and frozen in structures
that prevent their authentic and compassionate manifestation.

Freeing these otherwise authentic intuitions from their crippling confinement to prerational structures and less-than-

worldcentric embrace is part of the postmodern project.

60. For an interesting discussion of this theme, see Peter Russell, The white hole in time.
Various theorists have pointed to an undeniable acceleration of the pace of evolution, where major transformations seem to
be occurring exponentially. This is certainly true from one point of view, but does not affect the argument that I will present in the
text.

61. We will investigate the “source” of such omegas in the next two chapters, though we can already see at this point that the

mystics would call that force Eros and that Goal God.

62. Fukuyama, The end of history and the last man, p. xiii.
The economic reasons will be discussed in volume 2, after we have looked at the techno-economic base of each of the major
worldviews. Since every interior has an exterior, each major worldview is correlated with (but not reducible to) a major force of
material production: magic (foraging), magic-mythic (horticulture), mythic (agrarian),
(industrial), vision-logic
(informational).

rational

In volume 2, the correlations and characteristics of these various modes of production will be examined at length, and, most
important, the status of the sexes will be examined in each period, with the goal of deciphering the roles of the sexes both
yesterday . . . and tomorrow.

The nature of the global transformation now in progress cannot adequately be discussed without an understanding of the role
of “the base” (the techno-economic infrastructure) in relation to various worldviews, and that, as I said, is a major topic of volume
2.

But this part of Fukuyama’s argument (the economic) is the Right-Hand component, the material component, and he
understandably finds it related to the conclusions of natural (RH) science: “Modern natural science [is] a regulator or mechanism
to explain the directionality and coherence of History. Modern natural science is a useful starting point because it is the only
important social activity that by common consensus is both cumulative and directional” (End of history, p. xiv).

The “struggle for recognition” is the Left-Hand component of his argument—the theme that mutual recognition, or the free
exchange of mutual self-esteem among all peoples, is an omega point that pulls history and communication forward, toward its
free emergence, which is then the end of history in that special sense.

63. End of history, p. xviii.
64. Ibid., p. xii.
65. I would like to mention several factors that New Age theorists tend to overlook in the “Greening of America” and “Age of

Aquarius” theories. Even if we collectively evolve to, say, the psychic Over-Soul—which would mean that the center of social
gravity revolved around political, educational, and cultural institutions organized toward the acknowledgment and realization of
the Over-Soul in each and every being, much as we now organize around the recognition of rational egoic self-esteem—even if
that were the case, three important factors should be kept in mind by the Aquarian utopianists:

(1) The average-expectable level of psychocultural development in any given society acts as a pacer of development up to that
level but does not guarantee that development in all individuals will so proceed. Very few people even in “developed” countries
reach a firm base in worldcentric, postconventional awareness (one study found only 4 percent of the American population at the
higher postconventional stage—and that is the stage that precedes and is necessary for the Over-soul descent!). The same
problems will beset any and all Over-Soul societies.

Conversely, no matter what the collective average-expectable level of a given society, individuals are always capable of
evolving and developing beyond it to any of the higher structures of consciousness, since these are structural potentials of the
human holon, although (a) they can only be exercised in microcommunities of the similarly depthed (sanghas), and (b) the higher
the average-expectable level of a given society, then the easier (but not necessarily more likely) higher development will be.

(2) Even if society collectively evolves to the average-expectable level of the Over-Soul, every single person born in that society
will nevertheless still start development at square one, as a single-celled zygote: and have to begin the arduous holoarchic climb,
physiocentric to biocentric to egocentric to sociocentric to worldcentric to theocentric. The pace of this climb can be accelerated,
but the fundamental stages cannot be bypassed (nobody can form concepts without having images, and so on).

And at every stage in development, things can go wrong. The more stages, the more nightmares of possible developmental

miscarriages.

(3) As for the higher stages themselves, they bring new and glorious potentials . . . and new and exquisitely wretched possible
pathologies. Read again Teresa’s account of the early subtle level (similar accounts are found in Hindu, Buddhist, and Sufi texts).
Won’t it be fun when society as whole is going through that stage?

The dialectic of progress covers even the face of God, and an idealized “Paradise” exists nowhere in the manifest Kosmos—for

reasons we will further see.

66. The totality of all manifestation at any time—the All—subsists in the low causal, as the sum total of the consequent and
primordial nature of Spirit (in roughly Whitehead’s sense), and this Totality is the manifest omega pull on each individual and
finite thing: as such, it is ever-receding: each new moment has a new total horizon that can never be reached or fulfilled, because
the moment of fulfillment itself creates a new whole of which the previous whole is now a part: cascading whole/parts all the way
up, holons endlessly self-transcending and thus never finally self-fulfilled: rushing forward ceaselessly in time attempting to find
the timeless.

And the final Omega, the ultimate and unmanifest Omega, the causal Formless, is the magnet on the other side of the
horizon, which never itself enters the world of Form as a singularity or as a totality (or any other phenomenal event), and thus is
never found at all in any version of manifestation, even though all manifestation will rest nowhere short of this infinite Emptiness.
Thus, from any angle, there is no ultimate Omega to be found in the world of Form. There is no Perfection in the manifest
world. Were the world of Form to find Perfection and utter fulfillment, there would be nothing else for it to do and nowhere else
for it to go: nothing further to want, to desire, to seek, to find: the entire world would cease its search, stop its drive, end its very
movement: would become without motion, time, or space: would become the Formless. But the Formless is already there, on the
other side of the horizon, which is to say, the Formless is already there as the deepest depth of this and every moment.

This Deepest Depth is the desire of all Form, which cannot itself be reached in the world of Form, but rather is the Emptiness of
each and every Form: when all Forms are seen to be always already Formless, then dawns the Nondual empty Ground that is the
Suchness and the Thusness of each and every display. The entire world of Form is always already Perfectly Empty, always already
in the ever-present Condition of all conditions, always already the ultimate Omega that is not the goal of each and every thing but
the Suchness of each and every thing:
just this. The search is always already over, and Forms continue their eternal play as a
gesture of the Divine, not seeking Spirit but expressing Spirit in their every move and motion.

CHAPTER 9. THE WAY UP IS THE WAY DOWN

 1. The ironic point is that Lovejoy displays no comprehension of the unifying Heart that integrates these two movements (and
about which, strictly speaking, only a “thunderous silence” can be maintained), and so he is baffled by the actual nature of the
ensuing titanic battle between the Descenders and the Ascenders, and, most lamentably, passes over those systems—such as
that of Plotinus—that perfectly integrate the two. But, like a good reporter, he gives us all the necessary information to flesh out
the picture for ourselves.

I should also mention that Lovejoy is not an advocate of the ideas whose history he is tracing; as for the Great Chain and its
three main tenets, Lovejoy himself rejects two of them (as I will explain); so I am not quoting from an authority predisposed to
support my position. Lovejoy, we would say, is a hostile witness, but no matter.

 2. P. 41. All quotes, unless otherwise indicated, are from The great chain of being. As for the pure Ascending One being
timeless, unchanging, eternal, etc., there are several reasons to suppose that this was a direct spiritual intuition whose historical
origin (in the West) we might trace to Parmenides. What I am about to suggest is rather speculative, but I believe future research
will tend to bear it out. The facts are fairly straightforward; their interpretation is tricky.

“One day, around 460 B.C., the great philosopher Parmenides came to town accompanied by his pupil Zeno. Parmenides
impressed Socrates with the idea of Permanence. Reality, Parmenides argued, is Unchanging. Zeno supported his mentor’s
position by reducing to absurdity any assertion that motion and change really do exist” (Cavalier, Plato, p. 31).

That is a popular account of the story Plato gives in the dialogue entitled Parmenides. Zeno’s “demonstrations” have usually
been taken as an example of a certain type of philosophical argument (dialectical refutation), and I do not doubt that they were
that. But if they are compared with, for example, similar dialectical arguments put forth by the Buddhist genius Nagarjuna, it
appears Zeno (and Parmenides) might have been attempting something else as well: namely, a direct pointing to reality freed of
all differentiating conceptualizations.

Reading the remaining fragments of Parmenides, one gets the strongest impression that he had directly glimpsed the causal,
formless “One,” against which all manifest objects are fleeting and ultimately unreal shadows. He thus makes the standard
distinction (as does Nagarjuna) between the Way of Truth and the Way of Appearance. To the world of appearance belongs all
differentiation, all generation and destruction, all motion and change, whereas the Truth is as it is, perfectly self-existing, and not
open to any differentiation or distinctions of any sort. As many scholars have noted, the Way of Truth is seeing the world sub
specie aeternitatis, and not according to the mere beliefs of mortals or the Way of Appearance.

If we take his assertion that motion does not exist as being literally true, then Parmenides has to be seen as being rather
confused. But if these statements were in fact part of the “pointing out instructions” for recognizing primordial awareness (free of
differentiating conceptualization), then they take on rather profound meaning.

From Dzogchen Buddhism to Vedanta Hinduism, for example, we often find statements such as “that which moves is not Real.”
This is not to deny relative motion; it is rather an attempt to directly point to primordial awareness which is prior to motion or
rest, which doesn’t enter the stream of time as a particular object (moving or resting), but rather is the immediateness—the
opening or clearing—in which all objects arise and fall.

This primordial awareness (itself neither at rest nor in motion) can in fact be rather easily pointed out to somebody using these
types of “pointing out instructions” (as evidenced, for example, in Dzogchen training [see The eye of spirit, chap. 12, and One
taste for examples of pointing out instructions]). Reading Parmenides, I get the distinct impression that this was in fact a large
part of what he was attempting. In numerous places it seems simply unmistakable. Parmenides thoroughly and continuously
denies any description of the world that presupposes that difference is real: he is directly pointing to the One, which can be
found in one’s own direct awareness prior to differentiation.

Thus, Parmenides’s Absolute wasn’t literally a round sphere, as many scholars have supposed, but simply the completeness
and fullness of Being in itself, prior to differentiation and prior to the Way of Appearance. And the dialectic was in part a way to
directly point to reality prior to its differentiation and illusory appearances, in which mortals become lost because they mistake
these appearances for the undivided Truth.

If this is so, then to Parmenides goes the honor of being the first influential Westerner (as far as I can tell) to penetrate to the
causal One, however briefly (although perhaps this might also be traced to Parmenides’s own teacher, whom tradition names as
the Pythagorean Ameinias).

Some scholars believe the meeting with Socrates actually occurred; others believe its invention was a liberty taken by Plato.
But the dates match up fairly well: Parmenides would have been about sixty-five, Zeno about forty, and Socrates “very young.” I
am inclined to the view that the meeting occurred; but in either case the influence of Parmenides on subsequent Greek thought is
undeniable. Moreover, the scholar T. Murti, whose Central philosophy of Buddhism is generally regarded as the finest treatment
of Nagarjuna in English, points to Plato’s Parmenides as the first real dialectic in the West that is similar to Nagarjuna’s. Whether
Plato fictionalized the meeting or not, that he chose Parmenides to present the dialectic shows that the meeting—if not
“historical” then certainly “philosophical”—had profound meaning for him. And it makes all the more credible Plato’s assertions
that what he was really up to could not be put into written words, but had to be pointed out directly, from teacher to pupil, by a
sudden illumination.

 3. P. 42. My italics.
 4. P. 45. My italics.
 5. P. 45. My italics.
 6. P. 53. My italics.
 7. P. 49.
 8. P. 48. My italics. I believe that this integration was grounded in a direct taste of causal/nondual awareness (however brief or
initial it might have been; remember Teresa’s point: one taste can be transformative). There can be no doubt that his Neoplatonic
descendants thought so, and no doubt that they themselves inculcated this practice (as we will see with Plotinus). But at the very

least, it is quite obvious that the overall Platonic theory involved this integration of Ascent and Descent, as Lovejoy makes quite
clear.

 9. This negation-and-affirmation (negate and preserve!) is found in all nondual contemplative schools. In Zen, to give only one
example, it is said, “If all things return to the One, to what does the One return?” The answer: “The Many” (though the student
has to demonstrate this understanding and not merely verbalize it; repeating the signifier without the developmental signified
earns only a whack from the Master). So also the famous: “Before I studied Zen, mountains were mountains; when studying Zen,
mountains were no longer mountains; when I finished studying Zen, mountains were once again mountains.” The dividing line is
the realization of Emptiness, or pure formless awareness (mountains were not mountains), in which all things then perfectly and
freely arise as Emptiness just as they are (mountains were once again mountains, self-liberating). But one has first to realize the
great death of Emptiness, or one remains merely lost in the mountains (shadows).

10. Hamilton (trans.), Phaedrus, p. 52. My italics.
11. Phaedrus, pp. 54–56.
12. Later in this chapter, we will see that Thanatos integrated is not the “death instinct” but Agape; Agape divorced from Eros

becomes Thanatos, the death instinct.

In Eye to eye I pointed out that the life and death “instincts” or drives or forces have actually been used by theoreticians in
two very different ways, which we might call vertical and horizontal. “Vertical life” is Ascent or Eros, as I am using it here (a move
to higher and wider integrations), and “vertical death” is Thanatos (a move to lower and shallower occasions, thus less unified,
resulting ultimately in insentient holons).

“Horizontal life,” on the other hand, refers to the preservation of the elements of any given level, and “horizontal death”
refers to the negation or surrendering of those elements. Thus, vertical Life (Eros) accepts the death or negation of a previous
level while preserving its elements: it negates and preserves: a greater Life involves the death of the lesser life.

Thus, horizontal death is part of greater Life, whereas vertical Death is simply dissolution. This, of course, is a semantic
nightmare, but failure to distinguish these different types of “life and death” have led to numerous theoretical difficulties (see
Eye to eye, chap. 7, for an extensive discussion of these issues).

13. I.20–21. All quotes, unless otherwise indicated, are from Inge, The philosophy of Plotinus, vols. 1 & 2, indicated as I and II.
14. I.120. These are Inge’s words paraphrasing Porphyry.
15. Again, experience is the wrong word; the Nondual is not an experience, but the vast openness in which all experiences
come and go; the “apprehension” of the nondual carries with it an exhausting of any interest in merely experiential endeavors.
Nonetheless, “direct experience” has the advantage of conveying the fact that this realization is not simply theoretical or abstract
or whatnot (which is why I will continue to use “direct experience” on occasion).

Porphyry reports that he had four major breakthroughs or “satoris,” if we may call them that; Plotinus tells us only that he
himself had the realization “often,” as in “often the case” or “typical.” Karl Jaspers comments, “What, according to Porphyry,
would seem to have been a rare, anomalous experience, is, in the statement of Plotinus, the natural reality.”

Also noteworthy is that, whereas the mystical experiences of the psychic and subtle level are often quite dramatic, ecstatic,
and extraordinary (and they are indeed experiences), the causal/nondual realization is usually “ordinary,” “nothing special,”
simply because it is a realization of the divine in every single ordinary act. Thus when Jaspers, also known for his extensive work
on psychopathology, reports the following, it is very telling: “Ecstatic states and mystical experiences play an important part in the
history of all cultures. They are a field of psychological observation in which certain basic forms of experience always recur [what
we call the deep structures of the psychic and subtle]. Plotinus’s transcending of thought seems to differ from such experience.
His accounts contain the barest minimum of psychological phenomena and no psychopathological indications whatever. One is
impressed by the simplicity of his communication from the depths” (Great philosophers, p. 55).

16. This is the Upper-Left quadrant, including the higher or transpersonal stages discussed in the last chapter. This is not to
imply that Plotinus or Aurobindo were necessarily ultimate Realizers in a permanent or perfected sense, but that they are superb
representatives of a full-spectrum approach to human growth and development based on their own experiential disclosures of
the higher domains.

17. II.134. My italics.
18. II.ix, 137.
19. II.58–59.
20. II.139. My italics.
21. He refers to it as “the within that is not within”—i.e., the within that is without, or subject-object nonduality.
22. II.xi. Jaspers emphasizes: “Plotinus’s writings are an unexcelled record of this fundamental experience. The experience he
pursues is not one that is enjoyed as an event in time; it pervades all moments of [time and] existence and is the source of all
meaning. He actually experienced as a perfect whole what in this immanent world we can know only in the duality of loving and
loved, beholding and beheld, that is, he experienced the goal that gives our imperfect yearning its direction” (p. 54).

I would amend that slightly to say that an experience that is not in time is not really an experience in the typical sense of the

word, but rather the ground or opening in which all experiences arise (since experiences have a beginning and an end in time).
This nondual realization is the immediateness of all experience and is not itself any particular experience. This, of course, could be
said for any nondual realizer, from Buddha to Christ to Krishna to al-Hallaj, as their own teachings make quite clear. But it is not
just the “highest goal” that Plotinus “experiences” or realizes and asks us to experimentally reproduce in the laboratory of our
own awareness; it is every developmental stage leading to it, and then the “final” grasp of the Ground that is found in each and
every stage, high or low: the hierarchy, having served its purpose as a ladder, having been long ago abandoned.

23. In other words, these higher stages are as real as any other developmental stages (linguistic, cognitive, ego, moral, etc.).
They are reconstructions of the characteristics repeatedly displayed by those who have developed competence at the particular
stage; they are structured wholes with defining patterns (deep structures) that govern the socioculturally constituted surface
structures; and these deep structures stably emerge in an order than cannot be altered by conditioning. (See Transformations of
consciousness.)

This is similar to Tart’s notion of a “state-specific science,” except that “state” is a very general notion; preop, conop, and
formop, for example, all exist in the “waking state,” and yet they are dramatically different worlds. It is a structure-specific
science, along with a state-specific science, that is required, and one that is additionally reconstructive and not simply
comparative.

The notion of “states” is an important conceptual tool—states do indeed exist—but they cover only discrete possibilities
(hence, “discrete state of consciousness” has replaced “altered state of consciousness”); but it is when discrete states are
converted into enduring traits (structures) that development occurs. See note 17 for chap. 14. [See Integral psychology.]

24. Aristotle had, in De Anima, first outlined the holonic notion of a “higher grade”: each higher grade or level possesses the
essentials of the lower (but not all the incidentals of the lower) plus essential and differentiating characteristics of its own that are
not found in the lower, even though it shares a common boundary with the lower.

25. I.221.
26. This is the whole topic of involution and evolution, a topic that we will be following in all three volumes of this series, each

time adding more perspectives to it.

For the moment, we should note the following: in Plotinus’s view, in evolution or Reflux, if we represent the lowest level as A,
the next level up is A + B, the next is A + B + C, and so on. But in involution or efflux, if we start with the highest and represent it as
A, the next level down is A – B, the next is A – B – C, and so forth, since each involutionary efflux is a subtraction or a stepping-
down from the ground of its predecessor. This is why Plotinus says that efflux (involution) is to be “understood in minuses.” What
is left over after all subtractions—namely, matter—is thus also that which is most
(most basic) for the whole
sequence, and that which is still present, even in the lowest realm, I have summarized with the twenty tenets (which are
therefore operative in all domains as well, since they are what even the least possess: the weakest noodle science).

fundamental

For Plotinus, in efflux or ontological essence, destroy any higher dimension and you destroy all lower, which is the opposite of
evolution, where manifestation, because it is being built back up to Unity, rests upon each previous lower manifestation. Plotinus
emphasizes both: that the higher is in no way dependent upon the lower for its being or essence, but does depend upon it for its
manifestation. (Here Plotinus and Hegel would part company; contemplative evidence supports Plotinus, as does Aurobindo’s
view.)

For a good introduction to this topic (without the twenty tenets), see Schumacher’s Guide for the perplexed.
To such questions as, Where was mind before it emerged? Plotinus would answer, Where was two plus two equals four?

Everywhere and nowhere.

This phenomenon—namely, the presence of the higher pre-ontological worldspaces as present structural potentials in the
human bodymind—is behind a vast number of theories attempting to account for and describe the involutional or Descending
currents in the Kosmos and in the human being. Mystical experiences (of a psychic, subtle, causal, or nondual nature) are so
common to humankind, and share at least a broad similarity wherever they occur (despite the inevitable cultural colorings given
to them)—and when they do occur, virtually all of them carry the overwhelming conviction that one is not stumbling onto
something sui generis, made up, constructed at the moment, or fabricated by the individual human mind; rather, one has the
overwhelming apprehension that one is recognizing something once known but long forgotten, that one is being ushered into a
worldspace that in some extremely fundamental sense existed prior to its recognition: it was there all along, just not seen.

And one of the many amazing things about mystical experiences is that, however much culture does indeed mold these
apprehensions, more often than not the apprehensions do not confirm a person in his or her cultural beliefs, but totally explode
any cultural beliefs imaginable: the person is totally undone, like Paul on the road to Damascus, or totally surprised, or completely
taken aback. Die-hard materialists can have these experiences as easily as purebred idealists, and both are completely stunned
into awestruck silence: the depths of the Mystery are disclosing themselves, and a muted mind must only bend in reverential
awe.

The involutionary theories—from Plotinus to Hegel,

from
Abhinavagupta to the Lankavatara Sutra—are all attempts to take into account that the depths of the higher structural potentials

from Asanga to Aurobindo,

from Schelling to Shankara,

are already present but not seen. This is not so different from mathematics (and, indeed mathematics is usually included in the
involutionary theories): granted that math is only formulated by the human mind, do we really think that mathematics applies
only to the human mind? Or that its patterns weren’t operating prior to the emergence of the human brain?

The involutionary theories would rather say that the formative tendencies and patterns of the Kosmos that produced the
human brain are being, to some degree, recognized by that brain: in this special sense, they are dis-coveries, un-coveries, re-
cognitions, anamnesias, recollections, apprehensions of patterns and worldspaces present as potentials but only now being
actualized or apprehended in individual cases.

This in no way denies that the surface structures of these worldspaces have to be worked out in cultural, historical, social, and
intentional settings. Nor does it deny or denigrate the fact that human beings must,
in large measure, work out their
nondetermined fate with diligence. It only says that the apprehension is in some profound sense embedded in the structure and
the dynamic process of the Kosmos as well—it is not merely a subjective, personal, idiosyncratic fantasy—and this is why the
mystical experiences always carry the sense of recognition and rediscovery, however initially surprising.

Many of the involutionary theories are admittedly rather crude by today’s analytic standards. Plato’s recollection of the Forms
was always molded on a type of Pythagorean mathematics that we would now view as rather limited; Hegel’s Logic (precisely the
attempt to articulate the potential patterns present prior to manifestation but not apart from manifestation, patterns that would
then unfold in evolution or development)—is terribly dated and culturally situated; Shankara’s archetypes are still loaded with
mythic and culturally bound Forms; Plotinus’s Efflux is limited by the particular knowledge of the world disclosed at that time;
Asanga and Vasubandhu’s alayavijnana is perhaps more sophisticated in that the supra-individual Forms are the sum total of
Kosmic memory-habits, but suffers from not being able to articulate the origination of such memories (the Hua-yen philosophy of
causation by mutual interpenetration would arise to address just that lack).

Nonetheless, all of those are sincere attempts to outline involution, and all of them absolutely agree on the central and crucial
issue: the presence of the higher worldspaces as potentials given to us now, but not yet realized. And in that deep form, the
mystics of the world are in virtually unanimous and unyielding agreement, and this on the basis of their experiential evidence
disclosed and discussed in a community of intersubjective interpreters. It is the only interpretation that makes sense of the
mystical experience: a Kosmic depth disclosed, not an individual subjective fantasy conjured up.

27. The concepts “potential” and “actual” go back particularly to Aristotle, where Matter is pure potential and Form is
actuality; the lower is in the higher potentially, the higher is in the lower actually; or the higher is the actual of which the lower is
potential—the lower the level, the more it is “infected” with mere potentiality; the higher the level, the more actual, less
potential. Plotinus generally follows suit. Modern usage would keep the meaning but often reverse the semantics, saying that the
higher is an unrealized potential in (or for) the lower that needs to be realized or actualized in its own case; it comes to the same
thing, and the meaning is as expressed in the paragraph.

28. Inge, I.248. Plotinus has a remarkable theory of the self, which is still altogether viable. Aside from the notion that we have
“two souls” (the timeless witness and the temporal self), the self (or Soul) for Plotinus has two different meanings. One, it is a
particular level or dimension of existence—the World Soul (or psychic level). But two, the Soul is what we moderns would call the
“self-system,” the actual navigator of the great holarchy—not a particular stage but the “traveler” of each stage; not a rung in the
ladder but the climber of the ladder. As such, the Soul or self-system can span the entire spectrum of development (except the
higher limits, where it is transcended or becomes the Absolute). Inge: “It [the Soul] touches every grade in the hierarchies of value
and existence, from the super-essential Absolute to the infra-essential Matter. It has its own centre, a life proper to itself; but it
can expand infinitely in every direction. No limit has been set to its possible expansion” (I.203).

Development, then, is a case of the Soul growing and expanding, taking more and more of the external world into itself, as
Plotinus puts it. And what causes the Soul to be at a particular level of development? According to Plotinus, “All souls are
potentially all things. Each of them is characterized by the faculty which it chiefly exercises. The souls, thus contemplating
different objects, are and become that which they contemplate.” In other words, the level at which the self places its attention is
the level at which it remains: you become what you contemplate.

Therefore, contemplate the One. This begins, Plotinus says, when “loving-kindness burns like a fire” and the Soul immerses
itself in a contemplation of Spirit, where, as Plotinus puts it, “it will see God and itself and the All; it will not at first see itself as the
All, but being unable to find a stopping-place, to fix its own limits and determine where it ceases to be itself, it will give up the
attempt to distinguish itself from universal Being, and will arrive at the All without change of place, abiding there, where the All
has its home”—there being, of course, here (I.203).

Finally, for Plotinus, these dimensions are not just lying around waiting to be perceived in a passive fashion by the Soul.
Plotinus’s theory of perception is one of “making and matching”—perception is active, not passive. This theory, via Schelling,
would lead to much of Gestalt psychology and autopoietic theories of cognition.

29. Taylor, Sources of the self, p. 250.
30. Likewise, Grace is Agape, and is given freely to all; it shines on all as the omega pull of the Source-Goal, urging Eros to
return, to reflux, to that Source. (This doctrine of grace is also extensively found in the East, even—I would say especially—in

Buddhism, where it is behind all forms of guru yoga.)

In Japanese Buddhism, a distinction is made between self-power (Eros) and other-power (grace or Agape), as represented
respectively in Zen and Shin, but both schools agree that the distinction is ultimately based on the subject-object dualism, that
there is neither self nor other, neither eros nor agape—again, Eros and Agape united only in the nondual Heart.

31. As we saw, because Freud didn’t follow Ascent to its true Goal (he stops at rationality), he could not see Descent in its
fullness (as Agape). When “plugged into its source,” Descent is not death but Goodness, the creative Effulgence of the Divine
manifest in and as all things, including “dead” matter.

Even though Freud doesn’t see the Great Circle of Ascent and Descent, he of course makes use of what small segment of it he
does understand: in psychoanalytic therapy, one engages in “regression in service of ego”—that is, one descends back into a
lower level that was alienated and split off by fear and anxiety (by Phobos), reintegrates that level by embracing it with love and
acceptance (Agape), and thus releases that lower level from being a regressive pull, releases it from being in the grips of
Thanatos, and allows it to rejoin the ongoing march of a higher identity and a wider love of others (Eros).

But Freud, fractured note to Plato, cannot see all this in its larger context. Descent, for Freud, is merely destruction, which is
true only when it is disconnected from Ascent; he therefore cannot see that Descent is the creative movement of emanation, of
superabundance, of spiritual overflowing that reaches even into matter and glorifies all that it finds and all that it creates—and
manifests then not as death but as Goodness.

32. I.198, 205.
33. I.254.
34. This is why even Plato and Plotinus,

situated in an average-mode mythic worldview, would dramatically underrate,
although not ignore, the power and importance of empiricism; not even Aristotle would grasp the importance of empirical
measurement. Plotinus (and Plato) were situated in an average-mode mythological background worldview (mythic-rational),
against which they had to fight (while delicately and unavoidably embracing aspects of it). They spoke from the center of a mythic
worldview, even as their own substantive Reason transcended it, and even as their own contemplation transcended Reason; but
mythically situated they could not avoid. The mythic was simply the average level of consciousness, so of course some
individuals could move beyond it, but of course they still had to speak through it to some degree.

Rationality, as a basic organizing principle of average consciousness, was indeed deeper and wider than mythology, and that
was its positive and evolutionary advance, which allowed the Enlightenment philosophes to wildly deconstruct so much of the
predecessor worldview: they no doubt had a great deal of truth on their side. But differentiating the Big Three is one thing;
subsequently collapsing the Big Three to the Big One (flatland holistic systems-language, it-language, the Right-Hand path, the
monological gaze): that was something else altogether.

Plotinus, and Plato, were of course using rationality (and beyond), but, precisely because they were not situated in the
monological climate of early modernity (lucky in that regard!), the rationality was fuller and deeper and truer to itself; it was, as
Taylor points out, substantive and dialectical and dialogical, not merely instrumental and procedural and monological.

But with the shift in average-mode worldview from mythic-rational to rational (for that was the Enlightenment), then reason,
captured first by its positivistic powers, saw the entire Kosmos in terms of its Right-Hand or exterior or empirical components, and
thus the multidimensional Kosmos collapsed into the flatland holism of interlocking orders, with everything in the cosmos
interlocking so tightly (“they were wont to discourse at length on the Great Universal System”) that no Left-Hand component
(whether soul or consciousness or introspection or interpretation) had any place at all. All things being merely strands in the web
meant that all things were merely instrumental, and thus there was only a technological, monological, instrumental mode of
reason.

We will return to this in more specific detail in chapters 12 and 13.

CHAPTER 10. THIS-WORLDLY, OTHERWORLDLY

  1. The “One,” strictly speaking, refers to causal-level absorption, whether that causal level is viewed as Source (of involution)
or Summit (of evolution). But I will sometimes use One, as does Plotinus, to also mean the Absolute as Nondual (ultimate)
Ground. The same is true for terms such as Godhead and Spirit—they can mean causal oneness or ultimate nondualism (this
double usage is found in Ramana Maharshi and many others). I will do this only when the context makes clear, I believe, which
meaning is intended. This is always difficult, because there are only so many words to go around; but the realizations and the
meanings are indeed distinct.

  2. II.62.
  3. II.62. If by “One” we mean the infinite, by “All” we mean the sum total of finite manifestation, and by “Each” we mean each
particular manifestation, the Non-dual “stance” is: One-in-Each, Each-is-One, Each-in-All, All-in-Each, One-in-All. The pantheistic
stance as popularly advanced is: One-is-All, Each-in-All. The holographic “paradigm” is: Each-in-All, All-in-Each; as an overall
worldview, this is magical syncretism (which is why it is often hooked up with foraging worldviews).

When the Nondual traditions speak of the One-in-the-Many and the Many-in-the-One, they mean the One-in-Each-and-All and

Each-and-All-is-the-One.

The realization of One-in-Many and Many-in-One, is, of course, common and definitive for all Nondual schools, whether of the
East or the West. D. T. Suzuki, for example, maintained that the essence of Zen realization is contained in the Avatamsaka Sutra,
where the interpenetration of the Absolute (li) and the relative (shih)—One-in-Each (shih li wu ai)—allows the complete
interpenetration of the Each with Each and All (shih shih wu ai)—precisely Plotinus’s point.

At the same time, the “final” philosophical position of Zen, and all of Mahayana, is expressed in the Vimalakirti-Nirdesha Sutra,
which is a discourse on Nonduality. Each of the assembled sages gives his or her definition of Nonduality: it is the not-twoness of
nirvana and samsara, it is the not-twoness of enlightenment and passions, it is the not-twoness of the many and the one, and so
forth. The “correct” answer is finally given by Vimalakirti, who responds with “a thunderous silence.”

  4. That is to say, to each of those propositions corresponds a direct, repeatable, experiential disclosure, as interpreted in a

community of those who have mastered the paradigm and displayed competence in the injunctions and exemplars.

  5. Lovejoy, Great chain, p. 55.
  6. Inge points out that not only are efflux and reflux nondual in Plotinus, but even Matter and Form—that intractable Greek
dualism—“together are one illuminated reality.” Inge points out that this nonduality can be clearly traced back to Plato—it is
certain Plotinus thinks so—and thus Inge (among others) concludes flat-out that “Platonism is not dualistic.”

  7. Early Buddhism was a pure causal-level Ascending endeavor: flee the Many, hold only to the Unmanifest; samsara, the
world of illusion, was to be altogether transcended in nirvana (and the pure cessation of nirodh), and the two (samsara and
nirvana) are diametrically opposed; it was, in all essential respects, a pure Gnosticism.

Nagarjuna’s Mahayana (Madhyamika) revolution, on the other hand, was Non-dual (advaya) to the core, seeing that nirvana
and samsara are “not two,” which also gave rise to tantric or Vajrayana Buddhism, where even the lowest defilements were seen
to be perfect expressions of primordial wakefulness (rigpa). This is Plotinian through and through. Interestingly, Plotinus and
Nagarjuna lived around the same century (second–third century CE).

Thus, when Nagarjuna begins his attacks on the schools that he feels are the most distorted and partial, he does not so much
attack Hinduism, as might be expected from a Buddhist. He mostly attacks early Buddhism (Theravadin and Abhidharma) with a
vengeance; his attacks are unrelenting and powerful and altogether convincing. This is so similar to Plotinus’s attack on the
Gnostics that one is tempted is say that the World Soul was, at that particular time, definitely trying to win through to a new level
of spiritual realization (namely, Nondual), and tapped these two extraordinary individuals on the shoulders to carry out the task.

But whatever the cause, these two souls wrought historically unparalleled spiritual revolutions in the West and the East. It is
only a slight exaggeration to say that virtually every Nondual tradition in both East and West traces its lineage, in whole or part, to
Plotinus or Nagarjuna.

In the West, Christianity was lifted out of its mere mythic involvements, and into contemplative endeavors, by the efforts of
such as Augustine and Saint Dionysius, both directly and deeply influenced by Plotinus; from them it would influence virtually
every subsequent Christian mystic, including Saint Teresa, Saint John, Dame Julian, Cusanus, Bruno, Blake, Boehme, and Eckhart.
Plotinus would further be a main influence on Novalis and Schelling, and thus the entire Romantic-Idealistic movements (and
from there to Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, Emerson, William James, Royce). Neoplatonism was likewise a major influence on Jewish
mysticism (Kabbalah and Hasidism), and on Islamic mysticism (especially Sufism). None of those movements added substantially
to the overall revolution wrought by Plotinus, which is exactly why Benn could maintain that “no other thinker has ever
accomplished a revolution so immediate, so comprehensive, and of such prolonged duration.”

Except Nagarjuna. All schools of Tibetan Buddhism, of Chinese Ch’an and Tien Tai, of Japanese Zen and Shin and Kegon, trace
their lineages directly to Nagarjuna (in whole or part). But not only the extraordinary flowering of Mahayana and Vajrayana rests

on Nagarjuna’s shoulders: his dialectic was a major influence on Shankara, Vedanta’s greatest philosopher-sage (Ramana
Maharshi being one of Shankara’s many descendants), and Shankara’s Nondual (Advaita) Vedanta revolutionized all of
subsequent Indian philosophy/religion (so similar was it in many respects to Nagarjuna’s Madhyamaka that Buddhism simply died
out in India, being almost, as it were, reabsorbed in essentials back into Hinduism).

Thus, around the world, East and West, North and South—it is only a slight exaggeration to say that all Nondual roads lead to

these two most extraordinary souls, world heroes in the truest sense.
(For an extensive discussion of Nagarjuna, see note 1 for chap. 14).
  8. Tillich, A history of Christian thought, p. 374. Both Tillich and I are referring to the mythic components of Christianity, not to
its psychic and subtle-level direct realizations, many of which approached a pure nondual understanding (as we saw with Teresa
and Eckhart). Rather, it is the translation downward into “mythic dissociation” (precisely as defined by Campbell) that I am here
discussing, because this mythic dissociation, particularly in regard to the Incarnation (Descent) and the Ascension (Ascent), came
to thoroughly define essential Christianity, divorce it from other religions, and set an entire tone for the culture it would
subsequently define. God created this world (which indeed manifests Goodness to that degree), but our final destiny can be
found nowhere in this world (the classical Ascending ideal of mythic dissociation).

  9. History of Christian thought, p. 395.
10. They were a source of what Peter Berger calls nihilation, which, as I view it, is any threat to the cultural translation process
of generating meaning and its correlative form of social integration and stability. And, as Berger points out, nihilation needs to be
countered with therapia, or a dislodging of the source of nihilation. (Nihilation is the threatened negation of a given level of
translation; therapia is the preservation or restoration of that level. Transformation or transcendence, on the other hand, is the
negation and preservation of that level: its nihilation in a greater therapia or Eros that embraces and preserves—Agape—its own
accomplishments.)

But since cultures generally must preserve their own average-level mode of translation (as the source of social stability and
cultural cohesion) and ward off all negating threats, then all threats are simply and generically viewed as nihilation, and massive
measures of therapia (including coercion to the cultural paradigm) are brought into play (cf. Foucault). In rational societies, we
simply label someone “outlaw” and lock them up, or “mad” or “insane” and then drug them out of our misery (see A sociable
God for a distinction between pre-law and trans-law, two very different forms of outlaw, but both of which are nonetheless
simply viewed as nihilation to the average-mode cultural paradigm, and both of which are strenuously “marginalized”). But in
mythic societies, the nihilating offense is much more consequential, because an insult to the state is also an insult to God, and
thus anything from excommunication to burning at the stake will be required for cultural therapia. Because the Big Three aren’t
differentiated in mythic cultures, a threat to any one is a threat to all three, and must be treated accordingly.

11. We see this already happening with the Apostolic Fathers, particularly Clement of Rome and Ignatius of Antioch. The
original “preachers” of early Christianity, apart from the apostles, were the traveling “pneumatics,” those in whom “spirit was
alive” as a direct experiential opening. But by the time of the Apostolic Fathers, this “pneumaticism” was on the wane and was, in
fact, viewed as dangerous, because it led to “disorder.” The Apostolic Fathers therefore asked, Why do we even need them?
Everything that needed to be said had already been said, they felt—first in the Old Testament, then in the still-being-drawn-up
New Testament, and codified in the Canon and the Apostles’ Creed, a series of beliefs without any reference to actual
experience. The Church became the ekklesia (ecclesiastic) assembly of Christ, and the only governor of the ekklesia was the local
bishop, who possessed “right belief,” and not the pneumatic or the prophet, who might possess spirit but couldn’t be
“controlled.” The Church was no longer defined as the community of saints, but as the assembly of bishops.

With Tertullian the relationship would become almost purely legal, a matter of proper sacramental rites (whether the person
understood them or not), and thus, for example, baptism could save an infant. From here it was a short step to Cyprian’s binding
of the Spirit to the legal office of the Church. One could become a priest by ordination and not by awakening. A priest was no
longer holy (sanctus) if he was personally awakened or sanctified, but if he simply held the legal office.

Likewise, rituals became “objectively holy” and “binding” even if the giver of them was not subjectively holy, and even if the
receiver of them did not have the faintest idea what was going on—one could be “saved” by ritual sacrament alone and not by
direct experience and evolution: “He who does not have the Church as Mother cannot have God as Father” (Cyprian). For various
complex reasons, Augustine sided with this view, and the Church became structurally a pure mythic-rational legalism.

Finally, since salvation now belonged to the lawyers, grace became the forgiveness of sin (Saint Ambrose) conceived as
breaking the law—“You are forgiven”; gone is the conception of Grace as Deification or discovery of true Self (Saint Clement: “He
who knows himself knows God”).

Much of this is unavoidable in any organized realization; but it obviously can go too far, and this “too far” is part of the

“translation downward” which I am discussing.

12. History of Christian thought.
13. Justin Martyr, the most important of the Apologists, was pivotal in this regard, and is a perfect example of how the
realization of a universal Nous or Mind would be translated downward into an exclusive mythic property. He had three main

points:

(1) “Those who live according to the Logos are Christians.” This is fine; the Logos is the Nous or universal Mind in each of us,
and if a Christian is defined as one who lives in Logos, then to the extent that any of us live in Logos, we can all be called
Christians. This is very similar to D. T. Suzuki saying that all true religion has satori (realization of universal Mind or no-mind) as its
basis, and therefore all true religion has Zen as a basis. There is nothing in Justin’s position so far that is divisive or merely mythic.
(2) “What anybody has said about the truth belongs to us, the Christians.” This is still fine, as Justin has defined these terms. As
Saint Ambrose would later put it, “Whatsoever is true, by whomsoever it is said, is from the Holy Spirit.” All Truth issues forth
from Spirit, and if a Christian is one who is actually living in this Truth, then all Truth belongs to Christians, as defined. Again, this is
indistinguishable from Suzuki’s “All truth is Zen.”

(3) “If the Logos in its fullness had not appeared in Jesus, no salvation would be possible for anybody.” And there Justin steps
over the line, or down the line, and into mythic possessiveness. It follows only from any such line of “Christian” reasoning that the
Logos needed to descend into some particular embodiment or incarnation. If it is understood that Buddha or Krishna or Lao Tzu
was also a complete embodiment (Descent or Incarnation) and realization (Ascent or Ascension) of Spirit, that Jesus is non-
unique, then we have the notion of avatar or world teacher, which is fine. But the only way to claim that just one of them is “the
absolute and unique incarnation of God” is to ground that claim in mythological dogma that is separated out and protected from
reason, from evidence, and from direct spiritual realization, and given a privileged status that is merely sociocentric, not
pneumatocentric, in origin.

And the sad thing about this proprietary stance is that (1) it separates and divides Christians from all other humans and other
world citizens; (2) it divides Christ from all Christians, because Christ is, in the final analysis, unique; and (3) it ultimately divides
God from this world altogether, since the Incarnation and the Ascension, for this earth, both happened only once, no matter how
much the first two genuinely universal points of Justin’s ever-repeated argument are stressed.

Christian apologists are razor-sharp in applying these distinctions, and so you have to put it to them very bluntly: “Is Jesus
Christ unique? Is, to give just one example, Gautama Buddha also an absolute Incarnation and Ascension of the full Logos?” If they
say yes, then they are following genuine or catholic faith, and the only true conclusion of their reasoning; if they say no, they are
still stuck in their local volcano god and his “only begotten.” It will do no good, at this point, to claim that Buddhists are
participating in the same Logos that was uniquely manifested in Jesus. Many modern Christian mystics, incidentally, are perfectly
happy to answer yes.

The Trinitarian Doctrine (three Divine Forms, One Substance) is almost identical to the Buddhist doctrine of the Trikaya (three
Bodies of Buddha), as worked out in The Lotus Sutra, the Lankavatara Sutra, etc., and was designed to answer the same
question: If Buddha-nature (tathagatagarbha) is timeless and eternal, how did it come to appear in the historical person Gautama
Shakyamuni, and what is his relation to it? The answer was also essentially the same: the formless Ground or Truth Body
(Emptiness, the Dharmakaya; Father) appears,
in the world of form, as the Nirmanakaya or Form Body, the historical
manifestation (Gautama; the Son), mediated by the Transformation Body (the Sambhogakaya; Holy Spirit)—all three of which are
different but equal aspects of the Svabhavikakaya (Godhead). But the Buddhists drew the only correct conclusion: there are
therefore potentially an infinite number of equal Sons and Daughters of Dharmakaya; not only is Jesus accepted as a perfect
Nirmanakaya manifestation, it is expected.

14. See Up from Eden.
15. If any other individual fully Ascended, it would destroy the meaning and integration of society on the whole—politically,

morally, and religiously. This is, needless to say, a strong disincentive to Self-realization.

16. As a direct experience, not merely as a verbal claim. It will do no good, for example, to claim that Jehovah is a creation-
centered God or Alpha Source (which is certainly the orthodox claim); many magico-mythic productions are “nondualistic”- or
“holistic”-sounding, as we have seen: the gods and goddesses can be embedded in nature—it rains when they cry, and so forth.
Or “God created both heaven and earth”—the pure Alpha Source, it is said.

But the test is always: is this merely a metaphysical claim, or is it grounded in direct spiritual practice and direct, repeatable,
reproducible experience? Anybody can say “All is One.” The question is, what is the structure of consciousness that actually
authors that statement? Magic? Mythic? Mental? Psychic? Subtle? Causal?—for all can and will claim ultimacy, and all can sound,
on occasion, very “nondual.”

Anybody familiar with my work knows my profound indebtedness to the many great Christian (and Jewish and Islamic) mystics,
who rose above magic, mythic, and rational endeavors to ground a realization in psychic, subtle, and even causal endeavors. My
point, rather, is that the closer they got to that actual Goal, the more they were looked upon with grave suspicion and much
worse, for reasons I have tried to suggest.

17. In Lovejoy, Great chain, p. 68. My italics.
18. Tillich’s summary of Augustine; History of Christian thought, p. 112.
19. The main difference between the Eastern and Western Vedanta is the degree of penetration. The Witness-stance can be
pointed out to most people fairly easily, and they can begin to grasp and feel its implications. This is, we might say, a “beginning

glimpse.”

The next stage is to meditate on this understanding (in the Western sense of “thinking hard about it”), which can lead, as it did
for Descartes, to an actual absorption in the “I AM” state for several hours at a time. This is, so to speak, the second stage of
prolonged absorption, and it can so revolutionize one’s awareness and thoughts that, as Descartes put it, when he emerged from
that state his whole philosophy had been completely formed.

But according to Vedanta (and Zen and Vajrayana, etc.) those states have to be refined and polished and brought to a constant
realization, and not merely a “peak” experience or a “plateau” experience, because it is only in the breakthrough (the dissolution)
of the Witness that the Nondual is recognized. The theories that come out of temporary peak experiences are almost always, to
use an apt metaphor, half-baked. We see this half-bakedness in Augustine and virtually all of his “descendants” (with some happy
exceptions), but at least it is all a step in the right direction, and infinitely preferable to the impossible positivistic attempt to
ground certainty in the exteriorness of things.

Likewise, from Augustine on we would see two radically different approaches to trying to demonstrate (or “prove”) the
existence of God—and, no surprise, they are the Right- and the Left-Hand paths. The Left-Hand path (Augustine’s path) starts with
the interior, with immediate consciousness, and attempts to plumb the depths of that immediateness, of that Basic Wakefulness,
and finds enlightenment or Spirit in the direction of the absolute interior of consciousness, which itself then issues in the
nondual awareness transcending both interior and exterior altogether (the move from the interior to the nondual superior).
This is why virtually all Christian mystical schools would trace their lineage to Augustine (and Dionysius).

The Right-Hand path starts (and ends) with exteriors, and attempts to deduce, logically, the Author of the exterior pattern
(argument from design, ontological argument, first-cause argument, etc.). This is preeminently the path of Saint Thomas, and this
archbattle within the Church has always been between the Augustinians and the Thomists (in their many
is why
forms)—between the interior-mystical-consciousness approaches and the exterior, objectivisitic,
legalistic, dogma-scriptural
approaches (an exterior approach that continues right down to today, with the “modern physics proves the Tao” arguments,
which are all Right-Hand arguments).

the

Augustine would reply, first, that those Right-Hand “proofs” can’t be done (there is no convincing exterior proof) and, second,
even if there were,
transformation of
consciousness, and it is this inner transformation that alone discloses Spirit. Not an objective belief, but a transformation of
will—this alone discloses God, according to Augustine. In this, Augustine is brilliant, original, and altogether compelling.

it would be worthless, because exterior “proof” alone does not result in inner

The difficulty is that this half-baked Witness would play directly into the hands of the disengaged egoic-rationality of the
Enlightenment paradigm. In the Mahayana and tantric traditions, the pure Self or empty Witness transcends all, embraces all, and
thus is situated and embodied in the entire manifest realm (the Dharmakaya or Emptiness has Rupakaya or Form Body). The
disengaged ego of the Enlightenment was fueled in part, no doubt, by an intuition of the Witness (as we will see), but it lacked the
fully baked Rupakaya, its embodiment or embeddedness in the entire world of Form, and these merely dissociated and
disengaged aspects contributed to the “dehumanized humanism” of the Enlightenment.

But when Husserl explains that the world could end and it wouldn’t affect the pure Self, or describes the splitting of the
witnessing self from empirical self (e.g., in section 15 of Cartesian meditations), or when Fichte describes the pure Observing Self
as being infinite and supra-individual Spirit—this is Western Vedanta at its finest. It just needs its Rupakaya.

As for the general similarity of this Western Vedanta with the Eastern—Basic Wakefulness is impossible to doubt because
doubt itself presupposes it—here is only one example from Dzogchen (“the Great Perfection”) Buddhism, generally regarded as
the highest of the Buddha’s teachings (this is from Paltrul’s “Self-Liberated Mind”):

“At times it happens that some meditators say that it is difficult to recognize the nature of the mind [which means, in
Dzogchen, the absolute reality of pure Emptiness or primordial Purity]. Some male or female practitioners believe it to be
impossible to recognize the nature of mind. They become depressed with tears streaming down their cheeks. There is no reason
at all to become sad. It is not at all impossible to recognize. Rest directly in that which thinks that it is impossible to recognize the
nature of the mind, and that is exactly it.”

And as for the Witness itself passing into nonduality beyond subject and object, beyond inside and outside (but embracing
both): “There are some meditators who don’t let their mind rest in itself [basic immediateness], as they should. Instead they let it
watch outwardly or search inwardly. You will neither see nor find the mind by watching outwardly or searching inwardly. There is
no reason whatsoever to watch outwardly or search inwardly. Let go directly into this mind that is watching outwardly or
searching inwardly, and that is exactly it.”
20. History of Christian thought, p. 103.
21. Sources of the self, p. 131.
22. Taylor’s words, Sources of the self, p. 139.
23. History of Christian thought, p. 114.
24. Ibid., p. 121.
25. Great chain of being, p. 84.

26. In fact, the existence of evil was taken as a type of proof for the existence of Goodness. Evil, it was thought, was not an
actual substance or a real existent; it was simply a shadow; but all shadows are cast by Light, the Light of descending Goodness, in
this case. The point was much like Vedanta: manifestation is dualistic, both good and evil come into being as correlative polarities,
and you can’t have one without the other. This was the basis of the famous “optimism” of the seventeenth/eighteenth century,
and it meant almost the opposite of what it would mean for us today, where optimism means you can get rid of evil; then it
meant, you can never get rid of evil, and therefore this is the best world that could actually be constructed (that is, this is the best
of the actually possible worlds). What the Descenders lacked was the other half of the equation, the nondual view: both good and
evil can be transcended.

Parts of this and the next paragraph are a direct paraphrasing of Lovejoy. For an extended discussion of these “two strategies,”
see Da Avabhasa, The dawn horse testament, chap. 18. Da uses alpha and omega in an opposite semantic sense to mine; the
actual meanings are similar.

27. P. 84. There were, of course, many happy exceptions who saw, with Eckhart, Bruno, Cusanus, the way of the coincidentia
oppositorum—saw that the way up and the way down are to be united in every moment of perception. They did not always suffer
happy fates for this realization.

28. Great chain of being, p. 51.
29. Ibid., p. 65.
30. Ibid., p. 58.
31. The Descenders would exclusively claim that there are no gaps anywhere; the Ascenders would emphasize “leaps are

everywhere”—the former embracing flatland, the latter attempting to leap out of it.

Most present-day ecophilosophers, because they are not radically nondual in their approach, are forced to argue the continuity
thesis, which earns for them the charge from critics of being eco-fascists, which bewilders the ecophilosophers, who imagine that
a flatland holism is actually a liberating notion.

Lovejoy demonstrates, as I mentioned in chapter 1, that the Great Chain theorists all subscribed to three interrelated notions:
plenitude, continuity, and gradation. And, he points out, there was, and still is, a tension between the second and the third
(namely, “no gaps” and “leaps everywhere”). This is the theoretical tension inherent in emergence theories, an unavoidable
tension still present in today’s biological, social, and psychological developmental theories. For reasons that this tension cannot
be resolved theoretically, see chapter 14, “IOU.”

32. Divine ignorance, III.1.
33. Schumacher, Guide for the perplexed. Schumacher is something of a hero to ecologists and environmentalists, and rightly
so, I think; but they are utterly perplexed by his complete and enthusiastic embrace of hierarchy, precisely because they confuse
hierarchy with pathological hierarchy and thus fail to understand that the only way to construct a genuine holism is via a genuine
holarchy—flatland holism is not holism at all, but a heapism and a reductionism that produces not deep ecology but span ecology.

34. Great chain of being, p. 120.
35. Ibid., p. 119.
36. Ibid., p. 207, 186.

CHAPTER 11. BRAVE NEW WORLD

  1. Taylor, Sources of the self, p. x.
  2. My general claim is that most of the aspects of modernity that many theorists have seen as positive and beneficial can in
fact be resolved into variations on “No more myths” (since that also includes a transformation from conop to formop and thus a
differentiation of the Big Three, the specific “dignity” of modernity); and likewise, most of the aspects of modernity that have
been harshly criticized by theorists can be resolved into variations on “No more Ascent!” (since that also includes the loss of a
grounding in a source and a context that provided substantive integration and meaning, and set the rational-ego and its
instrumental-purposive reason afloat in a world that no longer cared).

  3. Their relational exchange was not merely with society at large, which would not comprehend their endeavors; their
relational exchanges occurred in the microcommunities or sanghas or lodges or academies of the like-minded, like-spirited, like-
depthed; just as, in our culture today, many people fall below, and a few above, the typical expectable level of consciousness,
morality, cognition, and so forth.

  4. As we saw, referents exist only in worldspaces (a given referent exists only in a given worldspace). And worldspaces are not
simply arbitrary interpretations of a pregiven monological cosmos; rather, worldspaces are embedded in the Kosmos, and are
constrained accurately by the depth that they can register (or make and match).

  5. Quoted in Taylor, Hegel, p. 4.
  6. See Feuerstein’s Structures of consciousness

available in English translation.

for a superb elucidation of Gebser’s work, which only recently became

  7. Tillich, p. 333. One of the reasons for all of this, I am suggesting, other than the emergence of rationality itself, is that since
the Ascendent One is no longer admitted, it becomes the Descendent or manifest All or Whole in which now resides Providence
or Harmony; it is no longer the relation of Each and All to the One but merely of Each to the All—it emphasized, as I said, the
descending “systems theory” of Plenitude, which is correct as far as it goes, but is only “half” the story.

In the terms of Kegon (or Hua-yen) philosophy of Chinese Buddhism (which is often misappropriated as a systems theory),
there are four main principles of reality. The first is shih, or individual phenomena. The second is li, or absolute noumenon. The
third is shih li wu ai
(between
phenomenon and phenomenon there is no obstruction—that is, all phenomena interpenetrate). Systems theory is the last tenet,
with no understanding of li, the absolute.

(between absolute and phenomena there is no obstruction). The fourth is shih shih wu ai

  8. Lovejoy, Great chain, p. 201.
  9. Tillich, History of Christian thought, p. 328.
10. All Chafetz quotes in this section are from Sex and advantage, chap. 1. All italics are mine.
11. Thus, the shift from the hoe to the plow—itself driven by the vastly superior capacity of the plow to produce
foodstuffs—meant a massive shift from a female-participatory to a predominantly male productive work force, and thus the
public/productive sphere shifted away from that 50–50 balance toward male specialization and monopolization—driven, as
Chafetz indicates, by efficiency and expediency.

The same shift from “matrifocal” or “bifocal” modes of production toward patriarchal modes would occur in societies that
were based on the mounted horse; an astonishing 97 percent of such societies were patrifocal/patriarchal (Lenski). This general
shift from matrifocal/bifocal to patriarchal—the development of the plow and horse—began around 3000 BCE, and accelerated
around 1000 BCE, especially with the invention of iron (swords and plows). The evidence (presented in vol. 2) shows quite clearly
that ideology had virtually nothing to do with this transformation; different ideologies were woven around the same basic
transformation in the infrastructure; and in all cases, ideology followed the base (e.g., male deities replaced female deities only
after the horse and/or plow was introduced, not before).

Much has been made of this shift from matrifocal or bifocal modes (“equalitarian”) to patriarchal modes by feminists who tend
to see women as powerless victims, despite the fact that such oppression theories have consistently failed to match available
data. As Habermas points out, these “imposition theories” are now regarded as empirically refuted (the evidence for this is
presented in vol. 2).

The great advantage of the more recent feminist theories (from Chafetz to Nielsen, not to mention the popular rise of “power
feminists”), other than matching the evidence, is that they refuse to paint women as subjugated sheep, and see them instead as
equal co-creators, under the given circumstances, of the various forms of social interaction: it is overwhelmingly empowering to
the female, and converts her from “defined by an Other” to “co-definer with an Other”—at each and every stage of human
development.

Most first- and second-wave feminists were thrown off track by the fact that women in other times and places would actually
choose values that did not match their own liberal-Enlightenment heritage, and the choosing of those values was therefore
attributed to an outside force (and not a deliberate choice co-created by the female in the face of difficult circumstances); this
postulating of an outside force inadverdently but automatically defined woman as primarily molded by an Other. This malevolent
Other was simply assumed to be Generic Male, and Oppression Studies 101 was set in motion, with the bizarre goal of
empowering women by first defining them as powerless.

Volume 2 is a look at the third-wave feminists who are quietly but dramatically rewriting the history books, telling the tale not
of women reacting nobly in the face of oppression, but pro-actively making the very best decisions possible in the gruesome
conditions known as life in this biosphere.

12. In volume 2, the correlations between the emergence of egoic-rationality and industrialization are traced. Egoic
instrumental rationality was intimately related with instrumental machinery/industry (Upper-Left and Lower-Right, respectively).
Thus, when Chafetz names industrialization as the single greatest factor in the liberation of the female, she is describing the
Lower-Right aspect of this shift (and I agree). In the LR, industrialization made individual physical strength less and less important,
which again was a factor freeing the female from the subservience inherent in the biosphere. This also explains why historically,
where previous women’s movements had briefly flourished (wherever reason first emerged, such as in Greece or India), they
nonetheless could not be sustained. The material base (LR) had not the industry to sustain the differentiation.

This applies to the other liberation movements as well. Rationality might create a mental space for universal perspectivism and
universal liberation; but industrialization allowed it to manifest. As Amory Lovins has pointed out, industrialization in Europe gave
every man, woman, and child the equivalent power of several slaves (so that today, Lovins calculates, every person in the world
has the average equivalent power of fifty slaves). And that made it all the more likely, and more possible, that actual slavery
could and would be outlawed.

These “Marxist” (or Right-Hand) considerations are part of volume 2, which sets a counterweight to the more “idealistic” (or
Left-Hand) presentation of this volume. My overall point, of course, is that an all-quadrant view would take both into equal

account. The fact that I am not covering the material base in this volume certainly does not mean I am neglecting it or devaluing
it; in many ways, as we will see, it was (and is) often the crucial dimension (particularly for the average-mode consciousness).

Finally, the role of industrialization in the liberation movements puts the ecofeminists in a particularly delicate position. Their
existence as a movement depends upon industrialization, the same industrialization that they must aggressively condemn as
leading to the despoliation of Gaia. They have to bite the hand that feeds them, so to speak. Or, we might say, they are individuals
who are not on speaking terms with their parents. I will explore this tricky situation in volume 2, and point out why the structures
of the centaur are the only ones integrative enough to address this situation.

13. Eisler, Chalice and the blade, p. 165.
14. Equality of men and women in the noosphere—equal access to the public domain of the noosphere and equal rights in that
domain—does not mean that a rigid 50–50 parity must be maintained in all areas. Many feminists believe, for example, that
women as mothers need special legal protections (paid maternity leave, for example); and the topic of women in frontline
combat will probably always be debated with no clearcut winner (although most countries that have tried women in frontline
combat positions—the Soviets in World War II and Israel in the Six-Day War—almost immediately abandoned the practice;
apparently women are more averse to blowing people’s brains out at close range).

Likewise, some feminist researchers believe that, given the unavoidable aspects of childbearing, a “parity” in the

public/productive domain would be around 60–40 male/female.

Parity, in other words, can still take into account some of the biological constants and differences, without letting them
dominate the scene or unfairly prejudice any situation; but a rigid 50–50 parity across the board is probably a bad yardstick.
Nonetheless, whatever we decide about parity, these issues can be consciously and in good will debated, and in all cases that
beats leaving the decision up to a hoe.

15. Eisler, Chalice, p. 151.
16. See, for example, Dale Spender, Feminist theorists: Three centuries of key women thinkers (New York: Pantheon, 1983),

and Mary Beard, Woman as a force in history (New York: Macmillan, 1946).

As for the debate about whether women gained ground or lost it in the Renaissance (compared to the feudal period), Eisler is
correct, I believe, when she states that “in neither period do we find any fundamental alteration of women’s subservience” (p.
227). The subservience, of course, was not primarily to men, but of both men and women to the biosphere.

17. Eisler, Chalice, p. 159.
18. Which is why this type of specific “aesthetic dimension” is not the same as the Upper-Left quadrant per se; aesthetic-
sensory cognition is simply a small part of the early development of the Upper Left; and when Kant uses it in this fashion, it fails
miserably in its assigned task of integrating the Big Three. Higher aesthetic development, which Kant hints at with his notion of
the sublime, would indeed refer to aspects of higher UL developments, but that is not what Kant has in mind for his integrating
link.

Also, I do not simply equate Beauty and Art. Beauty is the transparency of any phenomenon to the One; Art is anything with a

frame around it.

The frame is sometimes an actual frame (as around a painting), or an arch (around a stage), or even air (around a sculpture),
but a frame that always says: look at me. Anything within that frame is Art, whether it be the Mona Lisa or a tomato soup can.
The Mona Lisa is Art and Beauty; the tomato soup can is Art.

(All of these issues, and especially the nature of the Upper-Left quadrant, are discusses in greater detail in volume 3.)
19. If we define modernity loosely as consisting of any or all of the following factors—(1) the differentiation of the Big Three
(Weber); (2) the rise of the philosophy of the subject (Habermas); (3) the rise of instrumental rationality (Heidegger); (4) the
transparency of language (pre-Saussure); (5) the widespread turn within (Taylor); (6) belief in univalent progress—then
postmodernity may be loosely defined as any attempt to develop beyond (or at any rate to respond to) those factors. Foucault,
Habermas, Taylor, Derrida, Lyotard are thus, in very different ways, all postmodern, as I use the term. All are especially united in
the “death of the subject,” the “death of instrumental rationality,” and the “death of univalent progress,” though their proposed
solutions often differ dramatically. The thesis I defend in volume 3 is that all of them are accessing vision-logic in various ways
(integral-aperspectival), and thus all of them are particularly “postmodern.” As for the “postmodernists” who simply and solely
trash reason and the Enlightenment, the world regression, not integration, comes most to mind.

20. Paul Tillich’s claim, and I concur.
21. Tillich, History, p.33.
22. Inge, Philosophy of Plotinus, I.97.
23. Ibid., II.196, I.35. Gutsy Aristotle was more direct and “attributes no scientific or philosophical value to mythology” (II.196).
24. II.24.
25. II.17.
26. I.103.
27. Lovejoy, Great chain, p. 107.

28. Ibid., pp. 99, 111.
29. Ibid., p. 109.
30. Ibid., p. 116.
31. They were both also the first to clearly express the theory of

inherent in decentering rationality. Bruno
maintained that our perception of the world is relative to the position in space and time from which we view it, and consequently
there are as many world-perceptions as there are positions; this monadology had a profound effect on Spinoza and Leibniz.
Cusanus pointed out (in 1440!) that “it is evident that this earth really moves, though it does not seem to do so, for we apprehend
motion only by means of a contrast with some fixed point. If a man on a boat in a stream were unable to see the banks and did
not know that the stream was flowing, how would he comprehend that the boat was moving? Thus it is that, whether a man is on
the earth or the sun or some other star, it will always seem to him that the position he occupies is the motionless centre and that
all other things are in motion.” Rational perspectivism and relativity at its best.

relativity

32. Lovejoy, Great chain, p. 262.
33. Ibid., p. 232.
34. Ibid.
35. Ibid., p. 211.
36. Ibid., p. 184.
37. Ibid., p. 186.
38. Ibid., p. 188.

CHAPTER 12. THE COLLAPSE OF THE KOSMOS

  1. In any of the structures of consciousness development, one can be aware of the Ascending and Descending currents up to
and down from the particular level of one’s present state. Thus, for example, if one has evolved to the mythic level, one has
conscious access to the Ascending current from matter up to that level (i.e., matter to sensation to perception to impulse to
image to symbol to concept to rule), and to the Descending current from that level down to matter (from rule to concept to
symbol to image, etc., to matter). This doesn’t mean that one necessarily can verbalize those ascending and descending currents,
or consciously articulate them and theoretically objectify them; but rather it means that that is the degree and extent to which
one is consciously “plugged in” to the Great Circle of efflux and reflux. At any level of development, then, one can be conscious of
both Ascent and Descent up to and down from that level, and one can therefore emphasize Ascent, or Descent, or both (“up to”
and “down from” that level).

The two currents experientially join, and yield their secret marriage, only at the formless or causal level; prior to that point one
has access only to the arcs up to and down from the present level of development. I will return to the meaning of this when I
discuss Tantra (in volume 2), or the conscious union of the ascending and descending currents in the conjugal Heart.

  2. In Lovejoy, Great chain, p. 191.
  3. Habermas, Philosophical discourse, p. 112.
  4. Ibid., p. 19.
  5. Ibid., pp. 83–84.
Each of the Big Three was already integrated in its own domain (that was the differentiation/integration that constituted the
transformation upward from mythic-rational), but a further differentiation/integration would be necessary to integrate the three
domains themselves into a higher synthesis (the insoluble problems of one level being defused only at the next; the
differentiating component of the new and required differentiation/integration would be—and still is—the differentiation of
consciousness from a preoccupation with the individual domains to the exclusion of the others).
I will argue that the
transformation from formop (and the understanding) to vision-logic was the central platform of the Idealist movement, and that,
in various ways, vision-logic (dialectical, dialogical,
intersubjective,
feeling/vision) remains the cognitive goal, and aperspectival foundation, of the moments of truth of the postmodern theorists
(this is one of the major themes of volumes 2 and 3).

interpenetration of opposites,

integral-aperspectival,

  6. Donald Rothberg also gives a superb short summary of Habermas’s overall view of the result of this reduction: “On such a
basis, there has occurred what Habermas calls ‘the colonization of the lifeworld’: the emergence of models and practices of social
engineering and technical approaches to practical life and subjectivity; the increasing control by ‘experts’ of political and social
relations and subjectivity analyzed by Foucault (Rabinow); and the decline of public spheres of open discussion and debate, that
is, the decline of the core mechanisms ensuring democratic procedures (Habermas). In this way, the potentials of a vital public
realm of informed, practical reason and action, associated with much of the promise of democratic movements, has also been
only partly developed. Similarly, the potentials of modern subjectivity have also been severely constrained through extensive
control,
influence, and commodification.” (“The crisis of modernity and the emergence of socially engaged
spirituality.”)

ideological

  7. Lewis Mumford. The “disqualification” was not due primarily to the quantification or mathematicalization of the world; it
was due primarily to the objectification of the world, to the focusing merely on exterior, Right-Hand surfaces, which, precisely
because they are marked by extension, can be best treated as quantities and thus easily mathematized.

  8. Technically, the interior and exterior holarchies of depth and span were collapsed into only the exterior holarchies of depth
and span. Holarchies were still recognized, as I said (the Upper-Right and Lower-Right domains are both holarchical, and this was
not denied; and these holarchies, like all holarchies, possessed both a depth and a span). However, the only holarchies
acknowledged were holarchies of exteriors, of surfaces that could be seen empirically with the senses or their instrumental
extensions, and thus any values (any Left-Hand correlates) were automatically excluded. Since the interior dimensions were
denied, there were no holarchies of qualitative distinctions, of value, of consciousness, of goods or hypergoods; no
transformations of consciousness required to get at the truth, and no truth other than what could be analytically formulated
around empirical, value-free data.

Thus, even though the Right-Hand path acknowledges holarchies with depth and span, the depths of these holarchies all have
the same value, namely, nothing (that is, they are “value-free” surfaces). And thus, from the view of the interior and Left-Hand
path, all of the “empirical depth” of exterior holarchies (e.g., molecules have more depth than atoms) are no more than variations
on the same span (namely, empirical or functional, and thus based solely on physical size: molecules are bigger than atoms).
Value does not, and cannot, enter.

This collapse is also captured in a shorthand phrase I have been using: vertical and horizontal were collapsed into horizontal
alone (although technically, the correct statement is that vertical and horizontal of the interior and exterior were collapsed into
vertical and horizontal of the exterior alone). In this shorthand, vertical means interior, and horizontal means exterior (just as, in
the same shorthand, depth means interior and span means exterior).

  9. Taylor, Hegel, p. 4.
10. Dreyfus and Rabinow, Michel Foucault, p. 236.
11. Even if the empirical-sensorimotor world were “pregiven” in some fundamental ways—and this is the assumption made by
most practicing scientists—nonetheless the restriction of knowledge to that empirical world is the reductionism that most
concerns me (and that reductionism is the reflection paradigm).

The intrinsic features (Wilfrid Sellars) of the sensorimotor world are indeed, in my opinion, already laid down by evolution prior
to the emergence of rational reflection on that world; the practicing scientist is more or less correct in that regard,
I
believe—fundamental aspects of sensorimotor holons are “pregiven” in that rudimentary sense. (Sensorimotor holons mutually
enact each other and are not absolutely pregiven in that sense; but, relatively speaking, the human mind is handed that enaction
after the fact and begins its work with holons that are in many important respects then preexisting, even though mind will then
enact its own world with those holons as only a component of the overall gestalt; just as, for example, in the Piagetian system
operational cognition works with, but not only with, the holons already delivered to it by sensorimotor cognition.) Empirical
scientific paradigms govern the selection, disclosure, and elaboration, not the in toto creation, of sensorimotor holons (which is
why science, as Kuhn pointed out, can indeed make progress).

But the aspects of those holons that can disclose, and the interpretation of those holons, and the capacity to reflect upon them
in the first place, and the types of conceptual elaborations brought to bear upon the sensorimotor surfaces—all of this is not
pregiven, but rather develops in an intersubjective space of dialogical disclosures.

But the fact that sensorimotor holons are, in at least some important respects, preexisting in the sensorimotor worldspace (a
diamond will indeed cut a piece of glass, no matter what words or what theories we use for “diamond,” “cut,” and “glass”)—was
extended (by the Enlightenment) to the notion that all knowledge is itself merely a recovery, via unproblematic representation,
of altogether preexisting situations. Thus, whereas “diamonds” and “glass” exist in the sensorimotor world, knowledge of the
one cutting the other—and a theory of why it does so—exists only in the rational, not empirical, worldspace, and thus the overall
referents and gestalts of scientific knowledge are not simply lying around in the sensory world waiting for anybody to spot them.
Further, the subject of the knowing itself develops in an intersubjective space that alone discloses aspects of these overall
referents.

Moreover, whereas fundamental aspects of sensorimotor holons were laid down by evolution prior to reflection on them by
rationality (atoms were there, and are there, before reason thinks about them)—whereas, that is, sensorimotor worldspace
holons exist or subsist prior to mental formulation, cultural holons do not. When mind reflects on nature, much of the nature is
preexisting or pre-mental (the sensorimotor components); but when mind interacts with mind, the result is culture, and culture is
not simply preexisting, but is created with the interaction itself. Mind might discover various facts in nature, but mind creates
culture. And in that creation of culture, a reflection paradigm is woefully inadequate, because preexisting holons are not being
discovered, but rather newly created holons are being produced.

And while we can indeed “reflect on” and “represent” these created and produced cultural holons (such as language), we
via objectifying and empirical knowledge, but must also enter into their meaning via

cannot understand them merely
interpretation and hermeneutical disclosures.

The depth of an atom is relatively minor and can, for most practical purposes, be ignored (as in monological inquiry)—mutual
understanding is not really possible and thus not really sought (even though, strictly speaking, the atom still contains depth, and
thus still enacts its world with a type of interpretation, or a bringing forth of the types of distinctions it can respond to: the
atom’s agency is an opening or clearing which mutually enacts its worldspace with similarly depthed holons). As I said, because
this depth is relatively minor, it can be (and is) ignored for most practical purposes of human inquiry.

But as depth increases, less and less can we rely on mere empiricist reflection, on the monological mode; interpretation
becomes more and more a significant portion of the knowledge quest, and interpretive depth can then be ignored only by
inflicting a great deal of violence on the subject of inquiry.

Just so, intersubjective cultural understanding is not merely monological surface perception (or empirical experience), because
mutual understanding requiress interpretation of meaning, intention, and depth, none of which simply sit on the surfaces. The
crucial act of knowing in this case is not monological
interpretation of a depth; not perceiving
patches but interpreting their inner intentions and meanings. No amount of “reflection paradigm” will disclose that which lies
beneath the surface being reflected. When you and I talk, interpretation is the paradigm, depth the medium, intention the hidden
variable, and mutual understanding the goal. And none of that makes it into the reflection paradigm.

reflection on a surface but

But the restriction of all knowledge to monological reflection on preexisting occasions gave the impression that (1) particular
cultural truths were likewise fixed and unchanging, (2) intersubjective processes of knowledge creation had no bearing
whatsoever on disclosure of sensorimotor truths, (3) monological and representational knowledge was the only knowledge worth
pursuing, (4) subjective and intersubjective processes could be reduced to empirical referents, (5) interpretation of depth could
be subsumed in empirical reflection on surfaces. In short, all translogical and all dialogical truth could be reduced to the mute
monological gaze.

It was especially the ignoring of the role of intersubjective processes in the disclosure of objective knowledge, coupled with the
reduction of all knowledge to merely objective “recovery” from an altogether pregiven world—this was the reflection paradigm.
Subjective-I and intersubjective-we processes were reduced to objective-it forms that were thought to be equally recoverable in
simple “representation,” and thus all hermeneutic interpretations, all depth disclosures, all cultural meanings, all deeper and
higher subjective transformations—all were dispensed with in the simple monological gaze at a world of surfaces altogether
“pregiven.” (See also note 12 below.)

12. The interesting point is that empiric-analytic science actually requires, in its practitioners, the arduous transformation from
sensorimotor to preop to conop to formop. But formop is now, in today’s world, the average-expectable level for educated men
and women. Whereas, in previous eras, winning a rational perspective in the midst of a mythological worldview was a difficult
and dangerous task, now, with modernity, the rational structure is so taken for granted that its worldview is simply assumed to
be obvious and pregiven for any educated person.

Foucault makes this point with regard to Descartes. Whereas most previous philosophers had to describe an inner discipline
starts with the

truth—accessible, Descartes simply

and transformation required in order to make truth—even rational
“obvious” rational worldview; he doesn’t have to defend it or explain how to get to it.

Thus, when I say the rational Right-Hand path doesn’t require any transformation, what I mean is that it doesn’t require any
further transformation beyond what is now the average-expectable level of development (formop). Past evolution has already
won this arduous transformation, and so rational science could simply rest on those laurels, so to speak. Nothing higher or
deeper—no exceptional inner transformation or ascesis—is required in order to have access to “all the truth that is fit to know.”

Further, it is this entire series of previous interior transformations—sensorimotor to preop to conop to formop—that “rational
common sense” took entirely for granted, and thus it failed to see that its “common and obvious” world supposedly open to
simple “empirical viewing” was in fact a particular and generated worldspace, many of whose referents were not in fact lying
around waiting to be perceived by all and sundry, but were constituted in an arduous series of Left-Hand transformations, all of
which were taken for granted, all of which were ignored—an ignorance that absolutely crippled its epistemology and reduced it
to “I see the rose,” thus overlooking the crucial fact that the secret of the seeing was in how the “I” was generated in the first
place, and not in how the simple sensation of the rose jumps to that taken-for-granted I. The intersubjectively created
worldspace, which itself allows the disclosure of individuated subjects and objects, was ditched in favor a mindless staring at the
end result (mistaken as a pregiven), a mindless staring at the monological objects thus disclosed.

13. The role of industrialization—the instrumentalization of the economic base—obviously played a central and often
dominant role in the instrumentalization of reason: the positive feedback loop that began to spin out of control precisely in its
attempt to gain further control.

As I have often mentioned, the role of the techno-economic base in the stages of human evolution (and the construction of
various worldviews) is the topic of volume 2. All I can do in this volume is point out that not only am I not ignoring these factors, I
believe they have often been the major (but not sole) determining factors in many of these developments. But this definitely
requires a book-length treatment, and such is volume 2.

14. Taylor, Sources of the self, p. 232.

15. Ibid.
16. Taylor’s summary, ibid., p. 243.
17. Ibid., p. 264.
18. Quoted ibid., p. 265.
19. Hedonic pleasure/pain is almost always the most basic (and often the sole) inner motivation acknowledged by the Right-
Hand path, since that is as far into the interior dimension as they are willing to venture, and since it demands relatively little
interpretation. Since physical sensations are indeed very close to the surface (i.e., very shallow, very low on the holarchy), and
since the Right-Hand theorists have to find something to push their action terms in the first place, physical pleasure/pain works
perfectly for them. It gives them much pleasure, I presume.

As I indicated in a previous note (note 23 for chap. 8), the utilitarian ethic was the unpacking of the Basic Moral Intuition
(preserve and promote the greatest depth for the greatest span) in terms of monological reason, where depth is interpreted as
flatland mono-happiness (or pleasure) and span becomes all rational beings (and sometimes all sentient beings, since they share
the same lowest common denominator): thus, the greatest mono-happiness for the greater numbers. It is worldcentric, but
worldcentric flatland, and recognizes no serious gradations of depth or types of happiness. (This is pursued in volume 3.)

Although in the text I am strongly criticizing the flatland aspects of the utilitarians, the fact that they were one of the first clear
worldcentric-rational ethics should not be overlooked; and, from this perspective, they deserve high praise indeed. It is the
collapse of all motivations into flatland terms and hedonic happiness that I am, of course, criticizing.

20. Freud, of course, would treat his own “discovery” of the pleasure principle as a monumental breakthrough in psychology. It
was actually just a dreary uncovering of the simplest push in the purely Descended world; not exactly something, I would think, to
write home about.

21. For a wonderful discussion of these themes, and a lament of their loss, see Alasdair MacIntyre’s After virtue, 2nd ed.
22. Even though the affirmation of this particular ethic itself steps outside the interlocking order: this ethic devalues other
ethics—that is, it is a hierarchy of value that denies hierarchies of value, as we saw in chapter 1; theories that deny qualitative
distinctions themselves embody a hidden qualitative distinction.

Taylor again perfectly spots this contradiction as it appears in a Bentham or a Helvétius: “These thinkers recognized only one
good: pleasure. The whole point was to do away with the distinction between moral and non-moral goods and make all human
desires equally worthy of consideration. But in the actual content of its tenets, as officially defined, none of this can be said; and
most of it makes no sense.” That is, they valued this theory with a passionate commitment over rival values, when all values were
supposed to be monovalent: they can’t even justify their own stance (Sources of the self, p. 332).

23. Ibid., pp. 282, 264–65.
24. The rejection of higher/deeper motivations was also intensely driven by “No more myths!” being confused with “No more
Ascent!”: all higher aspirations (of any sort) were thought to be nothing but the ways in which religions devalued this world and
were thus willing to impose domination on their subjects in the name of a glorious afterlife (thus confusing all holoarchic
transcendence-and-inclusion with mere mythic dissociation).

It is true that some utilitarians attempted to reintroduce various types or degrees of “happiness” or the “good”; Taylor finds

them all unconvincing (and it is certain Kant and Hegel were completely unimpressed).

25. Taylor, Sources of the self, pp. 328–29; my italics.
26. Flatland holism is always dualistic to the core, not only because it denies Ascent, but because it splits relatively autonomous

agency from the networks of communion on its own level (as we will see in detail).

27. Taylor, Hegel, pp. 22–23.
28. Foucault, “The subject and power,” in Dreyfus and Rabinow, Michel Foucault, pp. 208–209.
29. Taylor spots the same two poles of the Enlightenment paradigm: “The attempts . . . of the radical Enlightenment, of a
Helvétius, a Holbach, a Condorcet, a Bentham were founded on this notion of objectivity, and the age of Enlightenment was
evolving an anthropology which was an amalgam, not entirely consistent, of two things: the notion of self-defining subjectivity
correlative to the new objectivity; and the view of man as part of nature, hence fully under the jurisdiction of this objectivity.
These two aspects did not always sit well together.” To put it mildly. Hegel, p. 10.

Sources of the self

30. Nor is this simply my reading of this extraordinary story. To give only one example now, Charles Taylor’s rather
extraordinary
concludes that the modern (and postmodern) worldview is marked by three main
characteristics: (1) a sense of inwardness (i.e., the Ego); (2) the voice of nature (i.e., the Eco), and (3) the affirmation of ordinary
life (by which Taylor specifically means a denial of a transcendental Source or Ground or ontic Logos, an ordinary life-world that
denies higher qualitative distinctions; in other words, a purely Descended world).

31. Habermas, Philosophical discourse, p. 107.
I would say rather, rationality preserves the concrete operational capacities that are the foundation of myth but negates the

exclusivity of conop that produces myth. Basic structures are preserved, exclusivity structures (and their violence) are negated.

We saw, in chapter 6, that part of the violence inherent in myth is due to the syncretic fusion of various holons that in fact

possess their own dignity and deserve their own individuality. Habermas reaches the same conclusion from a slightly different
angle: “Myth owes the totalizing power with which it integrates all superficially perceived phenomena into a [syncretic] network
of correspondences, similarities, and contrasts”—such as “Seven orifices mean only seven planets can exist,” a stance that
“integrates” its world by doing violence to the Kosmos. “For example, language is not yet [differentiated] from reality to such an
extent that the conventional sign is completely separate from its semantic content and its referents; the linguistic world view
remains interwoven with the order of the world.” This is the “holistic-sounding” syncretism so attractive to the New Age
“paradigm,” which ignores the other (and rather ugly) features that necessarily follow in its wake: “Mythic traditions [therefore]
cannot be revised without danger to the order of things and to the identity of the tribe set within it. Only when contexts of
meaning and reality, when internal and external relationships have been unmixed [differentiated], only when science, morality,
and art are each specialized in one validity claim, when each follows its own respective logic and is cleansed of all cosmological,
theological, and cultural [egocentric and ethocentric] dross—only then can the suspicion arise that the autonomy of the validity
claimed by a theory (whether empirical or normative) is an illusion because secret interests and power claims have crept into its
pores” (Philosophical discourse, pp. 115–16.)

32. Ibid., p. 116.
33. Further, the Ego camp would argue, we cannot say that acting for the good of the whole web can even offer a coherent
guideline for my moral actions. If the whole is really more than the sum of its parts, and if I am basically a part of this greater
whole, then I can never know what the whole actually has in mind, and so I can never genuinely or honestly claim to be acting for
the good of the whole (who knows what the whole is actually up to? It might be using me in ways that I can never even begin to
imagine, and so I can never use “the good of the whole” to guide my individual actions, since the good of the whole is beyond my
knowledge).

On the other hand, if I claim to become “one with the whole,” then I am claiming something that no other part has access to; I
am claiming, in fact, that I am not merely a strand in the web (which is supposed to be my official position, and the position that
is supposed to be the foundation of my ethics, a foundation that I have just negated). Thus, either way, the “strand-in-the-web”
argument fails as a basis for moral action.

34. Taylor, Hegel, p. 32.
35. Kant is, in other words, fighting to introduce a true measure of genuine Ascent into the flatland ethos in general (and the
flatland instrumental-utilitarianholists in particular), and since freedom (and wisdom) is always found in the Ascending current of
Eros, the moral freedom Kant offered was absolutely exhilarating to the entire era. In terms of the overall spectrum of
consciousness, Kant was pointing out that happiness does not reside in merely bodily desire (which is egocentric), but rather
resides in a transformation—an Ascent!—from egocentric and sociocentric (heteronomy) to worldcentric care, a worldcentric
stance that, since it is generated by my own rational will (by my own rational capacity for universal perspectivism), is thus truly
free, truly self-determined, truly autonomous (I would say, relatively more autonomous than its predecessors; even greater
freedoms lie beyond the egoic-rational, as Schelling would soon announce).

But it was Kant’s noble, and in some important ways quite successful, attempt to introduce a real Ascent into the monochrome
and flatland world that would drive Fichte’s culminating insight into the pure Freedom of the pure Self or
infinite supra-
individual Subject, and this Fichtean move of pure Ascent (and the inherent problems of a pure Ascent divorced form Descent)
would trigger the attempted integration with the Descending current (itself often represented by Spinoza; we will return to this in
detail in chapter 13). This problem of integration had already showed up in Kant’s rational Ego divorced from the Eco, and this is
the problem the text in now introducing (alongside the many positive accomplishments of the Ego in general).

36. Thus also the “political atomism” that coexisted uneasily with the “systems harmony” (see fig. 12-6): the holistic world left
no room for the subjective self, and this atomistic self then found in its own hyper-agency none of the communions that would
automatically bind it, and find it, in community, and so consequently the disengaged self had recourse to a variety of social
contract theories, as if selves could and would only come together as a business venture. The Idealists would point out (using
vision-logic) that agency is always agency-in-communion (whether it realizes it or not)—a self is always a self-in-relationship. We
will be returning to this topic, and the twin notions of rights (agency) and responsibilities (communion), throughout this volume.

37. Foucault, Discipline and punish, p. 200. Incidentally, the Age of Man is correctly named in the masculine; it was indeed a
hyperemphasis on the agency that tends to be more characteristic of the male (according to radical feminists, and it’s not hard to
agree with them). Only hyper-agentic males could come up with a theory of community based on a contract. This is explored in
volume 2.

38. Habermas, Philosophical discourse, p. 341.
39. Ibid., p. 246.
40. Ibid., p. 245. Taylor concurs with both Foucault and Habermas, and refers to the “anthropology of the Enlightenment” as

“the ‘objectification’ of human nature” (Hegel, p. 13).

41. This doesn’t mean that the objective study of human and social behavior—the Right-Hand path—is without importance (on
the contrary!). Rather, the point is that when human subjects (and intersubjectivity—“subjects in communication”) are reduced

merely to their objective components, reduced merely to empirical aspects which then claim to be the “only” knowledge—just
then do these endeavors become pseudo-science, because that reduction itself cannot be sustained as a validity claim, or as
genuine knowledge. It can only be sustained as a power drive (according to both Foucault and Habermas).

I would like to add that that power drive is Thanatos. It is the reduction of the higher to the lower. Although, as I will argue in
the text, the central negative motivation of the Ego camps was Phobos, or the fear of the lower, in this particular objectifying
stance their own Thanatos was at work. The new “dehumanizing humanism” was dehumanizing precisely because the
fingerprints of Thanatos were all over the corpse.

When I read Foucault in this light, I am struck by the integrity and the dignity of the man and his absolute outrage at the hand
of Thanatos descending on ordinary citizens in the name of a higher “benevolence” and “enlightenment.” Foucault, I think, will
always be remembered as the great chronicler of the Thanatos underbelly of the Enlightenment paradigm, its monological
reduction of “subjects in communication” to “objects of information,” claiming to be benevolent, ironically enslaving.

42. Habermas, Philosophical discourse, p. 265.
43. “That is to say,” as Habermas summarizes it, “the self-relating subjectivity purchases self-consciousness only at the price of
objectivating internal and external nature. Because the subject has to relate itself constantly to objects both internally and
externally in its knowing and acting [the reflection and production paradigms], it renders itself at once opaque and dependent in
the very acts that are supposed to secure self-knowledge and autonomy. This limitation, built into the structure of the relation-to-
self [retroflected instrumentality], remains unconscious in the process of becoming conscious. From this springs the tendency
toward self-glorification and illusionment, that is, toward absolutizing a given level of reflection and emancipation” (ibid., p. 55).

44. Habermas’s words, Philosophical discourse, pp. 32–33.
45. Ibid., pp. 55–56.
46. This is Habermas’s summary of Horkheimer and Adorno. Habermas agrees only with regard to monological, not dialogical,

reason, which is also my view. (Ibid., p. 110.)

Moreover, there is a convincing reading of Foucault that places him as well within this general stance. That is, as Foucault
himself made quite clear, it was not reason in toto that he was attacking, but reason in its objectifying, monological,
instrumental, and representational modes (and the retroflection of those modes in subjectifying/subjugating ways).

Dreyfus and Rabinow are certainly of this opinion. On instrumental-rationality, Foucault demonstrated that “human needs
were no longer conceived of as ends in themselves or as subjects of a philosophic discourse. . . . They were now seen
instrumentally and empirically, as means for the increase of . . . power” (p. 141). On the merely objectifying-rationality:
“Foucault’s object of study is the objectifying practices . . . as they are embodied in a specific technology” (p. 144). On
representational-rationality: “The theory of representation, linked with the social contract view and with the imperative of
efficiency and utility, produced [quoting Foucault] ‘a sort of general recipe for the exercise of power over men: the mind as a
surface of inscription for power, with semiology as its tool; the submission of bodies through the control of ideas’” (p. 149). And
we already heard Foucault himself on monological-rationality: men and women became “objects of information and never
subjects in communication.”

Thus, as Dreyfus and Rabinow conclude, it is those generally monological-modes of reason applied to humans that are
(which, I would add, is always the power of Thanatos, the
especially shot through with thinly or thickly disguised power
reduction of intersubjective communication and mutual understanding to objectifying/subjectifying/subjugating modes of power-
over). This is why Dreyfus and Rabinow conclude that in Foucault’s project, “trying to show that the relations of truth and power
have for good reasons been mistakenly held to be opposed is still a matter of applying a new and modified form of reason against
a more highly complex version of power.” A new reason against power. This, they say, “should be seen as an advance, not a
refutation of the Weberian project. Foucault is eminently reasonable” (pp. 132–33).

This, too, why Foucault identified himself with the broad lineage of Kant, and why he went out of his way to identify his points
of agreement with Habermas. Foucault: “There is the problem raised by Habermas: if one abandons the work of Kant or Weber,
for example, one runs the risk of lapsing into irrationality. I am completely in agreement with this.” The problem was not solved
by the abandonment of reason, but a finer attunement to its dangers and abuses: “How can we exist as rational beings,
fortunately committed to practicing a rationality that is unfortunately crisscrossed by intrinsic dangers? What is this Reason that
we use? What are its limits, and what are its dangers?” (“Space, Power, Knowledge”).

Thus, the notion that Foucault saw all knowledge and reason equally and thoroughly shot through with power/domination is
altogether incorrect. Nonetheless, this is a very common misconception, held mostly by certain American academics
(unflatteringly but not altogether incorrectly referred to as “tenured radicals”), who want to deconstruct all forms of accepted
knowledge.

Foucault’s more balanced view—“What is this Reason that we use? What are its limits, and what are its dangers?”—has been
the topic of this “Ego-negative” section in the narrative, where we explored some of the more common charges against the limits
and the dangers of reason, and especially reason captured by its monological/instrumental mode (and we will return to these
limitations and dangers in chapter 13). These were especially dangers inherent in monological-rationality (we will explore similar

dangers and limitations inherent in dialogical rationality in chapter 13).

It has long been known, for example, that cognitive development is necessary but not sufficient

But at this point I would like to mention possibly the worst danger of rationality in general, a danger not inherent or intrinsic in
reason, but a horrible misuse to which it can and all too often is (and has been) put. Namely, the structures and products of
rationality can be used by a self (or society) that nonetheless is itself at the archaic, the magic, or the mythic mode of motivation.
for moral development.
Thus, to use Piaget and Kohlberg as examples, a person who has reached formop cognitively, can nonetheless remain even at
moral stage 1. Formop rationality can support a fully postconventional moral response (worldcentric mutual recognition), but
the fact that a person has access to formop does not guarantee that she will live up to its standards: moral development often
lags behind cognitive development (whereas the reverse is not the case: someone at a postconventional moral response is always
using formop in that response: conop and preop will not support postconventional responses). Thus, a highly developed moral
response always has a highly developed cognitive structure, but not vice versa: highly developed cognitive structures do not in
themselves ensure a moral response from that higher level (the reason, put simplistically, is that it is one thing to be able to
merely think from a higher level, but quite another to actually inhabit
that level with one’s whole being, and thus respond
morally from that higher level).

This is the difference between self-stages and basic structures (in this case, moral-stages and basic cognitive capacity, the latter
of which is necessary but not sufficient for the former). And that means that a self (or society) with access to formop can use
those powerful structures to implement preconventional (magical) or conventional (mythic) agendas—the higher reason is used
for quite base purposes, and there is the nightmare of the explosive power of rationality (and all its technical know-how) put in
the hands of egocentric magic and ethnocentric myth.

What was the Holocaust but the use of extremely sophisticated technical-rationality in the service of an ethnocentric
mythology? Rationality itself, in its forms of intersubjective communication and mutual recognition, does not seek domination but
mutual understanding. Rationality seeking less than that
is rationality shackled and in servitude to egocentric power or
ethnocentric domination, forms of massive power which those structures could not themselves create, but structures that can all
too readily exploit the technical powers of rationality in service of a moral response less than worldcentric—less than universal
pluralism,
less than mutual understanding in a discourse of tolerance and recognition: power to my ego, my tribe, my
culture—using the extremely sophisticated tools of a hijacked rationality.

These disasters—the Holocaust will always stand as the unimaginable example—have often been blamed on reason per se, but
that is a grave misinterpretation. These disasters are the depth-capacity of reason in servitude to the shallow moral designs of
egocentric and ethnocentric magic and myth. It is quite true that those disasters would not and could not have happened
without rationality (which has lead confused theorists to lay the blame simply at rationality’s doorstep); but those disasters
were not implemented by rationality, but rather by a moral response that could not live up to rationality’s worldcentric
perspectivism, and therefore simply hijacked rationality and its know-how down to their own self-promoting, other-destroying
level, in service, in servitude, in shackles to a master race, a master creed, a master ethnic that seeks not world understanding but
world domination, mythic-imperialism of the fatherland, of the motherland, of the chosen peoples, one way or another, and in all
cases: precisely the failure of reason, not its true colors, and precisely the triumph of a will shackled to mythic-imperialism.

Just so, the ecological crisis of modernity could not have happened without rationality’s technological power, a power that can
always overrun the biosphere in dissociative ways (a danger that I have been emphasizing throughout this account). But the major
moral motivations behind the eco-crisis are not due to rationality, but rationality (and its technical know-how) in service of
ethnocentric dominance or tribal power ploys. To pollute a common atmosphere knowing it will kill your own people is not
rational in any sense of the word; it is in all ways a failure of reason applied to reason’s own capacities, and driven precisely by
sociocentric and egocentric magic and mythic uncaring—there is the drive behind “modernity’s” eco-crisis, even if the means
are provided by a hijacked rationality. Not only is tribalism not the answer to the eco-crisis, it is precisely the primary motivational
cause: reason hijacked to my tribe (or my group or my nation), and completely disregarding the global commons.

Where previously and historically tribalism could only deplete small portions of the eco-system before it was forced to move
on, extended tribalism can now, with the tools of a higher rationality, despoil the entire biosphere. The means are rational; the
motives are egocentric and sociocentric: the motives precisely are not up to reason.

47. Quoted in Taylor, Sources of the self, p. 354.
48. Ibid., p. 24.
49. Taylor, Hegel, p. 22.
50. Ibid., p. 25.
51. Ibid., p. 23.
52. Ibid., pp. 26, 25.
53. That culture (and the rational-ego) can indeed repress and dissociate natural/libidinal impulses is true enough, and those
alienated impulses need to be recontacted, freed from the cultural repressions, and reintegrated into the psyche (regression in
service of the ego). But when culture is seen as only or primarily a repressive force, then the cure is regression, period, and this is

the self-defeating and self-contradictory stance that many Eco-Romantics, then and now, embraced.

Thus, for our salvation, we were to retreat, not prior to the dissociation (everybody agreed that was necessary), but prior to
the differentiation that had allowed the dissociation: not simply prior to the disease, but prior to the depth itself!—which
amounted to: cure the disease by becoming more shallow.

These specifically regressive Eco-movements were (and are) extremely vocal and condemnatory in their rhetoric, and they
never tire of leveling ad hominem attacks at their opponents, who are never portrayed as sincere but mistaken, but rather as
monstrous idiots. Since ad hominem seems to be the mode of argument here, my own observation is that these particular critics
seem to gravitate to the past phylogenetic structure that corresponds with the ontogenetic structure in themselves that is
immediately prior to their failed personal integration.

54. Taylor, Hegel, p. 26.
55. ReVision 15, no. 4, p. 184.
56. Habermas, Philosophical discourse, p. 338.
57. In the ecomasculinist camp, theorists of the God-forsaken world write books with titles like In the absence of the sacred,
where “sacred” is defined as the archaic and magic structure. That book completely ignores the difference between
differentiation and dissociation, and all of its arguments rest upon that failure. Its author’s Zoroastrian worldview is then used for
a critique of modernity, but “modernity” for Mander means anything at or beyond the hoe.

In the ecofeminist camp, the prevailing view is that the Great Goddess was honored the most in horticultural (and a few early
maritime) societies (a view spearheaded by Gimbutas, Eisler, Spretnak), but then the Goddess was destroyed, more or less
literally, by the coming of the Sun Gods and the warrior patriarchy. In volume 2, I try to demonstrate that this confuses the
mythological Great Mother figure with the actual Great Goddess.

The Great Mother figure was indeed largely embedded in the horticultural structure (much as the Great Father figure was
embedded in the agrarian structure; see Up from Eden). This also shows quite clearly that the Great Mother corpus was not
rooted in farming per se and the seasonal currents of nature, but rather was rooted in the hand-held hoe used by the female
work force; when the plow was invented—still a purely farming culture—the deity figures almost universally switched to Great
Father images, because the plow was operated solely by males, and the mythic-heavenly figures in both cases reflected who
was most responsible for subsistence (there is considerable data for this, which I present in volume 2).

And in agrarian societies—still

farming societies—female subordination and patriarchal rule was at its peak!, and matched
only by horse/herding cultures. The agrarian/farming cultures were very much in tune with nature, for sure: very much in tune
with nature’s disregard for rights based on anything other than power and might.

But the Great Goddess is best conceived, not as any particular structure or epoch or nature, horticultural or otherwise, but as
the overall movement of Efflux, of Creative Descent and Superabundance, of Agape and Goodness and Compassion. She is not
Gaia, not nature, not planting mythology (although She embraces all of those in Her divinely Creative Matrix). She even embraces
the patriarchy and was every bit as much behind that structure as any other. (Likewise, true God is not the Great Father figure,
but the overall movement of Reflux and Ascent and Eros; all of which is discussed at great length in volume 2).

By confusing the Great Goddess with the horticultural Great Mother mythic corpus—which was indeed superseded with the
coming of the patriarchy—it appears that male culture destroyed the Goddess (a handful of males on a small planet destroyed the
Creative Efflux of the entire Kosmos?), and that what is required is a recovery and resurrection of the Great Mother mythos.

The same Zoroastrian dualism, the same assumption that the Goddess could be banished, when all that was banished was a
poorly differentiated mythos that many ecofeminists have reinterpreted to fit their ideology. When the Great Goddess is instead
seen to be the entire movement of Creative Descent and Efflux (at each and every epoch), then the cure is no longer regression to
horticultural mythology, but progression to Goddess embodiment in the forms of today’s integrations (Agape).

The Great Goddess is not a victim, nor could She be banished without destroying the entire manifest universe. But by claiming
that She was banished, and by purporting to know how and why it happened, these ecofeminists are then in possession of a
certain type of power, the power to tell the world what it must do in order to recapture an ethos of which these theorists are now
the primary possessors. The Goddess is shackled to a horticultural planting mythology that ensures that She could never be
integrated with modernity, and sees Her only as our Lady of the Eternal Victim. The very framing of the Goddess in those terms
denies Her ever-present creative attributes and buries them in rhetoric.

That which one can deviate from is not the true Tao. Not only is modernity not devoid of the Goddess, her Goodness and
Agape and Compassion are written all over it, with its radically new and emergent stance of worldcentric pluralism, universal
benevolence, and multicultural tolerance, something that no horticultural society could even conceive, let alone implement. Her
Grace grows stronger and more obvious with every gain in the liberation movements, and that we ourselves have not always lived
up to her new Grace that was modernity’s Enlightenment, shows only that we are still surly children not on speaking terms with
our own divine parents.

CHAPTER 13. THE DOMINANCE OF THE DESCENDERS

  1. Lovejoy, Great chain, p. 292.
  2. Ibid., p. 313.
  3. Ibid., p. 312.
  4. Ibid., pp. 293–94.
  5. Ibid., p. 313.
  6. Taylor, Sources of the self, p. 285.
  7. Ibid., pp. 297–98.
  8. Ibid., p. 299.
  9. Ibid., p. 301.
10. Ibid.
11. The following quotes are simply repeats from those given in chapter 8, and the references can be found there.
12. This is not magical

indissociation (although it often verged on that), because the mononature that is now spirit is

nonetheless a differentiated nature.

13. Foucault, The history of sexuality and Discipline and punish.
14. Dreyfus and Rabinow, Foucalt, p. 140.
15. Lovejoy, Great chain, p. 256.
16. Ibid., p. 281.
17. Schelling, System of transcendental idealism.
18. Fichte’s Wissenschaftslehre had three basic postulates, according to Fichte. The first is that “the ego simply posits in an
original way its own being.” The second is “A non-ego is simply opposited to the ego.” The third, “I posit in the ego a divisible non-
ego as opposed to a divisible ego.”

The first postulate refers to the Pure Ego or supra-individual (transpersonal) pure Self or pure Witness (the I-I). It is that which,
according to Fichte, is the pure activity of perceiving but can never itself be perceived as an object (only intuited from within). This
pure activity or pure openness is the condition and the ground of any and all objects, and thus “out of” this Pure Self (which
Fichte maintains is infinite and supra-individual), comes all finite objects—and this is the second postulate.

Since the finite non-ego (or objectivity in general) now exists, it is perceived by a finite and individual ego—and that is the third

postulate.

Thus, the absolute and infinite Self posits within itself the finite ego and finite nature (“divisible”). This is a very clear form of
the “Western Vedanta” that I have mentioned on several occasions. And Fichte derives all of this, not so much as a matter of
abstract philosophy (although it was certainly that), but as a direct inquiry into consciousness: he bases it on the interior, not the
exterior (the latter he calls “dogmatism” leading to “determinism and mechanism”). He used to say to his students: “Be aware of
the wall. Now be aware of who or what is aware of the wall. Now be aware of who is aware of that. . . .” In other words, pushing
back further and further to that pure Witness which is the ground of all existence but cannot itself be seen as an object. That pure
Activity (or pure Witness), according to Fichte, is the ground and necessary condition for the manifestation of any objects at all,
and as such, there is precisely nothing individual and finite about it: it is infinite, absolute, supra-individual. (Fichte is sometimes
accused of meaning the finite ego is the ground, but this is entirely incorrect, as Fichte himself often pointed out.)

The entire world is thus, according to Fichte, the product of the pure Self’s “productive imagination” (thus doing away with
Kant’s thing-in-itself). This is all virtually indistinguishable from Shankara and the notions of pure Atman, its identity with pure
Brahman, and the production of the world through Brahman-Atman’s creative maya.

The main (and crucial) difference between these forms of “Western Vedanta” and the Eastern approaches is that the latter
maintain that the intuition of pure Witness has to be sustained through rigorous yogic concentration and intense discriminating
awareness (prajna), or it is “snapped up” too soon by the finite self or ego.

In Zen, for example, inquiry into “Who am I?” (e.g., “Who chants the name of Buddha?” or “What is my Original Face?” or
simply “Mu”) can take six or seven years, on average, before a truly profound breakthrough can occur; Fichte, apparently, intuited
only glimmers of this profound openness, which is why I also refer to most Western Vedanta as “half-baked.”

And in this half-baked form, it would play into the hands of the finite, hyper-agentic, disengaged subject of the Enlightenment
paradigm. Nature, or the total nonego, was not finally integrated in pure Self; rather, nature was simply the instrumental
background against which the Ego had to struggle morally to free itself, and this process of extrication, of disenchantment, was
unending. As such, when Schelling claimed that Fichte did not truly integrate the Ego and the Eco, Schelling was quite right, I
believe. But this shouldn’t stop us from appreciating the important and profound steps that Fichte took in the right direction,
however much he stopped short of a true breakthrough and true integration. (I would especially mention, for example, that
Fichte’s presentation of “a pragmatic history of consciousness” not only was the precursor of Hegel’s developmental
phenomenology of consciousness, but is the grandfather of virtually all schools of developmental psychology in general.)

As for Fichte’s final position, it comes to the same thing to say that Fichte ended up with virtually an unending Ascending path

that divorced itself from any true Descent (see next note), and that nature remained, as it were, the necessary enemy.

19. It was an attempt at pure Ascent, pure transcendence, pure Reflux, radical detachment. Both Kant, and to a much greater
extent Fichte, were trying to reintroduce an Ascending and antileveling current into the flatland ontology, and this is why the
impact of their philosophies was always described in terms like “exhilarating”—freedom is always in the Ascending current, but
the agonizing dilemma remained for them both: how to integrate this with the Descending and manifest world, for without that
integration Ascent is always, we have seen, bought at the price of repression: Eros degenerates into Phobos.

20. Males, generically having trouble with relationships, are often drawn to the impersonal it-language of Spinoza’s infinite
Substance: no messy interpersonal dialogical understanding here. Many proponents of deep ecology have explicitly called on
Spinoza to support a depersonalized spiritual substance and a denatured nature; it plays into the hyperagency of the masculine
mode.

21. It was a pure Descent, a pure immanence, total Efflux, radical immersion. The Eco camps were working within the great
interlocking order, the manifest system, and attempting to reintroduce Spirit into a world (and nature) virtually abandoned by the
pure Ego of Kant and Fichte, attempting to reweave the repressed fragments of a disengaging Subject. And indeed, the
compassionate, caring, inclusive Agape is always found in the Descending current—but again the dilemma: how to integrate that
with some sort of true Ascent, for without Ascent, Agape always degenerates, we have seen, into Thanatos: pure regression to
predifferentiated states, which is not healing but heaping (i.e., wounding).

22. In the East, the same dilemma showed up in the desire to unite the Pure Ascended Self or Consciousness (Purusha) with the
Pure Descended Substance of the manifest world (Prakriti), or again, pure Emptiness with pure Form; or yet again, nirvana and
samsara. The early yogic schools had taken the Gnostic or purely Ascending solution: the dissolution of all Form in pure
unmanifest Emptiness or absorption, the extinction of samsara in nirvana.

The first decisive and far-reaching step to pure Nonduality was taken by Nagarjuna, in a move quite similar to Plotinus
(transcend and include, nirvana and samara are not-two), a Nondual breakthrough that was subsequently applied to Hinduism by
Shankara, to Kashmir Shaivism by Abhinavagupta, to Vajrayana by Padmasambhava—to name a very few. (For an extended
discussion of this theme, see note 1 for chap. 14.)

The second step, a thoroughgoing evolutionary Nonduality, was made most explicit in the East by Aurobindo, and in the West

by the gentleman the text is about to introduce. This Eastern approach is explored in depth in volume 3.

23. Taylor, Hegel, p. 36.
24. Taylor, Sources, p. 382.
25. From various letters, in Kierkegaard, The concept of irony and Notes of Schelling’s Berlin Lectures. As Schelling began
deviating into mythology, Kierkegaard lost his high opinion of him, as is well known (and it is certainly not hard to share
Kierkegaard’s opinion in that case).

26. Copleston’s wording, vol. 7.1, p. 133. The good books by (or about) Schelling are very hard to come by, which is extremely
unfortunate. The one widely available account is Copleston’s History of philosophy. This contains an excellent short summary of
Schelling’s work, and since it is also virtually the only one readily available, I have tried to draw most of my quotations from it.

27. Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel each give their own version of the Great Holarchy, which, however we slice it, is in most

essentials Plotinian.

28. Copleston, vol. 7.1, p. 141.
29. Schelling’s usage; Hegel would suggest a similar scheme but with different terminology and, of course, a bit of an argument

as to the precise nature of the unifying Absolute, revolving around cows.

30. Copleston, vol. 7.1, p. 163.
31. Copleston’s summary, vol. 7.1, p. 139.
32. Schelling’s brilliant synthesis and integration of the Ego and the Eco stand in sharp contrast to most of today’s approaches
to the environment, which still typically pursue either the Egoic-rational calculative adventure (“reform environmentalism”), or
fall into various forms of regressive Eco-Romantic “reechantment.”

Indeed, the Eco-Romantic advocates of the “reenchantment of the world” are still very much with us. Most of the “new
paradigm” schools of thought betray a profound allegiance to the flatland interlocking order (the fundamental Enlightenment
paradigm), and then within that flatland they wobble between some version of rationalistic systems theory (mostly the
ecomasculinists) or nature as disclosed in sentiments (mostly the ecofeminists). To the extent that either attempts to escape the
flatland interlocking order at all, they do so by regression to agrarian alchemy, magical animism, astrology, horticultural planting
mythology, or foraging human-nature in-dissociation.

In these approaches, there are the standard Eco-Romantic elements: (1) a confusion of differentiation and dissociation leading
to pre/trans fallacies; (2) a leveling of those very differentiations that allow their quest in the first place; (3) the view that history
and evolution are marked by a heinous Crime that removed us from the Paradise now Lost; (4) a concomitant eulogizing of the
archaic indissociation state (both phylogenetically and ontogenetically) as being “nondual” and “spiritual/mystical” or generally
“holistic” (instead of seeing that it is predifferentiated, not transdifferentiated);

(5) a “critique” of culture (and modernity) based upon the recapture of the archaic Paradise Lost, now conceived as the

Promised Land; (6) a regressive slide into divine egoism, in either the form of monological systems theory preserving the
disengaged ego in its empirical flattening (Habermas), or in the form of biocentric feeling and sentimental emoting as the
connecting link to the “divine” (Taylor); (7) the need for a “new paradigm” that recaptures the Paradise Lost in a “new”
epistemology of syncretism and indissociation, based, again, on either systems theory or somatic-vital sentiment. To give some
prominent examples:

Morris Berman, The Reenchantment of the World and Coming to Our Senses

Morris Berman begins his particular quest for the new paradigm by enthusiastically embracing Gregory Bateson’s version of
cybernetic reality (the systems theory approach to flatland). In The reenchantment of the world, Berman begins with all the
standard critiques of the “disenchanted” modern world. Failing to grasp specifically any of the dignities of modernity, he of course
finds the “disenchantment” not in the dissociation of the Big Three, but in the differentiation of the Big Three; and there then
follows the standard and glowing (and disingenuous) eulogizing of medieval alchemy-animism, astrology, and magico-mythic
anything.

As an Eco-Romantic, and fully caught in that version of the pre/trans fallacy, Berman is locked into elevationism. There is
“divisive” consciousness (everything modern, scientific, rational) and there is “participatory consciousness” (everything else: he
mentions alchemy, magic, psychosis, dreams, mysticism, shamanism, mythology, and anything premodern). Since modern
rationality/science is pretty bad, everything else must be pretty good (or various degrees of pretty good). And so of course he
must eulogize alchemy, astrology, primitive participation, etc.

Thus, as examples of medieval “unified consciousness” (his term), where everything is “interlinked” with everything else,
Berman gives the example of sixteenth-century Oswald Croll, who offers the “fact” that “walnuts prevent head ailments because
the meat of the nut resembles the brain in appearance.” To which we might ask, as a test of truthfulness and sincerity, if Dr.
Berman has a headache, does he take two walnuts?

This “walnut/brain” is, as we have seen, the Piagetian confusion of metaphor as literal (preop), where two holons with similar
agency are thought to have causal power: syncretism romantically reread as “holism.” Berman gives other extensive examples of
this “unified consciousness,” especially drawn from magic, alchemy, and astrology. Here is the Renaissance “magician” Agrippa
von Nettesheim, in his De Occulta Philosophia of 1533: “All Stars have their peculiar natures, properties, and conditions, the
Seals and Characters whereof they produce, through their rays; whence every natural thing receives from its Star shining upon it,
some particular Seal, or character, stamped upon it; which Seal or character contains in it a peculiar Virtue. Every thing, therefore,
hath its character pressed upon it by its star for some particular effect, especially by that star which doth principally govern it” (p.
75).

That “astro-logic” is a good example of the Left Hand of the magico-mythic worldview, syncretically interwoven with its Right-
Hand components (predifferentiated). Berman comments that “given this system of knowledge, modern distinctions between
inner and outer, psychic and organic (or physical), do not exist. If you wish to promote love, says Agrippa, eat pigeons; to obtain
courage, lions’ hearts.”

This type of indissociated astro-logic must be eulogized because, compared to modern science, this syncretism appears
“holistic” and “unified.” But the “crime” of the Enlightenment (the “bad news”) was not the loss of that undifferentiated
syncretism (as Romantics imagine); the crime was that, with the final differentiation of that syncretism—the differentiation of the
Big Three—the differentiation was not yet brought into a new and corresponding integration: in the newly emerged egoic-
rational worldspace, the newly emerged interior of the new worldspace was not integrated with the newly disclosed type of
exterior world (I and we and it fell into dissociation). Thus, merely comparing the dissociated components of modernity with the
integrated
flatland comparison (a comparison only of
differentiation/integration and not also of the different degrees of depth)—makes it appear that modernity is only a brutal
mistake.

components of medievalism, makes

it appear,

in this

But Berman realizes that a simple return to magico-mythic animism is not possible, and maybe not even a good idea (although
he’s not sure exactly why). So he shifts course a bit and (in another standard elevationist ploy) says that what we actually need,
and need desperately, is to recapture animism in a “mature form.” The alchemical/magical/syncretic worldview he thus starts
referring to as “naive animism,” and our salvation lies rather in a postmodern animism (what he also calls—when he tries to
distance himself from naive syncretism—a “nonanimistic participation.” But then, what happened to animism?). And for this
“unity” he finds the best candidate to be Gregory Bateson and a version of . . . no surprise: cybernetic systems theory. Envisioned,
of course, as an enterprise of recovery of archaic modes that, well, aren’t really archaic anymore.

“Our culture, with its heavy emphasis on the digital, could restore such a complementary relationship only by recovering what
it once knew about archaic modes of thought,” and this will lead to “the sort of society that might be congruent with the holistic
or cybernetic vision,” which “is a mature type of alchemical . . . reasoning adapted to the modern age” (pp. 252, 255, 270; Berman
uses “dialectical reasoning” to cover dreams, psychoses, holism, alchemy, etc.; this is not vision-logic but paleo-logic). This

Batesonian cybernetic holism, says Berman, is by far the best candidate for world salvation in the postmodern era.

But then, finally, Berman thinks about all of that and, in the closing pages of his book, effectively nullifies virtually everything
he has just labored to endorse (strangely, he does the same thing in his next book, as we will see). In the course of “just
mentioning” some of the problems of Batesonian cybernetics, Berman gives (intentionally or not) a devastating critique of
flatland holism in general, pointing out (quite rightly, and for the all reasons we have seen, especially concerning the
extraordinary power drives of monological systems theory) that “holism, in short, could become the agent of tyranny.” And the
holistic worship of nature goes hand in hand with this tyranny, since “the celebration of nature versus artifice is a central tenet of
fascist ideology” (pp. 291, 292; my italics): what others have frankly called eco-fascism.

He thus offers, for salvation, basically nothing. His pre/trans fallacy has left him holding the ontological bag: “We thus confront
a choice that must be made and yet cannot be made: the awakening of an entire civilization to its repressed archaic knowledge.”
What we adults really need, in other words, is to embrace a mature form of kindergarten. The “choice that must but can’t be
made” is simply the choice based on his pre/trans confusions (can’t is to must as pre is to trans, and “fusing” the latter pair
means a fusion of the former, which leaves him paralyzed).

Still under sway of this pre/trans fallacy, and still thoroughly confusing differentiation and dissociation, Berman is sure the
answer must lie prior to the differentiation of mind and body: that is to say, our salvation must be primarily bodily, sensory, and
somatic
in nature, and thus what we really need, in this sensory-bound, sex-drenched, hedonistic, pleasure-seeking, body-
gratifying culture of ours is . . . just a little more body.

And so, in his next book, Coming to our senses, Berman turns to the somatic body in earnest and thoroughly abandons any
pretense to cybernetic systems theory (indeed, the Batesonian cybernetic flatland that was postmodernity’s best chance of
salvation now gets nary a mention; in between these two books, Berman wrote several very severe criticisms of systems theory,
often arriving, I believe, at several right conclusions for several wrong reasons). He switches from the systems theory of “holism”
to the “nature as it makes me feel” version, and throws his allegiance to the body, to its feelings, to its vital-impulsive force and
pure emoting, to sensory delight—and thus adopts, in the process, a purely and classically Descended worldview, a worldview
that sees all Ascent, of any variety, as primarily an attempt (often evil) to overcome a state of affairs (the subject/object “split”)
that simply never should have happened in the first place.

Thus, echoing the two-millennia-old mantra of Descenders everywhere, Berman’s conclusion is that it is time to do away with
all Ascent entirely, and this strikes him as a wildly new and original idea: “There is another alternative to recycling the ascent
structure, and that is to finally abandon it once and for all. There can be no healing of our culture and ourselves without taking
this option. Nothing less is at stake than the chance to be finally, fully human” (p. 307).

And thus, in line with every Descended hedonist who ever found ascent too demanding, Berman believes that “this is the
crucial point—that true enlightenment is to really know, really feel . . . your somatic nature” (and never mind that Zen defines
Enlightenment as “body and mind dropped”!). “The shift away from ascent, and toward bodily presence in the world,” he says,
there is our salvation (pp. 310–11).

Thus, if we can really emote in a genuine way, all of our existential problems will melt away. That my feelings cannot even
begin to take the role of other, that my feelings, as feelings, are self-reverberating, that they circle egocentrically in their own
orbit, that in themselves they never ascend into the intersubjective circle where love alone truly shines and compassion alone can
flourish—that promoting a “feel good” ethic as the primary moral impulse lands me squarely in divine egoism and existential hell:
of all of that, nary a note from Berman. He wants merely “direct engagement with nature and bodily functions.” So self-absorbed
is this stance that the selfcentric nature of the stance doesn’t even dawn on him.

THE SINGLE BOUNDARY FALLACY

In the modern and postmodern era, the retro-Romantic psychological project has always centered on the first fulcrums of
present-day human development, during the first three years of life, and the horrendous “split” between self and other that
occurs at that time (these theorists don’t usually distinguish fulcrum-1 and fulcrum-2, and so they mean the “first” differentiation
of the self and other, the subject and object, from the primal/archaic state of undifferentiated and indissociated participation,
which primarily occurs, we have seen, in the first two-to-three years of life). This necessary differentiation (F-1 and F-2) is
completely confused with dissociation and is therefore interpreted as a primal loss, a primal alienation, that forever divides the
self from others, from itself, and from nature. And most subsequent human desire, drive, motivation, and cultural endeavors are
then seen as a doomed series of twisted attempts to regain this Paradise Lost.

And indeed, Berman takes, as his point of departure, just these theorists. “For the ‘French school’ of philosophy and child
psychology—Henri Wallon, Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Jacques Lacan—this moment [of self-other differentiation], which marks the
birth of your identity as a being in the world, also marks the birth of your alienation from the world” (p. 36). Not that this
differentiation can go too far, or develop poorly, into pathological dissociation and alienation, but that it simply is itself the
Great Crime. (This position was taken most forcefully in America by Norman O. Brown, whom Berman frequently quotes with

much approval.)

The great problem with all of these theories is that, working within the modern flatland paradigm, they only recognize one
basic boundary: the horizontal boundary between self and other (or subject and object), and since all alienation does indeed
require some sort of separation of self and other, then this primary differentiation (F-1 and F-2) must simply be equated, not with
the possibility of alienation, but with alienation itself.

(For further discussion of the Single-Boundary Fallacy, see note 3 for chap. 6 and note 17 for chap. 14.)
What all of this overlooks is the vertical dimension of different types of boundaries altogether: there is the differentiation of
physical self and physical other (F-1), of emotional self and emotional other (F-2), of conceptual self and conceptual other (F-3),
of cultural role-self and role-other (F-4), and so on throughout the vertical spectrum, with each self marked by an important
functional boundary.

And only one of those boundaries is actually physical, and actually follows the skin-boundary of the physical body (F-1). All of
the other boundaries (emotional to mental to spiritual) do not follow the skin-boundary at all (they merely refer to it and are
grounded in it). My mental self, for example, includes all sorts of identifications with family, values, causes, groups, nations, etc.,
none of which exist inside my skin-boundary.

Rather, an entity is inside these various boundaries (emotional, mental, etc.), not when it is inside the physical body, but when
it follows the rules (the code, the regime, the agency) of that particular self-sense or holon (much as you are “in” a chess game if
you are following the rules of the game, no matter where you are physically sitting: you can even phone in your moves; and you
are “out” of the game, not if you move in physical space, but if you break the rules).

That is, an entity becomes “inside” the structure of any holon when it is following the rules of the deep structure of that holon
(when it is assimilated into the code, pattern, or regime of the holon), and this is true for physical boundaries, emotional
boundaries, mental boundaries, etc. When physical food is first swallowed and enters the stomach, it is dissolved and digested,
and the needed nutrients enter the bloodstream, from there to be assimilated into the structures of the physical body (they
become truly part of the physical body, truly “in” the body), and unneeded food continues to pass through the digestive tube and
out of the body: it never becomes part of the body, it is never assimilated into the patterns of the body itself: it remains outside
the body’s game, the body’s rules and patterns, regimes and codes.

Likewise, another person becomes part of your emotional makeup when that person is in your emotional space, not in your
stomach, and that emotional space floats beyond the skin, only occasionally checking in with the physical boundaries. The person
(as image and emotional representation) becomes a part of your emotional patterns (your overall affective mood states and
structures), and thus is in that emotional space as surely as food is in your stomach, but these two boundaries are not at all the
same simple physical boundary (and that is what I mean when I say that an entity is in a structure or a holon when it is following
the patterns or rules of the deep structure of that holon: I can emotionally identify with people, causes, groups, nations, no
matter where they are actually located: they become part of me when I take them into my emotional identity, my emotional
space, and they then operate within that space, following its particular rules, or the patterns of my affective mood states, which
themselves might accommodate, or shift deep structure, in order to assimilate the new items).

The mental space likewise floats outside the emotional (the cognitive-mental space can actually take the role of other, “see
through their eyes,” assimilate/accommodate new ideas, etc.); and the spiritual space floats outside the mental and into the
Kosmos at large.

Each of those boundaries is crucial. Indeed, the differentiation of an earlier boundary is the prerequisite for the integration
of the self at the next-higher boundary. Thus, the stable emotional-self rests on the stable physical-self boundary; the stable
mental-self rests on a stable emotional-object constancy (stable emotional boundary), and so on. The previous differentiated self
is integrated into the newly emerging self, which must likewise stably differentiate itself from the others in its newly emerging
environment. The boundaries of the previous self-structure are preserved in their function and their capacity, but negated in their
exclusivity or partialness. Boundaries are not simply lost or evaporated or erased; they are transcended and included.

And this continues until all the self/other boundaries have been thoroughly preserved (included) and utterly negated
(transcended) in Spirit. Zen masters, for example, can perfectly well tell the difference between their physical body and a physical
chair (or physical other): the Zen adept is not healing the split between chair and body; he or she is transcending and including
all self/other boundaries in the Empty clearing that allows all boundaries to arise, and cherishes all boundaries precisely as they
are. The Zen adept is perfectly aware of the difference and the boundary between chair and body, between ego and other,
between up and down, between meow and bark. Satori is not a “meltdown”; it is a negating and preserving of the entire manifest
domain as a transparent shimmering of the empty Divine.

But if all of those important (and necessary) boundaries are simply collapses into one, single, arche-boundary, which is merely
called THE “self/other” boundary, then massive theoretical confusion results. Even in psychoanalysis, for example, there is still the
lingering notion that all mental
identification involves temporary regression to the oral stage, because there is only one
boundary recognized, and thus taking something across the mental boundary must be actually regressing to the physical oral
boundary (any introjection must follow the same pathway as food, for there is only “the” boundary).

Likewise, with the more avant-garde theorists (who dabble in Zen and mysticism): since higher states involve somehow a
“nonduality,” then it appears that all the crucial and developmental action centers around this “single” self/other boundary, and
since the first important boundaries (physical and emotional) are indeed differentiated during the first three years of life, this
seems to be THE fulcrum driving all subsequent human development: it seems that the loss of the archaic predifferentiated state
is irrevocable alienation, whereas it is simply the first stage of waking up.

The existential terrors that come with the first boundaries are not created by those boundaries, but simply disclosed by them:
it’s called recognizing samsara. The consciousness of those terrors can indeed be blotted out by regressing prior to the
differentiation; but the terrors are actually overcome, not by going prior to the boundaries, but by transcending them.

But Berman follows the “single boundary” flatland paradigm, and thus he refers to this “single” differentiation as “the basic
fault” (following Balint), in the sense of “basic default” and “basic mistake,” which, like a geological fault line, he says, lies ready to
toss up earthquakes under stress. But Berman does not believe that this basic differentiation/default is universal, because, he
says, premodern foraging tribes either did not possess it at all or possessed it only a little (no argument from me there). But
beginning with the Great Crime of the Neolithic farming cultures (and here we go), which differentiated the tame and the wild,
subsequent history has been one long slide into more and more misery and mistake, all driven by humanity’s attempts to
overcome THE basic default that separates self and other. And so, he blithely assures us, “Most of our history has been a kind of
unnecessary artifact” (p. 311).

As an example of what he considers a “mistake,” he gives especially the Neolithic distinction between “tame” and “wild”:
“Once Wild and Tame were established as categories of life, so that Self and Other necessarily became antagonistically related,
the ‘problem’ of what to do with immediate forms surfaced as a problem” (p. 76). Note that he maintains that distinguishing tame
and wild necessarily alienates subject and object (these types of “necessities” are very common when every differentiation is
read as a dissociation, because every branch of the oak must then be seen as a different type of violation of the acorn).

Likewise, the Great Crime according to the (ecomasculinist) Romantics (who embrace foraging) is always horticulture (tame
vs. wild), all of which overlooks the foraging-culture distinction of the Raw and the Cooked—its own attempt to alter nature to
suit its own ends. But the retro-Romantic position demands an earlier state of human existence that did not attempt to “alter
nature,” because the existence of this state is demanded by their prejudged critique of modernity (i.e., a “paradise” must have
existed in the past because differentiation itself is not embraced by Romantics, so the predifferentiated past must be the Lost
Paradise—an ideology that then rides roughshod over massive amounts of unpleasant evidence to arrive at glowing
interpretations of the noble savage, Philip Slater and Gilbert Brim being merely two of the most recent reenchanters).

And thus, true to form, Berman maintains that “Neolithic civilization opened up an opposition between the Self and the World.
Within the matrix of Neolithic society, and the categories of Self/Other, or Tame/Wild, the schismogenic cycle is quite inevitable.
Western consciousness is deeply influenced by this dualism”—even though Eastern consciousness, which equally developed the
Wild/Tame distinction, is somehow “nondualistic” (which undercuts his entire argument at the crucial fulcrum, because this is not
actually a nasty dualism but a growth differentiation).

In all of this, there is no serious and consistent distinguishing between differentiation and dissociation, and there is no
distinguishing whatsoever between all the vastly different types of necessary and functional boundaries: there is simply the basic
gap, the basic fault, the basic split. There is no predifferentiated to differentiated to postdifferentiated integration and union (like
every other process in nature); rather, there is simply subject/object fusion versus subject/object alienation: there is simply the
nice acorn versus the vicious violence done to it by the oak—the oak being the alienated, fractured, distorted acorn.

Thus, for Berman, everything past

fulcrum-2 (that is, everything past the biocentric bodyego, the somatic-vital body) is
fundamentally nothing but various ways to tragically and pathetically attempt to bridge “the gap”—bridge the “split” that
foragers did not have and that all of subsequent history has pathetically attempted to overcome. Everything past berry picking is
past or beyond the immediate, sensory-driven body, and thus fundamentally should simply not have happened (“a kind of
unnecessary artifact”), because everything beyond the immediate sensory body is . . . bad.

This means, as well, that for Berman the only ontological reality is that of the felt-body, the vital-emotional body, prior to its
“split” into mind and body (prior, that is, to fulcrum-3). Since the vital body (the “somatic reality”) is the only fundamental reality,
then all of history has to be coded in this vital body, and has to be seen as primarily the vicissitudes of the body and its primary
feelings. Everything else is . . . the pathetic attempt to fill the gap, the basic default. And thus a real history would have to be the
history of the body, period. “History is finally an activity of the flesh” and can only be disclosed by “techniques of somatic analysis.
The truth can only be seen from a somatic point of view” (his italics; pp. 136–37).

This is a tall order, even for a dedicated reductionistic (even the Marxists abandoned this one), and so in order to make “the
body” the primary mover of all history, Berman has to come up with some very clever definitions of “body” in order to cover all
the bases. And this he does, implicitly giving “the body” five entirely different definitions, which gives him more than enough rope
to hang history.

The five different uses: body as somatically felt, body as experience in general, body as interiorness, body as predifferentiated
consciousness, and body as physiological (including the brain). But the first two are the most important, and I will focus on those.

1. By “body” Berman primarily means the somatic, physical, sensory, felt-body. Hence the title: Coming to our senses.

Generally, what we mean by “the flesh” or “the senses” or “vital feelings.”

2. But he also uses “body” to mean any “intense experience,” and anything that is intensely experienced is therefore somatic
in Berman’s universe (in this he even includes intense mystical states where the felt body disappears altogether, as he readily
concedes; but since this experience is intense,
be body, according to this definition, whether or not that is
phenomenologically completely wrong).

it must

The real problem with “body = experience” is the fundamental problem with empiricism in general.

THE MEANING OF EMPIRICISM

The strength of empiricism has always been its insistence on grounding knowledge in experience; the disaster of empiricism is
that it has never been able to define experience adequately—in fact, it excludes much experiential evidence and settles, by
default, on “sensory experience,” presumably (and wrongly) because it (sensory experience) alone is supposed to be public. Thus
empiricism tends to switch from experience as general prehension (well and good) to experience as sensory prehension
(reductionistic).

There is sensory experience, there is mental experience, and there is spiritual experience (to stick with the simplified holarchy
of body, mind, spirit; the same analysis applies to all of the levels of the spectrum of consciousness, which is a spectrum of
experience).

But empiricists usually take mental experience to be simply an abstraction from sensory experience (the reflection
paradigm), with all the self-contradictions and inadequacies involved in that fundamental Enlightenment paradigm (and which we
have discussed at length). Mathematics, for example, is not simply an abstraction from sensory experience. Mathematics, as it is
performed, is an incredibly rich, thick, deliciously dense mental experience: I directly perceive, with the mind’s eye, the display of
symbols, ideas, and concepts that parade by in my awareness, and that are every bit as real,
in themselves, as the experience of
clouds or rain or rocks. After all, both symbols and rocks are, at the actual moment of their experience, given to me in immediate
awareness. (To say that rocks are “real” and symbols “aren’t” is a mental deduction away from the direct experience in
immediate awareness.)

Mental experiences (such as images, symbols, and concepts) often get a “bad reputation” as being “dry and abstract,” but only
because, unlike sensory experiences, mental experiences, besides being direct and immediate in themselves, can also go one
step further and represent sensory experiences. The word rock (the mental experience “r-o-c-k”) can stand for the sensory
experience of rock. And if I get caught up in having mental experiences substitute for sensory experience, then yes, those mental
experiences become “mere abstractions” in the bad sense: I have a sign but I am avoiding the referent. But that is an abuse of
mental experiences, not a definition of mental experiences, nor is it anything even remotely close to an explanation of mental
experiences, most of which don’t even have purely empirical/sensory referents in the first place: I can simply and empirically
point to a rock, but I can’t simply and empirically point to envy, pride, honor, or jealousy, which is why empiricist
theories—sensory/reflection theories—of language fall apart when it comes to the dialogical phases of intersubjective linguistics,
as we have repeatedly seen. Most mental experiences and signs point, not
to sensory referents, but to other mental
experiences or referents; they are not abstractions from sense data, but condensations of rich mental experiences that circulate
in the hermeneutic circle. They possess sensory components, but cannot be reduced to sensory components precisely because
they do not primarily derive from sensory components: they transcend and include sense data—and therefore do not merely
point to, or abstract from, sensory impressions.

Thus, as hermeneuticists have pointed out, language does not just represent the sensory world, it creates worlds not found
simply in the senses, it discloses worlds, presents worlds, and doesn’t just represent them. Language is the stuff of the
noosphere, which doesn’t primarily point to the biosphere or physiosphere, but primarily transcends the naturic sphere and
points to other mental and linguistic experiences—whether magical, mythical, rational, or existential. Some of these
mental/linguistic experiences point to premental holons, some point to transmental holons, and many simply point to other
mental holons—a point we will return to in a moment—but in no way are they merely abstractions from sensory experiences.

(That the noosphere is thus “constructed” and not merely “reflecting” or “representative” does not mean, as we have seen,
that it is therefore merely arbitrary, as radical relativists maintain; it is still grounded in validity claims that allow cultural
learning
to occur, because mental holons follow their own law-governed patterns and do not simply float happily and freely in random
space. But the true moment of relativism, and a truth I endorse, is that, precisely because the noosphere does not merely reflect
the biosphere, cultures cannot be judged merely on how well they mirror the physical world according to empirical science: if
knowledge and culture are mistaken as merely the “mirror of nature,” and if true knowledge of nature is given only by modern
empirical science, then all cultures have to be judged merely against modern science, and other cultures are then reduced to only
being “near misses” or “prototypes” of Newton. Judgments can be made across cultures, but the merely empiricist judgment is
as inadequate there as elsewhere.)

It is in dealing with the world-creating, world-disclosing, world-presenting capacity of language that the merely “reflective”
empirical/behaviorist theories of language come up short. And, whatever one might otherwise think of Chomsky’s theories of
language, it is almost universally agreed that he dismembered these theories in his widely circulated critique of Skinner.

Now, in addition to direct sensory experiences and direct mental experiences (both of which, even if they are partially
mediated, finally and always present themselves immediately), there are also direct
spiritual experiences. A subtle-level
illumination, for example, is presented to my awareness in the same direct, immediate, given fashion as the experience of a rock
or the experience of a mental image: they simply show up and I prehend them (quite apart from whatever mediating chains
deliver them to the display; when we discover these mediating chains, they, too, enter awareness, when they do enter,
immediately).

This is why, even if empiricism is always and lamentably tending toward “sensory empiricism,” many mystics speak of “mystical
empiricism,” meaning direct mystical experience, using “experience” in the wider and truer sense of “immediate awareness” and
not just “immediate sensory awareness” (which is why so many mystics insist on calling their endeavors experiential,
experimental, and scientific in that sense).

And here, too, mental experience can get into trouble, because it can use a mental symbol, such as the mental experience of
the word “G-o-d,” to stand for the spiritual experience of direct illumination (for example), and so here again it is caught in
“mere abstractions”: it is using mental experiences to try to cover experiences that aren’t
in themselves mental. These
“representations” then become “mere metaphysics,” and since the time of Kant, we all know that is a very bad idea: it won’t hold
water, which is to say, it hasn’t any experiential grounding: this type of “mere metaphysics” is simply empty categories devoid of
true knowledge, which is to say, devoid of true experience.

However, since Kant doesn’t acknowledge spiritual experience, he therefore thinks metaphysics per se is dead, which is the
point at which Schopenhauer, among others, leveled a devastating criticism of Kant (and the point where Katz’s neo-Kantian
argument also collapses). Kant demonstrated that mental symbols without experiential grounding are empty: but the real
conclusion of his argument is that all future metaphysics must be experiential—that is to say: experimental, grounded in direct
awareness and experience, coupled with validity claims that can be redeemed in the experiment of contemplation, and
grounded in the
and
confirmation/rejection.

injunction/paradigm,

apprehension,

accumulation:

three

strands of

all

true

knowledge

Virtually every thinker from Kant onward (and following his pioneering lead) has announced “the death of metaphysics” and
the “death of philosophy”—from Nietzsche to Heidegger, from Ayer to Wittgenstein, from Derrida to Foucault, from Adorno to
Lyotard. And in the sense of the “death of empty categories,” I agree entirely. But the real prolegomenon to any future
metaphysics is, not that the endeavor is altogether dead, but that the real metaphysics can now, finally, get under way: actual
contemplative development (grounded in genuine spiritual experience) is the future of metaphysics.

Thus, Kant’s attempt to “abolish knowledge [representational metaphysics] in order to make room for faith” (in God), should
be completed à la Nagarjuna: abolishing mere symbols and concepts (abstract or representational metaphysics) in order to make
room, not for faith in God, but for direct experience of God.

The point, then, is that we want to take the best of empiricism in general: genuine knowledge must be anchored in validity
claims of evidence and experiential grounding; and we then add what should have been obvious all along: there is sensory
experience, mental experience, and spiritual experience (holarchically interwoven, so that, for example, mental experience
provided by culture mediates and colors, but does not create in toto, sensory experience and, should it occur, spiritual
experience). We then add one final point: don’t confuse these types of experience, and don’t use the categories of one to cover
the others (category error).

Thus, the “death of metaphysics” correctly means the death of using mental experiences (symbols) to stand for spiritual
experiences, and the real birth of genuine metaphysics means: discover those spiritual experiences directly (and communally
shared in a sangha of intersubjective discourse of checks and balances, and thus thoroughly grounded in validity claims).

WHICH BODY?

To return to the main topic: I mention all of this because Berman, by making the somatic-sensory body mean experience in
general, can sneakily cover the entire spectrum of consciousness and claim that all of it is really the somatic-body. He simply
switches definitions whenever necessary: from somatic experience to all experience and back again.

And he actually does this, by coming up with what he calls “the five bodies.” Based on a (rather confused) interpretation of the
Great Chain given by Robert Masters, Berman maintains that there are actually five bodies available to humans: (1) the physical
body; (2) the vital-biotic body, which he also calls the lived-body and, loosely, he says this is also “the mind”; (3) the deeper mind,
astral body, or true Self, which he also calls “soul”; (4) the psychic or paranormal body; and (5) ultimate spirit or the World Soul
body.

This, as I said, is a slightly confused reading of what we have been summarizing as matter, body, mind, soul, and spirit; but

either of these versions of the Great Chain will suffice at this point. Berman’s main contention is that all of these levels of
consciousness are really bodily events; he even claims that they are (potentially) universal because they are rooted in deep
physiological processes of the somatic reality (the five bodies possess what I have called universal deep structures; in his own
way, he is saying that the Great Chain is not a cultural artifact but is rooted in universal deep structures).

If Berman stopped there, that would be fine, more or less. The traditions (such as Vedanta) themselves use “body” in the same
extended sense of “experience,” and since all of the levels of the spectrum of consciousness are experiential realities, they are
often referred to as being “bodies” or “sheaths” (the gross body, the subtle body, the causal body; or the Three Bodies of Buddha:
gross, subtle, and very subtle—same general notion).

But notice, for the traditions, that these “bodies” are not variations on the gross somatic body: the somatic body itself is
simply one of numerous bodies, most of which are completely nonempirical, nonsensory, nonvital, nonbiocentric (I would say, vis-
à-vis the four quadrants, that all of these other bodies have Upper-Right-quadrant correlates, but none of them can be reduced
to those correlates, and none of them are merely Left-Hand gross-vital entities).

But Berman wants it both ways: since the only body that is really real is the gross somatic body, all of these other bodies must
really be . . . distorted ways to fill the primary gap, the basic fault. Once the somatic body differentiates from the world (F-
2)—which Berman does not really see as a necessary differentiation on the way to higher integration, but primarily as the “basic
split, the basic alienation, the basic default”—once that “basic split” occurs, then all of these other bodies are really twisted and
distorted ways to bridge the gap, to come to terms with the Original Sin (the “single” boundary), and thus all of these other
bodies—that is, the entire spectrum of Ascending developments!—are simply and finally “unnecessary artifacts.” The entire
dynamic of ascent and development is a contorted attempt to fill in the original gap, the gap created because we weren’t
“mirrored enough” by Mommy at age two.

Everything past fulcrum-2 is thus fundamentally unnecessary; and with this absurdity, Berman tosses the last ten thousand
years of human development into the garbage can. Both Hitler and Jesus, he tells us, are driven by the same basic energy. Page
after page he rattles on royally about the colossal stupidity of the entire human race, a stupidity that touched every single cultural
artifact past the picking of berries.

Occasionally Berman pauses to grudgingly admire some cultural production (certain modern artists, alchemists, the mystical
Cathars of the Albigensian heresy), and gives a certain backhanded compliment to their accomplishments, along the lines of: (1)
the basic default (F-2) isn’t universal, because foragers don’t have it (or much of it); (2) but the post-berry-picking world is
universally stuck with it; (3) but it can be used creatively or destructively (and here he gives the lip-service to the creative use of
something that, after all, never should have happened in the first place); (4) and then he ends with a call, nevertheless, to
abandon ascent altogether and sink back into the senses, emoting in genuine fashion, and stopping, not to smell the roses, but
only to smell the roses.

In the course of his historical analysis, he inadvertently points out the true drive of much of history, and the true drive that
the experience of the simple somatic body (as

has always been resisted and condemned as heresy, and this heresy is not
Berman painfully attempts to maintain), but rather, actual experiential Ascent.

Berman outlines “four heresies” that have marked the West: the Greek (or Gnostic, by which he usually means Plato/Plotinus,
but which also includes the actual mystical foundations of Jewish and Christian spirituality); the Albigensian heresy (the Cathars
of southern France, who began actual mystical practices and experiences, against which the Inquisition was originally instituted);
the occult sciences (of the later Middle Ages, the early scientists who were also mystics, magicians, and/or occultists of various
flavors); and Nazism/fascism (which is, sort of, twisted ascent).

Interestingly, almost all of the movements that he likes (from certain early mystical scientists to the Cathars) were involved in
actual Ascent (which he calls “five body practice,” which means roughly, spanning the spectrum), and this was viewed as heresy
by the Church (for all the reasons we investigated). And all the movements he especially condemns (Nazism) were involved in
frustrated, twisted, distorted, or falsely promised ascent.

But never mind: it’s time to do away with Ascent altogether. Not time to differentiate between true Ascent (as in the Cathar
movement, which Berman grudgingly acknowledges was one of the finest cultures ever devised in the West, post-foraging-wise)
versus frustrated or twisted Ascent (the Nazis, even though most of the Nazi ideology, as Berman himself inadvertently makes
clear, was of the purely Descended, biocentric, emotion-drenched, nature-appealing, eco-fascist variety).

No, it is time to simply do away with Ascent altogether. What we need is a “restoration of the body,” a “coming to our senses.”
As I earlier pointed out, according to Berman our salvation must be primarily bodily, sensory, and somatic in nature, and thus
what we really need, in this sensory-bound, pleasure-seeking, body-gratifying culture of ours is . . . just a little more body.

Back to the body, back to the senses, back to the purely Descended world. And if it seems to a critic such as myself that our
culture is already choking on sensory gratification, a Berman will always respond that we are not really feeling our body, but
providing substitutes for it. The standard Descended solution: our problem is that we just aren’t close enough to the sensory
Shadows.

Back to the body, back to the senses, back to preconventional, egocentric, nature as it makes me feel. A restoration of the

body: a centering in divine egoism, as long as it feels really good. Berman uses as an example of the “pure love” that he advocates
as our salvation: a type of emotion displayed by a two-year-old child. “I believe it is this sort of consciousness that can properly be
called Love of Life.” Perhaps; but not Love of Other. The two-year-old, however “spontaneous” and “open,” does not take the role
of the other, enter into genuine intersubjective care where love is first seeing the other, putting oneself into the shoes of the
other, and then honoring the other, often at one’s own expense, precisely because it promotes the greatest depth for the
greatest span. The two-year-old, locked into its own feelings, and not troubled by that nasty Basic Fault that lies right around the
corner: there is the retro-Romantic Eden, this egocentric wonderfulness standing down in the face of Kosmic compassion.

Berman thinks about all this, and, true to form, in the last two pages of his book he basically erases his entire argument. “I am
left with one lingering doubt, namely, that I have perhaps overvalued the body as a vehicle for cultural integrity. For returning to
the body, in and of itself, as Paul Ryan once pointed out to me, is a monistic solution—it can only give you monads.”

Preconventional, egocentric, body-bound monads: coming to our senses.

Theodore Roszak, The Voice of the Earth

By far the most sophisticated reenchanter is Theodore Roszak, and in his highly readable The voice of the earth, Roszak sets
out to create an “ecopsychology” which would heal the “split” between human and nature. This is a useful and interesting book,
precisely because it shows what happens when the transpersonal dimensions are left out, and the prepersonal and personal are
forced to do double duty: a strain that finally breaks them both.

Like all reenchanters, Roszak traces the rise of the personal out of the prepersonal (what he also calls the protopersonal), and
then, instead of further development into the transpersonal, we are given merely the task of uniting the prepersonal and the
personal. Instead of integrating Earth, Human, and Heaven (body, mind, and spirit, or prepersonal, personal, and transpersonal,
with the understanding that “Heaven” is right here, right now, on this Earth, when we live in transpersonal awareness)—instead
of recommending that overall integration, a balanced Earth/body and Human/mind is simply confused with Heaven/spirit itself.
And since children and primal people did not differentiate clearly between Earth and Human, they must have been living in
Heaven, and evolution beyond that Eden is a Tragic Mistake. Ecopsychology will reverse this Horrific Crime, and we will all once
again be ushered into Heaven.

The specific difficulty with these types of approaches is that, as we have seen, the real problem (and the real pathology) is not
the differentiation of Earth and Human, but the dissociation of Earth and Human. Roszak rather thoroughly confuses the two,
which throws him into profound pre/trans fallacies, and this shows up in his presentation as a considerable wobbling and
ambivalence (and often blatant self-contradiction) about the “Edenic” state itself. On the one hand he senses (and states) that the
primal state was thoroughly parochial (egocentric/ethnocentric to the core), yet on the other hand it must be the repository of
universal ecological wisdom, so he must figure out a way to eulogize the primal undifferentiated state and distance himself from
it at the same time.

Unlike many reenchanters, Roszak is simply too fine a thinker (not to mention talented writer) to try to gloss over or oppress
the obvious facts of evolution itself, starting with its thoroughly hierarchical nature. The universe “reveals itself as an emerging
hierarchy of interlocking systems (a scale of forms)” (p. 133). “All theories of deep systems are hierarchical. They map the
universe as a pyramid of systems ranked from lesser to greater, lower to higher, simpler to more complex” (p. 173).

Likewise, he clearly grasps emergence, novelty or creativity, and the fact that each level in the holarchy is an actual
transcendence or liberation involving increased relative autonomy. “Emergence is what happens when we move across the
boundary that defines hierarchical levels; we encounter genuine novelty” (p. 172). “Where we cross [a boundary] between higher
and lower system . . . this astonishing process by which each structural level is not only elevated above, but in a significant sense
is liberated from the governance of the next level down. Each level both depends upon and yet transcends the level below” (p.
175).

Transcends and includes: which is precisely why differentiation, which allows transcendence, can go too far into dissociation,
which denies the dependence upon the lower and thus alienates it (the real pathology). Roszak doesn’t seem to grasp this
elemental difference, but he does, nonetheless, approvingly quote L. L. Whyte in this regard: “When not pathological the human
person is, like all viable organisms, a differentiated hierarchy, a superbly coordinated system of hierarchies. Hierarchical structure
is the basic feature common to matter and mind [his italics]. When we are ill there is a failure of coordination at one or more
levels in these hierarchies, and the clarification of the relation of body to mind and psychosomatic illness requires a hierarchical
approach. Guilt, hypocrisy, heartbreak, and so on, are lesions in the hierarchy” (p. 181).

Pathology, in other words, is due not to differentiated hierarchy, but to lesions (dissociations) in the natural hierarchies. And it
is these lesions, not the required differentiations, that are the problem: but this crucial distinction is thoroughly missing in
Roszak’s presentation, and thus he proceeds to attempt to cure the human race with ecopsychology when he has not yet
correctly diagnosed the actual disease, and, as usually happens with such approaches, the cure is more frightful than the illness.

In the meantime, his frank grasp of the basic truths of evolution leads him to an extremely gutsy admission for an eco-

philosopher: human beings are indeed, he says, squarely on top of the pyramid of evolution. “Each level is shaped by the needs of
the next level up. This is what the universe has been doing in all the long while since the atom and the galaxy rose into existence.
It has been reaching toward finer orders of complexity, toward realms so subtle and complex that they can be fabricated only out
of the delicate dynamics of the human imagination. And what stands at the crest of the hierarchy holds a crowning position. It
embodies the full potentiality of all that has gone before, realizing it, expressing it. It occupies the frontier of the cosmos.
Evolution progresses as a hierarchy of dynamic systems, all of which culminate in the human world. Human centrality emerges at
the culminating ‘now’ of a hierarchically evolving universe” (pp. 185, 191, 209).

This “human centrality” is behind Roszak’s endorsement of the Anthropic Principle. And, he says, “The Chain of Being becomes

the temporal progression of complex systems emerging and maturing since the Big Bang” (p. 209).

There is obviously much truth to this pyramid of development as Roszak presents it; the evidence is simply too overwhelming
for him to ignore it. But at precisely the point that all genuine Great Chain theorists would continue the development beyond the
typical human state and into the transhuman, transpersonal, spiritual domains, Roszak is forced to stop. Since he will not
acknowledge any genuinely transpersonal development, humans in their present state (the average egoic-mental state of
consciousness and its desires) are left as the crown of evolution.

And precisely because he lacks a transpersonal dimension, and because present-day humans (the personal domains)
apparently lack anything that is genuinely spiritual, Roszak must situate his spirituality in . . . the prepersonal domain. That’s all
he has left in his pyramid. It is not, as in the genuine Great Holarchy theorists, that the prepersonal and the personal (Earth and
Human, body and mind) have to be taken up, integrated, and healed in the transpersonal domain (Heaven and spirit): rather, our
salvation now lies merely in getting back beneath the original differentiation of Earth and Human: getting back prior to the Great
Crime.

But this presents grave theoretical difficulties for Roszak, because, after all, it implies that evolution—this drive toward what
Roszak calls higher, greater, more complex forms, with each successor being a greater “crowning achievement” toward which all
lower developments were aiming—implies that all of that, somehow, was operative for fifteen billion years, finally producing
humans, whose own evolution . . . then proceeded to run backward. The primitives had it right, and everything else has been
downhill, at which point, in all such accounts, the laws of evolution so eulogized up to that point are simply suspended and
replaced with the author’s favored ideology about how the world should have unfolded.

At this point Roszak’s presentation simply begins to contradict itself on almost every important point. Primal or tribal
consciousness, he says, is indeed parochial and ethnocentric to the core: “Every group has its own rituals, its own words of
power” (p. 76). There is nothing global or universal, he says, in the tribal rituals, and tribal healers deny that there are common,
worldcentric powers at work: the powers work only for their particular tribe: “There are tribal healers who have denied the
validity of any attempt [to reach any peoples beyond the particular tribe]” (p. 76). So much for a global humanity. Thus, Roszak
says, tribal structures and “therapies” are “stubbornly parochial.”

Even though there is nothing in the primal/tribal structure itself that is worldcentric, Roszak must

find some trace of his
Heavenly Paradise here, because he has nowhere else to situate it. And so, flagrantly contradicting himself, he is forced to say
things like: “Science permeates the lives of people everywhere in the modern world. It is the closest our species has come to a
universal culture since the days of the hunters and gatherers” (p. 95). The foragers had a universal culture? When few of them
even spoke the same language? And when he just denied any universality to them?

Likewise, the primal/tribal consciousness per se must have been a source of “ecological wisdom.” And yet his own evidence
shows, as he puts it, that in many instances “tribal societies have abused and even ruined their habitat. In prehistoric times, the
tribal and nomadic people of the Mediterranean basin overcut and overgrazed the land so severely that the scars of the resulting
erosion can still be seen. Their sacramental sense of nature did not offset their ignorance of the long-range damage they were
doing to their habitat” (p. 226).

Likewise, other primal societies have, “in their ignorance, blighted portions of their habitat sufficiently to endanger their own
survival. River valleys have been devastated, forests denuded, the topsoil worn away; but the damage was limited and
temporary” (p. 69).

The correct conclusion, in other words, is that the primal/tribal structure per se—in itself—did not necessarily possess

ecological wisdom, it simply lacked the means to inflict its ignorance on larger portions of the global commons.

The main difference between tribal and modern eco-devastation is not presence or absence of wisdom, but presence of more
dangerous means, where the same ignorance can now be played out on a devastating scale. The cure is not to reactivate the
tribal form of ecological ignorance (take away our means), nor to continue the modern form of that ignorance (the free market
will save us), but rather, to evolve and develop into the centauric vision-logic that,
for the first time in history, can integrate a
biosphere and noosphere now irreversibly differentiated.

And one of the leads in this area is indeed the useful and true portions of systems theory and ecological science that, for the
first time in history
(as Roszak freely concedes) can demonstrate that the ignorance of ecology will kill us all. Neither
indissociation (tribal) nor continuing dissociation (industrialization) will save Gaia: both have amply demonstrated their inherent

failings in that regard.

And that is why, as Roszak constantly points out, “Nothing [referring to science] now stands a better chance of uniting us as
one human family” (p. 95). But, he also stresses, science, as a rather dry and abstract endeavor will not move the hearts and
emotions of millions, and so—he is still looking for somewhere to situate his Heaven, since he will not allow a transpersonal
release—and so what is needed is science integrated with . . . primitive animism. (“If any part of an animist sensibility is to be
reclaimed, the project will have to integrate with modern science”: p. 94).

And here Roszak’s pre/trans fallacy (with all its self-contradictions) comes to the fore. Roszak wants to take, from primals and
from infants, the parts of animism that he likes and then jettison the rest (which he concedes are merely “superstitious”). And
so, in his pick-and-choose paradigm, he announces that “I take the liberty of passing over practices one finds throughout tribal
culture (such as hexes, curses, the evil eye, and human sacrifice) that are authentically ‘superstitious’ . . .” (p. 77). Those practices
are not superstitious; they are integral to the cultural meaning and the functional fit at those stages of development; in every way
it’s a package deal.

Having confused differentiation and dissociation, and thus likewise confusing anything prerational with transrational release,
Roszak leads us on a eulogizing chase through all of the standard elevationist ploys. He fails to see that development involves a
lessening of narcissism (in the bad sense), and thus he must eulogize anything egocentric as a way out of ethnocentric, totally
overlooking preconventional versus postconventional responses, and thus he must champion: narcissism in general, animism,
typhonic bodyego impulse, biocentric immersion. Since he has no developed conception of postconventional society, anything
preconventional steps in to announce our salvation. “If this be narcissism,” he says, “make the most of it.”

In the same way, he subscribes to “the” single boundary between self and other, a boundary that primals and infants do not
possess, and the existence of which constitutes the Primal Crime. The “id” therefore really represents a union with the “entire
world” prior to differentiation, and we must in some sense get back to that primal undifferentiated state to heal the planet. . . .

Lacking a Heaven principle, a genuinely transpersonal state, Roszak must find his salvation, not in the overall integration of
Earth, Human, and Heaven (body, mind, and spirit), but only in the de-differentiation of Earth and Human—which drives most of
his own self-contradictions.

Here is what I believe is very true and very useful about Roszak’s presentation, and how I believe it can be reconstructed:
The differentiation of Earth and Human, body and mind, biosphere and noosphere, begins (as we have seen) with fulcrum-3
and is more or less completed with fulcrum-5. At each of those fulcrums, the differentiation process can go too far into
pathological dissociation, and that indeed is part of the pathology of modernity (the “bad news”). And the cure does involve, as
Roszak indicates, a “recontacting” of the alienated dimensions, that is, a recontacting of the biosphere. When Roszak says the
core of the id is actually the biosphere, I agree entirely (and I made just that point in chapter 6). Every neurosis, I suggested, is a
miniature ecological crisis (repression of biosphere by noosphere), and the worldwide ecological crisis is in fact a worldwide
psychoneurosis.

On all of that, I agree with Roszak completely. But because he confuses differentiation and dissociation, and because he does
not recognize any “crowning” achievement in evolution higher than the human mind (no transpersonal, transmental Spirit), then
he must look for his salvation—and ours—in a “mature” regression to infantile animism/narcissism (somehow integrated with
modern science). He confuses prerational nature/id with transrational spirit.

And, indeed, Roszak concedes that the id/Gaia that we are to recontact is actually a lower structure, driven merely by survival
instincts. It is “a wisdom like that of the body in its stubborn will to pursue the tasks that physical survival demands. In the classic
metaphysical use of the word, this is what ‘soul’ meant: the principle of bodily life that only God could create, but which
functioned at some lower level than the demands of mind or spirit” (p. 159).

So here we have body/id/Gaia—which we are supposed to recontact—being lower than mind or spirit. But of spirit we hear . .

. precisely nothing. Our salvation is simply recontacting the lower and living with that.

Since the biosphere/Gaia has indeed been dissociated, I agree that part of the cure is “derepression of the shadow”—that is,
recontacting the lower structure that has been alienated and distorted. But recontacting the lower is not at all the same as
discovering the higher: and it is in the higher that the true healing, and the true integration, can occur: it is only in the higher
(fulcrum-5 and beyond) that global consciousness, global awareness, global conceptions, and global solutions can even be
entertained in the first place. And in this, Roszak leads us exactly in the wrong direction, under the banner of his pre/trans
confusions.

To use my terms, Roszak traces the “split” as it occurs from fulcrum-3 to fulcrum-5 (from the bodyego to rationality); and since
he recognizes no higher stages, the “cure” must be recontacting the biosphere prior to fulcrum-3 and resurrecting the magico-
animistic primal state. But it is only with worldcentric rationality (which starts at fulcrum-5) that global
solutions to the
dissociations can be conceived and implemented. This global orientation intensifies at fulcrum-6 (vision-logic) and reaches a
major culmination at fulcrum-7 (the Over-Soul that is the World Soul). But Roszak has already confused the World Soul with
magical-animism, and so he has no reason to lead us forward into the higher and integrative stages, and so instead he simply
looks for ways to mix infantile animism/narcissism with modern science.

But since the primal structure (phylo and onto) contained neither inherent ecological wisdom (as he clearly demonstrates)
nor a worldcentric/global orientation (as he also demonstrates), what exactly is it that we are supposed to recapture? The special
form of primal ignorance?

Reintegrating the lower is mandatory, as I fully agreed; but reintegrating the lower is not finding the higher. Yet in our
aggressively Descended world, this is precisely the type of solution that is so attractive. No higher, transpersonal growth is
required: simply fall back into something we allegedly knew yesterday. No nasty Ascent here: let the id be our guide to paradise,
and let biocentric immersion lead the way to the glorious spirit for all.

Instead of climbing up and off the pyramid in transpersonal release—and actually having done with this anthropocentric
madness—let us instead climb right back down it, right back into egocentric, biocentric, narcissistic, self-crowning glory, there to
heal the planet. Because Roszak (and many ecophilosophers in general) aggressively denies any truly transpersonal sphere, the
prepersonal domain is forced to serve that spiritual function.

(See note 17 for chap. 14 for further “reenchanters” and the inherent problems thereof.)

The Devil for Eco-Romanticism

There seems to be a general formula running through most of the reenchanting ecophilosophers, and it is some version of:

rationality is the Devil, Gaia is the God/dess.

One finds variations on this standard formula not only in Berman and Roszak, but in most of the “new paradigm” theorists,

virtually all of the ecofeminists, and virtually all of the ecomasculinists (deep ecologists).

And I believe it has a fairly simple explanation. In Up from Eden I suggested that the God of one stage of evolution and
development tends to become the Devil of the next. What at one stage is worshiped and identified with becomes at the next
stage precisely that which must be transcended, fought, and differentiated from: the God of one stage becomes the Devil of the
next, becomes a reminder of what we once were and should not slide back into, that slide being “sin,” devolution, regression,
retreat.

Thus, the “Pan” God of the pagan religions (half human, half animal) became the actual personification of the Devil for
monotheism. And at the next stage, when Reason became the God of the Enlightenment, the God of monotheistic and mythic
religions became the Devil oppressive of free thought and full human potential—the God of mythic religions now had to be
fought, overcome, transcended: it became the Devil of the Enlightenment.

Likewise, since the postmodern world is beginning to move into postrational modes, the time is ripe for Reason to start looking
like the great Devil. That reason ideally should be transcended and included doesn’t really matter: what tends to hit people first
is the difficult task of actually differentiating from a structure which generations revered as the Divine itself—the God of
Reason—and in that difficult differentiation, fine distinctions about “transcend and include” are not often translated into mass
consciousness: reason starts to the look like the great Devil.

But if reason has become the great Devil, where is the new God? If the World Soul (the structure actually awaiting the
postrational reception) is simply confused with Gaia, then Gaia becomes the new God/dess, the new Spirit, and we have the
standard eco-formula: analytic patriarchal rationality is the Devil, Gaia is the God/dess. Which then translates into a thousand
derivative forms: reason is analytic and divisive, Gaia is holistic and wholeness; reason is nasty patriarchy, wholeness is sweet
matriarchy; reason is authoritarian, Gaia/wholeness is freedom; and so on through a series of dualisms meant to announce the
New Age.

In other words, I believe that in many cases a good and true intuition of the World Soul is being filtered through what is in fact
the old structure of the Eco-pole of the fundamental Enlightenment paradigm, the flatland embrace of empirical mononature (or
the flatland system of Gaia) as God (or Spirit or Goddess).

This is why most of these theories do not escape the flatland paradigm—which is why they so easily confuse great span with
great depth and thus can embrace Gaia as being “more whole,” instead of seeing that it is simply bigger but more shallow:
confusing bigger with better is the flatland paradigm.

And all of this plays directly into the standard regressive (and “reenchanting”) trend of many of the Eco-approaches: analytic
reason is simply condemned, for the most part (a certain lip-service aside) and not also included. These approaches are therefore
constantly tending to go prerational, as we have repeatedly seen (e.g., Berman and Roszak). And since Gaia per se (the biosphere
per se) is regressive as well, we thus have the standard regressive slide into an egocentric/geocentric stance that marks so many
of these approaches.

The ways in which otherwise good and true spiritual intuitions get “unpacked” in less than graceful ways—ways that actually

abort the original intuition—are the topic of the next chapter.

33. P. Rieff, Euphorion, quoted in Lovejoy, p. 298. More than one commentator has pointed out the similarity of Hegel’s system

with that of Proclus, Plotinus’s most brilliant successor.
34. Tillich, History of Christian thought, pp. 488–89.

35. System of transcendental idealism was published in 1800; Origin of species in 1859.
36. Copleston, vol.7, p. 141.
37. Lovejoy, p. 320.
38. Ibid., pp. 262, 198.
39. There are numerous excellent discussions of the untenability of natural selection as the primary mechanism of evolution.
One of the best, for several reasons, is that given by Varela, Thompson, and Rosch in The embodied mind. For a discussion of their
enactive paradigm, see notes 49 and 52 for chap. 2, notes 13 and 43 for chap. 4, and note 1 for chap. 14. See also Stuart
Kauffman’s brilliant The origins of order.

CHAPTER 14. THE UNPACKING OF GOD

  1. Nor, I believe, is Spirit’s literal interpretation as “no-self” very helpful either.

The Buddhist Doctrine of No-Self

As is well known, Theravada Buddhism (and the general Abhidharma doctrine, the oldest of the Buddhist schools, unkindly
referred to by later schools as Hinayana, or “Lesser Vehicle”) has, as one of its central teachings, the doctrine of anatta (or
anatman in Sanskrit), which literally means “no-self.” The mental stream is said to be composed of five aggregates (skandhas),
none of which is or has a self, but together these aggregates give rise to the illusion of a separate, grasping, desiring self. A more
careful meditative analysis of the mind stream, it is said, will reveal that the skandhas, although real enough in themselves, do not
constitute a real and enduring self (but are instead simply discrete and momentary elements of experience), and thus this
liberating discovery is simultaneously a release from the pain (duhkha) of defending an entity that isn’t even there.

This no-self or anatman doctrine was particularly leveled against the Brahmanical and Samkhya doctrines of a permanent,
unchanging, absolute Subject of experience (Purusha, Atman). And against the Atman tradition, the Anatman doctrine was
wielded with much polemical force: in place of substance, flux; in place of self, no-self; in place of unitary, pluralistic; in place of
cohesive, discrete.

Thus, the Abhidharma accepted the reality of momentary, pluralistic, discrete, and atomistic elements (dharmas) and accepted
their causal effects as real (codependent origination). This causal (karmic) linkage allows the discrete momentary states to give
rise to the illusion of an enduring, cohesive self, much as whirling a flashlight at night gives the illusion of a real circle. This
cohesively felt but illusory self is driven by fear, grasping, and ignorance (particularly the ignorance of the reality of momentary
states).

However true aspects of that doctrine might be, it nonetheless generated considerable controversy in subsequent Buddhist
development. Virtually all ensuing schools of Buddhism (the Mahayana, or “Great Vehicle,” and the Vajrayana, or Tantric Vehicle)
accepted the Abhidharma as a starting point, but none of them remained with it: none of them accepted it as the final word, so to
speak. In fact, the Abhidharma doctrine as a complete and adequate system was aggressively attacked, both in its capacity to
cover relative or phenomenal reality and in its ability to indicate absolute reality. Some schools, in fact, would claim that the
Abhidharma, taken in and by itself, fundamentally misunderstood both illusion and reality, both relative and absolute truth:
wrong on all counts, as it were.

Thus, Nagarjuna launched a devastating attack on the ultimate reality of the skandhas and dharmas themselves (they have
apparent reality only), and the general Yogachara and Vajrayana tradition lambasted the skandha system because it only dealt
with “coarse”-level reality (the gross realm, or Nirmanakaya) and did not cover the “subtle” and the “very subtle” realms (what
we have called the subtle and the causal, and which Vajrayana identified with the Sambhogakaya and Dharmakaya). Higher stages
of meditative development, Vajrayana claimed, would disclose these subtle and very subtle dimensions of consciousness
(particularly in the anuttarayogatantra tradition, which we will discuss in a moment), and the Abhidharma system, they claimed,
was completely inadequate in this regard: it covered only the Nirmanakaya (gross-form-oriented or sensorimotor-oriented
consciousness).

One would think that as a Buddhist, Nagarjuna would busy himself with the standard attacks on the Samkhya and Atman
traditions; in fact, his main target is the Abhidharma of early Buddhism. “Nagarjuna himself applied the dialectic [critical analysis]
against the Abhidharmika system—the doctrine of Elements [dharmas]. The Madhyamika Karikas [one of Nagarjuna’s major
works] are a sustained attempt to evolve the Śunyata [Emptiness] doctrine out of a criticism of the realistic and dogmatic
interpretations of early Buddhism. His criticism of the Samkhya and other systems of the Atma tradition is rare and implicit”
(Murti, p. 165).

T. R. V. Murti’s The Central Philosophy of Buddhism, although not without its difficulties and occasional inaccuracies, is
nonetheless a classic in the field, and it still manages to pinpoint several crucial factors in this area (many scholars, as David Loy
points out, feel that “Murti’s study remains perhaps the best work in English on the subject”: p. 59). Without endorsing all of
Murti’s conclusions, I would nevertheless like to draw on those aspects of his presentation that remain valid. And all of this will
eventually bring us to the genuine problems that have arisen in interpreting Spirit in terms of a “no-self” doctrine.

Because above all, for Nagarjuna, absolute reality (Emptiness) is radically Nondual (advaya)—in itself it is neither self nor no-
self, neither atman nor anatman, neither permanent nor momentary/flux. His dialectical analysis is designed to show that all
such categories, being profoundly dualistic, make sense only in terms of each other and are thus nothing in themselves (the
Emptiness of all views and all phenomena). This dialectical analysis applies to all things, all thoughts, all categories: they are all
mutually dependent upon each other and thus are nothing in themselves. They therefore have a relative or phenomenal reality,
but not absolute or unconditioned reality (which is Emptiness disclosed in nondual prajna, which is not a reality apart from the

relative world of Form, but is itself the Emptiness or Suchness of all Forms).

“In the Prajnaparamita and the literature of the Madhyamika [the school founded by Nagarjuna], the one basic idea that is
reiterated ad nauseum is that there is no change, no origination, no cessation, no coming in or going out; the real is neither one,
nor many; neither atman nor anatman; it is as it is always.

“Origination, decay, etc. [codependent origination of Abhidharma], are imagined by the uninformed; they are speculations
indulged in by the ignorant. The real is utterly devoid (Śunya [Empty]) of these and other conceptual constructions; it is
transcendent to thought and can be realized only in non-dual knowledge—Prajna or Intuition, which is the Absolute itself.

“We are also expressly warned not to consider Śunyata as another theory, the Dharmata [the Real] as other than the
phenomenal world. The Absolute in one sense transcends phenomena as is devoid of empiricality, and in a vital sense is
immanent or identical with it as their reality.

“The butt of the criticism is the dogmatic speculations (the reality of skandha, dhatu, ayatana, etc.) of the earlier Buddhism; the
skandhas are not impermanent; but they are Śunyata, lacking a nature of their own. Pratitya-Samutpada is not the temporal
[and causal] sequence of entities [as in the Abhidharma] but their essential dependence”—that is, each entity depends on the
others and thus is nothing in itself: it is not ultimately real—it belongs to appearance only. Thus, the entire doctrine of no-self
and dependent origination “receives a deeper interpretation as appearance; and by a relentless dialectic it is shown that nothing
escapes this predicament” (p. 86, my italics).

Thus, what for the Abhidharma were marks of the real (impermanence, no-self, and flux) are all shown by Nagarjuna to be
marks of the unreal: they are dualistic notions dependent upon their opposites, and thus are nothing in themselves. And
dependent origination—the notion of temporal causal linkage between phenomena—is shown by Nagarjuna to mean that no
phenomenon is independent, unconditioned, self-generating; rather, they are all mutually dependent, which looks like a nice
systems theory, and indeed it is; but Nagarjuna then adds the crucial point: mutual dependence is a mark of the unreal, since the
dependent entities are nothing in themselves—they have apparent or relative reality only, not unconditioned or absolute reality:
“phenomena are unreal or śunya because they are dependent; mutual dependence is a mark of the unreal” (p. 106).

Nor can we escape this by taking dependent origination itself as absolutely real, because, says Nagarjuna, the same argument
can be applied to the series itself: if all things dependently originate, does origination itself originate? If so, it is relative and
unreal; if not, it contradicts itself, and is thus unreal: either way, unreal.

Thus, for Nagarjuna, all views, of whatever nature, are smashed by the dialectic. “Relativity or mutual dependence is a mark of
the unreal. No phenomenon, no object of knowledge, escapes this universal relativity. Tattva or the Real is something in itself,
self-evident and self-existing. Only the Absolute as the unconditioned is real, and for that very reason it cannot be conceived as
existence or non-existence, atma or anatma” (p. 139).

And, according to Nagarjuna (and perfectly à la Augustine) we can criticize all partial views because we have, in our own
awareness, access to prajna, or nondual Perfection of Wisdom, against which imperfections stand out like a sore thumb. (For a
further discussion of Nagarjuna’s dialectic, see note 4 below.)

Absolute reality, then, is neither self nor no-self, neither substance nor flux, neither permanent nor impermanent, nor any
other combination of such dualistic notions, but rather is the nondual Emptiness of all phenomena, all views, all stances. As the
Ratnakuta Sutra (one of the early Mahayana texts) puts it: “That everything is permanent is one extreme; that everything is
transitory is another. . . . that ‘atman is’ is one end, that ‘atman is not’ is another; but the Middle Way between the atma and
anatma views is the Inexpressible.” Is Emptiness.

Thus, “for the Madhyamika, the Real is neither one nor many, neither permanent nor momentary, neither subject nor object . .
. , neither atma nor anatma. These are relative to each other and are equally unreal. Nagarjuna says: ‘If the apprehension of the
impermanent as permanent is illusion, why is the apprehension of the indeterminate as impermanent not illusion as well?’” (p.
239).

The question then arises, if no-self and impermanence do not actually apply to the Absolute (which is neither self nor no-self,
nor both nor neither, etc.), do the notions of impermanence and no-self apply to the phenomenal stream itself (as maintained by
the Abdhidharma)? If no-self is not absolutely true, is it at least relatively true? If it does not apply to noumenon, does it at least
apply to phenomena?

And here the doctrine fares no better. Nagarjuna (and several of his followers) demonstrate that on the phenomenal level, the
states (skandhas) cannot exist without a self, and the self cannot exist without the states: they are mutually dependent. Likewise,
substance does not exist without modes or flux, and vice versa. Neither the states in themselves (without a self), nor the
momentary modes, can even offer an adequate explanation of phenomena!

“If we confine ourselves to the phenomenal point of view, if we propose merely to give a transcription of what obtains in
everyday experience, we must accept, besides the states or moments, the activity and the agent. From the noumenal point of
view of the Unconditioned truth, the moments too are as unreal as the activity which the earlier Buddhism rightly rejects. The
correct Madhyamika standpoint is that modes by themselves cannot offer an adequate explanation of phenomena. Substance too
must be accepted” (p. 187).

Likewise for the self as cohesive agent in the phenomenal stream: “Nagarjuna explicitly says that there can be no act without
an agent or vice versa; he calls them ignorant of the true meaning of the Buddha’s teaching who take the reality of the atman only
or of the states as separate from it; if there is no atman apart from the states, there are no states too apart from the atman. In
fact, the entire Madhyamika position is developed by a trenchant criticism of the one-sided modal view [selfless flux] of the
Abhidharmika system, by being alive to the other side of the picture equally exhibited in the empirical sphere [my italics].

“In the same strain Chandrakirti [a principal successor of Nagarjuna] complains that the Abhidharmikas have not given an
adequate picture of the empirical even. ‘If it is sought to depict the empirically real then besides momentary states, the activity
and the agent too must be admitted.’ Chandrakirti shows, in a sustained criticism of the view of mere attributes or states without
any underlying self in which they inhere, that this does violence to common modes of thought and language; it fails as a correct
picture of the empirical; nor [as we have already seen] can it be taken as true of the unconditioned real”—wrong on both counts,
as it were (pp. 249–50).

These criticisms pointed up “the inadequacy of a stream of elements to account for the basic facts of experience, memory,
moral responsibility, spiritual life, etc.: the states (skandhas) cannot completely substitute the atman; a permanent synthetic unity
must be accepted” (as a relative truth; p. 81). “On the modal view [anatma, no-self], there are the different momentary states
only; there is no principle of unity. But mental life is inexplicable without the unity of the self” (p. 205).

But again, on the phenomenal plane, this does not mean that the self-view alone covers the scene: “The self of the [early]
Brahmanical systems is a bare colorless unity bereft of difference and change, which alone impart significance to it.” Rather,
according to Nagarjuna, “the self has no meaning apart from the states . . . , and there are no states apart from the self. The two
are mutually dependent”—and therefore, both are phenomenally real but ultimately unreal, ultimately Empty (pp. 204–6, 249).

In short, both the cohesive self and the momentary states are relatively real, but both are ultimately Empty: the absolute is
neither self nor no-self (nor both nor neither), neither momentary nor permanent (nor both nor neither), but is rather the
“Thatness” disclosed by nondual Prajna or primordial awareness, a “Thatness” which, being radically unqualifiable, cannot be
captured in any concepts whatsoever.

(We would say: the signifier “Emptiness” can only be understood in those who possess the developmental signified that is
Prajna, whereupon the actual referent “Emptiness” is directly perceived as the Emptiness of all forms whatsoever, and not the
privileging of one form or concept, such as no-self, over its opposite, such as self. But the referent of the signifier “Emptiness”
becomes obvious only upon the awakening of Prajna, and Prajna is not an idea or a theory but an injunction or a paradigm: it
begins its practice by categorically rejecting every conceivable category of thought to embrace the Real, or Dharmata. This
categorical rejection—the dialectic—creates an opening or clearing in awareness in which the primordial and unobstructed
nature of the Real can shine forth nondualistically as the Suchness of all phenomena. And all of those words are nevertheless still
signifiers whose actual referents are disclosed only in that “opening” or “clearing,” and prior to the discovery of that opening or
Emptiness, they are all equally off the mark. Even the phrase “Emptiness is free of thought concepts” would itself be denied:
that’s just more words. Where is the actual referent? Where is your Original Face right now?)

Scholars are still arguing about the exact influence of Nagarjuna on subsequent Eastern thought, but most agree that the
Nondual Madhyamika was a profound revolution that, to one degree or another, influenced virtually all succeeding schools of
Asian thought (either directly or indirectly). Because Emptiness was not a realm apart from or divorced from other realms, but
rather was the reality or Suchness or Emptiness of all realms, then nirvana was not, indeed could not be, sought apart from the
phenomenal world. This, indeed, was revolutionary.

Thus the almost purely Ascending and Gnostic bent of the Samkhya, Yoga, and Abhidharma systems (nirvana as the extinction
or utter cessation of samsara) gave way to a variety of Nondual systems (Yogachara, Vedanta, Tantra), all of which maintained, in
their various ways, that “Emptiness is not other than Form, Form is not other than Emptiness”—the union and integration of the
Ascending and Descending Paths, of Wisdom and Compassion, of Eros and Agape, of Ascent to the One (formless nirvana)
perfectly and fully embracing the world of the Many (samsara and Form).

In all of these developments, a Path of Ascending (and Ascetic) Purification and Renunciation (where defilements are
exterminated in cessation) gave way to Paths of Transformation (where the defilements are seen to be the seeds of
corresponding wisdoms, since nirvana and samsara are ultimately not-two: the Ascending wisdom has a Descending compassion,
and thus the defilements—indeed, the entire manifest domains—are seen to be expressions of the Absolute, not detractions
from it: the integration of Ascending and Descending, Emptiness and Form, Wisdom and Compassion). And these in turn often
gave way to Paths of Self-Liberation, where the defilements are seen to be already self-liberated just as they are, and just as
they arise, since their basic nature is always already primordial Purity (pure Emptiness in pure Presence: the radical and already
spontaneously accomplished union of Emptiness and awareness/clarity/form: the already accomplished union of Ascent and
Descent: Emptiness and Awareness, Emptiness and Clarity, and Emptiness and Form).

And all of this, in a sense, was opened up by Nagarjuna. Already in the Madhyamika we find the twin principles of Prajna
(Wisdom) and Karuna (Compassion), the former seeing that all Forms are Empty, the latter seeing that Emptiness manifests as all
Form, and thus each and every Form is to be treated with care and compassion and reverence. (Cf. the whole discussion of this

theme of ascending Wisdom—the Good—and descending Compassion—Goodness—in chapters 9 and 10.) “Śunyata [Emptiness]
and Karuna [Compassion] are the two principal features of the Bodhicitta [awakened mind]. Śunyata is Prajna, [Wisdom or]
intuition, and is identical with the Absolute. Karuna is the active principle of compassion that gives concrete expression to
Emptiness in phenomena . . . , a free phenomenalizing act of grace and compassion [Descent/involution or manifestation itself as
an act of Agape/Compassion]. If the first [Prajna] is transcendent and looks to the Absolute [Eros], the second [Karuna] is fully
immanent and looks down toward phenomena [Agape; thus together: Ascent and Descent, evolution and involution]. The first is
the universal reality of which no determinations can be predicated [Emptiness disclosed in and as Prajna]; it is beyond the duality
of good and evil, love and hatred, virtue and vice; the second is goodness, love and pure act. Buddha and the Bodhisattva are thus
amphibious beings with one foot in the Absolute and the other in phenomena [nondual]. They are virtuous and good [Eros] and
in the world [Agape]. With its phenomenalizing aspect, Karuna, the formless Absolute (Śunya)
the source of all goodness
manifests itself as the concrete world. But the forms neither exhaust nor do they bring down the Absolute. It is through these
forms again that individuals ascend and find their consummation with the universal Real” (pp. 264, 109).

This profoundly Nondual conception had its equally profound impact. “Śunyata is the pivotal concept of Buddhism. The entire
Buddhist philosophy turned on this. The earlier realistic phase of Buddhism, with its rejection of substance and uncritical erection
of a theory of elements, was clearly a preparation for the fully critical and self-conscious dialectic of Nagarjuna. Not only is the
Yogachara idealism [Empty Consciousness] based on the explicit acceptance of Śunyata, but the critical and absolutist [Nondual]
trend in the Vedanta tradition [of Gaudapada and Shankara and Ramana Maharshi] is also traceable to this” (p. 59).

And likewise the rise of Tantra. Although general tantric practices have a long history, nonetheless “it is Śunyata that provided
the metaphysical basis for the rise of Tantra”—largely because, as I indicated, nirvana was no longer conceived as being away
from samsara (and body and sex and flesh and the senses in general) but rather was to be found within them. “It is the Śunya of
the Madhyamika that made Tantricism possible. It may thus be said to have initiated a new phase in Buddhist philosophy and
religion; this had its due influence on the corresponding phase on the Brahmanical side.” As Bhattacharya put it, “There is hardly a
Tantra in Hindu literature which is not tinged with Buddhistic ideas; it is no exaggeration to say that some Tantras of Hindus are
entirely Buddhist in origin. It is thus amply proved that the Buddhist Tantras greatly influenced the Hindu Tantric literature” (all
quotes p. 109).

These are a few of the reasons that I earlier likened Nagarjuna’s influence in the East to that of Plotinus in the West: they

brought the Nondual revolution.

Perhaps the major difference between the Madhyamika and the subsequent Non-dual traditions which it sparked is that
Madhyamika (as Prasangika) remained the pure via negativa school: no concepts at all (including the concept of no concepts)
could be applied to the Real, which is “what” is disclosed in Prajna, not in concepts or ideas (I’ll return to this in a moment: it was
primarily a statement about signifiers and referents and corresponding injunctions/paradigms). Emptiness was not a conceptual
view, but the Emptiness of all views, which itself is not another view. As Nagarjuna trenchantly put it, “Emptiness of all views is
prescribed by the Buddhas as the way of liberation.
Incurable indeed are they who take Emptiness itself as a view. It is as if one
were to ask, when told that there is nothing to give, to be given that nothing” (p. 163).

Thus ultimately Emptiness takes no sides in a conceptual argument; Emptiness is not a view that can dislodge other views; it
cannot be brought in to support one view as opposed to another: it is the Emptiness of all views, period. The relative merits (or
relative truth) of various views are to be decided on their own terms.

The subsequent Nondual schools would, in various ways, relax the purity of this intense via negativa and, also in various ways,
would look for phenomenal metaphors for Emptiness. Advaita Vedanta and Yogachara/Vijnanavada (Consciousness-only) schools
“both reach advaitism [Nondualism]—the advaita of Pure Being (Brahman) and the advayata of Pure Consciousness (vijnapti-
matrata) by rejecting appearance through dialectical methods—through negation. Their Absolutes partake of the form of the
Madhyamika Śunyata in being transcendent to thought and being accessible only to non-empirical Intuition [prajna, jnana]. They
also have recourse to the two truths [absolute and relative]” (p. 59).

Thus, “In the Madhyamika, Vijnanavada [Consciousness-only], and Vedanta systems, the Absolute is non-conceptual and non-
empirical [perceived with the eye of contemplation, and not merely with the eye of mind or the eye of flesh]. It is realized in a
transcendent non-dual experience, variously called by them prajna-paramita, lokottara-jnana, and aparoksanubhuti respectively.
All emphasize the inapplicability of empirical determinations to the Absolute, and employ the language of negation. They are all
agreed on the formal aspect of the Absolute [i.e., its strict unqualifiability with merely phenomenal categories].”

However, “The Vedanta and Vijnanavada identify the absolute with something that is experienced in some form even
empirically—the Vedanta with Pure Being which is Atman and the Vijnanavada with Consciousness. Taking these as real, they try
to remove the wrong ascriptions which make the absolute appear as a limited empirical thing. When, however, the atman or
vijnana is absolute,
it is a misuse of words to continue to call it by such terms; for there is no other from which it could be
distinguished. They are also [at this point] reduced to [and agree with] the Madhyamika position of the Absolute as utterly
inexpressible. Words can only be used metaphorically to indicate it” (p. 236, my italics).

But in that indication lay the direction that subsequent Nondual schools would follow (even though always resting, as it were,

in final Emptiness). “The Vedanta and Vijnanavada [and Tantra], owing to their [metaphorical] identification of the real with
Atman or Vijnana [or Tantra: great bliss] are seemingly more able to provide a bridge between the world of appearance and the
Absolute. The transition seems easier. The Madhyamika by his insistence on the sheer transcendence of the absolute and his
refusal to identify it with anything met with in his experience is too abrupt and harsh. But in principle, however, there is no
difference in the form of the Absolutes in all these systems. Śunyata represents the form of all Nondualism” (p. 237).

As for the “bridge” between Absolute and phenomena: “Both Vedanta and Vijnanavada analyze illusion [samsara] and show
that the illusory appears on a real ground but for which illusion itself would not be possible [again, cf. Augustine]. The world-
illusion is thus a super-imposition on Brahman or Vijnana. It is not true to say that the Madhyamika conceives illusion to occur
without any underlying ground. Tattva [Suchness] as Dharmata [realm of the Real] is accepted by the Madhyamika as the
underlying ground of phenomena. But it is not [actually] shown by him to be immanent in experience, how Dharmata activates
and illumines empirical things. Not that the Madhyamika takes the Absolute and the world of phenomena as two different sets of
entities; but the Absolute is nowhere explicitly shown to be in things constituting their very reality. The relation between the
two is not made abundantly clear. This may be said to constitute a drawback in the Madhyamika conception of the Absolute” (p.
237).

And this “drawback” is what Vedanta, Yogachara, and Tantra set about to redress.
In their various conceptions, the pure Self constitutes a bridge to the Absolute (Vedanta), pure Consciousness freed of duality
constitutes a bridge (Yogachara), and the emotions and desires of ordinary awareness constitute a bridge (Tantra). Thus, in
Vedanta, “Brahman is no doubt devoid of determinations [is pure Emptiness]; it cannot be made an object of thought as a
particular thing is. But it is self-evident [nondual intuition of Brahman is self-evident, self-certifying immediateness] and because
of this anything becomes evident; it implicitly, invariably and unconditionally illumines all things. In a slightly different manner
Vijnanavada shows that the object is dependent on consciousness, and not vice versa.” Likewise, Tantra would show that even
ordinary emotions and desires and confusions, if entered into with open awareness, would disclose the wisdoms at their base.
Bridges each and all, whereas for “Madhyamika the Absolute is also held to be immanent, but epistemologically it is not shown to
be such”—the drawback (p. 237).

Before we move on to the next and closely related topic (namely, the subtler stages of consciousness revealed beyond the five
gross skandhas of Hinayana), let me finish with Murti by noting his assessment of the relation of the Consciousness-only schools
with aspects of Western Idealism: “The parallel for Vijnanavada in the West is the system of Fichte or Hegel, both of whom
conceive the Pure Ego (Fichte) or Reason (Hegel) as self-legislative, as containing and creating both the categories and the objects
on which the categories function. The difference between Hegel and Vijnanavada is that the Hegelian absolute is thought or
Reason [vision-logic]; the Vijnanavada absolute is above reason and is non-dual” (p. 317). I believe that the assessment I give later
in this chapter is more specific, but the general agreement with Murti will be obvious.

The tantric Buddhism of Tibet (Vajrayana) would (particularly in the oldest, or Nyingma, tradition) divide the overall Buddhist
teachings into nine yanas (vehicles, levels, stages): the first two were Hinayana, the third was Mahayana, and the remaining six
were Tantric, divided into the three lower or outer Tantras (Kriya, Charya, Yoga), and the three higher or inner Tantras
(Mahayoga, Anuyoga, and Atiyoga).

I will here briefly focus on the two highest yanas, the Anuyoga (or “Highest Yoga Tantra”) and the Atiyoga, or Dzogchen, the

“Great Perfection.”

The “bridges” that tantric Anuyoga would disclose between the ordinary, gross-oriented mind and the enlightened mind of
Clear Light Emptiness centered on the subtler states of consciousness and their associated “energies” or “winds.” Consciousness
was said to be divided into “gross,” “subtle,” and “very subtle” (causal) dimensions, with each dimension possessing a “body” or
“medium” or “energy,” commonly called a “wind” (so that we have a gross bodymind, a subtle bodymind, and a very subtle
bodymind). Meditation consisted in a developmental unfolding of gross mind to subtle mind to very subtle (causal) mind,
accomplished by a meditative manipulation of the winds or energies or bodies that supported each mind.

Thus, the existence of the five skandhas is fully acknowledged, as in the Abhidharma, but the skandhas are, as it were, just the
beginning of the story. The five skandhas are generally listed as (1) physical form, (2) sensation, (3) perception/impulse, (4)
emotion/image (“dispositions”), and (5) symbolic/conceptual consciousness. (Note that these are also exactly the first five basic
structures of consciousness in the Upper-Left quadrant as I presented them in the text; see, for example, figs. 4-1, 5-1, and 9-1.)

For the higher Tantras, the last skandha—or mental consciousness in general—is then further divided into three general
domains: the gross, the subtle, and the very subtle. The gross realm is the sensorimotor realm, and the gross mind is the mind
tied to, or reflective of, the sensorimotor world (and supported by the gross or vital wind). The subtle domain is the mind freed
from all gross-conceptions (as revealed in higher meditative states, certain dream states, and so on), supported by the subtle
wind (and channels and drops—all part of the “subtle anatomy” of consciousness). The very subtle domain is the mind of Clear
Light Emptiness, supported by the “eternal indestructible drop” and very subtle wind in the center of the Heart.

These three domains (gross, subtle, and very subtle or causal) are also said to correspond to the Nirmanakaya, the
Sambhogakaya, and the Dharmakaya; and to waking, dream, and deep sleep states (at which point the similarities with the

Vedanta become quite striking; see Cozort 1986 and Gyatso 1982).

Geshe Kelsang Gyatso explains: “The five physical sense consciousnesses—those of the eye, ear, nose, tongue, and body—are
necessarily gross levels of mind. The sixth consciousness—mental consciousness itself—has three divisions of gross, subtle, and
very subtle. All eighty indicative conceptions [waking-state concepts and skandhas] belong to the gross level of mind. These are
the ‘used minds’ and include the different thoughts we remember, what we think, and so forth. They are ‘used minds’ because
they realize, hold and cognize their objects [all in the gross realm]; they think and meditate and we—the person—use them. In
addition, the first four signs of meditation [its early stages relating to the five elements] are all gross minds because their
mounting winds are gross” (p. 139).

As the gross mind (and wind) subsides with further meditation, the subtle dimensions (of which there are three) begin to

unfold in developmental sequence.

Using my terminology, these three subtle minds (beyond the gross-oriented ego/centaur) begin with the psychic level (and the
psychic anatomy of subtle winds and channels that begins to disclose at that level) and move into the subtle realm itself
(experienced as various interior illuminations, as we will see), culminating in perfect cessation or pure unmanifest causal
absorption (experienced as “black near-attainment”).

Thus, Gyatso: “Beginning with the fifth sign [of advanced meditation, which is called white luminosity appearance] the subtle
minds are experienced. They manifest from the beginning of the mind of white appearance to the mind of red increase [which are
both subtle-level illuminations] to the end of the mind of black near-attainment [causal cessation]. Each successive mind is subtler
than the last. Each is classified as subtle because during its arraisal there are no gross dualistic conceptual thoughts” (p. 139).
(Compare this with note 8 for chapter 8, where I defined the subtle level as having no gross-referents in cognition; there is still,
however, a subtle dualism between subject and object, and this is also pointed out by Anuyoga.)

This subtle-level development culminates in “black near-attainment,” “black” because all objective awareness ceases, and
“near-attainment” because it is close to pure Nondual Emptiness/Awareness (or the Clear Light). As I would put it, black near-
attainment is the transition between causal and nondual. “Finally, after the mind of black near-attainment has ceased, the mind
of clear light arises. This is called the very subtle mind [causal/nondual] because there is no subtler mind than this” (p. 139).

It is this very subtle (causal/nondual) mind that is the Empty Ground of Enlightenment, and thus it is also called the “Root
Mind” or the “Foundation Mind,” and it is associated with the very subtle wind that is the “eternal indestructible drop or empty
essence” in the heart. Gyatso: “The very subtle wind and the very subtle mind that is mounted upon it reside in the indestructible
drop in the center of the heart” (p. 74). “At that time, the very subtle primordial wind and mind of clear light become manifest. It
is called ‘the eternal indestructible drop’ because the continuum of the very subtle wind within it is never broken” (Cozort, pp. 76,
72). Gyatso: “Without utilizing this very subtle mind and wind there is absolutely no possibility of reaching the perfect
enlightenment of Buddhahood” (p. 140).

Gyatso continues: “This very subtle mind residing within the heart is referred to both as the root mind and the resident mind.
This latter name is employed to differentiate it from the gross and subtle levels of mind, which are temporary. While the gross
body and mind are temporary bases upon which the ‘I’ is imputed [mistaken for the Real], the primary and continuously residing
bases of imputation are the very subtle mind and its mounted wind” (his italics; pp. 137, 195.)

Gyatso then drives to the major point: “The very subtle body of the continuously residing continuum never dies [is timeless]. In
the same way, the continuously residing body—the very subtle wind—is never separate from the continuously residing self. You
have never been separated from it in the past nor will you ever be separate from it in the future” (p. 195, my italics).

Note the use of “continuously residing self”; we will return to this terminology shortly; for the moment simply notice that, as a
(and it remains merely a metaphor until one has awakened to the direct realization for oneself), it is perfectly

metaphor
appropriate to use “continuously residing self” to indicate this state.

This very subtle mind (and continuously residing self)—that is, the pure Empty Awareness as Clear Light—is the root cause
and support of all
lesser states and domains (hence “causal”). “The distinguishing factor of secret mantra [Vajrayana] is its
assertion that the deluded mind of self-grasping depends upon its gross mounted wind. This gross wind developed from a subtle
one which in turn developed from the very subtle wind mounted by the all empty mind of clear light.” And there is a precise
description of Involution or Efflux (causal to subtle to gross) (p. 194).

And therefore, after one has developed (or evolved) to an awakening of the very subtle consciousness (nondual
Emptiness/Awareness), one then consciously reverses this path of Ascent and deliberately re-creates the complete path of
Descent: one reanimates from the causal to the subtle to the gross, reentering on the “way down” all of the meditative signs
and all of the actual domains that one first met on the “way up,” thus uniting and integrating the Path of Ascent with the Path of
Descent (the real secret of Tantra), balanced and upheld by the indestructible empty essence that is the Heart.

Thus Gyatso: “When you arise from the appearance of Clear Light the first thing you will experience is the mind of black near-
attainment of reverse order. Then comes the mind of red increase, the mind of white appearance, the eighty gross conceptual
minds [and senses] and so forth in an order that is the reverse of the sequence in which the winds originally dissolved. The mind
of clear light is the foundation of all other minds. When the gross and subtle minds and winds dissolve into the indestructible drop

at the heart [pure Ascent], you perceive only the clear light and it is from this clear light that all other minds—each one more
gross than the one it follows—are generated [pure Descent]” (p. 76, my italics).

As for referring to the Real (Emptiness) as a continuously residing self (or True Self, or pure Consciousness, etc.): since
Nagarjuna had already demonstrated that the Real is neither self nor no-self, but that in the phenomenal realm, there is no self
without the states and no states without the self, then the metaphor of a True Self could in fact serve as a much better bridge:

Not that a phenomenal self gives way to no-self (for pure Emptiness is neither self nor no-self); and not that a phenomenal
no-self gives way to pure Emptiness (there is no phenomenal no-self); but rather, a phenomenal self gives way to pure Emptiness
(that strictly speaking is neither self nor no-self nor both nor neither).

And since in the phenomenal realm the self is necessary and useful (as Nagarjuna and Chandrakirti pointed out), then as a
bridging metaphor, it was more adequate to speak of the phenomenal self (relatively real but ultimately illusory or phenomenal-
only) giving way to a True Self (that was no-phenomenal-self, and that strictly speaking was neither self nor no-self but pure
Emptiness, free of all conceptual elaborations).

Thus Emptiness as True Self, Emptiness as pure Consciousness, Emptiness as Rigpa (pure knowing Presence), Emptiness as
primordial Wisdom (prajna,
jnana, yeshe), Emptiness as primordial Purity, even Emptiness as Absolute Subjectivity: all of these
bridging notions began to spring up in the Mahayana and Vajrayana to supplement (or even replace) the notion of no-self, which,
strictly speaking, was wrong both phenomenally and noumenally.

And indeed, starting with the Nirvana Sutra, the absolute was often metaphorically categorized as “Mahatman,” the “Great
Self” or “True Self,” which was no-phenomenal-self: the selfless Self, so to speak (still metaphorical). And down to today (to give
just a few examples), Zen master Shibayama would find that the ultimate state could best be metaphorically indicated as
“Absolute Subjectivity.” As he puts it, “The Master does not refer to the subjectivity that stands over against objectivity. It is
‘Absolute Subjectivity’, which transcends both subjectivity and objectivity and freely creates and uses them. It is ‘Fundamental
Subjectivity,’ which can never be objectified or conceptualized and is complete in itself, with the full significance of existence in
itself” (Zen comments on the Mumonkan, p. 92).

Likewise, Shibayama uses “True Self” to mean no-separate-self: “Thus Mumon says, ‘There is nowhere to hide the True Self.’
When the world is I-myself, there is no self. When there is no self, the whole world is nothing but I-myself, and this is the true no-
mind in Zen. The ancient Masters were never tired of pointing out that the ‘True Man of no title’ [True Self that is no self] is the
Master, or Absolute Subjectivity, and this is one’s original True Self. To realize one’s antecedent determinant is to awaken to the
‘the True Self that is prior to the birth of one’s parents.’ It is to be born anew as a person of Absolute Subjectivity” (pp. 173, 123,
338). As Suzuki Roshi would put it, small mind finds itself in Big Mind.

Likewise, by the time we reach the highest vehicle in the Vajrayana (which is Maha-Ati, or Dzogchen, “The Great Perfection”),
the absolute is most often described in terms of permanence, singularity, freedom, unbroken continuity, ongoing pure Presence.
Thus the great Dzogchen teacher, Chagdud Tulku Rinpoche, who is one of a handful of Tibetan masters giving the entire Dzogchen
teachings, A to Z, including rushan, togyal, and trekchod, explains: “From the day we were born until the day we die, our life
experience is an ever-changing relative truth that we hold to be very real. It is not, however, absolutely real or permanent. This is
very important to understand. When you wake up from your dream of life, all of your experiences, which seemed true, were not
really true in the absolute sense.

“The criterion we can use for understanding truth is permanence. If something is permanent, it is true. If it is impermanent, it is
not true, because it is going to disappear. To wake us up so we can see the illusory quality of our relative reality and understand
our foundational absolute nature is the goal of the Buddha Dharma. A completely awakened state is enlightenment, the
unwavering recognition of the absolute nature of our being. Absolute nature pervades everything and is separate from nothing,
but we have gone so far into mind’s dualistic delusion, that we have lost sight of what is absolute. Seeing separateness where
there is none, we suffer in our experience of relative truth, [quenched only by] the unchanging, deathless absolute, the
unchanging bliss of enlightenment” (Life in relation to death, pp. 10, 11, 14).

Likewise the Dzogchen master Namkhai Norbu, describing the self-knowing absolute or primordial state of pure Presence
(yeshe/rigpa), points out that the Primordial State (or pure Presence, pure Emptiness) is not a particular experience, whether of
pleasure or clarity or “voidness” itself, but rather is that which cognizes all experiences (or the pure Presence of any experience):
“There is a great deal of difference between a sensation of pleasure and one of voidness, but the inherent nature of both the two
experiences is one and the same. When we are in a state of voidness [no-thoughts], there is [nonetheless] a presence that
continues all the time, a presence which is just the same in an experience of pleasurable sensation [or any other experience]. This
Presence is unique and beyond the mind. It is a non-dual state which is the basis of all the infinite forms of manifestation.”

Thus, he continues, “All that appears to us as a dimension of objects [‘out there’] is not, in fact, really something concrete at all,
but is an aspect of our own primordial state appearing to us. Different experiences can arise for us, but the presence never
changes” (Dzogchen, pp. 52, 53, 50).

Different meditation practices engineer different states and different experiences, but pure Presence itself is unwavering, and
thus the highest approach in Dzogchen is “Buddhahood without meditation”: not the creation but rather the direct recognition

of an already perfectly present and freely given primordial Purity, of the pure Emptiness of this and every state, embracing
equally all forms: embracing a self, embracing a no-self, embracing whatever arises.

But in no case is primordial Emptiness a particular state versus another state, or a particular concept versus another concept,
or a particular view versus a different view: it is the pure Presence in which any and all forms arise. It certainly is not “no-self” as
opposed to “self.” It is rather the opening or clearing in which, right now, all manifestation arises in your awareness, remains a
bit, and fades: the unwavering clearing itself never enters the stream of time, but cognizes each and all with perfect Presence,
primordial Purity, fierce Compassion, unflinching Embrace.

This unwavering Presence is not entered. There is no stepping into it or falling out of it. The Buddhas never entered this state,
nor do ordinary people lack it (the Buddhas never entered it because nobody ever fell out of it). It is absolutely not an
experience—not an experience of momentary states, not an experience of self, not an experience of no-self, not an experience of
relaxing, not an experience of surrendering: it is the Empty opening or clearing in which all of those experiences come and go, an
opening or clearing that, were it not always already perfectly Present, no experiences could arise in the first place.

This pure Presence is not a change of state, not an altered state, not a different state, not a state of peace or calm or bliss (or
anger or fear or envy). It is the simple, pure, immediate, present awareness in which all of those states come and go, the opening
or clearing in which they arise, remain, pass; arise, remain, pass. . . .

And yet there is something that does not arise or remain or pass—the simple opening, the immediateness of awareness, the
simple feeling of Being, of which all particular states and particular experiences are simply ripples, wrinkles, gestures, folds: the
clouds that come and go in the sky . . . and you are the sky. You are not behind your eyes staring out at the clouds that pass; you
are the sky in which, and through which, the clouds float, endlessly, ceaselessly, spontaneously, freely, with no obstruction, no
barriers, no contractions, no glitches: no moving parts in one’s true nature, nothing to break down. In spring it rains; in winter it
snows. Remarkable, this empty clearing.

You do not become this opening or clearing; you do not become the sky. You are not always the sky, nor are you already the
sky: you are always already the sky: it is always already spontaneously accomplished: and that is why the clouds can come and
go in the first place. The sunlight freely plays on the water. Remarkable! Birds are already singing in the woods. Amazing! The
ocean already washes on the shore, freely wetting the pebbles and shells. What is not accomplished? Hear that distant bell
ringing? Who is not enlightened?

And yet, and yet: how best to refer to this always already Emptiness? What words could a fish use to refer to water? How could
you point out water to a fish? Drenched in it, never apart from it, upheld by it—what are we to do? Splash water in its face? What
if its original face is water?

Twisting in this linguistic dilemma, the Mahayana/Vajrayana often uses equations such as: Big Mind = no-mind, True Self = no-
self, Original Face = no-face, Permanent Vajra = impermanence of all objects, and so on. But it is quickly added that both “Self”
and “no-self” (or “permanent” and “impermanent”) are mere words, that is, mere signifiers. And thus in order for either of them
to actually be true (absolute truth), one has to recognize the pure Emptiness, the pure opening or clearing in which all words, all
things, all processes, spontaneously arise and fall. “Emptiness” or “True Self” or “no-mind” or “no-self” are all, finally, signifiers
whose referent discloses itself only upon following the injunctions (paradigms) of contemplative competence which unfolds the
appropriate developmental signified resulting in the direct recognition of always-already pure Emptiness, the recognition of
one’s “True Nature,” which is, so to speak, all-pervading water: the referent is the universe of One Taste. But the Zen masters
don’t want you to explain Emptiness or nonduality to them; they want you to directly show them Emptiness, which might be as
simple as yawning or snapping your fingers: Just this!

Thus, Shibayama, after repeatedly referring to reality as “Absolute Subjectivity,” quickly adds: “It is Absolute Subjectivity, one’s
original True Self. But however precisely you may describe ‘it,’ you will miss it if you ever try to describe it at all; you have to grasp
it yourself if you want to really know it. To call it by these names [Absolute Subjectivity, no-mind, True Self, no-self] is already a
mistake, a step toward objectification and conceptualization. Master Eisai therefore remarked, ‘It is ever unnameable’” (pp. 309,
93).

And Chagdud adds: “As the Buddha taught, in absolute truth, nothing really comes, and nothing really goes. Nothing is born,
nothing ceases. Neither something nor nothing, [pure Presence] is neither one nor many. Absolute truth is beyond all of these
ordinary concepts. Words can’t name it”—unless one has recognized it, and then words work just fine: the cherry blossoms are in
bloom, the spring air is cool.

Now I mention all of this because no-self has been mistaken (particularly by several Western theorists) as an accurate account
of the phenomenal mind stream (which is incorrect: self and states are both relatively real), and also as a description of the
ultimate Reality (also incorrect: the Ultimate is
shunya of self and no-self), and this has caused an enormous amount of
confusion, a confusion that has not helped the spread of Dharma in the West.

When “no-self” is literally applied to the Absolute, or the primordial state, or pure Emptiness, then that misunderstanding
locks Emptiness into an extremely dualistic notion. Whether the experience of self or the experience of no-self arises, both are

equally manifestations of the Primordial State, self-cognizing Emptiness and spontaneous luminosity. “Emptiness” is not a
conceptual doctrine which one uses to advance the theoretical position of no-self as against the position of cohesive self—and yet
it is being used, by some Western interpreters, to do just that.

Likewise, the no-self doctrine is being used by many Westerners to describe the lived, phenomenal mind stream: the
phenomenal stream is supposed to be without a cohesive self. And here this confused and untenable notion runs into massive
amounts of psychiatric and psychological evidence about what happens when the phenomenal mind lacks a cohesive self: the
result is borderline neurosis and psychosis. If the self-system, in its formative phases (particularly fulcrum-2), fails to clearly
differentiate self and object representations, the self boundary is constantly open to emotional flooding, on the one side, and to a
sense of pervasive emptiness or hollowness or depression, on the other. A cohesive self fails to emerge and consolidate, and thus
the mind stream remains a series of often fragmented “no-coherent-self” states, which is not Buddhist heaven but psychological
hell.

And thus, when orthodox psychological researchers hear that the mind is “really without cohesive self,” they are simply
flabbergasted. You mean, people want to be borderline? They honestly cannot imagine what these “Buddhists” mean, because
the self is being denied reality precisely on the plane that it is indeed real—and the loss of this cohesive self is not Enlightenment
but some of the most painful psychological disturbances known.

These particular Western Buddhist interpreters are, with very good intentions, trying to integrate East and West, but in using
the inadequate “no-self” doctrine, they invariably can point to only a few Western theorists. There is the obligatory quoting of
Hume’s paragraph from Treatise (which actually demonstrated nothing but the lame fact that if I look only at objects, I will never
find a subject); and then some passing reference to Jacques Lacan (who himself committed the Single Boundary fallacy and is no
friend of Emptiness; see note 3 for chap. 6 and note 32 for chap. 13). And recently attempts have been made to connect “no-self”
with poststructuralism (ditto Hume) and “selfless” cognitive science (about which, more later).

But the rest of the traditions, both East and West (the vast majority of which do not deny a phenomenal cohesive self) are
sealed out of their “integration,” which has unfortunately led to a type of Buddhist arrogance: their phenomenal “no-self”
doctrine (which indeed is unique to Hinayana) is felt to be the only correct doctrine, and everybody else is profoundly wrong (they
go absolutely apoplectic if you mention Aurobindo or Ramana Maharshi).

This is why the work of such theorists as Jack Engler is so important. Engler, trained in both Buddhist vipassana (mindfulness)
meditation and Western psychotherapy (and who works as a practicing therapist), made a much more useful theoretical bridge:
“You have to be somebody before you can be nobody.” That is, it is necessary to form a stable, cohesive self before one can
transcend (or deconstruct) that self in pure Emptiness. Condemning the ego for not being Emptiness is like condemning an acorn
for not being an oak—and, as we have seen, it is profoundly inadequate both phenomenally and noumenally. (Engler’s approach
was consonant with my own work on the pre/trans fallacy—pre-ego to ego to trans-ego, and one has to form a stable ego before
one can stably go trans-ego—and with Daniel Brown’s work on the higher stages of Buddhist meditation, and thus we became the
three main coauthors of Transformations of Consciousness; Engler’s quote is on p. 49.)

But Engler’s analysis contains another very important insight. Based on his clinical experience, he began to suspect that some
individuals who were lacking a fully cohesive self were in fact drawn to this notion of phenomenal “no-self” because it seemed to
speak to their condition, and certainly seemed to rationalize it. Since many researchers feel that a general borderline malaise is
actually increasing in America (and not simply being reported more often [Masterson]), the appeal of this “no-self” notion is
perhaps understandable. The Hinayana “no-self” speaks especially to individuals with an already precarious sense of self-
cohesiveness.

Further, given the fact that the pure and exclusive “no-self” doctrine of the Abhidharma is part and parcel of an exclusively
Ascending and Gnostic path, culminating in complete withdrawal from (and condemnation of) samsara and the manifest realm,
this would directly appeal to those who were already having trouble befriending samsara in the first place. Instead of embracing
the entire manifest realm with love and Agape, one simply opts out entirely (with Eros gone Phobos). As one Theravadin teacher
put it, when asked about the suffering of others, “I don’t care, I’m getting off.”

Engler and I are not suggesting that any theorist who subscribes to the literal “no-self” doctrine is personally borderline. We
are suggesting that, in addition to its own insuperable difficulties on both phenomenal and noumenal planes, this literal no-self
doctrine is all too easily confused with a borderline worldview; and, indeed, this does especially appeal to individuals who are
already having difficulties forming a cohesive self.

This phenomenal “no-self” doctrine: what difficulties it has caused in the attempt to integrate East and West. Perhaps it is time
to throw our synthesizing net a little wider, a little more generously. If there is indeed Buddha-nature, it would not leave itself
without a witness in other cultures, other places, other times: and in the ears of sensitive men and women, it seems to have
whispered the equivalent of “Mahatman” much more often than “anatman.”

Francisco Varela’s Enactive Paraligm

Finally, to return to The embodied mind, by Varela, Thompson, and Rosch (see previous comments: notes 49 and 52 for chap. 2
and notes 13 and 43 for chap. 4). As I indicated, in my opinion I find their overall approach enormously rewarding and significant.
Not only is their enactive paradigm one of a very few attempts to integrate the Left- and Right-Hand paths in cognitive science, it
is the only major paradigm (using the word in its technically correct sense as injunction) that takes a meditative/mindfulness
approach to the Upper-Left dimensions in an attempt to integrate them with Right-Hand cognitive science, an approach that
alone can embody a scientific (i.e., repeatable, communal, injunctive) disclosure of the domains of awareness.

My major criticisms, all within this prior admiration, relate to several topics mentioned above:
(1) Varela et al. attempt to build most of their bridges between direct, lived experience (Left Hand) and objectivistic cognitive
science (Right Hand) using the Abhidharma doctrine of “selfless minds” and the theory of discrete, selfless states and aggregates.
But this Hinayana approach, as I tried to indicate, denies the cohesive self on precisely the plane where it is real and pragmatically
mandatory. The authors are constantly emphasizing that, for most people, the cohesive self is unavoidable, habitual, inescapable;
it is only with mindfulness training that we can actually interrupt the formation of a self out of the momentary states: presumably
a two-year-old child cannot perform mindfulness training, and thus the self-sense is inevitable in human development. But an
inevitable illusion is not merely an illusion: it is serving some purpose (it is, in fact, preventing borderline fragmentation, among
many other things).

This type of atomistic analysis (à la Abhidharma) thus fails to account for the extremely important developmental period where

a cohesive self is crucial. And thus:

(2) It tends to play into the borderline worldview, as I described above, and thus throws us into the retro-Romantic notion that
at some point in development a horrible mistake occurred, and we have undo the mistake by digging backward, instead of
evolving forward to higher integrations that overcome a partialness.

Each stage of self-development is indeed a type of deconstruction of the previous self-sense, not by plopping straight into pure
Emptiness, but by growing a deeper and wider self that undoes the lesser self, until all selves are undone in Emptiness (which is
neither self nor no-self). The mind stream, after all, does not deconstruct itself: it is deconstructed by a finer employment of
attention and will, which, by any other name, means a self strong enough to finally die in pure Emptiness, not a self weak enough
to regress to fragmented “no-self” discrete atomistic experiences.

(3) Modern cognitive science, as we have seen (note 43 for chap. 4), postulates something like a computational mind (or even a
society of mind) that in itself is completely lacking consciousness. That is, cognitive science believes in the existence of totally
unconscious intentional computations (or whatnot) that perform all the requisite functions of cognition, and your presence is not
required. What is
really happening in your “mind” is a series of objective functions that possess no consciousness at all;
consciousness remains either a puzzling epiphenomena, or is pronounced to be “not good for anything.”

The authors refer to this as the discovery of the “selfless mind,” and they therefore wish to integrate this scientific “discovery”
with the Abhidharma “no-self” analysis of phenomenal experience, thus building a bridge between experience and theory. The
“selfless minds” of cognitive science are supposed to be the correlate of the “selfless minds” of Abhidharma analysis. The practice
of mindfulness (which discloses “no-self”) can thus be brought together with the theoretical discovery of “selfless minds,” they
maintain.

But cognitive science has not discovered selfless minds; it has discovered mindless minds. There is in cognitive science no more
room for mindfulness/awareness factors than there is room for a conscious self: all of those are banned from discussion, and
banned from any sort of real existence, by the very mode of investigation itself. As I suggested earlier, far from being a major
discovery, the “mindless minds” notion is a fait accompli of the objectivistic, representational paradigm that guides the
theoretical, objectivist notion in the first place. Varela et al. are building a bridge between an inadequate (if not downright
wrong) skandhas theory and the reductionistic portion of cognitive science.

(4) Because of their Abhidharma no-self atomistic analysis of experience, the authors likewise are constantly “juxtaposing” this
with Emptiness and with the “selfless minds” of cognitive science. Both of these reductionistic approaches (Abhidharma and
cognitive science) are supposed to be “evocative” of Emptiness. But, as I tried to argue, to bring Emptiness to bear on a particular
view—as a crowbar to dislodge a particular view (instead of all views)—is to reduce Emptiness to one notion among others. It
comes perilously close to “incurable view” Emptiness.

Thus, with reference to the above four points, it’s hard to avoid the impression that the authors are taking the inadequate (or
even wrong) aspects of all four and trying to integrate those inadequacies: a truncated/atomistic Hinayana psychology with the
reductionistic aspects of cognitive science, flirting with an incurable view of Emptiness, and tending toward an embrace of the
borderline worldview.

The authors are very much aware of some of these difficulties, and after working hard to establish these points, they begin to
carefully qualify or even gingerly withdraw from them. Of cognitive science’s “discovery” of “no-self” (which is really just a
reductionism inherent in the approach), they finally state: “In cognitive science and in experimental psychology, the
fragmentation of the self occurs because the field is trying to be scientifically objective. Precisely because the self is taken as an
object, like any other external object in the world, as an object of scientific scrutiny—precisely for that reason—it disappears from

view” (p. 230). Exactly. In this regard, cognitive science has not discovered an important
fact of existence that needs to be
integrated (as they earlier maintained), it has rather distorted the subjective domain in a way that needs to be abandoned (just
as the Abhidharma distortion needs to be).

Likewise, of Hume’s self-vanishing act, which they had earlier called “brilliant,” they now point out, with reference to
objectifying: “Nowhere is sleight of hand between inner and outer [subjective and objective] more evident than in the work of
David Hume” (p. 230).

Of Emptiness and its “juxtaposition” with “no-self” analysis and the “selfless minds” of cognitive science, which they previously
suggested, the authors now state: “This is a crucially important point. There is a powerful reason why some Madhyamika schools
only refute the arguments of others and refuse to make assertions. Any conceptual position can become a ground, which vitiates
the force of the Madhyamika (this is also why pragmatism is not the same as the middle way of Madhyamika). We would be doing
a great disservice to everyone concerned—mindfulness/awareness practitioners, scientists, scholars, and any other interested
persons—were we to lead anyone to believe that making assertions about enactive cognitive science was the same thing as
allowing one’s mind to be experientially processed by the Madhyamika” (p. 228).

And as for the Abhidharma theory of Elements (skandhas, states, dharmas), the authors are certainly aware of its fate in
subsequent Buddhist schools: “The basic element analysis received certain kinds of devastating criticism from philosophers such
as Nagarjuna” (p. 117). And, of course, Zen’s approach was characteristically right to the point: “They were traditionally burned in
Zen” (p. 121).

The authors then state that what they are actually trying to do is use these analyses (selfless minds, no-self phenomenal
stream, enaction, etc.) simply to help evoke the true groundlessness of pure Emptiness. “Just as the Madhyamika dialectic, a
provisional and conventional activity of the relative world, points beyond itself, so we might hope that our concept of enaction
could, at least for some cognitive scientists and perhaps even for the more general milieu of scientific thought, point beyond itself
to a truer understanding of groundlessness” (p. 228).

Personally, I find the enactive paradigm itself very appealing and a genuine advancement of knowledge, but not for that
reason, because the “groundlessness” that they point to is, as I suggested, often atomistic, reductionistic, borderline, fragmented.
It builds bridges precisely to the aspects of various theories that ought to be rejected, not integrated.

Because of this bias to a “no-self” analysis of the phenomenal mind stream, the authors likewise (and ironically) fail to
appreciate aspects of the enactive paradigm that actually go a considerable way to solving some of the problems that their “no-
self” analysis prematurely and unfortunately dissolves or disrupts. To mention a few:

The authors, early on in their attempt to build a bridge between the atomistic aspects of Abhidharma and the reductionistic
aspects of cognitive science, point to Minsky’s notion of the mind as a “society” (the society of mind), the idea being that we can’t
find a self here either: an individual mind is really a society of agents. And while there is some truth to that (nobody believes the
self is the monolithic monster dominating awareness that many Enlightenment writers seemed to imagine), nonetheless there is a
profound and significant difference between individuals and societies (although both are holons within holons within holons):
individuals have a locus of self-awareness. That is, a compound individual is a society that further serves as a locus of self-sense.
And whether that self-sense is “real” or “illusory” doesn’t change the fact that individuals have it, societies don’t.

Moreover,

this

self-sense develops.

fulcrums of
differentiation/integration (before fully recognizing Emptiness). This Left-Hand developmental process is not simply a matter of
monological and sensorimotor cognition (although grounded in it). It is also, and especially, a matter of dialogical exchange and
intersubjective mutual understanding (on the way to translogical Emptiness). And at that intersubjective and dialogical point,
sensorimotor phenomenology begins to fail us miserably (after serving its grounding function).

It develops, as we have seen,

through nine (or

so) major

And this indeed is one of the primary reasons that phenomenology as a discipline so often gave way to various forms of
structuralism and neostructuralism (and even poststructuralism): the intersubjective functions of cognition display patterns that
are not obvious, and not available, to simple phenomenological apprehension (that is, they follow patterns that are not available
to or disclosed by the senses or immediate lived experience). The phenomenologists were simply no match for such items as
linguistic intersubjectivity and the patterns that it displayed, patterns that could not be recovered in phenomenology.

Foucault recalls, in listening to a lecture by Merleau-Ponty (the theorist that Varela et al. point to as most resembling their own
approach): “So the problem of language appeared and it was clear that phenomenology was no match for structural analysis in
accounting for the effects of meaning that could be produced by a structure of the linguistic type. And quite naturally, with the
phenomenological spouse finding herself disqualified by her inability to address language, structuralism became the new bride”
(Miller, Passion, p. 52). This in turn would lead to Piaget, and Habermas, and more adequate accounts of the development of
intersubjective competence. (See note 28 for chap. 4 for an extended discussion of the inadequacies of phenomenology.)

I am not suggesting an abandonment of phenomenology (nor unadulterated embrace of genetic structuralism). Rather,
phenomenology (especially of the Merleau-Ponty variety) forms a type of foundational edifice quite similar, I believe, to that
proposed by Varela et al. But its monological apprehensions need to be supplemented with dialogical recognitions, and this
begins to take us away from the too-heavily sensorimotor anchoring in which Varela and his colleagues seem a bit mired.

This

sensorimotor-heaviness

shows up in the authors’ presentation,

confusion of
organism/environment with inner/outer, which in fact are two very different types of interaction and enaction (the former is
interaction between Upper Right and Lower Right—or objective organism and objective environment—the latter is interaction
between Left and Right—or interior and exterior). They quote Lewontin and Oyama in support of the contention (which I accept)
that the organism and the environment co-generate each other. But the argument of both of those authors (and most similar
micro/macro arguments) are couched in purely outer (or objective) terms: they are talking about the interaction and mutual
codetermination of Upper Right and Lower Right: that is, the mutual determination of the organism (its genetic material, its
physiological structure, its nervous system, and so on) and its ecological environment, which are all exteriors.

I believe, as a constant

But that is most definitely not the same as the interaction between the interior lived experience (Left Hand) with the outer
material forms (Right Hand), whether those exterior forms are organismic or environmental. To equate the two is, once again, to
buy into the flatland (Enlightenment) paradigm, even if we are trying to redress that paradigm by having the Upper Right
(organism) and Lower Right (environment) mutually codetermine each other. Important as that insight is, it still buys the
fundamental Enlightenment paradigm: it reduces the Left-Hand experience to the Right-Hand description, monological in result
(thus Lewontin uses subject and object interchangeably with organism and environment: precisely the problem).

This has the effect,

in the authors’ presentation, of confusing sensorimotor as organic structure (Upper Right) with
sensorimotor as immediate lived experience (lower portions of Upper Left), and this keeps their enactive paradigm heavily
grounded in a biologistic bias. Thus, to the question “What is cognition?” the authors answer that it is “Enaction: A history of
structural coupling that brings forth a world.” Fair enough. But then, to the question “How does it work?” they answer, “Through
a network consisting of multiple levels of interconnected, sensorimotor subnetworks.” And that doesn’t simply ground awareness
in sensorimotor networks, it reduces the significant aspects of awareness to its more fundamental foundations: reduces dialogical
understanding to monological apprehension (p. 206).

I do not doubt that basic sensorimotor cognition and the early mental categorization process has many of the features outlined

by the enactive paradigm. But even so, that covers only the first three fulcrums of a nine-fulcrum awareness.

Thus, the authors point, as example, to the work of Mark Johnson (The body in the mind); and, as far as it goes, I am in
complete agreement with their assessment. “Humans, [Johnson] argues, have very general cognitive structures called kinesthetic
image schemas. These schemas originate in bodily experience, can be defined in terms of certain structural elements, have a basic
logic, and can be metaphorically projected to give structure to a wide variety of cognitive domains.” These are simple
sensorimotor/physical schemas referring to such elementary distinctions as inside, outside, boundary, and so on (all anchored in
the preconceptual sensorimotor worldspace).

“On the basis of a detailed study of these kinds of examples, Johnson argues that image schemas emerge from certain basic
forms of sensorimotor activities and interactions and so provide a preconceptual structure to our experience”—very similar to
Piaget’s role of sensorimotor schemas in subsequent cognition. Johnson “argues that since our conceptual understanding is
shaped by experience, we also have image-schematic concepts. These concepts have a basic logic, which imparts structure to the
[higher] cognitive domains into which they are imaginatively projected. Finally, these projections are not arbitrary but are
accomplished through metaphorical and metonymical mapping procedures that are themselves motivated by the structures of
bodily experience” (pp. 175–76).

All of which I heartily endorse, as far as it goes. As I would put it, precisely because the mind transcends but includes the
sensorimotor body, the foundational structures of the mind (and higher conceptual/formal thought) do indeed rest upon
preconceptual bodily and sensorimotor foundations (the “include” part). But those foundations do not fully explain or account
for the functions, patterns or capacities of the higher structures themselves (the “transcend” part). Johnson’s book is thus quite
aptly named: the mind is not in the body, the body is in the mind. And for just that reason, significant aspects of mental cognition
and awareness are not simply, or even especially, sensorimotor networks.

(Likewise, spirit is not in mind, mind is in spirit; and thus mental interpretations color, but do not create, spiritual realities).
The authors’ sensorimotor/biologistic tilt further tempts us to overlook the equally important types of structural coupling that
are occurring in the Left-Hand dimensions themselves. That is, not only is the sensorimotor organism interacting with its
environment (the Upper Right interacting with the Lower Right, all of which can be investigated and described monologically), but
also the inner subject is interacting with its intersubjective pool of mutual understandings (i.e., the Upper Left is interacting with
the Lower Left), and this mutual intersubjectivity cannot be described or
investigated monologically: it is not simply the
interaction or enaction of the organism with its environment: it is the enactment of the understanding of one person by another,
with mutually shared experience the coinage and mutual understanding the goal. All of those have empirical and sensorimotor
correlates; none of them reside in those correlates.

And this is where Varela’s notion of structural coupling gains an added usefulness, even if not fully acknowledged by the
author: it is not just the structural coupling of the objective organism and its enacted environment, but also of the subjective
experience of that organism with the intersubjective experience of its enacted cultural worldspace (where, again, it creates and is
created by its forms of intersubjectivity, and not just its forms of interobjectivity).

Thus, where Varela et al. attack the representational paradigm for its insistence that there is a pregiven world that the
pregiven organism recovers in perception (I agree with that attack), nonetheless the alternative they propose is still monological:
the monological (sensorimotor-specified) organism enacts a monological world (the perception of color being their favorite
example). All of which is true enough, and all of which is foundational (or the sensorimotor starting point), but all of which totally
overlooks the further nonreducible developments in the intersubjective sphere, which cannot be recovered in an enactive
monological paradigm, but must include an enactive dialogical paradigm as well.

Thus, the authors (correctly, I believe) switch from a monological pregiven world to a monological enactive world (which is
correct as far as it goes); but fail to move on to the crucial components of a dialogically enacted cultural world, which does not
consist in the enactment of monological perception of surfaces (a patch of color), but the intersubjective interpretation of
depths not given merely by the surfaces. The authors thus escape the crude mirror of nature paradigm (monological and
pregiven), but only by attacking the pregiven part, not the monological part: the paradigm shifts from the monological mirror of
a sensorimotor world to the monological enactment of a sensorimotor world. They grasp correctly that the subject enacts an
object, but they fail to address the fact that, further, subjects mutually enact subjects via intersubjectivity, which is not the
perception of a surface patch but the interpretation of dialogical depth (itself contigent upon the developmental history of
structural couplings in the cultural worldspace, and not just structural couplings in the natural/environmental/sensorimotor
worldspace).

And further, it is only through the dialogical enaction that one gets to translogical Emptiness, and not through a regressive
dissolution of dialogical intersubjectivity into atomistic monological states and reductionistic mindless cognitive mechanism, the
path the authors often stray into.

(A more intensely nonreductionistic approach would likewise allow a more forceful recognition of telos/emergence in
development itself. Like all drift, natural drift occurs only where there is some sort of current; in this case, the current of the
Kosmos, or Eros. Enaction of the presently given worldspace is not just based on past structural coupling. Rather, based also on
the emergent pressure of the future, the present world is enacted.)

That said, let me finish by repeating the strengths of the enactive paradigm, which first of all actually is a real paradigm,
because it embodies a specific program of injunctive research (namely, the open-ended investigation of direct lived experience
with a view to its integration with theoretical models). We might see it this way:

In Vajrayana (which the authors endorse), it is typical to embrace all three Buddhist vehicles in something of a developmental
arc. One begins with Hinayana mindfulness, which is the monological investigation of immediate awareness. One then moves to
Mahayana, and the specific approach of exchanging self and other (tonglen), that is,
and
intersubjective circle of awareness. One then moves to Vajrayana, or the final dissolution of exclusively monological apprehension
and dialogical exchange, and rests in the nondual luminous Emptiness that playfully manifests all worlds (translogical).

investigating the

dialogical

Given the very crude state of modern cognitive science, the authors, in a sense, had no choice but to give a Hinayana-level
account, and in many ways I think this can serve as a beginning foundation for the yet-higher developments of cognitive
understanding, to which, no doubt, the authors of this volume will contribute in no small measure. (For a critique of
phenomenology, see note 17 below.)

2. Nowhere are the inadequacies of taking monological sciences and trying to make them into a complete “new paradigm”
more obvious than in the “new physics and mysticism” writers and theorists, whose names are legend. When reductionists have a
spiritual experience (not generally dealt with in physics textbooks), it usually acts as an incitement to commit philosophy, and the
result is not for the faint-hearted.

However wonderfully well intentioned, most of these theories—which play on the theme that the “new physics” (quantum and
extend a flatland

relativistic) supports/suggests/proves a mystically unified worldview—are crippled by trying to simply
monological paradigm into dialogical and translogical domains (more of the flatland “bigger portions of bad food” approach).

They generally take certain mathematical formalisms (especially the Schroedinger wave equation and its collapse upon
measurement) and give them a very wide interpretation (despite the fact that physicists themselves are sharply divided over how
to interpret the formalisms), and they then wed this very loose and generous interpretation with their often equally loose
interpretation of mystical spirituality, and the result is something like, the new physics supports or even proves a mystical
worldview.

This admixture is promptly called “the new paradigm.” Danah Zohar: “The idea of a ‘quantum society’ stems from a conviction
that a whole new paradigm is emerging from our description of quantum reality and that this paradigm can be extended to
change radically our perception of ourselves and the social world we want to live in. A wider appreciation of quantum reality can
give us the conceptual foundations we need to bring about a positive revolution in society” (The quantum society).

From formalisms describing the lowest, shallowest, least conscious, least-depthed holons in existence, “extended to a
paradigm” that is supposed to cover dialogical, intersubjective, cultural exchange based on mutual understanding and mutual
recognition: this is more than a quantum leap, it is a leap of faith. Quantum formalisms cannot even account for the fundamentals
of biology and autopoiesis, let alone economics, psychology, literature, poetry, morals, and ethics, to name a vital few. But

physicalists are so used to thinking that “most fundamental” means “most significant” that they believe all higher branches of
knowledge must be grounded in least-depthed holons or not be grounded at all. Thus the constant tendency to “extend physics”
directly to any and all domains.

Thus Fred Alan Wolf: “I believe that quantum physics, the most powerful and rigorous science devised to date, will provide the

basis for the formation of a new psychology—a true humanistic psychology.”

This is simply painful, and it is a notion that is by no means confined to Dr. Wolf. A true humanistic psychology is built upon
processes of intersubjective understanding and mutual recognition, about which quantum physics has not a single thing to say.
Surely we do not want to base our new humanism on a power-driven monologue with rocks.

This extension of the monological hegemony and aggressive, even violent, reductionism suffers at both ends of the reduction
(and everywhere in between). Not only is reality automatically assumed to revolve most significantly around those holons that
actually possess the least significance, but mysticism itself—there are at least four quite different varieties of mysticism, as we
have seen—is homogenized into some version of the unified field or dynamic web or quantum vacuum (or some such creative
reading of the mathematical formalisms), and the two homogenized messes (“quantum” and “mystical”) are crudely pressed
together and presented as covering all the bases.

Besides distorting both ends of the spectrum of existence (physis and theos), it guts everything in between. Fred Alan Wolf’s
drug-induced mystical experience led him to this realization: “I was on this quest [using the psychedelic vine ayahuasca] trying to
understand shamanism from the point of view of physics. What I discovered is that it can’t be understood from the point of
physics alone.” Only a dedicated physical reductionistic could make that statement—forget shamanism: not even biology can be
“understood from the point of physics alone,” nor can art or economics or psychology or sociology. . . . That physics doesn’t cover
shamanism should be the least of his worries, but it perplexes Dr. Wolf no limit that physics doesn’t apply here. And so he decides
that “We need a new breed of physicists, who study living processes rather than the qualities of matter.” We have them, and
they’re called biologists.

As we have seen repeatedly throughout this volume, the shallower one goes in search of significance, the more egocentric
the belief system, because egocentrism is always the correspondingly shallowest point in the human holon. Lacking any real
depth/height, one finds only one’s own interior surveying all of reality, and all of a sudden, everything starts relating directly to
you, and the word magic of egocentric association starts to actually look profound, and profoundly desirable.

“When my intent is clear,” explains Wolf, “pathways appear as if by magic, taking me from one place to the next. Certain
connections get made; key phone calls come in.” Perhaps that is some actual psychic connection; a therapist might suggest it is
narcissism and delusions of reference (is the world really that accommodating to your ego?). Who can tell? For Wolf, it is all based
on the collapse of the quantum wave packet, so that, as his interviewer summarizes his position, “If you intend an ashtray, then
the cloud of possibilities qwiffs it into being.”

Fred puts this qwiffing to good use. In Lima, Peru, before his ayahuasca experience, he is shown a movie, The Winds of
Ayahuasca, with what most people would probably find to be a rather typical and unimaginative plot of an American academic
trying the drug, getting his paradigm blown, and, of course, falling in love with a beautiful native girl at the same time (take my
paradigm, please). Sure enough, Fred takes the drug, has his mind blown, and bags a Peruvian babe, all in a no doubt memorable
month.

“It was as if, astonishingly, inexplicably, the film had been written as a kind of life-script training entirely for him.” Wolf reports
breathlessly: “That was the realm of myth grabbing me by the collar and saying, Wake up, Fred! We’re going to show you why you
came down here to Peru.” Many people would have settled for drugs and sex, but apparently there’s more. “Here’s this movie,”
he continues, “made years before you arrive in Lima, yet in it you see your life laid out before you. Was the whole movie made
for me?”

He quickly decides in the affirmative, and so then must ask, “If so, who was scripting it?” That is, who was scripting this movie
made just for him, and long before he arrived? He decides that “the Australian Aborigines came up with the best answer. The
Great Spirit, they tell us, dreams us and all of material reality into existence.” Let’s assume that is indeed the case; but the Great
Spirit then scripts everything that is happening, and no movie, and no event, was scripted wholly or especially for Fred Alan Wolf.
That particular movie, in fact, was scripted by a bunch of not very imaginative filmmakers, and I would worry mightily, not
celebrate, if it “captured my life perfectly.”

Perhaps it really was genuinely psychic, and perhaps it was narcissistic reference. But my point is that in either case, the
monological maps will tilt our interpretations, no matter how genuine, in the direction of preconventional egoism, because there
is nothing in the maps to pull one up to dialogical endeavors, and thus no way to escape genuinely into the translogical. One is left
merely with: I have a new paradigm, and it is your job to change your beliefs to accord with mine. There is no other interior
development either recommended or mentioned or even hinted at (the embrace of the new monological paradigm is simply
supposed to rather automatically usher one into homogenized mystical mush; drugs, presumably, are optional).

As I said, always the monological views play into the hands of divine egoism and its power drives, which is a point that we have
seen emphasized by theorists from Foucault to Habermas. Without a paradigm of mutual dialogical recognition and care, there is

no way to pull anyone out of divine egoism and into worldcentric compassion, and from there into the Over-Soul that is the World
Soul, on the way to the mystery of the Deep altogether, and so instead we watch a life scripted by divine egos, for divine egos,
about divine egos, and this is meant to be the basis of a glorious new paradigm. And this, it seems to me, is exactly the essence of
so many “new physics and mysticism” notions—purely monological to the core.

No doubt. Dr. Wolf is attempting to stretch the knowledge quest by moving outside the realm of physics, and for this attempt
we can all applaud. But in my opinion, if we are not much more careful in how we interpret this expanded knowledge quest—if
we do not draw on all four quadrants equally, and if instead we simply orient ourselves around basically the lowest holons in the
Upper-Right quadrant—we are constantly in danger of tilting our interpretations in prerational, not transrational, directions.

(Richard Leviton, “Through the Shaman’s Doorway: Dreaming the Universe with Fred Alan Wolf,” Yoga Journal, July-August

1992.)

  3. This lack of cultural coherency in America has accelerated in the last few decades or so, with the result that virtually every
group or class or type of citizen in the country is attempting to become its own nation, its own special group certified by special
legal rights. The easiest and fastest way to secure special rights is to compete for the coveted status of victim, for this allows the
victim group, in effect, to claim war reparations. The manufacture of rights has gone into overdrive, with the various classes lining
up in court to outclaim each other as to who has been the most victimized, and thus who deserves the most war reparations. This
has resulted in a series of massive and bizarre IOUs, with everybody trying to extract payment from everybody else, and nobody
willing to pay.

At the beginning of this free-for-all for rights, the one great pool of war reparations was the white male, a pool from which
everybody eagerly dipped. But this apparently unlimited fund of reparations has been totally splintered and divided up (and dried
up), because white males now include males that themselves are vying for special rights as victims: drug abusers, emotionally
disturbed, obese, short, hearing-impaired, handicapped, satanically ritually abused. There is no single and simple fund of bad guys
left. Everybody, it seems, has victimized everybody else, and thus everybody is demanding special rights to protect them from
everybody else.

There are no rights without responsibilities, no agency without communion. It is physically, theoretically, and existentially
impossible to have one without the other. But in the splintering culture of America, each group wants agency (rights) with no
communion (responsibility). I happen to be in favor of many of these rights; but unless this country finds a more common union
and overriding principle of coherency—unless these rights are plugged into correlative responsibilities and communions—then
the manufacture of rights alone simply contributes to the further fragmentation of the country, which alone can secure and
protect the new rights in the first place. The IOUs are coming due. . . .

  4. We can now finish our account with deconstruction, and set it in the context of Nagarjuna’s Emptiness (a topic I will return

to in volume 3 in much greater detail; the following may be taken as a preliminary summary).

We have seen that deconstruction is based on the twin principles, as Culler put it, that meaning is context-dependent and
contexts are boundless—precisely another approach to the IOU principle (the contexts are whole but are never completed, and if
they are, they self-contradict: complete or coherent, never both). A literary text, to the extent it attempts to be a “whole work,” a
“work of art,” “a self-contained whole,” will therefore issue a hidden IOU, an implicit IOU—hidden or implicit because language
tends to take its own nature as given and unproblematic and thus unexamined (which we’ll return to in a moment).

But first, to give a counterexample, mathematics makes its own transfinite IOUs explicit—the sets must expand indefinitely or
mathematics self-destructs—and mathematicians do this explicitly because, so to speak, their job is to scrutinize mathematical
language in its very syntax, its very structure, and so eventually they were forced to make explicit these IOUs. Mathematics had
not always done this; in fact, the IOUs were very much implicit, hidden, unconscious until the Tarski/Gödel revolution, which, so
to speak, psychoanalyzed math and dug up, from the depths of its foundations, the dirty little secret: mathematics is not, and
never can be, coherent and complete.

When Tarski and Gödel wrenched this secret from the depths of mathematics, it first caused an intense commotion, almost
panic, because the very foundations of mathematics—long taken to be the one, true, self-sufficient, self-complete, and self-
certain form of human knowledge—was now shown to be inherently wobbling between self-contradiction, on the one hand, and
incompleteness (un-self-certainty) on the other. But nowadays it’s all taken rather in stride: let the sets expand forever, and let us
get on about our business as usual. As I would put it, all holons issue an IOU to the Kosmos, and so what else is new?

What else was new was that essentially the same drama began to unfold in the study of everyday language itself, and literary
language in particular. Language speakers and even language theorists had long been operating on hidden IOUs, and on the naive
assumption that language is simply a transparent window through which one merely gazes undistortedly at a pregiven world (this
was, for example, Foucault’s point about the Classical Age: language was unproblematic). With the “linguistic turn” (dating
roughly to Saussure), where language began to look at itself, the thick tangle and convoluted web of systematically generated
meaning became a massive problem: how in fact did language represent a world, when inherently any word can stand for any
thing? The relations between signs themselves, and not so much the simpler relation between signs and things, became the focus
of intense investigation.

We saw this turn take two broad directions, following either the Left-Hand path of hermeneutics (meaning is generated by
background and often nondiscursive social practices, which can only be grasped from within the context itself) or the Right-Hand
path of structuralism (meaning is generated by structures or supra-individual patterns of rule-governed linguistic behavior that
can only be grasped from the outside in an exterior mode of investigation). Hermeneutics focused on the signifieds (LH), which
could only be grasped from within by empathic participation, and structuralism focused on the signifiers (RH), which can best be
approached in a distancing stance of exterior study.

This Right-Hand structuralism soon gave way to the neo- and poststructuralists (Foucault to Barthes to Lacan to Derrida), which
emerged with the insight that the signifiers themselves were largely “free-floating,” anchored not in any pregiven empirical world,
but rather anchored all too often in politics, power, or prejudice. That is, meaning was not simply lying around on the surface
ready to be unambiguously perceived like a patch of color (as in the inadequate empirical theories), but rather was a complex
self-referential system that was profoundly context-dependent, and . . . contexts are boundless.

And that gave the poststructural deconstructionists the tool to aggressively (often wildly) deconstruct meanings that were
previously felt to be engraved in concrete and set in the unvarying ways that “things always are”: now meaning, and the world of
meaning, was disclosed not as a perception, but as a construction, and to the extent this construction was mistaken for eternal
verities, it could be textually deconstructed just to point out how fleeting its “given truths” were, how context-dependent they
were, and how contexts shifted endlessly, and how in principle they could never be mastered. . . .

The deconstructionists (particularly starting at Yale, home of a trio of professors—Derrida himself, the brilliant Paul de Man,
and J. Miller—who were dubbed “the boa-deconstructors”) began by examining
(Derrida’s examination of
Rousseau’s double use of the term nature still being a classic). As I earlier indicated, a literary text, to the extent it attempts to be
a “whole work,” a “work of art,” “a self-contained whole,” will therefore issue one or more hidden IOUs, implicit IOUs—hidden or
implicit because language tends to take its own nature as given and transparent. Although the deconstructionists did not at first
articulate the principles of their own procedure (they did not articulate the IOU principle, even though they were using it), they
nonetheless wielded it with brutal efficiency. That is:

literary texts

A literary text, like all holons, issues some sort of IOU: it will contradict itself at certain crucial points; it will use certain key
terms but give them opposite meanings; it will assume truths that it cannot itself generate; it will double back on itself self-
reflexively and thus erase its own message; it will create a hierarchy of meaning only to have the text itself upset the hierarchy; it
will create binary oppositions that pretend to be separate but actually undo each other; it will marginalize some notion as being
not central yet define the central notion in terms of the marginal—the list is virtually endless, and the deconstructionists zeroed
in on just these IOUs, just these hidden contradictions and inconsistencies and self-betrayals that the text itself would inherently
issue. And that was exactly the agenda of the deconstructionists: find the points in the text where the text refers to itself,
eventually contradicts itself, and thus self-deconstructs (just as mathematics does when it tries to become complete and
coherent).

And just as the initial discovery of the IOU principle in mathematics caused an uproar verging on panic, so the
deconstructionists were the terrorists of the linguistic world, sending panic echoing down the halls of establishment academia.
Every text, without exception, could be deconstructed (because every holon issues an IOU; in the literary text, simply look for the
meaning the text is trying to convey, show that that meaning is dependent upon a context beyond the text and thus totally out of
control of the text itself, and thus the text becomes “undone,” becomes not a self-contained and coherent artistic statement, but
merely the unconscious mouthpiece of contexts beyond its control, contexts that swamp its own proclaimed message and set it
afloat on a sea of signifiers of which it is only dimly aware: far from carrying an artistic and noble impact, it is a duped lackey of
contexts that use and abuse it, contexts it is apparently too ignorant to grasp).

The deconstructionists, having (implicitly) stumbled on the IOU principle in literary holons, eventually let this truth spin all out
of control, and in ways simply not warranted by that truth itself—ways that therefore turned finally on the terrorists themselves
and deconstructed the deconstructionists. We have seen repeatedly throughout this book that sliding contexts do not mean the
contexts are merely arbitrary and therefore imposed merely by power or prejudice. Contexts slide, but they often slide in
relatively stable ways; meaning is context-bound, but many contexts are common or shared (and can be so disclosed in mutual
understanding); contexts are boundless, but that doesn’t prevent them from being fixed in relative but stable ways; that
sociocultural reality is largely constructed does not mean it is constructed arbitrarily, for linguistic meaning is itself exposed to
extralinguistic restraints (in both I, we, and it domains), and that allows meaning to be tied to validity claims that can be
redeemed in the intersubjective circle, validity claims of truth, truthfulness, cultural justness, and functional fit. As I summarized it
in chapter 5, the deconstructionists (and extreme relativists) went from saying that no perspective is finally privileged to saying
that all perspectives are simply equal—at which point this stance turns on itself, undercuts and deconstructs its own claim to
validity, and collapses under its own weight.

Just as the explicit disclosure of the IOU principle in mathematics moved it from closed and self-sufficient truths to stable,
open, relative truths (with a period of panic), so the literary world began to slowly make a similar transition (also through much
initial panic). But it soon became obvious that the end result of deconstructionist literary critique was always the same: the text

blows up. Deconstruction became a generic, all-purpose solvent; it told us something about all literary holons and about language
in general (all texts issue an IOU), but about specific texts it had precisely nothing to say. As literary criticism, it was virtually
worthless (even Foucault referred to Derrida as a literary terrorist).

But here was a “literary criticism” made to order for the tenured radicals of the sixties: haven’t the wits to build a building? No
problem, just blow one up instead. [See Wilber, Boomeritis (forthcoming)]. Thousands of Ph.D. dissertations in deconstructionist
themes were issued by American universities, with individuals like Stanley Fish leading the way. By 1979, Derrida was the most
frequently cited authority in papers submitted to the journal of the Modern Language Association.

Deconstruction as a movement never caught on in Germany or France or England (or anywhere else, for that matter), and thus,
at the height of the tear-down frenzy, Jacques Derrida exclaimed, “America is deconstruction!” It never caught on elsewhere
because, apart from its undeniable contribution vis-à-vis the IOU principle in literature, it had nothing else of substance to say: it
could only deconstruct what somebody else had the creativity to construct: it was basically parasitic. And it ended, as has often
been pointed out, in pure nihilism, at which point it dissolved its own stance, and certainly its own credibility.

The end of any serious deconstructionist movement came with the Paul de Man debacle. On the morning of December 1, 1987,
the New York Times reported that a young Belgian scholar named Ortwin de Graef had recently discovered incontrovertible
evidence that in the 1940s Paul de Man, the most gifted and brilliant of the American deconstructionists, had been a Nazi
sympathizer (writing articles and reviews for Belgian newspapers supporting the Nazi cause—something he had gone to great
pains to hide) and had authored such articles as “The Jews in Contemporary Literature,” where he had stated, among other
things, that “a solution to the Jewish question . . . would not involve deplorable consequences for the West. It would lose, all told,
a few personalties of mediocre value. . . .”

The deconstructionists immediately leapt to de Man’s defense with all the conceptual tools at their slippery disposal, and
furiously attempted to demonstrate that inherently sliding contexts meant that de Man’s pro-Nazi actions were actually the
opposite of a Nazi sympathizer, that his helping the Nazis was really not helping the Nazis, that his anti-Jewish stance was really
pro-Jewish, that the criminal was really the victim, and other variations on the theme that “yes” really means “no” because
contexts are boundless. . . . (Curiously, the deconstructionists did not likewise think that “less salary” was the same as “more
salary,” or that “no tenure” was really “tenure.” Amazing how language straightens right up when you’re sincere.)

Put bluntly, the deconstructionist defense came down to: since there is no way to anchor truth and right, there can be no false
and wrong either, so Paul de Man’s crime was really its binary opposite, innocence—and another nasty value hierarchy had once
again been deconstructed and inverted, an inversion that converted a vicious act into a merely linguistic predicament, and
excused an ontological demon as being merely an embarrassing literary faux pas, about as grievous as, say, a dangling participle.

Aperspectival madness—the inevitable endgame of confusing sliding contexts with merely arbitrary contexts, and the
inevitable endgame of disconnecting meaning from validity claims, claims that seize contexts and hold them still long enough to
establish clearly enough just who did, and who did not, help the Nazis.

As I indicate in the narrative, the best way to understand the real import of the partial truths that the deconstructionists
stumbled on is to set them in the much deeper context of Nagarjuna’s more radical (and, paradoxically, much more sane)
deconstruction, where relative truths are conceded a relative reality (mathematics works just fine in the finite realm, as long as it
admits its IOUs and does not pretend to the Absolute); but, demonstrates Nagarjuna, if any relative truth is pushed to the
absolute, it contradicts and deconstructs itself
(which is what happened to deconstruction when it thought it had become
absolute). See note 1 above.

For Nagarjuna, the deconstruction of relative truths leaves not nihilism but Emptiness: it clears away the conceptual rubble in
the mind’s eye and thus allows the space of nondual intuition to disclose itself, and thus it follows to the limit the whole point of
the IOU game: if you don’t want to be a complete self-contradiction, then you must come to rest in infinite Emptiness, which
alone redeems all IOUs, and which alone sets the soul free on the ocean of infinite Mystery.

  5. Taylor, Hegel, p. 39. My italics.
  6. Ibid., p. 44. My italics. I have changed “men” to “men and women.”
  7. Quoted in Weiss, Hegel, p. 15. As I put it earlier (in chap. 8), higher development is important, not because it actually

moves closer to Ground, but because it makes it harder to deny the ever-present Ground.

  8. As for their use of vision-logic: Kant had carefully differentiated the Big Three (theory, morals, judgment), expressed
theoretically in empiric-analytic inquiry and pragmatically in categorical morality (“act in such a way that the law governing your
behavior might be universal”—i.e., postconventional), and however much he expressed the hope that aesthetic judgment might
bridge the gap between theory and practice, his own efforts at such, although very suggestive to a whole generation, were not
altogether satisfactory.

The first thing Fichte did was attempt to break the hold of formal rationality by demolishing Kant’s “thing-in-itself.” If, as Kant
had said, the thing-in-itself can never in any way be known, then, said Fichte, it doesn’t exist. In its place he substituted the power
of the productive imagination of the infinite and supra-individual Self, which in essence meant: it is not that there is some forever
unknowable thing-in-itself, quite different from consciousness, that impinges on consciousness and “causes” perception; it is

rather that there is only one dynamic Life process that knows itself in various degrees and from various angles. The
world-knows-itself in various ways, and in order to do so it first cuts itself up, so to speak, into finite subject and finite object—but
both subject and object issue from the same ground, so their apparent incompatibility is never ultimate, and the ground can be
recovered in pure nondual perception.

But the ground of which Fichte speaks is almost always the Over-Soul, the psychic-level Witness (his pure Ego); he speaks
constantly of it as “ever-receding,” which is very typical of psychic-level Witness intuitions (the causal Witness never recedes). He
expresses this psychic vision in centauric vision-logic, which shows up most notably in his moral position, which demands “an
organization which transcends the individual State, namely, a federation of all States,” and which meant a worldwide community
of world citizens. Schelling was of similar opinion.

As for existential meaning, which, as we have seen, so often accompanies centauric vision-logic: “In these romantic groups
there was an ironical transcending, a going beyond, the given forms of social existence. This [paradoxically but typically] results in
a feeling of emptiness with respect to the meaning of life. You see now that the central problem of the twentieth century,
namely, the question of the meaning of life, came out very strongly in the second period of Romanticism” (Tillich, p. 385).

Hegel’s Reason (Vernunft)—as opposed to the understanding (Verstand) of formal operations—is one variety of pure vision-
logic: dialectical, uniting opposites, members “passing into the other” at every point, and one member implying/containing all the
others (network-logic). This “interpenetration of opposites” was one of the famous summaries of vision-logic (Engels).

As for their glimpse of higher or transpersonal domains: as I just mentioned, Fichte seems to have had a very strong psychic-
level stance; his pure Ego is almost pure psychic-level Witness (or Over-Soul), which Fichte always approaches by the injunction:
“Observe the observing self,” which of course you can’t, but which for precisely that reason leads you to an “ever-receding”
intuition of the Seer as that which cannot be seen but through which all that is seen moves. Fichte’s method opens one, I believe,
into psychic-level Witnessing, but not stably into subtle or causal Witnessing; it was nevertheless a giant step forward from formal
operational, and a true blossoming of Western Vedanta.

Hegel’s Absolute is very similar to the low-causal saguna Brahman—God’s “consequent Nature,” the ultimate (but ever-in-
process) Holon that embraces all manifest holons (and is, in that special sense, dependent upon them), and his Categories are
very similar to the archetypes of the high-subtle (“primordial Nature”), although many traditions, such as the Yogachara of Asanga
and Vasubandhu, see the archetypes as habit-memories more than eternal Forms, though all agree that the archetypes are
formative processes prior to but not other to any particular manifestation. Hegel had no experience, and no conception, it seems,
of the pure causal unmanifest, and his joke on Schelling (“that dark night in which all cows look alike”) actually works against him
here. His “infinite-in-the-finite” is thus “low-causal in the finite,” and not “ultimate-in-the-finite.”

This is also shown by reference to two aspects of the high-causal, both of which Hegel denied, and both of which therefore
situate his infinity elsewhere (i.e., in the low- and not high-causal). One, the unmanifest or high-causal is in no way dependent
upon, or affected by, any manifestation—manifestation itself does not add to or subtract from it in any way whatsoever (the
whole world, said Eckhart, adds nothing to Godhead; this is also Plotinus’s view, and Ramana’s). Two, we cannot say that creation
necessarily arises from the causal; neither, however, can we say it does not—those are two alternative views of Spirit, but Spirit is
not an alternative (is not dualistic). When the sages speak of the “superabundance of the One” and its “overflowing in and as the
Many,” that is a poetic concession to the verbal world; it is most definitely not the basis of a principle of sufficient reason.
Whenever “spontaneous superabundance” is reduced to the principle of sufficient reason (and we see this in thinkers as diverse
as Spinoza, Leibniz, aspects of Saint Thomas, Hegel, etc.), it is obvious that they are trying to “think their way” to or from Spirit,
and that will never work.

Turn now to the low-causal (final-God, saguna Brahman): as the (ever-receding) Holon of all manifest holons, it participates in
the experience of every holon and is, in a sense, the “result,” at any stage, of the sum total of all holons’ experience at that point
in manifestation, although it is not simply the summation (but the organizing process as well). This is, of course, very close to
Whitehead’s consequent Nature and Hegel’s self-actualizing Spirit, in which all is preserved (along with its “primordial nature” of
formative processes in the high-subtle, which are prior to but not other to any manifestation).

Schelling’s brief but unmistakable experiences of the high-causal show up in this doctrine of the pure undifferentiated Abyss
(Urgrund)—pure Emptiness—which is indeed a dark night in which all cows do in fact look alike. Like Hegel, however, he seems to
have no clear experience or conception of the ultimate stages; his “infinite-in-the-finite” is “high-causal-in-the-finite.”

All of these experiences (or intuitions) were largely, as I said, translated downward into terms of vision-logic, and this left no
injunctive proof for their existence—the particularly fatal flaw of Idealism. The Idealists undoubtedly glimpsed significant portions
of the transpersonal domain, and at least made them a theoretical cornerstone of their systems. But glimpsing is not
living—Idealism had no contemplative path to assure the reproducible results of its random intuitions. Further, since vision-logic
was the actual level at which they were most stably adapted, they had a tendency to confuse Spirit with vision-logic itself; and, in
fact, this is exactly what Hegel does (“The real is rational [Reason = vision-logic or dialectical-network], the rational is real”).

In this sense, the Idealists were indeed “Idea-ists” or “Mind-ists,” and not “Pneuma-ists” or “Spirit-ists.” In Yogachara terms,
the Idealists identified Reality with manas (or, at best, with tainted alaya-vijnana) and did not clearly break through to pure

Alaya (or Amala), or causal/nondual Thusness.

This led Hegel to the belief that all the essentials of the manifest world could be deduced by dialectical reasoning, and this led

to his confusing of logical deduction with historical procession.

It didn’t take a Russell or a Moore to fundamentally undo that proposition. Many people were struck by its “forced” or
“mechanical” nature. It wasn’t so much that Hegel’s general conclusions were wrong as that his methodology was entirely out of
place for what are, after all, transrational domains. But even within his own system, Hegel could not deliver the “reconciliation”
(what we might call “ultimate integration”) that the system promised. As I would word it, the dialectic might get you to vision-
logic, and point tantalizingly to higher (and even causal) occasions—no mean feat—but it could not actually bring you to those
higher levels, and thus it could not finally or in any ultimate fashion integrate the Ascending and Descending currents in the
human being (although, we might say, it would be a step in the right direction).

Schelling was aware of this inadequacy and devoted his remaining years to developing existential (“positive”) philosophy,
which, I would maintain, was altogether appropriate, since the centauric-existential level was and always had been the Idealists’
home base. Centauric vision-logic can integrate Ascent and Descent up to and down from that level, but not beyond to their
common source and actual “reconciliation.” As Schelling’s erstwhile friend Schiller would put it, “In reality there will always
remain a preponderance of one of these elements [Ascent and Descent] over the other; and the highest point to which
experience can attain [for all they knew] consists in an oscillation between these two principles”—between, that is, fleeing the
shadows or embracing the shadows, with no discovery of that nondual awareness that unites transcendence and embrace in
every act of choiceless awareness.

  9. As I will argue in volume 3, the great quest of an integral postmodernity is for centauric vision-logic, or the aperspectival-
integral bodymind as a collective center of social gravity—a development that, I will argue, awaited the evolution of the computer
and information technology; the industrial base could support only an instrumental rationality.

In short, as I construe it: the quest of modernity was for the Ego in rationality; the quest of postmodernity is for the Centaur in
aperspectival vision-logic (and I will relate them to the industrial and informational base in volume 2). [See also The Marriage of
Sense and Soul and Integral Psychology.]

As indicated in note 5 for chapter 11, we can loosely define modernity as consisting of any or all of the following factors: (1) the
differentiation of the Big Three (Kant); (2) the rise of the philosophy of the ego-subject (Habermas); (3) the rise of instrumental
rationality (Heidegger) and its base of industrialization; (4) the transparency (“nonproblematic” nature) of language (pre-
Saussure); (5) the widespread turn within (Taylor); (6) the belief in univalent progress—all of which I have summarized as “the Ego
in rationality.” Likewise, postmodernity may then be loosely defined as any attempt to develop beyond (or at any rate to respond
to) those factors (focusing particularly on the “centaur in vision-logic”).

In many ways, the first factor (the differentiation of the Big Three) remains the crucial item, and the integration of the Big
Three, now that they have been irrevocably differentiated, remains the crucial problem, in the development from modernity to
postmodernity. In a global world increasingly united only by the language of natural science (and similar monological it-languages,
whether financial, informational, economic, or ecological), the recalcitrant dilemma is the integration of the increasingly isolated
individual (the I) with meaningful forms of community (the we) against the backdrop of a universalist natural science (the it). And
in societies where the collective we has managed to evolve beyond tribal magic and beyond mythic-imperialism (i.e., where the
Big Three have actually been differentiated), the integration of the individual and the culture is still painfully problematic.

Nowhere is this more obvious (and more exacerbated) than in America, and astute observers of American life—starting most
notably with Alexis de Tocqueville—have returned time and again to the difficulties and dilemmas of integrating the newly
emerged Ego (and its “individualism”) with the larger currents of social life. Tocqueville, in fact, helped give currency to a new
word: “‘Individualism’ is a word recently coined,” he wrote, “to express a new idea. Individualism is a calm and considered feeling
which disposes each citizen to isolate himself from the mass of his fellows and withdraw into the circle of family and friends; with
this little society formed to his taste, he gladly leaves the greater society to look after itself.” There is the disengaged and
autonomous Ego of the radical Enlightenment, taken to its social limit, exacerbated in an America of puritan-to-cowboy self-
reliance.

Robert Bellah and The Good Society

This “new individualism” has been penetratingly examined by Robert Bellah and his colleagues (Richard Madsen, William
Sullivan, Ann Swindler, Steven Tipton), most notably in Habits of the heart and The good society. In Habits, Bellah et al. identify
four main cultural currents that mold the American character: biblical, republican, utilitarian, and expressive (represented by, for
example, Winthrop, Jefferson, Franklin, and Whitman). While all four strands have a strong emphasis on the individual, the first
two (biblical and republican) are forms of what the authors call “social realism,” the belief that society is at least as real and as
important as the individual, with meaning and reward found in relationships and community; whereas the last two (utilitarian and
expressive) are forms of “ontological individualism,” the belief that society is a “second-order, derived or artificial construct” and

the individual is the primary reality. In a sense, the first two stress the importance of communion, the last two stress individual
agency.

Bellah and company would like to see the two strands of social realism (or communion-emphasis) somehow “updated” and
“reappropriated” as a counterblast to rampant individualism (and hyperagency), but just how to accomplish this is exactly the
problem, and their analysis, although often profound, is not altogether compelling. The difficulty, as I see it, is that both of the
communion-strands derive from agrarian societies (and their intense mythic-membership modes and plow-patriarchy), and thus
these “social glues” are often shot through with sexism, racism, elitism, dominator hierarchies, etc. (all of which Bellah et al.
concede).

The last two strands—the highly individualistic strands—derive, of course, from modernity and the Enlightenment: utilitarian
individualism (stressing calculating rationality) stems from the utilitarian English Enlightenment (Locke to Bentham), and the
expressive strand (stressing expression of feelings and “feel good” ethos) from the Eco-Romantic rebellion. According to Bellah,
both of these (utilitarian and expressive) have often ironically fused to produce the extremely agentic, hyperindividualistic, almost
“atomistic” individualism of America (which I think is very true).

As my own analysis suggested, this “hyper-Ego” (whether utilitarian rational Ego or expressive divine egoism) went hand in
hand with a collapse of the Kosmos into monological, flatland terms devoid of any (explicit) qualitative distinctions; and this was
intimately related with the lack of integration of the Big Three once they had been irrevocably differentiated. Bellah: “If popular
culture makes a virtue of lacking all qualitative distinctions, and if the intellectual culture, divided as it is, hesitates to say anything
about the larger issues of existence, how does our culture hold together at all?” (p. 281).

The answer is, “tenuously”: “The culture of separation offers two forms of integration—or should we say pseudo-
integration?—that turn out, not surprisingly, to be derived from utilitarian and expressive individualism. One is the dream of
personal success. . . . The second is the portrayal of vivid personal feeling. . . . But a strange sort of integration it is, for the world
into which we are integrated is defined only by the spasmodic transition between striving and relaxing and is without qualitative
distinctions of time and space, good and evil, meaning and meaninglessness” (p. 281; my italics).

According to Bellah et al., a world lacking all qualitative distinctions is therefore construed, not according to what is worth
pursuing, but simply in terms of what works (as we put it, “What does it mean?” is reduced to “What does it do?”: efficient
means replace any criteria of worthy ends). Bellah: “For most of us, it is easier to think about how to get what we want than to
know what exactly we should want” (p. 21).

This is exemplified in the two dominant “figures” of the culture of separation: the manager (utilitarian) and the therapist
(expressive). “Like the manager, the therapist takes the functional organization of industrial society for granted, as the
unproblematical context of life. The goal of living is to achieve some combination of occupation and ‘lifestyle’ that is economically
possible and psychically tolerable, that ‘works.’ The therapist, like the manager, takes the ends as they are given; the focus is
upon the effectiveness of the means” (p. 47; my italics; see note 42 for chap. 4 for “adaptation” as covert acceptance of
“unproblematic” context).

“Between them, the manager and therapist largely define the outlines of twentieth-century American culture.” They both
focus on the individual, “presumed able to choose the roles he will play and the commitments he will make, not on the basis of
higher truths but according to the criterion of life-effectiveness as the individual judges it” (p. 47).

And particularly as the individual

it. Since all “values” are held to be equivalent (there are no explicit qualitative
distinctions), then whatever makes me feel good must be good, as long as it doesn’t overtly harm someone else. “Moral
standards,” says Bellah, “give way to aesthetic tastes” (p. 60).

feels

Bellah then drives to the heart of the matter: “If the self is defined by its ability to choose its own values, on what grounds are
those choices themselves based? For many, there is simply no objectifiable criterion for choosing one value or course of action
over another. One’s own idiosyncratic preferences are their own justification. The right act is simply the one that yields the agent
the most exciting challenge or the most good feeling about himself” (pp. 75–76).

“Now if selves are defined by their preferences, but those preferences are arbitrary, then each self constitutes its own moral

universe, and there is finally no way to reconcile conflicting claims about what is good in itself” (p. 76; my italics).

And here we have the all-too-familiar slide of the expressivist (Eco-Romantic) current into divine egoism and biocentric
feeling—“the culture of Narcissus” (Lasch). Small wonder that large segments of American culture would be drawn to everything
from sensory/material drenching in consumerism, sexually titillating anything, egocentric/biocentric tribalism dressed as a new
paradigm, body-bound expressive “therapies,” “do your own thing” idiosyncratic “values,” fluctuating “meanings” that follow the
ecocentric ebb and flow of passing feelings, and “relationships” whose primary aim is to “feel good,” relationships that form—and
dissolve—just as fast as the fleeting feelings that drive them.

Bellah et al. go on to point out that in this atmosphere of “feel good,” all values eventually are reduced to economic values,
because where feelings predominate, money alone can buy the free time to indulge them—the more money you have, the more
free feelings you are allowed. “In the absence of any objectifiable criteria of right and wrong, good or evil, the self and its feelings
become our only moral guide. What kind of world is inhabited by this self, perpetually in progress, yet without any fixed moral

end? There each individual is entitled to his or her own ‘bit of space’ and is utterly free within its boundaries. But while everyone
may be entitled to his or her own private space, only those who have enough money can, in fact, afford to do their own thing” (p.
76). Under these circumstances, “utility replaces duty; ‘being good’ becomes ‘feeling good’”—and that depends primarily on
bucks.

Thus the “strange and spasmodic integration” of the culture of separation: work as hard as you can (utilitarian) in order to

retreat to the “freedom” of a private space of egoic feeling (expressivist) or shared feelings in a lifestyle enclave.

And thus, to return to my original point, what has failed miserably is still the integration of the Big Three (exacerbated in
America, but evidenced aplenty in modernity at large). Particularly under the onslaught of divine (and regressive) egoism,
alternating with a utilitarian-individualism [see Boomeritis], Bellah finds that “what has failed at every level—from the society of
nations to the national society to the local community to the family—is integration: we have put our own good, as individuals, as
groups, as a nation, ahead of the common good” (p. 285).

And he ends with a general conclusion that is certainly supported by the analysis offered in this book: “What we find hard to
see is that it is the extreme fragmentation of the modern world that really threatens our individuation; that what is best in our
separation and individuation, our sense of dignity and autonomy as persons, requires a new integration if it is to be sustained.

“The notion of a transition to a new level of social integration may also be resisted as absurdly utopian, as a project to create a
perfect society. But the transformation of which we speak is both necessary and modest. Without it, indeed, there may be very
little future to think about at all” (p. 286; my italics).

The difficulty that the authors (and postmodernity) are grappling with, as I see it, is constituted precisely in the tension
between the two “communal” strands (biblical and republican) and the two hyperagency strands (utilitarian and expressivist). The
agrarian-based biblical and republican strands—both variations on the duty ethic first formulated in mythic-membership
cultures—seem to be the only available counter-blasts to the hyperindividualism and “unencumbered self” of modernity. And,
indeed, this tension is reflected in the constant debate between liberal individualism (the unencumbered self) and various forms
of communitarian theorists (of the saturated/situated self).

But, in my opinion, stripping the biblical and republican strands of their racism, sexism, dominator hierarchies, etc., is not
“updated” enough to carry the burden of the integration of the Big Three, while the emerging forms of “integration” of the
individualistic strands are indeed and all-too-often “pseudo-integrations.” This dilemma—the dilemma of postmodernity—is a
central theme of volumes 2 and 3.

The Evolution of Religion

As for Bellah’s pioneering work on the evolution of religious systems, see Beyond belief. Bellah presents a standard version of
some of the twenty tenets, and of course I agree with him on those points. For example, “Evolution at any system level I define as
a process of increasing differentiation [tenet 12b] and complexity of organization [12a] that endows the organism, social system,
or whatever the unit in question may be [any evolving holon] with greater capacity to adapt to its environment, so that it is in
some sense more autonomous [12d] relative to its environment than were its less complex ancestors,” although, of course,
“simpler forms can prosper and survive alongside more complex forms” (p. 21).

Further, Bellah points out, “Since it has been clear for a long time that levels of social and cultural complexity are best

understood in an evolutionary framework, it seems inevitable that religion too must be considered in such a framework” (p. 16).

Religious symbolism, says Bellah, “tends to change over time, at least in some instances,

in the direction of more
differentiated, comprehensive forms [tenet 12]. . . .” Bellah then traces five major stages of religious evolution, which he calls
primitive, archaic, historic, early modern, and modern, and which correspond quite closely with our archaic/magic, mythic,
mythic-rational, early rational/egoic, and rational/existential. A comparison of his stages with my descriptions will show the very
strong and wide-ranging correlations and similarities.

Bellah concludes that “freedom has increased [tenet 12d] because at each successive stage the relation of humans to the
conditions of their existence has been conceived as more complex, more open and more subject to change and development. This
scheme of religious evolution has implied at almost every point a general theory of social evolution,” which is why Habermas has
also found Bellah’s work inspirational (pp. 24, 44).

At the same time, Bellah is fully aware of what we have called the dialectic of progress; it is not all simply sweetness-and-light

progression: “At every stage the increase in freedom is also an increase in the freedom to choose destruction” (p. xvi).

Beyond these large areas of agreement, my major criticism of this approach is that is based almost entirely on the analysis of
social action systems according to the general cybernetic model (largely following Parsons): the standard Lower-Right systems
theory that always tends to dissolve qualitative depth into functional action terms and behavioristic variables, and thus dissolve
the distinction between authentic and legitimate (the capacity for vertical transformation and depth-disclosure is dissolved into
the capacity for horizontal translation and functional fitness: the standard Right-Hand path that converts being into doing).

Bellah: “An action system may be defined as the symbolically controlled, systematically organized behavior of one or more

biological organisms.” Symbolic messages are thus eventually reduced to representational and monological recovery of internal
or external messages: “Information in such a system consists largely of symbolic messages that indicate [represent] something
about either the internal state or the external situation of the action system” (pp. 9, 10).

That is standard monological reductionism, and it leads naturally to relegating the entire Left-Hand dimensions to that which is
simply “left over” after the systems analysis: “Thus, the set of symbolic patterns existing in a system will be partially determined
by the nature of the external world with which that system has had to deal and by the nature of the laws governing the cognitive
processes of the brain [all Right-Hand]. Within these limits there is a wide range of freedom, within which alternative symbolic
patterns may operate with equal or nearly equal effectiveness”—and thus questions of the worth or authenticity of those “equal
alternatives” get little or no attention within the constraints of functional fit and legitimacy (p. 10).

This reductionism leads naturally to a view of “symbolic action” as a monological linkage of meaning and motivation in a
behavioristic system, and thus the role of religion is reduced to: “Religion is the most general mechanism for integrating meaning
and motivation in action systems,” and therefore any symbolic system that offers this “integration” is “religious,” whether we
would call it “true” or not (p. 12). The truth-value of all religious propositions is thus reduced to the functional capacity of the
propositions to appear to be true and meaningful, which then provides the “integrating” link with motivation. But this is simply
to reduce truth to the functional value of holding-something-as-true, which also happens to dissolve this theory’s own claim to
be true.

Thus, Bellah is perhaps too optimistic about the capacity of the “cybernetic model” to integrate Left- and Right-Hand paths. “It
is precisely the stress on autonomy, learning capacity, decision, and control that gives the cybernetic model the ability, lacking in
previous mechanistic
the humanistic disciplines—the
Geisteswissenschaften—without abandoning an essentially scientific approach” (p. 10).

and organic models,

to assimilate

the

contributions of

But it is precisely the incapacity of monological, cybernetic, representational systems theories to integrate dialogical,
intersubjective, and interpretive occasions that has increasingly become obvious. The subjective space that builds those
representational cybernetic models is not itself built only of representations but also of interpretive and intersubjective
occasions, themselves not modeled in the theory that is supposed to explain them. The belief that such monological models can
explain them is the fundamental Enlightenment paradigm in all its inadequate aspects, is everything bad about the disengaged
and hovering Cartesian ego.

That religion seeks to integrate meaning as a Left-Hand dimension with motivation as a Right-Hand behavior is true enough,
but the meaning component cannot be reduced to monological representation without completely destroying the sought
integration.

I am not denying most of the specifics of Bellah’s functional, Right-Hand analysis; I am denying it is the only, or even the most
basic, analysis of religion. Bellah has refined many of these views, and he discusses some of these issues in the introduction to
Beyond belief. And, as the previous section on Habits of the heart makes obvious, Bellah has become quite sensitive to the
importance of qualitative distinctions and ontological values in providing the meaning component of the desired integration,
none of which can be covered by cybernetic or systems theory.

10. As we put it earlier, by insisting that the noosphere is part of

the biosphere, the actual integration is utterly blocked,
because the noosphere is not part of the biosphere, the biosphere is part of the noosphere (and parts of the human being are
parts of both). The Eco camp’s “integration” is fabricated only by an ontological regression that confuses great span with great
depth and thus jeopardizes both.

11. A small faction of ecofeminists have rebelled against a flatland bioequality, and I will examine their important contributions

in volume 2 (Zimmerman, for one, has fruitfully drawn on their work, as has Cheney, all of which is carefully evaluated).

By and large, however, the ecofeminists have often substituted egoic-communion for egoic-agency, still caught as they are in
the other pole, the Eco-communion pole, of the fundamental Enlightenment paradigm. And thus, when they attempt to escape
the violence and leveling of the flatland view, they end up perpetuating it in subtler forms.

Charlene Spretnak, as only one example, in States of Grace, continues her several-books-long attack on anything agentic
(which she ascribes mostly to the masculine mode) and emphasizes instead a thoroughly communion-based approach (more
feminine, as it were). But then, when it comes to the spiritual orientation that will supplant and heal this agency-laden
“patriarchal” worldview, she ends up almost incomprehensibly championing a broad form of vipassana/Theravadin Buddhism,
the East’s archetypal and merely Ascending path, which is radically dualistic and hyperagentic, a pure Goddess-denying, Descent-
denying, Goodness-denying, Plenitude-denying path, a path that historically has denied and devalued the body, the earth
(samsara), sex (and the ultimate sin-temptation, woman). Spretnak’s stance is known as out of the frying pan and into the fire.

Sexual Universals

At the same time, I believe Spretnak and other feminists, who insist on the existence of universal native differences between
the male and female value spheres, are quite right. But most of the attempts to delineate these “strong sexual universals” suffer

by not taking a multidimensional view. In volume 2, based on rather extensive evidence, I suggest that a much more adequate
view can be advanced by, at the very least, delineating the ways that translation and transformation operate in men and women.
With this approach, we then have,
in addition to such physical universals as strength/mobility, sexual profligacy, child
birthing/lactation, and tactile differences (and other commonly advanced biological differences), the following: I advance the view
that, on average, men tend to translate with an emphasis on agency, women tend to translate with an emphasis on communion.
And men tend to transform with an emphasis on Eros (transcendence), women tend to transform with an emphasis on Agape
(immanence).

These two “basic universals” (referring to the male/female native differences in ways of translation and transformation) help
to explain an enormous amount of cross-cultural data and male/female differential values. In volume 2, I attempt to show the
applicability of these universals by reformulating the various stages of present-day psychological, moral, cognitive, and object-
relations development as they appear (sometimes quite differently) in men and women (both men and women translate with
both agency and communion, but, as I suggested, males tend to place a higher emphasis on agency, women on communion; and
likewise with transformation: men and women access both Eros and Agape, but men tend to emphasize the former, women the
latter).
likewise trace these universals as they appear in historical development (during the six or so major stages of
technological/worldview evolution).

I

The point, as I suggested in chapter 5, is to isolate a set of constants or universal differences, and then follow these universals
as they manifest in different forms due to different evolving worldviews, modes of production, techno-economic infrastructures,
and so on—because these various structures, at different stages of evolution, placed different values on the male and female
spheres, emphasizing and prizing now one, now the other, occasionally both. But oppression has virtually no explanatory power
or place in this scheme, which relieves us from the men-are-pigs, women-areduped-sheep view.

On the historical status of men and women (down to today), most radical feminist and ecofeminist analyses suffer badly from
taking a one-dimensional view (analyzing merely the differences in translation and not also transformation: agency versus
communion is their only scale). Because they do not factor in the various stages of historical transcendence and transformation
(Ascent), these feminist analyses are thus forced to make agency and communion cover the ground that actually belongs to Eros
and Agape. They are thus forced to see agency (and “men”) as “bad,” communion (and “female”) as “good.” The bad agency then
must have oppressed the good communion, and women are then necessarily defined as primarily molded by an Other. To say that
men forced women to be molded is to define women as weaker. To say that women didn’t object to this oppression because they
were brainwashed is to define them as stupider. This is useless and self-defeating. When a more multidimensional analysis is
applied, these categories of molded/weaker/stupider are unnecessary to get the game going.

And finally, these basic universals give us a series of strong clues as to the male and female faces of Spirit, and to the

differences in male and female spirituality, spiritual practices, and spiritual goals (all of which are carefully explored).

My point with regard to most forms of ecofeminism can thus be put very simply: in denying any true transcendence and Ascent
(Eros), most ecofeminists emphasize only immanence and Descent (Agape). In thus denying any true Ascent, they remain
thoroughly wedded to flatland, and as such, they simply substitute the more feminine communion for the more masculine
agency: they don’t calculate flatland, they commune with flatland.

The same lack of vertical depth and transcendence, the same “nonhierarchical” heterarchy of shadows, the same failure to
transform, and merely instead a different way to translate the same old flatland: mononature is not now God, mononature is the
Goddess.

It’s not so much that such approaches are altogether wrong as that they desperately need to be complemented and
supplemented and rounded out. Because the dominant theme of Western culture, certainly from the time of the Ego-
Enlightenment, has emphasized hyperagency (as we have amply seen), the general Eco-Romantic rebellion (of which ecofeminism
is an offshoot) tended always to emphasize communion and thus to give a greater (sometimes total) emphasis to the feminine.
But, as we also saw, that Eco-Romantic emphasis on feminine/communion was simply the other pole of the fundamental
Enlightenment paradigm (communing with the great interlocking order of mononature): the other side of the flatland street.

What both the Ego (agency) and the Eco (communion) lacked—and what they both still lack—is the balance, not just of agency
and communion, but also of Ascent and Descent, Eros and Agape, transcendence as well as immanence. What is not needed is
simply more of the same dualistic view, now from the other side of the same failed coin: only Agape over Eros, only immanence
over transcendence. This is just more of the fractured, schizoid notes to Plato. [For a more inclusive view, see The eye of spirit,
“Integral Feminism,” chap. 8.]

12. In volume 2, I will look at how agency/communion as rights/responsibilities plays out in the masculine/feminine modes,
tend to the agentic/rights, and female to the
drawing, of course, on Gilligan’s observation that male modes
communion/relational/responsibilities; this is a prelude to the masculine and feminine faces of Spirit, set in the context of the
Great Holarchy of Being. But this is not just a theoretical venture; the actual status of men and women in the five or six major
technological epochs are examined carefully for clues to their native orientation.

13. That less significant holons have fewer rights (and fewer responsibilities) than more significant holons does not mean they

have no rights, and the recognition of their relative rights is part of the Liberation of Life (Birch and Cobb) that is inherent in the
Eco-Noetic Self and its Community of all sentient beings.

As suggested in previous notes (see especially note 23 for chap. 8), the Basic Moral Intuition is “protect and promote the
greatest depth for the greatest span.” That is, when we intuit Spirit, we are actually intuiting it as it appears in all four quadrants
(because Spirit manifests as all four quadrants—or, in short, as I and we and it). Thus, when I am intuiting Spirit clearly, I intuit its
preciousness not only in myself, in my own depth, in my I-domain, but equally in the domain of all other beings, who share Spirit
with me (and as me). And thus I wish to protect and promote that Spirit, not just in me, but in all beings possessing that Spirit, and
I am moved, if I intuit Spirit clearly, to implement this Spiritual unfolding in as many beings as possible: I intuit Spirit not only as I,
and not only as We, but also as a drive to implement that realization as an Objective State of Affairs (It) in the world.

Thus, precisely because Spirit actually manifests equally as all four quadrants (or as I, we, and it), then Spiritual intuition, when
clearly apprehended, is apprehended as a desire to extend the depth of I to the span of We as an objective state of affairs (It):
Buddha, Sangha, Dharma. Thus, protect and promote the greatest depth for the greatest span.

Precisely how to implement this Basic Moral Intuition (BMI)—the actual details of its application—that is not given in pure
intuition. Rather, the details of application are part of the intersubjective and cultural and social project that all of us, in open
communication free of domination, must discuss and decide. That is why the human moral response is a fine mixture of the
Divine and the Human. That I clearly intuit Spirit in all I’s and all We’s and all Its does not mean that I automatically know all the
details (scientific, philosophic, ethical, cultural, and otherwise) that must go into the final decision. In fact, I might have a fine
intuition of Spirit but unpack it poorly owing to lack of relative understanding and relative knowledge.

Thus, for example, a Zen master might have a profound intuition of oneness with the Kosmos, with Gaia and all its inhabitants,
and be dedicated to not harming a single living being, but that doesn’t mean that the Zen master will automatically know that
Styrofoam will kill life. The BMI is the infusion of the Divine into our awareness, not the working out of specific details.

I earlier gave as example one of the most agonizing of modern moral dilemmas, abortion. To the egocentric level of
development (preconventional), abortion is in most cases completely acceptable, because this level of development recognizes
depth only in itself (it extends depth only to a span of 1, namely, divine egoism; as Kohlberg’s research showed, morality at this
stage is “whatever I wish”). This level intuits Spirit (all levels do), but with its limited consciousness, the Basic Moral Intuition
(protect and promote the greatest depth for the greatest span) shows up as: take care of number one, primarily, and then
anybody who supports number one. (Infanticide is thus quite common in tribes organized around preconventional arbitration;
Lenski reports that about one-third of all children at birth were “thrown away” in these societies; this is nonetheless perfectly
legitimate at that level, because the ecological-carrying capacity of the tribe was quite limited—usually around forty people
maximum—and infanticide was the most acceptable form of population control; the greatest depth for the greatest span was
served by that practice).

With the expansion of awareness to the sociocentric/conventional level, span is extended to include one’s culture, group, or
nation. The BMI (greatest depth for greatest span) then shows up as “my country right or wrong” (depth is extended to the span
of all people in the chosen group, but to few or no outsiders). In most agrarian mythic-membership cultures, abortion is
considered a sin, because the fetus is a potential convert to that mythic God and thus a part of the chosen group, and thus
infanticide partakes of mythic theocide, which might bring catastrophic retribution from the God (within the mythic circle, that is
a very legitimate belief).

On the other hand, in the earlier horticultural mythic societies, infanticide as a sacrifice to the Goddess—this was considered
acceptable, even mandatory, because the sacrifice of that particular depth increases the greatest depth for the greatest span (by
ensuring a bountiful harvest, for example). Within that horticultural/mythic structure, that is also a legitimate unpacking of the
BMI (and becomes “immoral” only when a greater collective depth is actually available, which itself would condemn this
practice as unacceptable: the classic case of Abraham, first asked to sacrifice his son, then having the sacrifice called off: that is
exactly the transition between horticultural/mythic and agrarian/mythic-rational).

With the expansion of awareness to the postconventional (rational-worldcentric) level, span is extended to include all humans
universally and non-ethnocentrically (regardless of “chosen group” mythic status), and it is here that abortion becomes, for the
first time, a profound dilemma: there are cases where it might be okay, and cases where it might not.

The difficulty, I believe, becomes precisely because the form of the BMI is protect and promote the greatest depth for the
greatest span, and that always means that some depth can be sacrificed for a greater depth across greater span. The feminist
argument in favor of legalization of abortion (or choice), though not put in exactly these terms, amounts to this: the depth of the
mother (and consequently society) might be so profoundly harmed by having a child that the greatest depth for the greatest span
is actually served by legalized abortion (the Soviet Union, for example, used this argument explicitly; over a third of adult women
consequently had abortions).

This argument (pro-choice) is directly related to the issue of reproductive rights: in attempting to grow beyond patriarchy (or
the once-appropriate, now-outmoded, predominantly male rights of agency in the noosphere), it is essential that women be given
rights over their own reproductive capacity; since “rights” always means “wholeness-value” or “autonomous value” (as

explained in the text), reproductive rights means that the woman will make the decision herself, autonomously, and not as part
(or responsibility) of some other agency (such as the government/society). And, as always, if these rights are not recognized,
then the wholeness, the autonomy announced by those rights, is not sustained: the woman is not her own wholeness, her own
person, in this regard (i.e., if the rights are not recognized, that particular wholeness dissolves; the woman’s rights revert to
another agency, in this case, society, and women who have abortions are pronounced criminal).

Those are all legitimate arguments in favor of abortion/choice (which is usually limited to the first trimester, another example
of the unpacking of the BMI: in the first trimester, the depth of the fetus is so relatively shallow that its sacrifice to a larger
scheme is felt to be more acceptable; however, at the point that the fetus becomes “viable”—that is, at the moment it can or
could sustain its own life—it is an autonomous whole, and we are then forced to recognize its
rights as an independent
wholeness; sacrificing it at that point is murder).

My point is that, whatever we decide on this (and other) issues, the BMI doesn’t deliver hard and fast decisions, but a simple
infusion of Spiritual Concern, which is unpacked according to the level of the depth of the person doing the intuiting, and is
always of the form “protect and promote the greatest depth for the greatest span” (as best as that person can understand it).

Just so with animal rights and our understanding of them. That animals have relatively fewer rights (less depth) than humans
does not mean that they have no rights. That is, they possess a certain depth, a certain wholeness, they are ends in themselves
possessing intrinsic value. How much weight to give animal rights is open to fair discussion; my point is that, with the expansion
of awareness beyond the egoic-rational (worldcentric human) to the centauric and even psychic (all
life forms), then the
recognition of rights other than the merely human is then the form taken by the more expanded (deeper and wider) Basic Moral
Intuition.

This doesn’t mean we can’t kill animals if genuinely necessary; it means that it will upset anybody with this deeper intuition if
we kill animals needlessly or heedlessly. And the greater the depth of the animal killed (ape versus worm, for example), the
greater the intrinsic value that we have just destroyed. This killing will upset more highly evolved individuals, because the greatest
depth for the greatest span is now starting to include nonhuman life as well.

Of course, this does not mean that all individuals upset by the killing of animals are operating from a centauric or psychic
level—in fact, often the contrary: too many animal rights activists seem shot through with an ideological fury that betrays not
moral sensitivity but divine egoism hooked to a convenient cause.

Further, many animal rights activists implicitly—and sometimes quite explicitly—value animal life above human life: if the
analysis I have presented is accurate, then these individuals are in fact caught in what appears to be a regressive moral pathology.
That, in the best sense, we try to extend certain elementary rights to animals (especially more developed animals, all mammals
and certainly all primates) simply means that we, as a culture, have evolved to the point where an expansion of awareness is
recognizing that the BMI extends to nonhuman life, and when we extend these elementary rights to animals, it means that we
have the evolved capacity to recognize the wholeness value, the intrinsic value, in those holons, and the rights protect the
wholeness of that holon, that particular animal (however far down we decide to push those rights). If we don’t recognize those
rights, then that wholeness is not honored, and we will indiscriminately dissolve that wholeness (i.e., kill that animal heedlessly).

That is the intrinsic-value side of the argument for animal rights (it is wrong, in and by itself, to destroy depth); the extrinsic-
value side is that our own lives depend upon the mutual flourishing of the greatest variety of animals (diversity of eco-system).
We are harming ourselves, finally.

But the interesting thing about the Basic Moral Intuition is that it does not carry the command “Protect only depth.” It carries
the command “Protect all four quadrants as best you can,” that is: protect not just depth but depth × span (and that always
demands various sacrifices, for in a world of limits, not all can flourish paradisaically). This shows up even in animal population
control, for example. We have long recognized that limiting animal populations (by, yes, killing some animals) allows the greater
animal population to flourish more easily: we sacrifice particular depth for the greater depth × span. (This totally confuses the
more rabid animal rights activists, who want to make all rights absolute, which will never work.)

And, in an era of limits, we are starting to face these same dilemmas with human beings. In health care, a miniature version of
this shows up in our decisions about what diseases to cover in national health insurance. Which is better: spending $100,000 to
cure one person with a rare disease, or letting that person die and spending the money to save a dozen people with “less
expensive” diseases? In an era of limits, we are forced to choose (and probably choose the latter). Go one step further: what if
that one person is the President, or Albert Einstein, or Mozart, and the twelve are criminals on death row? You see how the
dilemma works? How do we unpack the intuition that we are to protect and promote the greatest depth for the greatest span?
The intuition is given; the unpacking is our moral dilemma, always.

Thus, the Basic Moral Intuition is an infusion of Care for all four quadrants, but does not come with instructions engraved in
stone tablets. What’s worth more, one ape or a thousand frogs? Probably the ape. But my point is that all of our moral decisions
(and dilemmas) are ultimately of that form, because they are all driven by the intuition “the greatest depth for the greatest span,”
and various types of depth and degrees of span are always necessarily being sacrificed for a greater depth × span, and how we
choose those sacrifices is always our moral dilemma, the precise reflection of samsara’s duality and its IOUs. (The recognition of

types of depth—an entire spectrum of depth—is what separates this from the flatland utilitarians, who interpret all depth as the
monohappiness of sensory pleasure, which prevents them from saying which is preferable, a happy pig or an unhappy Socrates.
The utilitarian position, as I earlier argued, is how the BMI appears to the monological reason of flatland.)

Likewise, because the BMI says to protect depth × span, and not merely depth only, this places a powerful curb on the
tendency to judge merely in terms of intrinsic value alone. A greater wholeness, with a greater depth, does indeed possess a
greater intrinsic value, but that is only “half” the story, so to speak. To return to the one ape, one thousand frogs example: on
intrinsic value alone, we would chose the ape. But both ape and frogs exist in networks of extrinsic communions as well (span),
and if we discover that the frogs are part of a fragile ecosystem and their death would disrupt the entire system (since they are
more fundamental than the ape), then we would choose to save the frogs, since that would preserve the greatest depth for the
greatest span, including probably the lives of other apes (demonstrating that is the tricky issue, which is why, again, the BMI
doesn’t offer details, only Concern).

Likewise with delicate issues in human affairs, such as affirmative action. If it can be demonstrated that the depth of one group
of people has been systematically oppressed by another group, then the greatest depth for the greatest span might indeed
involve attempts to redress the imbalance. Demonstrating that is, again, the tricky issue.

I mention these examples not to come down in favor of one or the other, but only to show that the BMI does not simply center
on depth alone (which would tend toward fascism), nor does it center on span alone (which would tend toward totalitarianism
and the tyranny of the majority), but rather centers on both. The BMI delivers to us an intuition to implement the greatest depth
across the greatest span, a spiritual Concern for all four quadrants, and the painful dilemmas of how to implement this intuition
are the dilemmas of finite beings in finite circumstances attempting to honor an infinite Care.

All of these issues, and some of my suggested solutions (although “solutions” is too strong a word) are gone into in detail in
volume 3. I wish here only to draw attention to the fact that all holons possess a degree of depth, with its correlative rights,
existing in a span with correlative responsibilities, and that as our own awareness evolves to greater depth itself, it more
adequately unpacks the Basic Moral Intuition, which infuses us with an awareness, and a drive, and a demand, to extend the
greatest depth to the greatest span, as best we can under the ridiculous circumstances known as samsara.

14. And, as we have seen, since flatland eco-holism confuses great span with great depth, it gets the instrumentalization itself
exactly backward. The biosphere does not depend upon the noosphere for its existence, but the noosphere does depend upon
the biosphere for its existence (yet another way of saying that the noosphere is not part of the biosphere, but rather the
biosphere is part of the noosphere). Which means, the biosphere has instrumental value to the noosphere (and noospheric
humans), not vice versa.

But my approach does not stop with instrumental value in any domain. Even though the biosphere is instrumental to the
noosphere, the biosphere itself still possesses equal Ground-value (as the visible, sensible God/dess), and further, each biospheric
holon possesses its own degree of instrinsic value (an ape is more intrinsically valuable than an atom, but the latter is more
extrinsically valuable than the former). Thus, the entire Kosmos exists as a network of rights and responsibilities correlative with
degrees of depth and consciousness. Nothing is ever merely instrumental to anything, and everything ultimately, finally, has
perfectly equal Ground-value as a perfect manifestation of primordial Purity, radiant Emptiness.

15. In presenting its empirical “holistic” worldview, most Eco-camps take for granted, and thus overlook, the vast networks of
intersubjective meaning and dialogical fabric that allow them to present and even comprehend a holistic web in the first place:
they discuss none of the extensive dynamics of intersubjective communicative exchange that allows and upholds their objective
web-of-life systems theories, and thus they have no actual recommendations as to how to reproduce that intersubjective
agreement and mutual understanding in others or in the world at large—they can only insist that everybody agree with them and
accept their systems view, ignoring how the intersubjective worldspace develops from egocentric to sociocentric to worldcentric
comprehension.

This taking-for-granted (and thus ignoring) of the interior, intersubjective worldspace (the Left-Hand dimensions of the
Kosmos), and consequently believing that all that is necessary is to produce a more “accurate” holistic map of the natural world:
this is exactly the fundamental Enlightenment (and Cartesian) paradigm, the “proud culture of reflection,” that “monster of
arrested development,” which contributed inexorably to the actual fracturing of the Kosmos, the collapse of the Kosmos, and the
consequent despoliation of Gaia precisely in the incapacity to engage the interior processes of transformation upon which
reflection itself depends in the first place, and upon which mutual agreement and mutual accord, which alone will save Gaia, must
proceed.

16. The Guru Papers, a book by Kramer and Alstad, is a typical example of a purely Descended approach claiming to have the
whole story. The authors mistake what certainly seems to be their ignorance of the Ascending current for a critique of all
Ascending endeavors, and then interpret any challenge to their own stance as being “authoritarian.” Their effort is admirable
when confined to the half of reality they admit, but it is an effort that remains, in its partialness, steeped in the dominance of
Descent.

Likewise, Goldsmith’s The Way: An Ecological World-View is a splendid recital of the Eco-systems worldview, and I agree with

a fair amount of its presentation, as far as it goes. But it is aggressively monological and purely Descended, and thus is replete
with the regressive yearning for what it calls “the earliest period when people everywhere really knew how to live in harmony in
with the natural world” (the naiveté of that stance is simply astonishing). Moreover, this monological view typically has no
conception of the actual dynamics of the entire Left-Hand dimension of the Kosmos; in this regard it is quite dualistic and
fragmented, and so of course it claims to be THE Way, as its title puts it, and states this claim very boldly: “These principles form
an all-embracing and self-consistent model . . .” (apparently never having heard of Gödel or Tarski).

These two books are archetypal examples of the Descended path in today’s world. Although these approaches lack any vertical
depth, they make up for that in a type of fearless shallowness. In both books, the lack of any Ascending current, any genuinely
transformative interior disclosures, allows the bearers of the worldview to go on about their business fundamentally
unchallenged. There is no consciousness higher or deeper than their present state, only a different monological worldview that
others should accept. Their salvation is not a matter of transcendence in their own case, but in altering the views of others.
Hence the dominance inherent in Descent; hence the authoritarian stance claiming to combat authoritarianism; hence the
flatland claiming to be the All.

17. The evidence for both of these claims is presented in volumes 2 and 3.
In this regard, a final word about Stanislav Grof and Jean Gebser, and a comment on the work of Richard Tarnas. Starting with
Grof (these comments are in light of my previous discussion of Grof’s work—note 3 for chapter 6—which the reader should have
read first):

Stan Grof

Grof, in Beyond the Brain (1985), pinpoints two major areas of “disagreement” or at least “mismatch” between his
psychological model and mine (“in spite of the otherwise far-reaching agreement”). The first involves the basic perinatal matrices.
“In my opinion,” he points out, “without a genuine appreciation of the paramount significance of [perinatal birth/death], the
understanding of human nature is bound to be incomplete and unsatisfactory. The integration of these elements would give
Wilber’s model more logical consistency and greater pragmatic power. Without this, his model cannot account for important
clinical data, and his description of the therapeutic implications of his model will remain the least convincing part of his work for
clinicians used to dealing with the practical problems of psychopathology” (pp. 136–37).

My explanation of fulcrum-0 (note 3 for chap. 6) should satisfy, in a general fashion, most of those objections. I have, since
1982, considered fulcrum-0 an integral part of the overall spectrum model (due primarily to Stan’s research and John Rowan’s
clarifications).

The second major “disagreement” mentioned by Grof and others is the “linearity” of my model. As Stan puts it, “My own
observations suggest that, as conscious evolution proceeds from the centauric to the subtle realms and beyond, it does not follow
a linear trajectory, but in a sense enfolds into itself. In this process, the individual returns to earlier stages of development, but
evaluates them from the point of view of a mature adult. At the same time, he or she becomes consciously aware of certain
aspects or qualities of these stages that were implicit, but unrecognized when confronted in the context of linear evolution” (p.
137).

My presentation throughout this book should make it clear that I am in general agreement with that statement, but perhaps
even more radically than Grof. Not simply each stage beyond the ego/centaur, but every stage of development unfolds/enfolds
its predecessors. Developmentalists from Loevinger to Kohlberg to Piaget have long pointed out that every stage involves various
types of reworkings of previous patterns, taken up, enfolded, and reassimilated into the new structures. The “linear” nature of
the various stages simply refers to broad patterns of
stable adaptation (not merely temporary experiences), which unfold
“linearly” in the way that an acorn unfolds “linearly” into an oak. Many temporary experiences can bounce all over the spectrum
of potential experiences, but stable and continuous adaptation depends upon ongoing holarchical structuralization that must
differentiate/integrate its predecessors: unfold, enfold (Grof’s “enfolds into itself”).

At the same time, because individuals have general access to gross/subtle/causal states (waking, dreaming, deep sleep),
temporary experiences can, as I said, move all over the broad spectrum of possible experiences. And these temporary “peak”
experiences tend to be emphasized in Grof’s work, which is fine (and they often have considerable therapeutic effect, which is
also just fine).

I agree with all of that, and I have all along (but beginning with Up from Eden, I pointed out that temporary experiences/states
must be converted into stable patterns if actual growth is to occur; we will return to this point in a moment). Some critics,
focusing on the “stages” portion of my model, think that I have some sort of monolithic, rigid, one-way street in mind, through
which development moves, clunking and chunking a step at a time. But this type of narrow one-way street conception is never
assumed by developmentalists of any variety; the various stages not only spiral, meander, wobble, and regress, they are
themselves simply mileposts in the winding road of growth (and, as such, are extremely important, but not monolithic). This is
largely taken for granted by developmentalists.

Moreover, in my model, there are the basic levels or waves of consciousness (matter to body to mind to soul to spirit), and the
lines or streams (cognition, affects, morals, self-identity, spirituality/faith, defenses, etc.) that move
various developmental
relatively independently through those levels. Thus, for example, a person can be a high level of development cognitively, a
medium level emotionally, and a low level spiritually. There is nothing linear about overall development.

Still, as I will emphasize in this note, even though overall development is not linear, and even though the self has access to all
sorts of altered states and temporary peak experiences—none of which are linear—if those states are to become enduring traits,
they must enter the stream of development and be converted from states to structures (or enduring capacities). In any
developmental
is “linear” as defined by
developmentalists: namely, each stage builds upon certain competencies laid down by its predecessors (e.g., atoms to molecules
to cells to organisms), and no amount of temporary peak experiences can turn atoms into cells without passing through
molecules.

this occurs (cognitive, moral, affective, etc.),

line that

the development

In short, while the model I have proposed makes ample room for both altered states and developmental structures, Stan’s
model accounts mostly for the former. This, in my opinion, is a major limitation in his model, since it means that it cannot easily
account for development at all. Since permanent realization and stable access to higher domains is one of my primary interests, I
have focused less on temporary states and more on enduring traits, but I fully acknowledge both.

Thus, from my perspective, the self-system can span the entire spectrum of potential experiences (which I will qualify in a
moment). At the very least—and this is virtually indisputable—the self has constantly available to it the three great states of
gross, subtle, and causal occasions (if nothing else, in waking, dream, and deep sleep states). And therefore, at any of its stages of
stable growth and development, the self has access to temporary experiences (“influxes” or “infusions” or “transfusions”) from
these states.

These temporary infusions and altered states are not necessarily, in and of themselves, the stuff of stable adaptation and
permanent structuralization (see below); but these general peak experiences can, and do, occur to the self at virtually any of its
stages of growth and development (because it is immersed in or surrounded by the three states at every stage). This is why I have
always agreed that children can indeed have a type of transpersonal influx (usually from the subtle state). And why “channeling”
of subtle occasions can occur at virtually any stage of development. And why paranormal phenomena are not a particular stage of
growth but an influx that may (or may not) occur at virtually any stage of growth. And why psychosis is sometimes invaded by
mystical transfusions (indeed, The Atman Project was one of the first clear attempts to delineate the influx of transpersonal
energies due to the breakdown of egoic translations in certain psychotic states).

But many theorists have so focused on these dramatic and temporary influxes or transfusions that the actual growth and
development process has been severely misconstrued and even misunderstood. Temporary infusion (as important and profound
as it sometimes is) becomes the be-all and end-all of consciousness occasions. This has led more than one researcher to sing the
glories of psychosis as primarily a wonderful means for mystical growth (e.g., Laing) and the joys of infancy as a paradisaical and
mystical state tragically fractured by growing up (e.g., Norman O. Brown, Michael Washburn).

Peak experiences can indeed glimpse various nonordinary states, but stable adaptation proceeds in a growthlike fashion (which
is why neither the child nor the psychotic nor the channeler can actually “own” and stably adapt to the infusion; moreover, the
latter two “transpersonal” states all rest on a dissociative base, which is why they occur outside the autonomy of the self-system;
I will return to this shortly).

But most important, focusing on peak experiences has caused an enormous confusion about what is actually available in
these experiences. Because, contrary to the peak theorists, not all of the spectrum of consciousness is lying around, fully formed
but submerged, like a sunken treasure chest, waiting to be dug up. Consciousness creates as much as it unearths, and thus, as
we will see, we have to be extremely careful in how we interpret these peak experiences—and most important, about the
intersubjective space in which these experiences occur.

In the first place, that a transpersonal experience might involve the “reentering” or “reworking” or “reexperiencing” of a
prepersonal occasion (archaic images, pleromatic indissociation, phylogenetic heritage, animal/plant identification, perinatal
patterns, etc.) does not mean the transpersonal awareness resides in those archaic structures: it is the transpersonal awareness
that is doing the entering, not the archaic modes—the question is always: what can those modes accomplish on their own, when
they alone are manifest? Not a single prepersonal structure can itself, in itself, generate intrinsic transpersonal awareness, but it
can become the object of transpersonal consciousness, and thus be “reentered” and “reworked,” and it then becomes a type of
vehicle of transpersonal awareness, but never its source. The pre/trans fallacy, in this instance, remains firmly in place.

Further, as I suggested in A Sociable God, we have to distinguish between peak experience, plateau experience, and stable
adaptation; and as I suggested in “Paths beyond Ego in the Coming Decades” (in Walsh and Vaughan, Paths beyond ego), higher
development is in part a conversion of temporary states into enduring structures of stable adaptation. That we have a type of
(limited but fluid) access to transpersonal states should not detract from the fact that temporary experiences are not the stuff of
enduring wisdom-adaptation (for an insightful reflection on these issues, see Reynolds 1994).

And this is why we have to be especially careful about the claim that all psychological domains are simply open to fluid access.

As Reynolds (1994) summarizes the Grofian view: “The clinical data Grof has collected during therapy sessions of LSD and
holotropic breathwork indicates a very fluid accessibility to all the domains of consciousness.”

But, in fact, all

the domains of consciousness are not available (holographically or otherwise) to a particular subject of
consciousness. For example, an adult at moral stage 2 does not have access to the consciousness of moral stage 5. Moral stage 5
(with all its enormous richness and characteristics) is not available to moral stage 2; no amount of LSD, breathwork, or any other
intense experiential drama will build the intersubjective structures necessary to take the role of other, reflect on those roles,
criticize those roles, and move into universal compassion, through which alone stable transpersonal awareness can shine.

(There is a sense in which the deep structures of higher stages are indeed present as potentials in the individual—what I have
called the “ground unconscious”—much as, for example, Chomsky believes that the brain simply comes with all languages
embedded in it as potentials. But just as that does not mean that a two-month-old child can simply and fluidly access French and
start speaking it, so an individual at moral stage 2 cannot simply access moral-stage-5 experiences.)

Thus, a moral-stage-2 person might experience a temporary dissolution of self/other boundary (and might indeed do so after
regressing to BPM), but that person will “contain” or “hold”—and therefore manifest—only a preconventional understanding of
that “nondual” state: which is to say, that person will understand it virtually not at all. A person at moral stage 2, who cannot
fluidly operate from the consensus role of the generalized other, will not stably adapt to universal mind.

POSTMODERNISM AND THE INTERSUBJECTIVE SPACE

Grof is aware of these general issues, but I feel he might be neglecting this crucial area. The tendency in his writing is to take
this intersubjective worldspace for granted (as I will explain in a moment) and then simply describe the monological subject
having monological experiences: the Cartesian subject has an experience, sees an archetypal
image, experiences volcanic
pleasure/pain, identifies with plants, has an out-of-the-body experience, relives birth, or perhaps dissolves altogether; and Grof
has given a truly extraordinary catalog of these phenomenological experiences (which, for the most part,
I accept as
phenomenology).

But all of that phenomenology takes for granted, and thus neglects, the crucial point that the subject of those experiences is
formed only through an intersubjective and dialogical process, and exists only by virtue of those (hidden) intersubjective
structures, which themselves
come jumping into awareness with LSD or breathwork or yoga or any simply
phenomenological awareness. The Grofian lists of transpersonal experiences are simply a phenomenology of experiences, and
accurate and important as that is, it fails (or comes up short) at precisely the point that all phenomenology fails: it takes the
subjective and intersubjective patterns doing the phenomenology for granted, and thus fails to disclose the processes and
intersubjective structures necessary for the experiences to be able to unfold at all (see below).

never

For these experiences do not unfold in pregiven subjective space; that subjective space exists only in, and by virtue of, an
intersubjective space formed by a developmental process of mutual understanding and mutual recognition, which is the actual
space or “background” of the subjective experiences (i.e., it is the intersubjective space in which the experiences come and go), a
background that does not itself enter awareness as an experience, and therefore cannot be found phenomenologically, and
thus can be found in none of Grof’s cartographies (important as they otherwise are).

(For a discussion of the background and structural unconscious—the hidden patterns of the intersubjective space—see note 28
for chap. 4. The discovery of the importance of the constructed intersubjective space is the essence of the genuinely post-
Cartesian paradigms, from structuralism to hermeneutics to genealogy and archaeology and grammatology—a point we will
return to below.)

By taking the intersubjective space for granted, then the isolated individual subject appears to be having a series of
monological experiences, and Grof has given us the phenomenology of many of those experiences. But his analysis leaves intact
the taken-for-granted nature of the intersubjective space (in which the particular subject and object arise). This approach is thus
still caught in the fundamental Enlightenment paradigm, which it alters by extending what the subject can experience (the
cartographies of nonordinary experiences), but it does not examine the intersubjective space that supports and allows the
particular subject and the particular experiences to arise in the first place. The subjective space in which these experiences occur
is not pregiven and unproblematic: it develops.

And that

examination leads to the developmental and formative processes that are hidden to phenomenology, an
examination that discloses the stages of the formation of the individual subject and thus discloses what that subject can
assimilate
(and stably adapt to) among the monological experiences that bombard it in dramatic experiential episodes
(breathwork, LSD, etc.). That aspect of the examination leads not just to a cartography and phenomenology of ordinary and
extraordinary experiences, but also to a developmental cartography of the intersubjective spaces in which the experiences arise
and can arise (and therefore, into which they can be stably integrated). We will see several examples of this in the next section.
Thus, in my own approach, the study of the peak (and temporary) experiences of phenomenology (important but limited) are
incorporated into a broader framework that includes the formative stages of structures of stable adaptation: the subject having

these experiences did not simply parachute to earth fully formed, and thus the types of experiences available to it are not in all
ways holographically pregiven and available to fluid access for any
subject (a broad and general range of transpersonal
experiences, yes; a stable adaptation and assimilation, no. I will return to this in a moment).

In short, the overcoming of the fundamental Enlightenment (Lockean to Cartesian) paradigm consists not merely in giving a
new and expanded description of the world, but also in recognizing the intersubjective construction of the consciousness that is
doing the describing, the intersubjective unfolding of the worldspace in which subjects and objects manifest (see note 15 above).
As I think I have demonstrated throughout this book, most of the “new paradigm” theorists (who claim to be non-Cartesian, and
most of whom Grof quotes with approval) are still Cartesian to the core: the subject of consciousness is simply giving a new,
expanded, process-oriented, nonatomistic, nonmechanistic description of the world, without any understanding that the subject
doing the describing is itself created by a dialogical process that does not enter awareness as an immediate object and thus never
enters their “new paradigm” descriptions. (They fail to recognize the various types of the “structural unconscious,” the
“background hermeneutic unconscious,” and the “functional unconscious” described in note 28 for chap. 4, all of which constitute
the actual breakthroughs in the genuinely post-Cartesian paradigms from Heidegger to Foucault to Habermas.)

It is precisely these formative processes of the intersubjective worldspace that create an opening or clearing in which different
types of subjects and objects can stably emerge: these developmental processes define the primary arc of consciousness evolution
and adaptation. And none of those processes make it into the “new paradigms,” and none of them show up on Grof’s extended
cartographies of phenomenological experiences.

Peak experiences can indeed bounce all over the spectrum of possibilities, in a specific sense: the average adult has access to
the entire phylogenetic (archetypal) image forms, the various perinatal matrices, the psychodynamic unconscious, as well as the
overall general states of gross/subtle/causal (waking/dreaming/sleep), and thus in every twenty-four-hour period the average
adult sweeps through the general spectrum of consciousness (gross to subtle to causal and back again: ascent and descent,
evolution and involution, the Great Circle once each day, not to mention miniature versions throughout). But those states (and
the temporary experiences they generate) can be converted into stable, conscious adaptations only through a process of
holarchical structuralization: converting states into traits.

No doubt a peak or plateau experience can profoundly alter people’s lives, and totally shake up their accepted worldviews, and
shatter old beliefs. But then, where do they carry it? What is done with it? Where does fit into their structure? How can they
manifest it? Are they ready for stable adaptation and conscious responsibility for the burdens of compassion and wisdom that
transpersonal structures demand? Or does the “insight” come and go as another sensational experience, and fade away into the
night, a vaguely fond memory of what might have been?

To give only one example, again using moral stages (since these indicate how people actually orient

themselves in
interpersonal space, as opposed to their own “private” experiences): Kohlberg’s moral stages have now been tested in numerous
widely different cultures (first-, second-, and third-world), and no exceptions to his basic stages have yet been found (there are
minor variations, but all are within the broad outlines). As far as we can tell, they are indeed universal deep structures (Gilligan
altered the surface, not the deep, forms). [See Integral psychology for references.]

Thus, a person at moral stage 2 who has a profound satori-like experience (say, a temporary dissolution of self in the causal
unmanifest, which is indeed ever-available), might have his belief system and worldview profoundly shaken, and this might
indeed lead him to transform his actual moral orientation in the world, which means he would move to . . . moral stage 3. There
is nowhere else for him to go. He will not simply jump to permanent stage-6 (or higher) adaptation (among other things, stage 6
operates upon various structures in stage 5 and stage 4, and these are not manifest, are not present: it would be like building cells
with no molecules).

By centering on the fact that temporary satori-like experiences are indeed available to virtually anybody (“fluid access”), we
tend to miss the crucial fact that, once the experiential fireworks have subsided, the arc of consciousness returns to its structural
patterns, which themselves evolve and develop in intersubjective formative processes. I am not saying experiential disclosures
aren’t important (just the opposite); but I am saying they address the phenomenal realm and tend to take the subject of the
experiences as unproblematic and monological, as a preexisting center of awareness against which we will throw experiences
until it surrenders, instead of seeing that the intersubjective worldspace allows the arising of both the subject and object in stable
awareness: altering the objective experiences without addressing the intersubjective developmental space in which the objects
and subjects arise will thus be of limited lasting effect (that is the whole point of the genuinely post-Cartesian paradigms).

Some Examples
Let me give a few examples of the intersubjective space and why typical phenomenology does not disclose it (and why it took
postmodernism to get beyond Cartesian phenomenology). Say you are watching a card game of poker. The cards are the actual
phenomena; you can see them directly; and you could do a complete phenomenology by describing each of them very carefully.
But the cards are being used according to various rules (the rules of poker), and those rules are not written on the cards. Those
rules appear nowhere on the phenomena, and thus even a complete and exhaustive description (and phenomenology) of all of
the cards would not tell you what the rules are.

In order to discover the rules—the actual structure (or grammar or syntax) of the game of poker—you have to perform some
sort of structuralism: you have to investigate the collective behavior of the cards, and study their patterns of relationships. You
have to discover which card goes where and when; you have to spot which combinations of cards “win”; you have to uncover the
specific ways and patterns that the cards are used. None of this is written on any of the cards. In short, you have to study the
intercard relationships (the intersubjective relationships). No amount of studying just the subjects (or just the objects: we are
using the cards to mean either individual subjects or objects)—no amount of phenomenology—will show you the intersubjective
patterns. And yet every card is obeying those intersubjective patterns.

The postmodern, post-Cartesian approaches are all united by a belief that background intersubjective (and interobjective)
patterns govern much of the phenomenology of individual subjects and objects, a background that cannot be spotted by a mere
phenomenology or a description of those individual subjects and objects. (This is why we heard Foucault, in note 1 above, explain
why phenomenology could not even handle the existence of linguistic meaning: subjective phenomenology cannot spot
intersubjective structures.)

Thus, we do not overcome the Cartesian paradigm by giving a more expanded phenomenology, important as that might be
(and this is what Grof has contributed). For even if we have superconscious subjects and mega-cards undergoing altered states,
those cards are still following patterns that can be found on none of them. The genuine post-Cartesian approaches therefore
focus on the intersubjective and interobjective patterns (described at length in note 28 for chap. 4) that create a space or clearing
in which the individual subjects and objects arise. And they investigate the influence of this background on individual states of
consciousness (a background that explicitly shows up in none of the individual states of consciousness).

What does a “space” or “clearing” mean in this regard? Originating with Heidegger, but taking on numerous other (yet related)
meanings, the idea is essentially this: reality is not a pregiven monological entity lying around for all to see; rather, various social
practices and cultural contexts create an opening or clearing in which various types of subjects and objects can appear. For
example, as I would put it, the magic worldspace creates a clearing in which animistic objects can appear; the mythic worldspace
creates a space in which a caring God can appear; the rational worldspace creates a clearing in which worldcentric compassion
can appear; the psychic worldspace creates a space in which the World Soul can appear; the causal worldspace creates a clearing
in which the Abyss can be recognized. None of those are simply lying around out there and hitting the eyeballs of everybody.
There is no single “pre-given world” (the essential insight of postmodernism).

This is why postmodernism is generally united in recognizing the fact that it is the intersubjective space (with its correlate, the
interobjective realm) that allows individual subjects and objects to be seen and recognized in the first place. This is why the
postmodern poststructuralists trace part of their lineage to Saussure, who demonstrated that language is an intersubjective
structure; and to Nietzsche, who emphasized interpretation over empiricism. This is also why the great postmodern thinkers have
all given their version of the background intersubjective space that cannot be grasped by mere descriptive phenomenology
(contra Husserl). Heidegger uses hermeneutics or interpretive ontology (as we saw: surfaces can be seen—phenomenology—but
depths must be interpreted); Foucault uses archaeology and genealogy to dig beneath and behind the phenomena (even if he
insists there are only surfaces, he is looking at interobjective surfaces and their rules of behavior); Derrida uses grammatology to
spot the play of signifiers and their endless contexts (none of which can be found in a phenomenology of signifiers). It is this
postmodern turn—which, in its constructive form, demands that all four quadrants be taken into account—that I have explicitly
attempted to incorporate, along with the important (but by itself inadequate) phenomenology of consciousness (which, by itself,
remains firmly rooted in the Cartesian space).

When it comes to individual psychology, a typical example is the one we have been using: moral structures and their
development. People generally feel that they are free to think whatever they like, and within limits that is true. But a person at
moral-stage 2 will not, under any circumstances, have a moral-stage-5 thought. As I said, stage-5 is built of components from all of
the earlier stages, just as letters go into words, go into sentences, go into paragraphs, and no one has ever seen a paragraph
without sentences. In other words, the intersubjective moral structures create a space in which individual thoughts will arise, and
thoughts that do not fit that space will simply not arise. This is what I mean when I say that the intersubjective structures create
an opening or clearing in which various types of subjects and objects can arise (and that is perhaps the root insight of the various
postmodern movements, including even Habermas).

Two points about this example. One, no altered state or peak experience will produce a moral-stage-5 thought in a moral-
stage-2 person. Two, no phenomenology of any subjective experience, at any stage, will disclose the structures of that stage.
Phenomenology has to be supplemented with structuralism (or any background analysis as described in note 28 for chap. 4). That
is what virtually all of the “expanded cartographies of consciousness” miss; and that is why, however transpersonal they are, they
are also still Cartesian. An “all-level, all-quadrant” approach is meant specifically to address this limitation.

Past Actuals and Future Potentials
This further points up the profound difference between experiences that, on the one hand, are essentially a process of past
future discovery or developmental building. To take them in

recovery (or reliving), and those that are essentially a process of
that order:

The average adult already has, for example, all of the structures in place that involve the birth trauma. Those perinatal
structures have already been laid down; they are simply unconscious, or unrecovered. All that is required, so to speak, is a
lowering of the repression or amnesia threshold (however conceived). The same is true of the Freudian or personal dynamic
unconscious and the phylogenetic or archaic heritage: they are already there
in actual structural form (but are simply
“forgotten” or “submerged”).

Experiential recovery or reliving of those already formed structures can thus, without too much fanfare, be therapeutic in
and of itself (I fully agree with Grof on that issue). Of course, these experiences will still have to be worked through, and they will
still have to fit into the ongoing march of structuralization that defines all growth and evolution (tenet 12c). And they will still
have to be assimilated into the subjective space of the self-sense. Thus, to stick with moral stages as an example: a person at
moral stage 5 might experience plant identification as an indication of worldcentric One Life; moral stage 1 will experience it as an
extension of its own narcissistic self and arrive at an ontological theory of the Wonder of Being Me.

But those previous, already evolved structures (phylogenetic and ontogenetic) can indeed be recovered by any techniques
that sufficiently lift the repression/amnesia barrier (LSD, yoga, breathwork, therapy, intense stress, etc.), and thus, working
through those experiences does not,
in itself, demand a fundamental and massive transformation of the self-sense. The reliving
and working-through can indeed dissolve various pathologies created by the repression or submergence of the past structures.
And this recovery (apart from dissolving certain pathologies) might also lead to a transformation that notches the self up from,
say, moral stage 2 to stage 3, or stage 3 to stage 4, as we saw.

But primarily this is a reworking (often therapeutic) of structures already present but submerged: the primary threat is in
lifting the pain (or amnesia) barrier that constituted the repression; the threat is not that the self will have to transform upward
by fundamentally surrendering its present subjective space: it simply has to work, into that space, some material that could just as
well already have fit into that space if it weren’t for the repression. And even if (by, for example, plant identification) the self
changes its objective worldview, a change of objective worldview is not necessarily a change in the subjective space that holds
that worldview. Saints as well as egotists can champion “One Life.”

But that

recovery of past structures already laid down (by phylogenetic or ontogenetic development) but subsequently
repressed or submerged (or at any rate forgotten)—that is quite different from building future structures as they unfold, for the
first time, in manifest consciousness. Here the intense experiential disclosures do not have to be worked into a subjective
structure already present, but rather have to be part of a subjective and intersubjective process of building a structure not yet in
existence: experiences have to be part, not of structural uncovering, but of structural building.

In short, there are very important differences between digging up past actuals and bringing down future potentials. Past
actuals (structures already laid down in evolution but subsequently submerged) include the phylogenetic heritage and the
ontogenetic heritage (from material/plant/animal identification to perinatal matrices to Freudian psychodynamic unconscious to
collective archaic unconscious). Although it might take a transpersonal awareness to access some of these more remote
structures, the point is that they are already formed, already evolved, already laid down, and so of course we have a type of
“fluid access” to them (once the amnesia barrier is penetrated by whatever means).

But future potentials are available only as potentials: the structures themselves have not yet been built in the particular
evolution of the particular individual (just as the higher moral stages are only future potentials to the lower stages). And thus, at
most, the average individual has access to random, temporary experiences (across the broad range of states, gross and subtle
and causal)—experiences which, if they are to enter consciousness as permanent, stable, responsible traits, must be built into the
ongoing stream of subjective and intersubjective structuralization. A person at moral stage 2 cannot simply unearth and instantly
have fluid access to all of the characteristics of moral stage 5—these future potential structures must be built and created
intersubjectively; they are not fully formed, buried treasure chests lying around and waiting to pop to the subjective surface
under hyperventilation.

The same is true of linguistic and grammatical structures, cognitive development, Loevinger’s self-development, Habermas’s
communicative competence, psychoanalytic object relations—the list is virtually endless, and none of those involve fluid access
(and unearthing) of an already formed occasion, but rather interpersonal and intersubjective building and creating. All of that
tends to get overlooked in the excitement of digging up a past actual (e.g., plant identification) or of experiencing an infusion
from subtle or causal states (e.g., satori-like experiences).

Temporary peak experiences from higher domains (subtle or causal) can indeed accelerate transformation toward those
domains, but cannot, for example, simply jump a person at moral stage 2 to moral stage 5 or beyond. There is no evidence that
suggests that can happen, unless you ignore the intersubjective space, at which point it appears that a simple transpersonal
experience has created a transpersonal subject, bypassing the unavoidable stages of subjective and intersubjective growth.

I previously gave the example of a moral-stage-1 individual who has a temporary peak experience of phylogenetic identity with
all plants/animals: the experience is eventually and necessarily interpreted in terms of the self-structure at moral stage 1: namely,
narcissistic and preconventional. We see this all too often in “weekend enlightenment seminars,” where the person dips into the
transpersonal well and emerges as a “transformed” person, namely, as an insufferable egotist, around whom the world now

revolves because the person is “empowered.” This is not the dissolution of the Cartesian ego, but its hyperinflation to cosmic
proportions: a temporary transfusion of higher domains has empowered a monster, as Charles Taylor might put it.

(These experiences may indeed—and often do—alleviate certain pathologies by virtue of putting the person in touch with past
actuals
that were previously submerged and then liberatingly unearthed in a dramatic recovery experience. And these
experiences may, at best, notch the person up a stage or two on the interpersonal scale. But just as often, they otherwise simply
reinforce, via a jolting transfusion, the person’s already present level of adaptation.)

If the dynamics of these two very different processes (past actuals and future potentials) are confused and conflated, and thus
both are equally modeled on the “already fully accessible” paradigm (which is true only of the submerged unconscious of past
actuals and certain temporary transpersonal experiences and states), then it appears that the engineering of subtler objective
experiences is the primary task, instead of also centering on the subjective and intersubjective processes of growth and
development which alone can stably accommodate the new experiential disclosures.

It is in the growth of subjective structures, themselves set in intersubjective modes of mutual understanding and mutual
recognition, that the Western paths of orthodox developmental psychology meet up with, and run into, the contemplative paths
of deeper/higher growth and evolution (mystical traditions East and West). This is an area that I believe Grof has neglected. My
respect for Stan’s work is well known. I am simply suggesting that he might be a little more sensitive to where these experiences
will fit in the ongoing developmental process of subjective (and intersubjective) space, into which and through which these
experiences come and go.

At the same time, this would open Grof’s model to the vast amount of research (clinical, philosophical, experimental,
dialogical, and therapeutic) on the formation of these intersubjective structures of competence (Piaget, Austin, Searle, Selman,
Loevinger, Kohlberg, G. H. Mead, Heidegger, Gadamer, Habermas, etc.), research that, after all, covers an enormous amount of
ground, which no comprehensive model can afford to ignore—and research that is at the heart of the genuinely post-Cartesian
revolution. [See The eye of spirit, chap. 7, for an extended discussion of Grof’s work.]

The Passion of the Western Mind
Richard Tarnas’s The Passion of the Western Mind is a fine narrative, thoughtful and insightful. But in the epilogue, Tarnas’s
presentation points up the extremely difficult and subtle issue of actually coming to terms with modernity, both what it
accomplished and what it demolished.

The general idea, as Tarnas presents it, is that the modern mind has emerged from an earlier, premodern participation
mystique (which he also calls “undifferentiated unitary consciousness”), through a painful process of alienation and separation
and dualism (the Ego of modernity), and is now on the brink of a dialectical synthesis and reunion of subject and object, mind and
nature, male and female, inner and outer, knower and known.

This scheme finds support, Tarnas believes, in the discoveries of depth psychology (Freud, Jung, Hillman, Grof), since these
approaches have undermined the absolute autonomy of the disengaged and rational Ego (as we have seen, depth psychology was
indeed one of numerous approaches that began to decenter the Ego).

At this point, Tarnas turns to a Grofian explanation based on the Basic Perinatal Matrices (or fulcrum-0, which moves from a
prior undifferentiated unity of fetus and womb, through a volcanically painful differentiation process, to a post-uterine resolution
and integration). Tarnas wants to see all of Western history playing out these three major subphases of the perinatal birth
trauma.

Although Tarnas is careful to point out that this “birth drama” of the Western mind cannot simply be reduced to the biological
birth trauma, there is a constant tendency to do exactly that. “The dynamics of this archetypal development [of the collective
Western mind] appear to be essentially identical to the dynamics of the perinatal process.” (All quotes are from pp. 430–44.)

And this means that all of the various fulcrums of differentiation/integration will be collapsed into one single, overarching
perinatal Fulcrum. Fulcrum-0 becomes the fulcrum of the entire Western mind. And this means Tarnas wants to see all of
Western history as having one long “metatrajectory” with three stages. The Western collective psyche, he says, started out in an
undifferentiated oneness with nature and the whole universe (“connection with the whole,” although what the “whole” means is
not really specified; we will return to this in a moment). Then the collective psyche began a painful process of separation,
differentiation, and alienation (there is no distinction here between differentiation and dissociation; there is simply alienation).
And that dualistic alienation brings us up to the present, up to the modern and postmodern mind (on the brink of tomorrow’s
reunion with that which was historically lost in the middle phase of alienation).

Thus, “the fundamental subject-object dichotomy that has governed and defined modern consciousness—that has constituted
modern consciousness, that has been generally assumed to be absolute, taken for granted as the basis for any ‘realistic’
perspective and experience of the world—appears to be rooted in a specific archetypal condition associated with the unresolved
trauma of human birth.”

With this allegedly unresolved birth trauma (the collective Western mind stuck, as it were, in the second subphase of fulcrum-
0), “an original consciousness of undifferentiated organismic unity with the mother, a participation mystique with nature, has
been outgrown, disrupted, and lost.”

Note the curious juxtaposition of “outgrown” with “disrupted and lost.” When we normally describe something as “outgrown”
(e.g., I have outgrown thumbsucking) the “outgrowing” is usually a good and desirable thing, whereas something “disrupted and
lost” is usually bad and alienating. But confusing these two is part of what seems to be Tarnas’s confusion of differentiation and
dissociation. Modernity’s necessary differentiation of the subject from an unreflexive immersion in magicomythic syncretism
must therefore actually be an unresolved birth trauma that is primarily alienating.

Tarnas is clearly aware of the necessary movement of modernity’s “separation,” but because he doesn’t distinguish
differentiation and dissociation, he is most taken with modernity in its alienating modes. He constantly refers to “separation” and
“dichotomy” and “dualism” as being the same thing. “Here [in the unresolved birth trauma], on both the individual and the
collective levels, can be seen the source of the profound dualism of the modern mind: between man and nature, between mind
and matter, between self and other, between experience and reality—that pervading sense of a separate ego irrevocably divided
from the encompassing world.”

All differentiations are thus converted merely to dissociations. At the same time, Tarnas collapses all fulcrums into fulcrum-0.
That is, a further confusion, as I see it, is that the dynamic of fulcrums in general—a dynamic that always moves from fusion to
differentiation to integration (that is the form of all nine fulcrums that we examined—this general dynamic of all fulcrums is
simply treated as being basically perinatal (simply because the perinatal fulcrum also follows the same general dynamic, and is
the first to do so). And thus, as soon as any intense differentiation/integration process occurs (as soon as any fulcrum is spotted),
it is called a perinatal process. Consequently, all of the other and significant fulcrums tend to get collapsed into the most
fundamental fulcrum (F-0).

This leaves Tarnas with only three major stages of growth and development (and only one birth process) through which he
must squeeze all of Western history,
instead of seeing that the death/rebirth (or differentiation/integration) process has
collectively occurred at least five or six major times, each of which was a profound, world-creating, world-birthing transformation
(e.g., archaic to magic to mythic to rational to centauric). To say that in each of these cases development basically repeated the
perinatal drama on a different level is simply to privilege the most fundamental fulcrum and try to make it explain the more
significant fulcrums that followed upon it (hence the enduring danger of reductionism that is vigorously denied and nevertheless
constantly embraced as explanatory).

Likewise, the collapse of all fulcrums into the perinatal fulcrum leaves Tarnas with the Single Boundary fallacy, which, as I
suggested (note 3 for chap. 6 and note 32 for chap. 13) tends to mark all retrogressive (and reductionistic) theories of
development: since there is only one major boundary in consciousness (or one major fulcrum of differentiation/integration,
instead of the nine or so boundaries or fulcrums that more adequately describe development), then the creation of that “single”
boundary tends to be seen as a primal alienation, a primal loss, instead of a necessary and appropriate process of growth and
differentiation (thus the juxtaposition of “outgrown” with “disrupted,” as if the oak were simply an alienating disruption of the
acorn).

With his Single Boundary fallacy, Tarnas can then reduce all differentiations (and all dissociations) to the perinatal boundary

and the unresolved birth trauma that is somehow inhabiting the entire Western mind.

That, as I said, is to reduce the boundary phenomenon of modernity to a perinatal birth boundary. But the defining boundary
of modernity (modernity’s Ego/world boundary) is a fulcrum-5 boundary: it is five complete boundaries down the road from the
birth trauma. (All of the previous boundaries are enfolded in the compound individual of modernity, and they unfold in its own
ontogeny, but they do not define the emergent component added by modernity.) That modernity’s specific dissociations
might indeed have reactivated a similar perinatal birth matrix (F-0 subphase 2) is certainly possible, but that completely reverses
the causal order of Tarnas’s scheme. Tarnas is invoking, as cause, that which is actually effect; and further, his “cause” is deeply
misread as perinatal (based on the Single Boundary fallacy).

Thus, modernity’s specific (fulcrum-5) boundaries actually involved the standard dynamic of growth from a previous relatively
undifferentiated state (in this case, mythic-syncretism) to differentiated (the Big Three) to integrated (still in progress), an ordeal
that can go pathological as fusion or failure to differentiate (on the one hand) or dissociation and hyperdifferentiation (on the
other). But specific fulcrum-5 problems cannot be reduced to fulcrum-0 disasters: that wipes out the major transformations of
fifty thousand years that prepared the way for modernity.

If there are F-0 pathologies, then these can indeed infect subsequent development. But an F-0 birth trauma could not be the
major cause of modernity because it implies premodern societies had no similar birth traumas at all (since they certainly had no
modernity). Rather, the dissociations in the F-5 boundaries of modernity could anchor themselves in the “existential” subphase
of F-0 (subphase 2) in a way that would not happen in premodern times because there were no collective F-5 boundaries in
premodernity to do the anchoring, even though they went through essentially the same perinatal birth process.

Either way, the perinatal matrices are not the cause of modernity. Rather, modernity’s own problems, generated primarily in
fulcrums 5 and 6, might indeed have reactivated a fulcrum-0 subphase and caused it to be selected as the bodily grounding of
its own self-generated dilemmas: being spat out of the womb has hit every human being from day one; modernity hit only a
recent few.

Thus, as a general point of agreement, I would say that modernity was indeed caught in subphase 2 (the differentiation
subphase) of a developmental fulcrum, but it is fulcrum-5, not fulcrum-0. It is fulcrum-5 subphase 2 (and not BPM II/III, or
fulcrum-0 subphase 2) that is Hegel’s “monster of arrested development,” or aborted birth in this case. As I repeatedly pointed
out in the text, modernity’s own differentiations fell into dissociation by lacking the higher, integrative, and resolving stance of
vision-logic (which would fulfill fulcrum-5 and act as the base of fulcrum-6, thus integrating the “monster”; we will return to this
actual alienation in a moment).

Since the biological birth matrix, like all fulcrums, also has a subphase 2 (painful differentiation), there is a broad sense in
referring to modernity’s “birth pains.” And that, I suppose, is the general way Tarnas (and Grof) use the BPMs. But after vigorously
denying any biological reductionism, they often tend to immediately do so anyway.

This certainly seems like an attempt to reduce a very complex and multidimensional situation to a simplistic and highly
“ordered” state of affairs, as if complexity must somehow be defused in a simple 1-2-3 move, instead of seeing that, as I said, the
“1-2-3” move (a fulcrum of development) has repeated itself in numerous profound (and profoundly different) transformations
across vast stretches of historical time.

There then follows the standard retro-Romantic pre/trans fallacy: the “original unity with the womb/world,” which has been

historically “disrupted and lost,” will now be resurrected in a mature form, and Tarnas makes exactly that claim.

An altogether fatal problem with these types of views is that the alleged “original union with the whole world” is not a
“union,” for one thing, and it does not involve the “whole world,” for another. Even if development were just this single and
simple 1–2-3 move (a single historical fulcrum as a “metatrajectory), it is still inadequate on both counts, in my opinion.

The original “union” state (whether conceived as the actual womb or as the pre-modern and prehistorical participation
mystique) is not a union because it is simply an undifferentiation. That would be like saying the acorn unifies all the branches and
all the leaves of the oak, whereas they are not actually differentiated in the first place: it is not a union of these later elements,
because these elements do not yet exist. (We can say it “unifies” them in potential, I suppose, but the point again is that the
particular union is indeed a potential, not an actual, and so, in the future, there is no past actual to resurrect. Thus, in either
case, there is no actual union to recontact. The only thing the acorn actually unifies is its own cellular components, and the oak
continues to do this or it would simply die, it would not limp into the future “alienated”; the “problem” the oak faces is how to
unify its leaves and roots and branches, and this the acorn does not even remotely do. Just so, neither the womb nor the
premodern state was a union of the Big Three, because those were not yet differentiated entities that could be united; they
either did not exist or were largely undifferentiated.)

Likewise, this primal “union” is not one with “the whole world” because the leaves and branches are not yet even part of the
world; the only “whole world” that is actually present is minuscule, relatively speaking. Likewise, for humans: the fetus in the
womb is not one with the whole world of intersubjective morals, art, logic, poetry, history, economics, etc., from which it will
supposedly “separate” and “alienate” itself upon birth; rather, it is one with a biophysical matrix that it will necessarily
differentiate. (And the premodern matrix did not unify the Big Three, but simply failed to differentiate them in the first place; this
is a fusion, not an integration or an actual union.)

From any conceivable angle, there is no actual union to resurrect; there is only a predifferentiation that is about to be

outgrown. It is surely unacceptable to call this diminutive and undifferentiated state a “union with the whole world.”

Incidentally, for a typical psychological approach to development based on this confusion, see Washburn’s The Ego and the
Dynamic Ground (1988), which stands as a classic attempt to define oaks in terms of recaptured acorns; and likewise Nelson’s
attempt, in Healing the Split
(1994), to integrate a developmental model with Washburn’s regressive orientation. Both
Washburn’s and Nelson’s attempts are based on variations of the Single Boundary fallacy, which usually brings numerous
pre/trans confusions in its wake. The “original union” of the infant state is said to be an “unconscious union with the ground or
whole,” which is supposed to be the essential spiritual state that will be resurrected in a conscious, mature form, once the ego
regresses to this state and reunites with it. The infant is said to be “more open” to this spiritual state than the adult.

But note that, as all parties would acknowledge, the infant cannot take the role of other and therefore cannot possess
anything resembling genuine love and compassion and interpersonal care and concern. Genuine love and compassion involves at
least the capacity to put oneself in another’s shoes and consciously act in their behalf, often against one’s own inclinations, and
this the autistic infantile self cannot do—it doesn’t even recognize an other, let alone take its role.

In other words, this “original union” cannot step outside of its own egocentric orbit, and it thoroughly lacks intersubjective love
and authentic compassion. Why would that egocentric lack of love and compassion be “spiritual,” and why would we want to
recapture that? If Spirit, among other things, is Love, how could the infantile self be “more open” to spirit when it cannot
evidence love or compassion in any authentic sense? To counter by saying that the infantile self is spiritual because subject and
object are still one, is precisely to fall into the Single Boundary fallacy, which is exactly the confusion that drives these theories.

Some adults, under regressive-type situations, do indeed recover childhood memories, but they inhabit those memories from
within a now broadly rational and perspectival cognition. That is, they might “remember” taking the role of other at age two or
three, and report vividly what this entailed. But clinical and empirical evidence repeatedly and consistently shows that actual

children at that age do not and cannot take the role of other (the Three Mountain experiment, for example).

Memory traces of childhood, some of which are broadly accurate (and many of which are not), are, in the adult, reactivated
and reinhabited by an irrevocably perspectival consciousness, and then those memories are “read” by that highly evolved
consciousness as if that were the way they were originally experienced. Once one has learned to take the role of other, that
capacity is not lost (except under the severest pathologies), and so no matter how much the adult “regresses,” the recovered
“memories” are recovered in an intersubjective and perspectival space, which then instantly and automatically interprets them
from that space, and then reads them back into childhood as if they were accurate and indelible photographs of the original
occasion, even if children at that age show no evidence of being able to do any of this.

Certain types of memory traces are in some cases actually there and broadly accurate, perhaps even back into the womb (as
some researchers claim), and we may suppose that they leave their imprints, like bruises, on the psyche. But when adults
“recover” these imprints, they reanimate them with a consciousness that brings to life aspects of these imprints that were simply
not registered at the time. The imprints, assuming they are there, are run through a highly evolved intersubjective space that can
then pull out implications and perspectives that were not present when the imprints were laid down, and this “pulling out” is then
mistakenly ascribed in all ways to a recapturing, a recapturing that goes quite beyond past actuals and into a reconstituting of
past actuals created by highly sophisticated structures of present consciousness. All of this imbues these lower structures with
capacities that massive amounts of empirical evidence deny they possess.

No doubt, as we said, infants and young children can have an infusion of transpersonal states (usually subtle), but this is an
infusion into an intersubjective space that is fundamentally preconventional and egocentric, not postconventional and
compassionate, and thus they cannot be carried in any evolved spiritual awareness. [See Integral psychology for an extensive
discussion of this issue.]

This infantile “spiritual union” seems especially attractive (and “divine”) when the Ego itself is painted in the very worst
possible light: following the Romantic agenda, the Ego is defined as a dissociation and not as a transformative and transcending
differentiation. The mature Ego is simply called “divisive,” “abstract,” “analytic,” and so forth, overlooking the fact that it is the
mature Ego that eventually builds a universal and worldcentric consciousness, the first consciousness in all of development
through which a truly postconventional and universal Love and Compassion can begin to flow, a worldcentric perspective that
unites more, integrates more, contains more union and more wholeness than the infantile self could even begin to imagine
(literally).

As a generalization, then, it is the Ego, not the infantile self, that is “more open” to the spiritual state (and the trans-egoic
states are even more open, and this “even more” does not include a return to the infantile lack of love and lack of compassion in
order to “recapture” this “spiritual ground” that was “lost”—a notion that can only be sustained by the Single Boundary fallacy).
[See The eye of spirit, chap. 6, for an extensive critique of Washburn’s model.]

Sometimes these theorists (and Tarnas is one) insist that by “whole world” they actually mean the “universal matrix” or the
Ground of Being. True, the undifferentiated womb state (however conceived) is indeed one with the Ground of Being, but then so
is absolutely everything else; thus, there is no reason whatsoever to privilege this state in that regard. Further, in terms of
consciously realizing this union with Ground, this state is the farthest removed, since it has the most number of stages of growth
lying ahead of it before it can consciously awaken to and as the empty Ground.

If (as an entirely separate issue) some pathology occurs in the differentiation process (it either remains stuck in fusion or goes
too far into dissociation), then healing that pathology does indeed often mean recontacting the alienated aspects (the past
actuals), but these past actuals are aspects of those lower levels themselves that were once present and then alienated: they are
not the higher level that was never present but will emerge to integrate the overall system. Again, the defining aspect of the
higher integration is not
recontacting a past actual, but rather involves the emergence of something largely novel (never
historically present and thus never historically lost).

All of these factors get collapsed by Tarnas into the simple 1–2-3 scheme (around the Single Boundary): original unity with the
“whole world” or “universal matrix,” then historical alienation from “the” world, then reunion with “the” world: “Yet full
experience of this double bind, of this dialectic between the primordial unity [the ‘whole world’] on the one hand and the birth
labor and subject-object dichotomy on the other, unexpectedly brings forth a third condition: a redemptive reunification of the
individuated self with the universal matrix.”

This seems to be a confusion between the process of

involution itself and specific events in evolution. Involution, or the
superabundant Efflux of the One into the Many, is simply confused with biological birth. The “universal matrix” (the One) thus
becomes the actual womb, and the biological birth process becomes the separation of the individual (and the Many) from the
One, which produces the “dualistic world,” which is then somehow reunited with the One after the biological birth trauma is
“resolved” by the Mother embracing the infant (which becomes the “nondualistic” state).

This reductionism is sweeping: “A redemptive reunification of the individuated self with the universal matrix. Thus the child is
born and embraced by the mother, the liberated hero ascends from the underworld to return home after his far-flung odyssey.
The individual and the universal are reconciled. The suffering, alienation, and death [birth trauma] are now comprehended as

necessary for birth, for the creation of the self. A situation that was fundamentally unintelligible is now recognized as a necessary
element in a larger context of profound intelligibility. The dialectic is fulfilled, the alienation redeemed. The rupture from Being is
healed. The world is rediscovered in its primordial enchantment. The autonomous individual self has been forged and is now
reunited with the ground of its being.”

There is indeed a type of “recovering” or “reuniting” with the One (the whole process of Ascent back to the One, as we have
seen; and we will return to this process in a moment). But the first thing to notice about that “reunion” is that the “oneness” or
the “whole” that we are to “recapture” never existed anywhere in previous evolution. The “primordial enchantment” that was the
historical “womb” of collective modernity was not a sweet holistic integration with the entire Kosmos and the One: it was an
often brutal indissociation that demanded seven planets for seven bodily orifices and was, on more than one occasion, willing to
burn anybody who disagreed. There is no way—and little reason—to “reunite” with that, any more than we would want to
reunite with “mature” thumbsucking.

The alienation that marked modernity was not an alienation from the previous mythic and allegedly “unified” structure
(which was often violently syncretic), but rather, after the Big Three had been irrevocably differentiated, there was as yet no
obvious way to reconcile and integrate them: nothing was lost, something was simply not yet found, and this let the Big Three
fall into fragments. Within the entirely new worldspace of modernity, a struggle to unite the newly emergent components of
that worldspace was as yet unfulfilled. The fulfillment itself would not consist in any sort of reuniting with anything lost, but
rather involved a newly emergent integration, which would bring a new synthesis entirely unprecedented.

That modernity also involved some repression of previous structures is in itself nothing new: myth repressed magic wherever
it could. Modernity had its own spectacular repressions, but those repressions are not what defined modernity—which was the
differentiation of the Big Three—and thus merely reversing its repressions of any previous structures would not itself constitute
the emergence of the higher structure (e.g., vision-logic), which could integrate the defining domains of modernity itself. To say
that modernity was defined primarily by its repressions
the standard retro-Romantic stance, the pre/trans fallacy that
confuses differentiation with dissociation and thus sees salvation as a recapturing of something lost with the Crime, instead of
moving forward toward something not-yet-born at the time.

is

Thus, modernity did not alienate a nature that was integrated in premodernity. A differentiated nature was never present in
premodernity to be integrated in the first place. Modernity differentiated nature and then failed to integrate that: it did not fail
at something premodernity had succeeded in. Rather, it failed in the second part of a task that no previous period had even
attempted.
integrate the new
differentiations.

It did not lose something that must be regained:

it has not yet found that which will

As with most subscribers to the pre/trans fallacy, Tarnas himself realizes that this new integration that will “heal modernity”
cannot actually be a reunion, and so, after laboring to demonstrate that it
is a reunion, he quickly but gingerly begins to
distance himself from that view. Actually, he says, the “recovery of the whole” will really be “a new and profoundly different
level from that of the primordial unconscious unity.” It involves, he says, something “fundamentally new in human history” (my
italics).

Profoundly different, fundamentally new. This is no more a reunion than an oak’s discovering that it is one with the whole
forest is a reunion with its acornness. But this does not stop Tarnas from unfortunately lapsing back into a recovery of past
actuals: the new state will be “a reconciliation with lost unity, a triumphant and healing reunion” (with something once possessed
in previous history or prehistory).

A more adequate view involves, I believe, the recognition that the dynamic of the stages of evolutionary growth does indeed
involve a series of deaths and rebirths: a series of undifferentiation to differentiation to integration; each new integration is then,
in its own way, undifferentiated with respect to further growth, and so it becomes the new ground for a new round of
fusion/differentiation/integration (each is a new fulcrum of growth). The birth trauma and perinatal process is the most
fundamental, and least significant, of these many fulcrums winding their way back to God.

Most fundamental, because it is the first fulcrum in individual evolution. It is the foundation, the first manifestation of growth
back to the Self; it sets the basic perinatal matrices and patterns that will ground the manifestation of consciousness (and thus I
have no doubt that in intense experiential disclosures, as with LSD or breathwork, it might be the bodily form reassumed in the
disclosure, as Grof repeatedly maintains). But in itself it is also the least significant, because the separation/individuation from
the biophysical perinatal matrix explains nothing that is specifically cultural, mental, social, artistic, economic, political, scientific,
etc., which are all worlds that emerge after the natal drama is finished. Yes, pathologies at fulcrum-0 can influence, but do not
cause, higher fulcrums. Each higher fulcrum is an emergent
that brings new capacitates, new desires, new cognitions, new
motivations, and new pathologies that cannot be reduced to, or explained by, the birth fulcrum.

If the higher boundaries and fulcrums are all collapsed to the most fundamental (fulcrum-0), and the Single Boundary fallacy is
embraced, then all subsequent movements of fusion/separation/integration must be seen as a replay of the first fulcrum:
reductionism at its worst, it seems to me.

The passion of the Western mind (and the Eastern mind as well) is not to recover what was prior in evolution, but rather what

is prior in involution—to recover what is prior to manifestation itself, prior to the whole movement of involution, prior to time
and duality and wombs and tombs and birth and death altogether: the self-existing, self-luminous, self-revealing, self-unfolding
Spirit that empties itself into and as the entire Kosmos. To recapture that is the passion of the Western mind.

And the evolution of that Western mind was not an alienating move away from the Answer, but a series of profound (and
heroic and painful) steps heading toward that Answer, the Chaotic Attractor as a future potential that was the Source and the
Goal of the entire display, a future potential that became actual
in any individual who stepped off the display and into the Abyss,
from which the individual was reborn, not from the womb, but from Emptiness itself—and as the entire Kosmos.

Jean Gebser

A final word about Jean Gebser’s work, since he has written at length about the coming transformation of the integral-

aperspectival mind, now haltingly in progress.

Gebser believed that the integral-aperspectival structure at its fullest was a transparency to the whole, the Itself, the fully
Spiritual, an unobstructed “access” to the total horizon, das Ganze (the whole). But this should not surprise us; we have seen the
ever-present tendency to mistake one’s present wholeness for Wholeness itself, whereas it is merely a phase in an ever-greater
unfolding. And when Gebser suggests that Jesus and Eckhart were embodying the integral structure, we know that he is short of
the mark (beyond the integral are the psychic, the subtle, the causal, and the nondual). Georg Feuerstein, in Structures of
Consciousness, points out, with reference to a continuous satori (which would indeed mark the ultimate or nondual stage), that
“it would appear Gebser was only marginally aware of this and that he might even have misunderstood it,” and that there is “a
depth of spiritual realization in Eckhart that is absent in Gebser.” [Feuerstein has subsequently agreed that beyond Gebser’s
integral structure lie at least psychic, causal, and nondual. See his “Jean Gebser’s Structures of Consciousness and Ken Wilber’s
Spectrum Model,” in Crittenden et al., Kindred Visions.]

As for Gebser’s confusion regarding the archaic structure and the Origin, or Ur-sprung. Of the archaic structure, Gebser says it
is “closest to and presumably originally identical with origin.” In fact, what the archaic structure was closest to was not the Origin
but the great apes and hominids. Feuerstein chastises me for accusing Gebser of a form of the pre/trans fallacy, and of course in
any sort of blatant fashion Gebser does not do so; but it is rampant in his confusing of prerational archaic with transrational
causal, prerational magic with transrational psychic, and prerational mythic with transrational subtle. The causal Witness, for
example, is not “close to the archaic” at all; it lies in precisely the opposite direction. Nor are subtle archetypes located in the
mythic structure: all dimensions are based on the transrational Forms lying next to the causal, not next to the magical.

In the terms of Da Avabhasa, the integral-aperspectival structure is a stage 3 to 4 structure. There lie beyond it stages 4
(psychic), 5 (subtle), 6 (causal), and 7 (nondual). Are we really to imagine that any of the examples Gebser gives of the integral
structure—say, Stravinsky, Cézanne, Frank Lloyd Wright—were anywhere near the seventh stage?

Feuerstein tries to support Gebser’s claim that the archaic consciousness is “closest to and presumably originally identical with
origin” by saying that “it is closest to the ever-present origin solely in terms of the simplicity of its internal configuration.” But that
will not do, first, because Origin is neither simple nor complex, but acategorical: it does not lie closer to simplicity than to
complexity, but embraces both equally in transparency. That cannot be used as a yardstick, and even if it were, then why not
push it back further and recognize that, given the even greater simplicity of the ape mind, the ape was even closer to the Origin?
That, again, is pushing it precisely in the wrong direction. But there is no reason to privilege archaic humans in that regard: worms
were even closer to that origin.

Feuerstein then points out that what Gebser must really mean, in part, is that the archaic is close to the Origin in potential, but
then Feuerstein himself immediately points out that that is true of every structure, since Origin is equally the ground of each.
And, I would add, since each structure is in potentia identically close to Origin, the only other measure is actually (or self-
actualizingly) close to Origin, and by that only acceptable measure, the archaic is, of course, the farthest from the Origin.

I am a great fan of Georg Feuerstein’s work, and have been honored to write a foreword for one of his many superb books, and
this is probably the only thing we have ever disagreed on sharply, in a friendly sort of way. [In the above-mentioned article,
Feuerstein, while not completely agreeing with my view of the archaic/origin, does acknowledge that Gebser’s position on this
issue is something of a “cop-out” that “contains unresolved difficulties.”]

In the meantime, both Feuerstein and I definitely agree that beyond the rational-ego is indeed the integral-aperspectival mind;
that it is holonic in nature, dialectical, dialogical, with a bodymind integration, linguistically transparent, and opening onto a more
truly conscious spiritual orientation. We both see evidence of that mind collectively emerging, and that is one of the topics of the
next volume.

References

Abend, S.; M. Porder; and M. Willick. 1983.

Borderline patients:

Psychoanalytic perspectives. New York:

International Univ. Press.

Abhinavagupta. 1988. A trident of wisdom. Trans. J. Singh. Albany: SUNY Press.
Abraham, R.; and C. Shaw. 1985. Dynamics. 3 vols. Santa Cruz: Aerial.
Abrams, M. 1971. Natural supernaturalism. New York: Norton.
Abrose, E. 1990. The mirror of creation. Edinburgh: Scottish Academic Press.
Achterberg, J. 1985. Imagery in healing. Boston: Shambhala.
______. 1990. Woman as healer. Boston: Shambhala.
Adair, R. 1987. The great design. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
Adler, G. 1979. Dynamics of the self. London: Coventure.
Adorno, T. 1973. Negative dialectics. New York: Continuum
Albert, M., et al. 1986. Liberating theory. Boston: South End Press.
Alexander, F. 1931. Buddhist training as an artificial catatonia. Psychoanalytic Review 18: 129–45.
Alexander, S. 1950. Space, time and deity. New York: Humanities Press.
Alkon, D. 1992. Memory’s voice. New York: HarperCollins.
Allaby, M. 1989. Green facts. London: Hamlyn.
Allison, J. 1968. Adaptive regression and intense religious experiences. J. Nervous Mental Disease 145: 452–63.
Allport, G. 1955. Becoming. New Haven: Yale Univ. Press.
Almaas, A. 1986. Essence. York Beach, Maine: Samuel Weiser.
______. 1988. The pearl beyond price. Berkeley: Diamond Books.
Anderson, L. 1991. Sisters of the earth. New York: Vintage.
Anderson, S., and P. Hopkins. 1991. The feminine face of God. New York: Bantam.
Anthony, D.; B. Ecker; and K. Wilber, eds. 1987. Spiritual choices. New York: Paragon.
Apel, K. 1980. Towards a transformation of philosophy. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Aquinas, T. 1969. Summa theologiae. 2 vols. New York: Doubleday/Anchor.
Arieti, S. 1955. Interpretation of schizophrenia. New York: Brunner.
______. 1976. The intrapsychic self. New York: Basic Books.
Aristotle. 1984. The complete works of Aristotle. Ed. J. Barnes. Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press.
Armstrong, A., ed. 1953. Plotinus. London: George Allen & Unwin.
Artaud, A. 1965. Artaud anthology. San Francisco: City Lights Books.
Assagioli, R. 1965. Psychosynthesis. New York: Viking.
Astavakra. 1982. The song of the self supreme. Clearlake, Calif.: Dawn Horse Press.
Augros, R., and G. Stanciu. 1988. The new biology. Boston: Shambhala.
Aurobindo. n.d. The life divine and The synthesis of yoga. Pondicherry: Centenary Library, XVIII–XXI.
Avalon, A. 1974 (1931). The serpent power. New York: Dover.
Ayala, F., and J. Valentine. 1979. Evolving. New York: Benjamin-Cummings.
Baars, B. 1988. A cognitive theory of consciousness. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Bachelard, G. 1987. On poetic imagination and reverie. Dallas: Spring.
Badiner, A. 1990. Dharma Gaia. Berkeley: Parallax.
Bailey, R. 1993. Eco-scam. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Baldwin, J. 1975 (1906–1915). Thought and things. New York: Arno Press.
Bandura, A. 1971. Social learning theory. New York: General Learning Press.

______. 1977. Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavioral change. Psychological Review 34: 191–215.
Barbour, I. 1990. Religion in an age of science. San Francisco: Harper.
Barbour, I., ed. 1973. Western man and environmental ethics. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.
Baring, A., and J. Cashford. 1991. The myth of the Goddess. New York: Viking Arkana.
Barnstone, W., ed. 1984. The other bible. San Francisco: Harper.
Barrow, J., and F. Tipler. 1988. The anthropic cosmological principle. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
Barthes, R. 1972. Critical essays. Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern Univ. Press.
______. 1975. S/Z. London: Cape.
______. 1976. The pleasure of the text. London: Cape.
______. 1982. A Barthes reader. Ed. S. Sontag. New York: Hill & Wang.
Bataille, G. 1985 (1927–1939). Visions of excess. Ed. A. Stoekl. Minneapolis: Univ. of Minnesota Press.
Bateson, G. 1979. Mind and nature. New York: Dutton.
Bateson, M. 1990. Composing a life. New York: Plume.
Baynes, K.; J. Bohman; and T. McCarthy. 1987. After philosophy. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Beall, A., and R. Sternberg, eds. 1993. The psychology of gender. New York: Guilford Press.
Beard, M. 1946. Woman as a force in history. New York: Macmillan.
Beck, A.; A. Rush; B. Shaw; and G. Emery. 1979. Cognitive therapy of depression. New York: Guilford Press.
Becker, E. 1973. The denial of death. New York: Free Press.
Belenky, M., et al. 1986. Women’s ways of knowing. New York: Basic.
Bellah, R. 1970. Beyond belief. New York: Harper & Row.
Bellah, R.; R. Madsen; W. Sullivan; A. Swindler; and S. Tipton. 1993. The good society. New York: Vintage.
______. 1985. Habits of the heart. Berkeley: Univ. of California Press.
Benoit, H. 1955. The supreme doctrine. New York: Viking.
Bentham, J. 1990. The principles of morals and legislation. Buffalo, N.Y.: Prometheus Books.
Benton, T. 1984. The rise and fall of structural Marxism. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Benvenuto, B., and R. Kennedy. 1986. The works of Jacques Lacan. London: Free Association Books.
Berger, P. 1977. Facing up to modernity. New York: Basic Books.
______. 1979. The heretical imperative. New York: Doubleday.
Berger, P., and H. Kellner. 1981. Sociology reinterpreted. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday.
Berger, P., and T. Luckmann. 1966. The social construction of reality. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday.
Bergson, H. 1944. Creative evolution. New York: Random House.
Berkeley, G. 1982 (1710). A treatise concerning the principles of human knowledge. Cambridge: Hackett.
Berman, M. 1981. The reenchantment of the world. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell Univ. Press.
______. 1989. Coming to our senses. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Berne, E. 1972. What do you say after you say hello? New York: Bantam.
Bernstein, R. 1983. Beyond objectivism and relativism. Philadelphia: Univ. of Penn. Press.
______, ed. 1985. Habermas and modernity. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Berry, T. 1988. The dream of the earth. San Francisco: Sierra Club.
Berry, W. 1977. The unsettling of America. San Francisco: Sierra Club.
Bertalanffy, L. von. 1968. General system theory. New York: Braziller.
Binswanger, L. 1956. Existential analysis and psychotherapy. In F. Fromm-Reichmann and J. Moreno, eds., Progress

in psychotherapy. New York: Grune & Stratton.

Birch, C., and J. Cobb. 1990. The liberation of life. Denton, Tex.: Environmental Ethics Books.
Bird, D. 1974. Born female. New York: David McKay.
Blanck, G., and R. Blanck. 1974. Ego psychology: Theory and practice. New York: Columbia Univ. Press.
______. 1979. Ego psychology II: Psychoanalytic developmental psychology. New York: Columbia Univ. Press.
______. 1986. Beyond ego psychology. New York: Columbia Univ. Press.
Blofeld, J. 1970. The tantric mysticism of Tibet. New York: Dutton.
Blos, P. 1962. On adolescence: A psychoanalytic interpretation. New York: Free Press.

______. 1967. The second individuation process of adolescence. Psychoanalytic Study of the Child 22: 162-86.
Blumberg, R. 1984. A general theory of gender stratification. In Collins 1984: 23-101.
Bohm, D. 1973. Wholeness and the implicate order. London: Routledge.
Bonifaci, C. 1978. The soul of the world. Lanham, Md.: Univ. Press of America.
Bookchin, M. 1990. Remaking society. Boston: South End Press.
______. 1991. The ecology of freedom. 2nd ed. Montreal: Black Rose.
Boorstein, S. 1983. The use of bibliotherapy and mindfulness meditation in a psychiatric setting. J. Transpersonal

Psych. 15 2: 173-9.

______, ed. 1980. Transpersonal psychotherapy. Palo Alto, Calif.: Science and Behavior Books.
Bosanquet, B. 1921. The meeting of extremes in contemporary philosophy. New York: Macmillan.
Boss, M. 1963. Psychoanalysis and daseinanalysis. New York: Basic Books.
Boucher, S. 1993. Turning the wheel. Boston: Beacon.
Boudon, R. 1971. The uses of structuralism. London: Heinemann.
Boulding, E. 1976. The underside of history. Boulder, Colo.: Westview.
Bourdieu, P. 1989. The logic of practice. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Bowie, M. 1991. Lacan. Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press.
Bowlby, J. 1969, 1973. Attachment and loss. 2 vols. New York: Basic Books.
Bradley, F. 1902. Appearance and reality. New York: Macmillan.
______. 1922. The principles of logic. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Bragdon, E. 1990. The call of spiritual emergency. San Francisco: Harper.
Brainerd, C. 1978. The stage question in cognitive-developmental theory. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 2: 173-213.
Branden, N. 1971. The psychology of self-esteem. New York: Bantam.
Brandon, R., and R. Burian, eds. 1984. Genes, organisms, and populations. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Brandt, A. 1980. Self-confrontations. Psychology Today, Oct.
Brennan, A. 1988. Thinking about nature. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Brentano, F. 1973. Psychology from an empirical standpoint. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Bridenthal, R., and C. Koonz, eds. 1977. Becoming visible. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Brim, G. 1992. Ambition. New York: Basic Books.
Brittan, A., and M. Maynard. 1984. Sexism, racism and oppression. New York: Blackwell.
Broad, C. 1925. The mind and its place in nature. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Broughton, J. 1975. The development of natural epistemology in adolescence and early adulthood. Doctoral

dissertation, Harvard.

Brown, D. P. 1977. A model for the levels of concentrative meditation.

International J. Clinical and Experimental

Hypnosis 25: 236-73.

______. 1981. Mahamudra meditation: Stages and contemporary cognitive psychology. Doctoral dissertation,

University of Chicago.

Brown, D. P., and J. Engler. 1980. The stages of mindfulness meditation: A validation study.

J. Transpersonal

Psychology 12 2: 143-92.

Brown, D. P.; S. Twemlow; J. Engler; M. Maliszewski; and J. Stauthamer. 1978. The profile of meditation experience

POME, Form II, Psychological Test Copyright, Washington, D.C.

Brown, L., and C. Gilligan. 1992. Meeting at the crossroads. New York: Ballantine.
Brown, N. O. 1959. Life against death. Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan Univ. Press.
Bruner, J. 1983. In search of mind. New York: Harper & Row.
Buddhaghosa, B. 1976. The path of purification. 2 vols. Boulder, Colo.: Shambhala.
Bulkeley, K. 1994. The wilderness of dreams. Albany: SUNY Press.
Burke, E. 1990. Reflections on the revolution in France. Buffalo, N.Y.: Prometheus Books.
Cabezon, J., ed. 1992. Buddhism, sexuality and gender. Albany: SUNY Press.
Callenbach, E. 1977. Ectopia. New York: Bantam.
Callicott, J. 1986. The metaphysical implications of ecology. Environmental Ethics 8: 301-16.

______. 1986. The search for an environmental ethic. In Regan 1986: 381-424.
Campbell, Jeremy. 1982. Grammatical man. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Campbell, Joseph. 1959–1968. The masks of God. Vols. 1-4. New York: Viking.
Campbell, Joseph. 1968. The hero with a thousand faces. New York: World.
Campenhausen, H. von. 1955. The fathers of the Greek church. New York: Pantheon.
Caponigri, A. 1963. Philosophy from the Renaissance to the romantic age. Notre Dame, Ind.: Univ. of Notre Dame

Press.

Capra, F. 1982. The turning point. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Capra, F., and D. Steindl-Rast. 1991. Belonging to the universe. San Francisco: Harper.
Caputo, J. 1986. The mystical elements in Heidegger’s thought. New York: Fordham Univ. Press.
Cassirer, E. 1951. The philosophy of the Enlightenment. Boston: Beacon.
Casti, J. 1989. Paradigms lost. New York: Avon.
______. 1990. Searching for certainty. New York: William Morrow.
Chafetz, J. 1984. Sex and advantage. Totowa, N.J.: Rowman & Alanheld.
Chagdud Tulku. 1987. Life in relation to death. Cottage Grove, Ore.: Padma.
______. 1991. Mirror of freedom. Various volumes. Junction City, Calif.: Padma. Chang, G. 1971. The Buddhist

teaching of totality. University Park: Pennsylvania State Univ. Press.

______. 1974. Teachings of Tibetan yoga. Secaucus, N.J.: Citadel.
Chase, S., ed. 1991. Defending the earth. Boston: South End Press.
Chaudhuri, H. 1981. Integral yoga. Wheaton, Ill.: Quest.
Chirban, J. 1981. Human growth and faith. Washington, D.C.: University Press of America.
Chittick, W. 1992. Faith and practice of Islam. Albany: SUNY Press.
Chodorow, N. 1978. The reproduction of mothering. Berkeley: Univ. of Calif. Press.
______. 1989. Feminism and psychoanalytic theory. New Haven: Yale Univ. Press.
Chomsky, N. 1980. Rules and representations. New York: Columbia Univ. Press.
______. 1984. Modular approaches to the study of mind. San Diego: San Diego Univ. Press.
______. 1986. Knowledge of language. New York: Praeger.
Chopel, G. 1992. Tibetan arts of love. Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion.
Chopra, D. 1992. Unconditional life. New York: Bantam.
Churchland, P. 1984. Matter and consciousness. Cambridge: MIT Press.
______. 1986. Neuorphilosophy. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Churchman, C. W. 1979. The systems approach and its enemies. New York: Basic Books.
Clifford, T. 1984. Tibetan Buddhist medicine and psychiatry. York Beach, Maine: Samuel Weiser.
Collins, A. 1987. The nature of mental things. Nortre Dame, Ind.: Univ. of Notre Dame Press.
Collins, R., ed. 1984. Sociological theory. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Commoner, B. 1990. Making peace with the planet. New York: Pantheon.
Commons, M.; F. Richards; and C. Armon. Beyond formal operations. New York: Praeger.
Connell, R. 1987. Gender and power. Stanford: Stanford Univ. Press.
Copleston, F. 1960–1977. A history of philosophy. 9 vols. New York: Image.
______. 1982. Religion and the one. New York: Crossroad.
Corballis, M. 1991. The lopsided ape. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
Cornell, D.; M. Rosenfeld; and D. Carlson. 1992. Deconstruction and the possibility of justice. London: Routledge.
Cornell, J., ed. 1988. Bumps, voids, and bubbles in time. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Cott, N., and E. Pleck, eds. 1979. A heritage of her own. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Cousins, M., and A. Hussein. 1984. Michel Foucault. London: Macmillan.
Coveney, P., and R. Highfield. 1990. The arrow of time. New York: Fawcett Columbine.
Cowan, P. 1978. Piaget with feeling. New York: Holt.
Coward, H. 1990. Derrida and Indian philosophy. Albany: SUNY Press.
Cozort, D. 1986. Highest tantra yoga. Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion.

Crittenden, J. 1992. Beyond individualism. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
Culler, J. 1982. On deconstruction. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell Univ. Press.
Da Avabhasa. 1977. The paradox of instruction. San Francisco: Dawn Horse.
______. 1978. The enlightenment of the whole body. San Francisco: Dawn Horse.
______. 1982. The liberator. Clearlake, Calif.: Dawn Horse.
______. 1989a. The basket of tolerance. Clearlake, Calif.: Dawn Horse.
______. 1989b. The Da upanishad. Clearlake, Calif.: The Dawn Horse.
______. 1991. The dawn horse testament. Clearlake, Calif.: Dawn Horse.
______. 1992. The method of the siddhas. Clearlake, Calif.: Dawn Horse.
Daly, M. 1973. Beyond God the father. Boston: Beacon.
______. 1978. Gyn/ecology. Boston: Beacon.
Dargyay, E. 1978. The rise of esoteric Buddhism in Tibet. New York: Weiser.
Darwin, C. 1872. Origin of species and The descent of man. New York: Modern Library.
Dattatreya. 1980. Tripura rahasya. Tiruvannamalai, India: Sri Ramanasramam.
______. n.d.. Avadhuta gita. Mylapore, Madras: Sri Ramakrishna Math.
Davies, P. 1991. The cosmic blueprint. New York: Simon & Schuster.
______. 1992. The mind of god. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Davies, P., and J. Gribbin. 1991. The matter myth. London: Viking.
Dawkins, R. 1976. The selfish gene. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
Deatherage, O. 1975. The clinical use of “mindfulness” meditation techniques in short-term psychotherapy.

J.

Transpersonal Psychology 7 2: 133-43.

de Beauvoir, S. 1952. The second sex. New York: Bantam.
Deikman, A. 1982. The observing self. Boston: Beacon.
Delaney, G., ed.. 1993. New directions in dream interpretation. Albany: SUNY Press.
Deleuze, G., and F. Guattari. 1983. Anti-Oedipus. Minneapolis: Univ. of Minnesota Press.
Delphy, C. 1984. Close to home. Amherst: Univ. of Mass. Press.
Dennett, D. 1978. Brainstorms. Cambridge: MIT Press.
______. 1984. Elbow room. Cambridge: MIT Press.
______. 1991. Consciousness explained. Boston: Little, Brown.
Derrida, J. 1976. Of grammatology. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins.
______. 1978. Writing and difference. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press.
______. 1981. Positions. Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press.
______. 1982. Margins of philosophy. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press.
Descartes, R. 1911. The philosophical works of Descartes. 2 vols. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Deutsche, E. 1969. Advaita Vedanta. Honolulu: East-West Center.
Devall, B., and G. Sessions, eds. 1985. Deep ecology. Layton, Utah: Gibbs Smith.
Dew, P. 1987. Logics of disintegration. London: Verso.
Dewey, J. 1981. The philosophy of John Dewey. Ed. J. McDermott. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press.
Diamond, I., and G. Orenstein. 1990. Reweaving the world. San Francisco: Sierra Club.
Diamond, M. 1974. Contemporary philosophy and religious thought. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Dinnerstein, D. 1976. The mermaid and the minotaur. New York: Harper & Row.
Dionysius the Areopagite. 1965. The mystical theology and celestial hierarchy. Surrey: Shrine of Wisdom.
Dogen. 1993. Rational Zen. Trans. T. Cleary. Boston: Shambhala.
Doore, G., ed. 1988. Shaman’s path. Boston: Shambhala.
Doresse, J. 1986. The secret books of the Egyptian Gnostics. Rochester, Vt: Inner Traditions.
Dossey, L. 1993. Healing words. San Francisco: Harper.
Douglas, M. 1966. Purity and danger. London: Routledge.
______. 1978. Implicit meanings. London: Routledge.
______. 1982. In the active voice. London: Routledge.

Dozier, R. 1992. Codes of evolution. New York: Crown.
Dretske, F. 1988. Explaining behavior. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Dreyfus, H. 1979. What computers can’t do. New York: Harper & Row.
______. 1982. Husserl: Intentionality and cognitive science. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Dreyfus, H., and P. Rabinow. 1983. Michel Foucault: Beyond structuralism and hermeneutics. Chicago: Univ. Chicago

Press.

Dudjom Lingpa. 1994. Buddhahood without meditation. Junction City, Calif.: Padma.
Dudjom, J. 1991. The Nyingma school of Tibetan Buddhism. 2 vols. Boston: Wisdom.
Durkheim, E. 1990. Ethics and the sociology of morals. Buffalo, N.Y.: Prometheus Books.
Dyer, D. 1991. Cross-currents of Jungian thought. Boston: Shambhala.
Eccles, J. 1984. The human mystery. London: Routledge.
Eckersley, R. 1992. Environmentalism and political theory. Albany: SUNY Press.
Eckhart, Meister. 1941. Meister Eckhart. Trans. R. Blakney. New York: Harper.
______. 1980. Breakthrough. Trans. M. Fox. New York: Image.
Eco, U. 1976. A theory of semiotics. Bloomington: Indiana Univ. Press.
______. 1984. Semiotics and the philosophy of language. Bloomington: Indiana Univ. Press.
Edinger, E. F. 1992. Ego and archetype. Boston: Shambhala.
Edwards, P., ed. 1967. The encylopedia of philosophy. New York: Collier Macmillan.
Ehrlich, P., and A. Ehrlich. 1991. Healing the planet. New York: Addison-Wesley.
Eichenbaum, L., and S. Orbach. 1983. Understanding women. New York: Basic Books.
Eisler, R. 1987. The chalice and the blade. San Francisco: Harper.
Eliade, M. 1964. Shamanism. Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press.
______. 1969. Yoga: Immortality and freedom. Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press.
Elior, R. 1993. The paradoxical ascent to God. Albany: SUNY Press.
Ellenberger, H. 1970. The discovery of the unconscious. New York: Basic Books.
Emerson, R. 1969 (1909-1914). Ralph Waldo Emerson: Selected prose and poetry. Ed. R. Cook. San Francisco:

Rinehart.

Engels, F. 1942 (1884). The origin of the family, private property, and the state. New York: International Publishers.
Engler,
J. 1983. Buddhist satipatthana-vipassana meditation and an object relations model of therapeutic

developmental change: A clinical case study. Doctoral dissertation, University of Chicago.

______. 1984. Therapeutic aims in psychotherapy and meditation: Developmental stages in the representation of

self. J. Transpersonal Psychology 16 1: 25-61.

Erdelyi, M. 1985. Psychoanalysis: Freud’s cognitive psychology. New York: Freeman.
Erdmann, E., and D. Stover. 1991. Beyond a world divided. Boston: Shambhala.
Eribon, D. 1991. Michel Foucault. Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press.
Erikson, E. H. 1950, 1963. Childhood and society. New York: Norton.
______. 1959. Identity and the life cycle. New York: International Univ. Press.
Evans, D. 1993. Spirituality and human nature. Albany: SUNY Press.
Evans-Wentz, W. 1971. Tibetan yoga and secret doctrines. London: Oxford Univ. Press.
Fairbairn, W. 1952. Psychoanalytic studies of the personality. New York: Basic Books.
______. 1954. An object relations theory of the personality. New York: Basic Books.
Fausto-Sterling, A. 1985. Myths of gender. New York: Basic Books.
Feigl, H. 1967. The ‘mental’ and the ‘physical.’ Minneapolis: Univ. of Minnesota Press.
Fenichel, O. 1945. The psychoanalytic theory of neurosis. New York: Norton.
Ferrucci, P. 1982. What we may be. Los Angeles: Tarcher.
Feuerbach, L. 1990. The essence of Christianity. Buffalo, N.Y.: Prometheus Books.
Feuerstein, G. 1987. Structures of consciousness. Lower Lake, Calif.: Integral.
______. 1989. Yoga. Los Angeles: Tarcher.
______, ed. 1989. Enlightened sexuality. Freedom, Calif.: Crossing.

Feuerstein, G., and T. L. Feuerstein, eds. 1993. Voices on the threshold of tomorrow. Wheaton, Ill.: Quest.
Feyerabend, P. 1978. Against method. London: Verso.
Fields, R. 1991. The code of the warrior. New York: Harper.
Fingarette, H. 1958. The ego and mystic selflessness. Psychoanalytic Review 45: 5-40.
Fischer, R. 1971. A cartography of the ecstatic and meditative states: The experimental and experiential features of a

perception-hallucination continuum. Science 174: 897-904.

Flanagan, O. 1984. The science of the mind. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Flavell, J. 1963. The developmental psychology of Jean Piaget. Princeton, N.J.: Van Nostrand.
______. 1970. Concept development. In P. Mussen (ed.), Carmichel’s manual of child psychology. Vol. 1. New York:

Wiley.

Fodor, J. 1975. The language of thought. Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press.
______. 1983. The modularity of mind. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Fodor, J., and E. Lepore. 1992. Holism. Oxford: Blackwell.
Forman, R., ed. 1990. The problem of pure consciousness. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
Foss, L. and K. Rothenberg. 1987. The second medical revolution: From biomedicine to infomedicine. Boston:

Shambhala.

Foucault, M. 1965. Madness and civilization. New York: Random House.
______. 1970. The order of things. New York: Random House.
______. 1972. The archaeology of knowledge. New York: Random House.
______. 1975. The birth of the clinic. New York: Random House.
______. 1978. The history of sexuality. Vol. 1. New York: Random House.
______. 1979. Discipline and punish. New York: Vintage.
______. 1980. Power/knowledge. New York: Pantheon.
Fowler, J. 1981. Stages of faith: The psychology of human development and the quest for meaning. San Francisco:

Harper & Row.

Fox, M. 1979. A spirituality named compassion. San Francisco: Harper.
______. 1991. Creation spirituality. San Francisco: Harper.
Fox, W. 1990. Toward a transpersonal ecology. Boston: Shambhala.
Frager, R., and J. Fadiman, 1984. Personality and personal growth. New York: Harper & Row.
Frank, J. 1961. Persuasion and healing: A comparative study of psychotherapy. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins.
Frankfurt, H. 1988. The importance of what we care about. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Frankl, V. 1963. Man’s search for meaning. Boston: Beacon.
______. 1969. The will to meaning. Cleveland: New American Library.
French, M. 1985. Beyond power: On women, men, and morals. New York: Ballantine.
Freud, A. 1946. The ego and the mechanisms of defense. New York: International Univ. Press.
______. 1963. The concept of developmental lines. In The psychoanalytic study of the child, vol. 8, pp. 245-65. New

York: International Univ. Press.

______. 1965. Normality and pathology in childhood. New York: International Univ. Press.
Freud, S. 1937. Analysis terminable and interminable. Standard Edition (SE). 23, pp. 209-53. London: Hogarth Press.
______. 1959 (1926). Inhibitions, symptoms and anxiety. SE 20. London: Hogarth Press.
______. 1961 (1923). The ego and the id. se 19. London: Hogarth Press.
______. 1961 (1930). Civilization and its discontents. New York: Norton.
______. 1964 (1940). An outline of psychoanalysis. SE 23. London: Hogarth Press.
______. 1971. A general introduction to psychoanalysis. New York: Pocket Books.
______. 1974. New introductory lectures in psychoanalysis. New York: Norton.
Frey-Rohn, L. 1974. From Freud to Jung. New York: Delta.
Friedan, B. 1963. The feminine mystique. New York: Dell.
Friedl, E. 1984. Women and men. Prospect Heights, Ill.: Waveland Press.
Fromm, E.; D. T. Suzuki; and R. DeMartino, 1970. Zen Buddhism and psychoanalysis. New York: Harper & Row.

Fukuyama, F. 1992. The end of history and the last man. New York: Avon.
Futuyma, D. 1986. Evolutionary biology. 2nd ed. Sunderland, Mass.: Sinauer.
Gadamer, H. 1976. Philosophical hermeneutics. Berkeley: Univ. of Calif. Press.
______. 1992. Truth and method. 2nd ed. New York: Crossroad.
Gadon, E. 1989. The once and future goddess. New York: Harper.
Galileo, G. 1990. Dialogues concerning two new sciences. Buffalo, N.Y.: Prometheus Books.
Gallup, G. 1982. Adventures in immortality. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Gard, R. 1962. Buddhism. New York: Braziller.
Gardner, H. 1972. The quest for mind. New York: Vintage.
______. 1991. The unschooled mind. New York: Basic Books.
Gardner, M. 1985. The mind’s new science. New York: Basic Books.
Gazzaniga, M. 1985. The social brain. New York: Basic Books.
______. 1992. Nature’s mind. New York: Basic Books.
Gebser, J. 1985. The ever-present origin. Athens: Ohio Univ. Press.
Gedo, J. 1979. Beyond interpretation: Toward a revised theory for psychoanalysis. New York: International Univ.

Press.

______. 1981. Advances in clinical psychoanalysis. New York: International Univ. Press.
Geertz, C. 1973. The interpretation of cultures. New York: Harper & Row.
Gergen, K. 1991. The saturated self. New York: Basic Books.
Gibson, J. 1979. The ecological approach to visual perception. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Giddens, A. 1971. Capitalism and modern social theory. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
______. 1977. Studies in social and political theory. London: Hutchinson.
Gilligan, C. 1982. In a different voice. Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press.
Gilson, E. 1941. God and philosophy. New Haven, Conn.: Yale Univ. Press.
Gimbutas, M. 1991. The civilization of the Goddess. San Francisco: Harper Collins.
Gleick, J. 1987. Chaos. New York: Viking.
Globus, G. 1990. Heidegger and cognitive science. Philosophy Today (Spring), 20-30.
Goldberg, A., ed. 1980. Advances in self psychology. New York: International Univ. Press.
Goldsmith, E. 1993. The way: An ecological world-view. Boston: Shambhala.
Goldstein, J. 1983. The experience of insight. Boston: Shambhala.
Goleman, D. 1988. The meditative mind. Los Angeles: Tarcher.
Goleman, D., and M. Epstein. 1980. Meditation and well-being: An Eastern model of psychological health. ReVision

3: 73-85.

Goodwin, B.; N. Holder; and C. Wyles, eds. 1983. Development and evolution. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Gore, A. 1992. Earth in the balance. New York: Houghton Mifflin.
Gossman, L. 1990. Between history and literature. Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press.
Gottesman, I., and M. Schields. 1972. Schizophrenia and genetics: A twin study vantage point. New York: Academic

Press.

Gottlieb, R., ed. 1990. New York: Crossroad.
Gould, S. 1977. Ontogeny and phylogeny. Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press.
Green, E.; A. Green; and D. Walters. 1970. Voluntary control of internal states: Psychological and physiological.

J.

Transpersonal Psychology 2: 1-26.

Greenson, R. 1967. The technique and practice of psychoanalysis. New York: International Univ. Press.
Greenstein, G. 1988. The symbiotic universe. New York: Morrow.
Greist, J.; J. Jefferson; and R. Spitzer, eds. 1982. Treatment of mental disorders. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
Griffin, D. 1989. God and religion in the postmodern world. Albany: SUNY Press.
______, ed. 1988. The reenchantment of science. Albany: SUNY Press.
Griffin, D., and R. Falk, eds. 1993. Postmodern politics for a planet in crisis. Albany: SUNY Press.
Griffin, D., et al. 1989. Varieties of postmodern theology. Albany: SUNY Press.

Griffin, S. 1978. Woman and nature. New York: Harper.
Groddeck, G. 1949. The book of the It. New York: Vintage.
Grof, C., and S. Grof. 1990. The stormy search for the self. Los Angeles: Tarcher.
Grof, S. 1975. Realms of the human unconscious. New York: Viking.
______. 1985. Beyond the brain. Albany: SUNY Press.
______. 1988. The adventure of self-discovery. Albany: SUNY Press.
Grof, S., with H. Bennett. 1992. The holotrophic mind. San Francisco: Harper.
Gross, R. 1993. Buddhism after patriarchy. Albany: SUNY Press.
Group for the Advancement of Psychiatry (GAP). 1976. Mysticism: Spiritual quest or psychic disorder? New York:

GAP (publication 97).

Guénon, R. 1945. Man and his becoming according to Vedanta. London: Luzac.
Guenther, H. V. 1989.

From reductionism to creativity:

rDzogs-chen and the new sciences of mind. Boston:

Shambhala.

Guntrip, H. 1969. Schizoid phenomena, object relations and the self. New York: International Univ. Press.
______. 1971. Psychoanalytic theory, therapy, and the self. New York: Basic Books.
Gupta, B., ed. 1987. Sexual archetypes, East and West. New York: Paragon House.
Gyatso, K. 1986. Progressive stages of meditation on emptiness. Oxford: Longchen Foundation.
______. 1982. Clear light of bliss. London: Wisdom.
Habermas, J. 1971. Knowledge and human interests. Boston: Beacon.
______. 1973. Theory and practice. Boston: Beacon.
______. 1975. Legitimation crisis. Boston: Beacon.
______. 1979. Communication and the evolution of society. Trans. T. McCarthy. Boston: Beacon Press.
______. 1984-1985. The theory of communicative action. 2 vols. Trans. T. McCarthy. Boston: Beacon.
______. 1990. The philosophical discourse of modernity. Trans. F. Lawrence. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Haley, J., and L. Hoffman, eds. 1968. Techniques of family therapy. New York: Basic Books.
Hall, E. 1959. The silent language. New York: Doubleday.
Halliwell, J. 1992. Quantum cosmology. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press. Hampshire, S. 1975. Freedom of the

individual. Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press.

Hanly, C. and J. Masson. A critical examination of the new narcissism. International J. Psychoanalysis 57: 49-65.
Hargrove, E. 1989. Foundations of environmental ethics. New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Harland, R. 1987. Superstructuralism. London: Methuen.
Harman, W. 1988. Global mind change. New York: Warner.
Harner, M. 1980. The way of the shaman. New York: Harper.
Harris, E. 1991. Cosmos and anthropos. Atlantic Highlands, N.J.: Humanities Press International.
______, ed. 1992. Cosmos and theos. Atlantic Highlands, N.J.: Humanities Press International.
Harris, K. 1978. Carlyle and Emerson. Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press.
Harris, M. 1974. Cows, pigs, wars and witches. New York: Random House.
______. 1977. Cannibals and kings. New York: Random House.
Harris, R. 1993. The linguistics wars. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
Hartmann, H. 1958 (1939). Ego psychology and the problem of adaptation. New York: International Univ. Press.
Hartmann, N. 1932. Ethics. New York: Macmillan.
Hartshorne, C. 1984. Omnipotence and other theological mistakes. Albany: SUNY Press.
Hartsock, N. 1985. Money, sex, and power. Boston: Northeastern Univ. Press.
Hastings, A. 1990. Tongues of men and angels. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Haught, J. 1984. The cosmic adventure. Ramsey: Paulist Press.
Hawkes, T. 1977. Structuralism and semiotics. Berkeley: Univ. California Press.
Hawking, S. 1988. A brief history of time. New York: Bantam.
Hayward, J. 1987. Shifting worlds, changing minds. Boston: Shambhala.
Hayward, J., and F. Varela, 1992. Gentle bridges: Conversations with the Dalai Lama on the sciences of mind. Boston:

Shambhala.

Heard, G. 1963. The five ages of man. New York: Julian.
Hebb, D. O. 1949. The organization of behavior: A neuropsychological theory. New York: Wiley & Sons.
Hegel, G. 1949. The phenomenology of mind. Trans. J. Baille. New York: Humanities Press.
______. 1971. Hegel’s philosophy of mind. Oxford: Clarendon.
______. 1974. Hegel: The essential writings. Ed. F. Weiss. New York: Harper Torchbooks.
______. 1977. Phenomenology of spirit. Trans. A. Miller. Analysis by J. Findlay. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
______. 1993. Hegel’s science of logic. New Jersey: Humanities Press International.
Heidegger, M. 1959. Introduction to metaphysics. New Haven: Yale Univ. Press.
______. 1962. Being and time. New York: Harper & Row.
______. 1968. What is called thinking? New York: Harper & Row.
Heidegger, M. 1977. Basic writings. Ed. D. Krell. New York: Harper & Row.
Hill, G. 1992. Masculine and feminine. Boston: Shambhala.
Hillman, J. 1972. The myth of analysis. New York: Harper & Row.
______. 1975. Re-visioning psychology. New York: Harper & Row.
______. 1989. A blue fire. Ed. Thomas Moore. New York: Harper & Row.
Hinding, A. 1986. Feminism. Minnesota: Greenhaven.
Hixon, L. 1989. Coming home. Los Angeles: Tarcher.
Hobbes, T. 1990. The Leviathan. Buffalo, N.Y.: Prometheus Books.
Hockett, C. 1987. Refurbishing our foundations. Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Hoeller, K. 1982. Merleau-Ponty and psychology. New Jersey: Humanities Press.
Hoffman, E. 1981. The way of splendor. Boston: Shambhala.
Hofstadter, D. 1989. Gödel, Escher, Bach. New York: Vintage.
Holton, G. 1988. Thematic origins of scientific thought. Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press.
Horkheimer, M., and T. Adorno. 1972 (1944). Dialectic of enlightenment. New York: Continuum.
Horner, A. 1979. Object relations and the developing ego in therapy. New York: Aronson.
Horney, K. 1950. Neurosis and human growth. New York: Norton.
______. 1967. Feminine psychology. New York: Norton.
Horowitz, M. 1988. Introduction to psychodynamics. New York: Basic. Houston, J. 1980. Life force. New York: Delta.
Hoy, D., ed. 1991. Foucault: A critical reader. Cambridge, Mass.: Basil Blackwell.
Hume, D. 1964. A treatise of human nature. Oxford: Clarendon.
______. 1990. An enquiry concerning human understanding. Buffalo, N.Y.: Prometheus Books.
Hume, R., trans. 1974. The thirteen principal Upanishads. London: Oxford.
Humphrey, N. 1983. Consciousness regained. New York: Oxford Univ. Press. Husserl, E. 1962 (1931).

Ideas. New

York: Collier.

______. 1965. Phenomenology and the crisis of philosohphy. New York: Harper & Row.
______. 1970. The crisis of European sciences and transcendental phenomenology. Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern Univ.

Press.

______. 1991 (1950). Cartesian meditations. Boston: Kluwer.
Huxley, A. 1944. The perennial philosophy. New York: Harper & Row.
Huxley, J. 1990. Evolutionary humanism. Buffalo, N.Y.: Prometheus Books.
Inada, K. 1970. Nagarjuna. Tokyo: Hokusiedo Press.
Inge, W.R. 1968 (1929). The philosophy of Plotinus. vols. 1 & 2. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood.
Jackendoff, R. 1987. Consciousness and the computational mind. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Jacobi, J. 1942. The psychology of C. G. Jung. London: Routledge.
Jacobson, E. 1964. The self and the object world. New York: IUP.
Jaggar, A. 1988. Feminist politics and human nature. New Jersey: Rowman & Littlefield.
Jahn, R., and B. Dunn. 1989. Margins of reality. San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Jaki, S. 1978. The road of science and the ways to God. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press.

Jakobson, R. 1980. The framework of language. Michigan Studies in the Humanities.
______. 1990. On language. Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press.
James, W. 1950 (1890). Principles of psychology. 2 vols. New York: Dover.
______. 1961 (1901). The varieties of religious experience. New York: Colliers.
Jameson, F. 1972. The prison-house of language. Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press.
______. 1981. The political unconscious. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell Univ. Press.
Jamgon Kongtrul the Third. 1992. Cloudless sky. Boston: Shambhala.
Janeway, E. 1980. Powers of the weak. New York: Knopf.
Jantsch, E. 1980. The self-organizing universe. New York: Pergamon.
Jantsch, E., and C. Waddington, eds. 1976. Evolution and consciousness. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.
Jantzen, G. 1984. God’s world, God’s body. Philadelphia: Westminster Press.
Jaspers, K. 1966. The great philosophers. New York: Harcourt.
Jee, L. 1988. Kashmir Shaivism. Albany: SUNY Press.
John of the Cross. 1979. The collected works of St.

John of the Cross. Trans. K. Kavanaugh and O. Rodriguez.

Washington, D.C.: ICS Publications.

Johnson, C. 1993. System and writing in the philosophy of Jacques Derrida. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Johnson, M. 1987. The body in the mind. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press.
Jonas, H. 1958. The gnostic religion. Boston: Beacon.
Jordan, J., et al. 1991. Women’s growth in connection. New York: Guilford.
Jung, C. G. 1957. The undiscovered self. New York: Mentor.
______. 1961. Analytical psychology: Its theory and practice. New York: Vintage.
______. 1964. Man and his symbols. New York: Dell.
______. 1971. The portable Jung. Ed. J. Campbell. New York: Viking.
Kakar, S. 1982. Shamans, mystics, and doctors. New York: Knopf.
Kalupahana, D. 1986. Nagarjuna. Albany: SUNY Press.
Kalweit, H. 1992. Shamans, healers, and medicine men. Boston: Shambhala.
Kant, I. 1949. Kant’s Critique of Practical Reason and other writings in moral philosophy. Trans. L. Beck. Chicago:

Univ. of Chicago Press.

______. 1951. Critique of judgement. New York: Hafner.
______. 1990. Critique of pure reason. Buffalo, N.Y.: Prometheus Books.
______. 1993. Prolegomena. Chicago: Open Court.
Kaplan, R. D. 1994. The coming anarchy. Atlantic, Feb.
Kapleau, P. 1965. The three pillars of Zen. Boston: Beacon.
Katz, J. 1972. Semantic theory. New York: Harper & Row.
______. 1990. The metaphysics of meaning. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Katz, S., ed. 1978. Mysticism and philosophical analysis. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
______, ed. 1983. Mysticism and religious traditions. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
Kaufman, G. 1985. Theology for a nuclear age. Oxford: Manchester Univ. Press.
Kaufmann, W. 1974. Nietzsche. Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press.
Keegan, J. 1993. A history of warfare. New York: Knopf.
Keeton, W., and J. Gould. 1986. Biological Science. 4th ed. New York: Norton.
Kelley, G. 1955. The psychology of personal constructs. 2 vols. New York: Norton.
Kelly, J. 1982. Early feminist theory and the Querelles des femmes, 1400-1789. Signs 8 (Autumn): 4-28.
Kernberg, O. 1975. Borderline conditions and pathological narcissism. New York: Aronson.
______. 1976. Object relations theory and clinical psychoanalysis. New York: Aronson.
Kessler, S., and W. McKenna. 1978. Gender. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press.
Khan, Inayat. 1977. The soul: Whence and whither. New York: Sufi Order.
Khyentse, D. 1992. The heart treasure of the enlightened ones. Boston: Shambhala.
Kierkegaard, S. 1953. Fear and trembling and The sickness unto death. New York: Anchor.

______. 1957. The concept of dread. Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press.
______. 1992. The concept of irony and Notes of Schelling’s Berlin lectures. Trans. Hong and Hong. Princeton:

Princeton Univ. Press.

Kimball, R. 1991. Tenured radicals. New York: Harper.
King, A., and B. Schneider. 1991. The first global revolution. New York: Pantheon.
Klein, A. 1986. Knowledge and liberation. Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion.
Klein, M. 1932. The psychoanalysis of children. London: Hogarth.
Koestenbaum, P. 1976. Is there an answer to death? New York: Prentice-Hall.
Koestler, A. 1964. The act of creation. New York: Dell.
______. 1976. The ghost in the machine. New York: Random House.
Kohlberg, L. 1981. Essays on moral development. Vol. 1. San Francisco: Harper.
Kohut, H. 1971. The analysis of the self. New York: IUP.
______. 1977. The restoration of the self. New York: IUP.
Kojeve, A. 1969. Introduction to the reading of Hegel. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell Univ. Press.
Kramer, J., and D. Alstad. 1993. The guru papers. Berkeley: North Atlantic Books.
Krishna, G. 1972. The secret of yoga. London: Turnstone.
Kroy, M. 1982. The rationality of mysticism. Privately published.
Kuhn, T. 1970. The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press.
Kunsang, E., trans. and ed. 1986. The flight of the garuda. Kathmandu: Rangjung Yeshe Publications.
Kurzweil, E. 1980. The age of structuralism. New York: Columbia Univ. Press.
LaBerge, S. 1985. Lucid dreaming. Los Angeles: Tarcher.
Lacan, J. 1968. The language of the self. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins.
Lacan, J. 1982. Feminine sexuality. New York: Norton.
Laing, R. D. 1969. The divided self. New York: Pantheon.
Lake, M. 1991. Native healer. Wheaton, Ill.: Quest.
Lakoff, G. 1987. Women, fire and dangerous things. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G., and M. Johnson. 1980. Metaphors we live by. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, R. 1975. Language and woman’s place. New York: Octagon Books.
Lancaster, B. 1991. Mind, brain, and human potential. Rockport, Mass.: Element.
Lasch, C. 1979. The culture of narcissism. New York: Norton.
Laszlo, E. 1972. Introduction to systems philosophy. New York: Harper & Row.
______. 1987. Evolution: The grand synthesis. Boston: Shambhala.
______. 1994. The choice: Evolution or extinction? Los Angeles: Tarcher.
Laughlin, C., J. McManus, and E. d’Aquili. 1992. Brain, symbol and experience. New York: Columbia Univ. Press.
Lawson, H. 1985. Reflexivity. La Salle, Ill.: Open Court.
Layzer, D. 1990. Cosmogenesis. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
Leach, E. 1974. Claude Lévi-Strauss. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press.
Lecky, P. 1961. Self-consistency. Hamden, Conn.: Shoe String Press.
Lehman, D. 1991. Signs of the times. New York: Poseidon.
Leibniz, G. 1990. Discourse on method and Monadology. Buffalo, N.Y.: Prometheus Books.
Lenski. G. 1970. Human societies. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Leopold, A. 1981 (1949). A sand county almanac. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
Lerman, H. 1986. A mote in Freud’s eye. New York: Springer.
Lerner, G. 1979. The majority finds its past: Placing women in history. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
______. 1986. The creation of patriarchy. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
Leslie, J., ed. 1989. Physical cosmology and philosophy. New York: Macmillan.
Lévi-Strauss, C. 1966. The savage mind. London: Weidenfeld.
______. 1972. Structural anthropology. New York: Penguin Books.
Levin, M. 1979. Metaphysics and the mind-body problem. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.

Levinson, D., et al. 1978. The season’s of a man’s life. New York: Knopf.
Levy, H., and A. Ishihara. 1989. The tao of sex. Lower Lake, Calif.: Integral.
Lewontin, R. 1983. The organism as the subject and object of evolution. Scientia 118: 63-82.
Liebes, Y. 1993. Studies in the Zohar. Albany: SUNY Press.
Lightman, A. 1991. Ancient light. Cambrdige: Harvard Univ. Press.
Locke, J. 1990. A letter concerning toleration. Buffalo, N.Y.: Prometheus Books.
______. 1990. Second treatise on civil government. Buffalo, N.Y.: Prometheus Books.
Loevinger, J. 1977. Ego development. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Loewald, H. 1978. Psychoanalysis and the history of the individual. New Haven: Yale Univ. Press.
Longchenpa. 1977. Kindly bent to ease us. 3 vols. Trans. H. V. Guenther. Emeryville, Calif.: Dharma Press.
Lovejoy, A. 1964 (1936). The great chain of being. Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press.
Lovelock, J. 1988. The ages of Gaia. New York: Norton.
Lowe, V. 1966. Understanding Whitehead. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.
Lowen, A. 1967. The betrayal of the body. New York: Macmillan.
Loy, D. 1987. The cloture of deconstruction. International Phil. Quarterly 27: 1, 60-80.
______. 1989. Non-Duality. New Haven: Yale Univ. Press.
Luk, C. 1962. Ch’an and Zen teaching. 3 vols. London: Rider.
Lukacs, G. 1971. History and class consciousness. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Lukoff, D.; F. Lu; and R. Turner. 1992. Toward a more culturally sensitive DSM-IV.

Journal of Nervous and Mental

Diseases 80: 673-82.

Lycan, W. 1987. Consciousness. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Lyons, J. 1991. Chomsky. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Lyons, W. 1986. The disappearance of introspection. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Lyotard, J. 1984. The postmodern condition. Minneapolis: Univ. of Minnesota Press.
Lyotard, J., and J. Thebaud. 1986. Just gaming. Manchester: Manchester Univ. Press.
Maccoby, E., and C. Jacklin. 1974. The psychology of sex differences. Stanford: Stanford Univ. Press.
Machiavelli, N. 1990. The prince. Buffalo, N.Y.: Prometheus Books.
MacIntyre, A. 1984. After virtue. 2nd ed. Notre Dame, Ind.: Univ. of Notre Dame Press.
______. 1990. Three rival versions of moral enquiry. Nortre Dame, Ind.: Univ. of Notre Dame Press.
Macy, J. 1991. World as lover, world as self. Berkeley: Parallax.
Madison, G., ed. 1993. Working through Derrida. Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern Univ. Press.
Mahasi Sayadaw. 1972. Practical insight meditation. Santa Cruz, Calif.: Unity Press.
Mahler, M. 1968. On human symbiosis and the vicissitudes of individuation. New York: IUP.
Mahler, M.; F.Pine; and A. Bergman. 1975. The psychological birth of the human infant. New York: Basic Books.
Mahoney, M. 1991. Human change processes: The scientific foundations of psychotherapy. New York: Basic Books.
Maliszewski, M.; S. Twemlow; D. Brown; and J. Engler. 1981. A phenomenological typology of intensiv meditation.

ReVision 4.

Mander, J. 1991. In the absence of the sacred. San Francisco: Sierra Club.
Manes, C. 1990. Green rage. Boston Little, Brown.
Manjusrimitra. 1987. Primordial experience. Boston: Shambhala.
Marcel, A., and E. Bisiach, eds. 1988. Consciousness in contemporary science. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
Marcuse, H. 1955. Eros and civilization. Boston: Beacon Press.
Margenau, H. 1987. The miracle of existence. Boston: Shambhala.
Marin, P. 1975. The new narcissism. Harper’s. Oct.
Marsh, J.; J. Caputo; and M. Westphal. 1992. Modernity and its discontents. New York: Fordham Univ. Press.
Martin, M., and B. Voorhies. 1975. Female of the species. New York: Columbia Univ. Press.
Marx, K. 1974. Political writing. 3 vols. New York: Random House.
______. 1977. Capital. 3 vols. New York: Random House.
Maslow, A. 1968. Toward a psychology of being. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.

______. 1970. Religions, values, and peak experiences. New York: Viking.
Maslow, A. 1971. The farther reaches of human nature. New York: Viking.
Masterson, J. 1981. The narcissistic and borderline disorders. New York: Bruner/Mazel.
______. 1988. The search for the real self. New York: Free Press.
Maturana, H., and F. Varela. 1992. The tree of knowledge. Rev. ed. Boston: Shambhala.
May, R. 1969. Love and will. New York: Norton.
______. 1977. The meaning of anxiety. Rev. ed. New York: Norton.
______, ed. 1969. Existential psychology. New York: Random House.
May, R.; E. Angel; and H. Ellenberger, eds. 1958. Existence. New York: Basic.
Mayr, E. 1982. The growth of biological thought. Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press.
McCarthy, T. 1978. The critical theory of Jurgen Habermas. Cambridge: MIT Press.
McCawley, J. 1988. Thirty million theories of grammar. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press.
McCulloh, W. 1965. Embodiments of mind. Cambridge: MIT Press.
McFague, S. 1987. Models of God. Philadelphia: Fortress Press.
McGaa, E. 1990. Mother earth spirituality. San Francisco: Harper.
McKibben, B. 1989. The end of nature. New York: Random House.
McMullin, E., ed. 1985. Evolution and creation. Notre Dame, Ind.: Univ. of Notre Dame Press.
Mead, G. H. 1934. Mind, self, and society. Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press.
Merchant, C. 1983. The death of nature. San Francisco: Harper.
______. 1989. Ecological revolutions. Chapel Hill: Univ. of North Carolina Press.
______. 1992. Radical ecology. London: Routledge.
Merleau-Ponty, M. 1962. Phenomenology of perception. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
______. 1963. The structure of behavior. Boston: Beacon.
Merquior, J. 1985. Foucault. London: Fontana.
______. 1986. From Prague to Paris. London: Verso.
Metzner, R. 1986. Opening to inner light. Los Angeles: Tarcher.
______. 1993. The split between spirit and nature in European consciousness. ReVision 15 (4): 177-84.
Meyendorff, J. 1975. Byzantine theology. New York: Fordham Univ. Press.
Meyer, J. 1975. Death and neurosis. New York: IUP.
Midgley, M. 1978. Beast and man. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell Univ. Press.
Milbrath, L. 1989. Envisioning a sustainable society. Albany: SUNY Press.
Mill, J. S. 1990. On liberty. Buffalo, N.Y.: Prometheus Books.
______. 1990a. The subjection of women. Buffalo, N.Y.: Prometheus Books.
______. 1990b. Utilitarianism. Buffalo, N.Y.: Prometheus Books.
Miller, J. 1976. Toward a new psychology of women. Boston: Beacon.
______. 1993. The passion of Michel Foucault. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Minsky, M. 1985. The society of mind. New York: Touchstone.
Minsky, M., and S. Papert. 1987. Perceptrons. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Mitchell, N., ed. 1985. Nobel prize conversations. San Francisco: Saybrook.
Moltmann, J. 1985. God in creation. London: SCM Press.
Money, J., and A. Ehrhardt. 1972. Man and woman, boy and girl. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins.
Monod, J. 1971. Chance and necessity. New York: Knopf.
Monroe, R. 1971. Journeys out of the body. New York: Doubleday.
Moody, R. 1988. The light beyond. New York: Bantam.
Mookerjee, A. 1982. Kundalini. New York: Destiny Books.
Morris, C. 1971. Writings on the general theory of signs. The Hague: Mouton.
Muller-Ortega, P. 1989. The triadic heart of Shiva. Albany: SUNY Press.
Mumford, L. 1966. The myth of the machine. New York: Harcourt.
Murphy, M. 1992. The future of the body. Los Angeles: Tarcher.

Murphy, M., and S. Donovan. 1989. The physical and psychological effects of meditation. San Rafael, Calif.: Esalen.
Murphy, N. 1990. Theology in the age of scientific reasoning. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell Univ. Press.
Murti, T. 1970. The central philosophy of Buddhism. London: Allen & Unwin.
Naess, A. 1989. Ecology, community, and lifestyle. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Nagao, G. 1989. The foundational standpoint of Madhyamika philosophy. Albany: SUNY Press.
______. 1991. Madhyamika and Yogacara. Albany: SUNY Press.
Nagel, T. 1986. The view from nowhere. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
Narada. 1975. A manual of Abhidhamma. Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society.
Nash, R. 1989. The rights of nature. Madison: Univ. of Wisconsin Press.
Needham, J. 1956. Science and civilization in China. Vol. 2. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Needleman, J. 1980. Lost Christianity. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday.
Neisser, U. 1976. Cognition and reality. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell Univ. Press.
Nelson, J. 1994. Healing the split. Albany: SUNY Press.
Nerval, G. de 1993. Aurelia and Sylvie. Santa Maria: Asylum Arts.
Neufeldt, R. 1986. Karma and rebirth. Albany: SUNY Press.
Neumann, E. 1954. The orgins and history of consciousness. Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press.
Newmeyer, F. 1986. Linguistic theory in America. New York: Academic Press.
Nicholson, S., and B. Rosen. 1992. Gaia’s hidden life. Wheaton, Ill.: Quest. Nielsen, J. 1990. Sex and gender in

society. 2nd ed. Prospect Heights, Ill.: Waveland Press.

Nietzsche, F. 1965. The portable Nietzsche. Ed. W. Kaufmann. New York: Viking.
______. 1968. Basic writings of Nietzsche. Trans. and ed. W. Kaufmann. New York: Modern Library.
Nisbet, R. 1980. History of the idea of progress. New York: Basic Books.
Nishitani, K. 1982. Religion and nothingness. Berkeley: Univ. of California Press.
Norbu, N. 1989. Dzogchen: The self-perfected state. London: Arkana Penguin.
______. 1989. Self-liberation through seeing with naked awareness. Barrytown, N.Y.: Station Hill.
______. 1992. Dream yoga and the practice of natural light. Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion.
Norris, C. 1987. Derrida. London: Fontana.
Novak, P. 1993. Tao how? Asian religions and the problem of environmental degradation. ReVision, 16 (2): 77-82.
Nyanaponika. 1973. The heart of Buddhist meditation. New York: Weiser.
Nye, A. 1988. Feminist theory and the philosophies of man. London: Routledge.
Nyima, C. 1989. The union of Mahamudra and Dzogchen. Kathmandu: Rangjung Yeshe Publications.
Nyima, C. 1991. The bardo guidebook. Kathmandu: Rangjung Yeshe Publications.
O’Brien, T., ed. 1988. The spiral path. St. Paul, Minn.: Yes International.
Ochs, C. 1983. Women and spirituality. New Jersey: Rowman & Allanheld.
Odajnyk, V. 1993. Gathering the light. Boston: Shambhala.
Ornstein, R. 1991. The evolution of consciousness. New York: Prentice Hall.
Ortner, S., and H. Whitehead, eds. 1981. Sexual meanings. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Otto, R. 1969. The idea of the holy. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
Oyama, S. 1985. The ontogeny of information. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Paehlke, R. 1989. Environmentalism and the future of progressive politics. New Haven: Yale Univ. Press.
Paine, T. 1990. Rights of man. Buffalo, N.Y.: Prometheus Books.
Palmer, H. 1988. The enneagram. San Francisco: Harper.
Parfit, D. 1984. Reasons and persons. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
Parkin, S. 1989. Green parties. London: Heretic Books.
Parsons, T. 1951. The social system. New York: Free Press.
Parsons, T. 1966. Societies. Engelwood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
Passmore, J. 1980. Man’s responsibility for nature. London: Duckworth.
Peacocke, A. 1986. God and the new biology. London: J. M. Dent & Sons.
Peacocke, A., ed. 1981. The sciences and theology in the twentieth century. Stocksfield: Oriel/Routledge.

Pearce, J. C. 1992. Evolution’s end. San Francisco: Harper.
Peat, F. 1991. The philosopher’s stone. New York: Bantam.
Peirce, C. 1931-1958. Collected papers. 8 vols. Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press.
Peirce, C. 1955. Philosophical writings of Peirce. Ed. J. Buchler. New York: Dover.
Penrose, R. 1990. The emperor’s new mind. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
Perls, F.; R. Hefferli; and P. Goodman. 1951. Gestalt therapy. New York: Delta.
Peters, T., ed. 1989. Cosmos as creation. Nashville: Abingdon Press.
Phillips, A. 1988. Winnicott. Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press.
Piaget, J. 1977. The essential Piaget. Eds. H. Gruber and J. Voneche. New York: Basic Books.
Plant, J., ed. 1989. Healing the wounds. Philadelphia: New Society.
Plaskow, J., and C. Christ, eds. 1989. Weaving the visions. San Francisco: Harper.
Plato. 1973. Phaedrus and letters VII & VIII. Trans. W. Hamilton. New York: Penguin.
Polkinghorne, D. 1983. Methodology for the human sciences. Albany: SUNY Press.
Polkinghorne, J. 1989. Science and providence. Boston: Shambhala.
Popper, K. 1974. Objective knowledge. Oxford: Clarendon.
Popper, K., and J. Eccles. 1983. The self and its brain. London: Routledge.
Porritt, J., and D. Winner. 1988. The coming of the greens. London: Fontana.
Post, S. C., ed. 1972. Moral values and the superego concept in psychoanalysis. New York: International Univ. Press.
Postal, P. 1974. On raising. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Priest, S. 1991. Theories of the mind. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Prigogine, I. 1980. From being to becoming. San Francisco: Freeman.
Prigogine, I., and I. Stengers. 1984. Order out of chaos. New York: Bantam.
Putnam, H. 1987. The faces of realism. LaSalle, Ill.: Open Court.
______. 1988. Representation and reality. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Pylyshyn, Z. 1984. Computation and cognition. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Quine, W. 1985. The time of my life. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Rabinow, P., ed. 1984. The Foucault reader. New York: Pantheon.
Radha, S. 1992. From the mating dance to the cosmic dance. Palo Alto: Timeless Books.
Ram Dass and P. Gorman. 1985. How can I help? New York: Knopf.
Ramana Maharshi. 1984. Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi. Tiruvannamalai: Sri Ramanasramam.
______. 1972. The collected works. London: Rider.
Rangdrol, T. 1989. Lamp of Mahamudra. Trans. Erik Pema Kunsang. Boston: Shambhala.
______. 1990. The circle of the sun. Kathmandu: Rangjung Yeshe Publications.
Rangjung Dorje. 1992. Song of Karmapa. Kathmandu: Rangjung Yeshe Publications.
Regan, T., ed. 1986. Matters of life and death. New York: Random House.
Reich, W. 1971. The function of the orgasm. New York: World Publishing.
Reiter, R., ed. 1975. Toward an anthropology of women. New York: Monthly Review Press.
Reynolds, B. 1994. A consideration of the transpersonal models of Stanislav Grof and Ken Wilber. Unpublished

manuscript.

Ricoeur, P. 1978. The philosophy of Paul Ricoeur. Boston: Beacon.
______. 1981. Hermeneutics and the human sciences. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Rifkin, J. 1984. Algeny. New York: Penguin.
______. 1991. Biosphere politics. San Francisco: Harper.
Ring, K. 1980. Life at death. New York: Coward McCann & Geoghegan.
______. 1984. Heading toward omega. New York: Morrow.
Rizzuto, A. 1979. The birth of the living God. Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press.
Roberts, B. 1989. What is self? Austin: Goens.
Robinson, H. 1982. Matter and sense. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Rodgers-Rose, L. F., ed. 1980. The black woman. Beverly Hills: Sage.

Rogers, C. 1961. On becoming a person. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Rolston, H. 1987. Science and religion. New York: Random House.
______. 1988. Environmental ethics. Philadelphia: Temple Univ. Press.
Roos, P. 1985. Gender and work. Albany: SUNY Press.
Rorty, R. 1979. Philosophy and the mirror of nature. Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press.
______. 1982. Consequences of pragmatism. Minneapolis: Univ. of Minnesota Press.
Rosaldo, M., and L. Lamphere, eds. 1974. Woman, culture, and society. Stanford: Stanford Univ. Press.
Rosen, H. 1985. Piagetian dimensions of clinical relevance. New York: Columbia Univ. Press.
Rosenthal, D., ed. 1991. The nature of mind. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
Rosewater, L., and L. Walker, eds. 1985. Handbook of feminist therapy. New York: Springer.
Rossi, A. 1977. A biosocial perspective on parenting. Daedalus, 106 (2): 1-31.
Rossman, N. 1991. Consciousness. Albany: SUNY Press.
Roszak, T. 1992. The voice of the earth. New York: Touchstone.
Rothberg, D. 1986. Philosophical foundations of transpersonal psychology. Journal of Transpersonal Psych. 18: 1-34.
Rothberg, D. 1986. Rationality and religion in Habermas’ recent work. Philosophy and Social Criticism 11: 221-43.
______. 1990. Contemporary epistemology and the study of mysticism. In R. Forman (ed.), The problem of pure

consciousness. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.

______. 1992. Buddhist nonviolence. Journal of Humanistic Psychology 32 (4): 41-75.
______. 1993. The crisis of modernity and the emergence of socially engaged spirituality. ReVision 15 (3): 105-15.
Rothenberg, P., ed. 1988. Racism and sexism. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Rothschild, J., ed. 1989. Machina ex dea. New York: Pergamon.
Rousseau, J. 1983. The essential Rousseau. New York: Meridian.
Rowan, J. 1990. Subpersonalities. London: Routledge.
______. 1993. The transpersonal. London: Routledge.
Rowbotham, S. 1974. Women, resistance and revolution. New York: Vintage.
Rubin, G. 1975. The traffic in women. In Reiter 1975: 157-210.
Ruether, R. 1983. Sexism and God-talk. Boston: Beacon.
Russell, P. 1992. The white hole in time. San Francisco: Harper.
Rutter, M., and M. Rutter. 1993. Developing minds. New York: Basic Books.
Sabom, M. 1982. Recollections at death. New York: Harper & Row.
Sadawii, N. 1980. The hidden face of Eve: Women in the Arab world. London: ZED Press.
Sade, M. de. 1965. Justine, Philosophy in the bedroom, and other writings. New York: Grove Weidenfeld.
Sadock, J. 1991. Autolexical syntax. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press.
Sahlins, M. 1972. Stone age economics. New York: Aldine.
Sanday, P. 1981. Female power and male dominance. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Sanday, P., and R. Goodenough, eds. 1989. Beyond the second sex. Philadelphia: Univ. of Penn. Press.
Sandel, M. 1982. Liberalism and the limits of justice. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Sandel, M., ed. 1984. Liberalism and its critics. New York: New York Univ. Press.
Sannella, L. 1976. Kundalini: Psychosis or transcendence? San Francisco: Dakin.
Sarup, M. 1989. An introductory guide to post-structuralism and postmodernism. Athens: Univ. of Georgia Press.
Saussure, F. 1966 (1915). Course in general linguistics. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Sayers, J. 1982. Biological politics. New York: Tavistock.
Scarce, R. 1990. Eco-warriors. Chicago: Noble.
Schafer, R. 1976. A new language for psychoanalysis. New Haven: Yale Univ. Press.
Scharfstein, B., ed. 1978. Philosophy East/Philosophy West. London: Basil Blackwell.
Schaya, L. 1973. The universal meaning of the Kabbalah. Baltimore: Penguin.
Scheffer, V. 1991. The shaping of environmentalism in America. Seattle: Univ. of Washington Press.
Schelling, F. 1978 (1800). System of transcendental idealism. Trans. P. Heath. Charlottesville: Univ. Press of Virginia.
Schmitt, C., and Q. Skinner, eds. 1988. The Cambridge history of Renaissance philosophy. Cambridge: Cambridge

Univ. Press.

Schneider, S. 1989. Global warming. New York: Vintage.
Schneiderman, S. 1983. Jacques Lacan. Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press.
Schopenhauer, A. 1969. The world as will and representation. 2 vols. New York: Dover.
Schumacher, E. F. 1977. A guide for the perplexed. New York: Harper & Row.
Schuon, F. 1975. Logic and transcendence. New York: Harper.
______. 1976. The transcendent unity of religions. New York: Harper & Row.
______. 1986. The essential writings of Fritjof Schuon. Ed. S. Nasr. Shaftesbury: Element.
Searle, J. 1969. Speech acts. Cambridge Univ. Press.
______. 1983. Intentionality. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
______. 1984. Minds, brains, and science. Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press.
______. 1992. The rediscovery of the mind. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Searles, H. 1960. The nonhuman environment in normal development and in schizophrenia. New York: IUP.
Segal, H. 1976. Introduction to the work of Melanie Klein. London: Hogarth.
Selman, R., and D. Byrne. 1974. A structural analysis of levels of role-taking in middle childhood. Child Development

45.

Shapiro, D., and R. Walsh, eds. 1984. Meditation: Classic and contemporary perspectives. New York: Aldine.
Sheldrake, R. 1981. A new science of life. Los Angeles: Tarcher.
______. 1989. The presence of the past: Morphic resonance and the habits of nature. New York: Viking.
______. 1990. The rebirth of nature. London: Century.
Shepherd, L. 1993. Lifting the veil: The feminine face of science. Boston: Shambhala.
Shibayama, Z. 1974. Zen comments on the Mumonkan. New York: Harper & Row.
Shoemaker, S., and R. Swinburne. 1984. Personal identity. London: Basil Blackwell.
Silburn, L. 1988. Kundalini. Albany: SUNY Press.
Singer, P. 1977. Animal rights. New York: Avon.
Singh, K. 1975. Surat shabd yoga. Berkeley: Images.
Sivard, R. 1985. Women: A world survey. Washington, D.C.: World Priorities.
Sjoo, M., and B. Mor. 1987. The great cosmic mother. San Francisco: Harper.
Skolimowski, H. 1981. Eco-philosophy. Salem, N.H.: Marion Boyars.
Slater, P. 1991. A dream deferred. Boston: Beacon.
Smith, A. 1990. Wealth of nations. Buffalo, N.Y.: Prometheus Books.
Smith, H. 1976. Forgotten truth. New York: Harper & Row.
______. 1989. Beyond the postmodern mind. Wheaton, Ill.: Quest.
______. 1991. The world’s religions. San Francisco: Harper.
Smith, P., and O. Jones. 1986. The philosophy of mind. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Smuts, J. 1926. Holism and evolution. London: Macmillan.
Sogyal Rinpoche. 1990. Dzogchen and Padmasambhava. California: Rigpa Fellowship.
Sorokin, P. 1937-1941. Social and cultural dynamics. 4 vols. New York: American Book Co.
Spence, J., and R. Helmreich. 1978. Masculinity and feminity. Austin: Univ. of Texas Press.
Spengler, O. 1939. The decline of the West. New York: Knopf.
Sperry, R. 1983a. Science and moral priority. New York: Columbia Univ. Press.
______. 1983b. Science and moral priority. New York: Columbia Univ. Press.
Spinoza, B. 1985. The collected works of Spinoza. Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press.
Spiro, M., ed. 1965. Context and meaning in cultural anthropology. New York: Free Press.
Spitz, R. 1959. A genetic field theory of ego formation. New York: IUP.
______. 1965. The first year of life. New York: IUP.
Spragens, T. 1990. Reason and democracy. Durham: Duke Univ. Press.
Spretnak, C. 1991. States of grace. San Francisco: Harper.
______, ed. 1982. The politics of women’s spirituality. New York: Anchor.

Spretnak, C., and F. Capra. 1985. Green politics. London: Paladin.
Stace, W. 1987. Mysticism and philosophy. Los Angeles: Tarcher.
Stavenhagen, R. 1975. Social classes in agrarian societies. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday.
Steinberg, D., ed. 1992. The erotic impulse. Los Angeles: Tarcher.
Stephanou, E. 1976. Charisma and gnosis in Orthodox thought. Fort Wayne, Ind.: LMOR.
Stern, D. 1985. The interpersonal world of the infant. New York: Basic.
Stevens, A. 1983. Archetypes. New York: Quill.
Stich, S. 1983. From folk psychology to cognitive science. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Stone, C. 1987. Earth and other ethics. New York: Harper & Row.
Stone, M. 1976. When God was a woman. New York: Harvest.
______. 1980. The borderline syndromes. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Strauss, L. 1989. Liberalism ancient and modern. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell Univ. Press.
Stuard, S., ed. 1976. Women in medieval society. Philadelphia: Univ. of Penn. Press.
Sturrock, J. 1979. Structuralism and since. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
Sullivan, H. 1953. The interpersonal theory of psychiatry. New York: Norton.
Suzuki, D. T. 1959. Zen and Japanese culture. Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press.
______. 1968. Studies in the Lankavatara Sutra. London: Routledge.
______. 1970. Essays in Zen Buddhism. 3 vols. London: Rider.
Swimme, B., and T. Berry. 1992. The universe story. San Francisco: Harper.
Szarmach, P., ed. 1984. Introduction to the medieval mystics of Europe. Albany: SUNY Press.
Taimni, I. 1975. The science of yoga. Wheaton, Ill.: Quest Books.
Takakusu, J. 1956. The essentials of Buddhist philosophy. Honolulu: Univ. Hawaii Press.
Tannahill, R. 1992. Sex in history. Scarborough House.
Tannen, D. 1990. You just don’t understand. New York: Morrow.
Tarnas, R. 1991. The passion of the Western mind. New York: Harmony.
Tarnas, R. 1993. The Western mind at the threshold. Quest. 6 2 (Summer): 25-31.
Tart, C. T. 1975. States of consciousness. New York: Dutton.
______. 1986. Waking up. Boston: Shambhala.
______. 1989. Open mind, discriminating mind. San Francisco: Harper.
______, ed. 1992. Transpersonal psychologies. New York: Harper Collins.
Taylor, C. 1975. Hegel. Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press.
______. 1985. Philosophy and the human sciences—philosophical papers 2. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
______. 1989. Sources of the self. Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press.
Taylor, P. 1986. Respect for nature. Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press.
Teilhard de Chardin, P. 1961. The phenomenon of man. New York: Harper Torchbooks.
______. 1964. The future of man. New York: Harper Torchbooks.
Teresa of Ávila. 1961. Interior castle. Trans. E. Peers. Garden City, N.Y.: Image.
Thompson, W. I. 1989. Imaginary landscapes. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
______, ed. 1987. Gaia: A way of knowing. Hudson, N.Y.: Lindisfarne Press.
______, ed. 1991. Gaia 2: Emergence. Hudson, N.Y.: Lindisfarne Press.
Thondrup, T. 1989. Buddha mind. Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion.
Thornton, M. 1989. Folk psychology. Toronto: Univ. of Toronto Press.
Thurman, R. 1984. Tsong Khapa’s speech of gold in the essence of true eloquence. Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press.
Tillich, P. 1967. A history of Christian thought. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Tocqueville, A. de. 1969. Democracy in America. New York: Anchor.
Tolstoy, L. 1929. My confession, my religion, the gospel in brief. New York: Scribners.
Tong, R. 1989. Feminist thought. San Francisco: Westview.
Torrance, T. 1981. Divine and contingent order. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
______. 1989. The Christian frame of mind. Colorado Springs: Helmers & Howard.

Toulmin, S. 1982. The return to cosmology. California: Univ. of California Press.
Toynbee, A. 1972. A study of history. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
Trungpa, C. 1976. The myth of freedom. Boston: Shambhala.
______. 1981. Glimpses of Abhidharma. Boulder: Prajna Press.
______. 1988. Shambhala: The sacred path of the warrior. Boston: Shambhala.
______. 1991. Crazy wisdom. Boston: Shambhala.
Turkle, S. 1984. The second self. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Ulanov, A. 1971. The feminine. Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern Univ. Press.
Underhill, E. 1955. Mysticism. New York: Meridian.
Unger, R. 1975. Hölderlin’s major poetry: The dialectics of unity. Bloomington: Indiana Univ. Press.
Unno, T., ed. 1989. The religious philosophy of Nishitani Keiji. Berkeley: Asian Humanities Press.
Urgyen, Tulku. 1988. Vajra heart. Kathmandu: Rangjung Yeshe Publications.
Vaillant, G. 1977. Adaptation to life. Boston: Little, Brown.
Varela, F. 1979. Principles of biological autonomy. New York: North Holland.
Varela, F.; E. Thompson; and E. Rosch. 1993. The embodied mind. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Varenne, J. 1976. Yoga and the Hindu tradition. Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press.
Vattimo, G. 1989. The end of modernity. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins.
Vaughan, F. 1979. Awakening intuition. New York: Doubleday.
______. 1986. The inward arc. Boston: Shambhala.
Venkatesananda, trans. 1981. The supreme yoga. Australia: Chiltern.
Verman, M. 1992. The books of contemplation. Albany: SUNY Press.
Vicinus, M., ed. 1972. Suffer and be still: Women in the Victorian age. Bloomington: Indiana Univ. Press.
Waldrop, M. 1992. Complexity. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Walsh, M., ed. 1987. The psychology of women. New Haven: Yale Univ. Press.
Walsh, R. 1977. Initial meditative experiences: I. J. Transpersonal Psychology 9: 151-192.
______. 1978. Initial meditative experiences: II. J. Transpersonal Psychology 10: 1-28.
______. 1980. Meditation. In R. Corsini (ed.), A handbook of innovative psychotherapies. New York: Wiley.
______. 1984. Staying alive: The psychology of human survival. Boston: Shambhala.
______. 1989. Can Western philosophers understand Asian philosophies? Crosscurrents 34: 281-99.
______. 1990. The spirit of shamanism. Los Angeles: Tarcher.
Walsh, R., and F. Vaughan, eds. 1993. Paths beyond ego. Los Angeles: Tarcher.
Warren, K. 1987. Feminism and ecology. Environmental Ethics 9: 3-20.
Washburn, M. 1988. The ego and the dynamic ground. Albany: SUNY Press.
Watts, A. 1968. Myth and ritual in Christianity. Boston: Beacon.
______. 1972. The supreme identity. New York: Vintage.
______. 1975. Tao: The watercourse way. New York: Pantheon.
Weber, M. 1963. The sociology of religion. Boston: Beacon.
Weil, A. 1972. The natural mind. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Weinberg, S. 1992. Dreams of a final theory. New York: Pantheon.
Welwood, J. 1990. Journey of the heart. New York: Harper Collins.
Werner, H. 1964 (1940). Comparative psychology of mental development. New York: IUP.
West, C. 1989. The American evasion of philosophy. Madison: Univ. of Wisconsin Press.
West, M., ed. 1987. The psychology of meditation. Oxford: Clarendon.
White, J. 1979. Kundalini, evolution, and enlightenment. New York: Anchor.
White, L. 1973. The historical roots of our ecologic crisis. In Barbour 1973: 18-30.
Whitehead, A. 1957 (1929). Process and reality. New York: Macmillan.
______. 1966. Modes of thought. New York: Macmillan.
______. 1967. Adventures of ideas. New York: Macmillan.
______. 1967. Science and the modern world. New York: Macmillan.

Whitmont, E. 1982. Return of the goddess. New York: Crossroad.
Whorf, B. 1956. Language, thought and reality. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Whyte, L. L. 1950. The next development in man. New York: Mentor.
______. 1954. Accent on form. New York: Harpers.
Wilber, K. 1977. The spectrum of consciousness. Wheaton, Ill.: Quest.
______. 1980. The Atman project: A transpersonal view of human development. Wheaton, Ill.: Quest.
______. 1981. Up from Eden. New York: Doubleday/Anchor.
______. 1986. A sociable god. Boston: Shambhala.
______. 1989. Eye to eye. Boston: Shambhala.
______. 1991. Grace and grit. Boston: Shambhala.
Wilber, K.; J. Engler; and D. P. Brown. 1986. Transformations of consciousness: Conventional and contemplative

perspectives on development. Boston: Shambhala.

Willis, J., ed. 1987. Feminine ground. Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion.
Winkelman, M. 1990. The evolution of consciousness. Anthropology of Consciousness, 1 (3/4): 24-32.
______. 1993. The evolution of consciousness? Anthropology of Consciousness, 4 (3): 3-10.
Winnicott, D. 1958. Collected papers. New York: Basic Books.
Winograd, T., and F. Flores 1986. Understanding computers and cognition. Norwood, N.J.: Ablex.
Wit, H. 1991. Contemplative psychology. Pittsburgh: Duquesne Univ. Press.
Wittgenstein, L. 1953. Philosophical investigations. London: Basil Blackwell.
Wollstonecraft, M. 1990. A vindication of the rights of women. Buffalo, N.Y.: Prometheus Books.
Wolman, B., and M. Ullman, eds. 1986. Handbook of states of consciousness. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Woolhouse, R. 1983. Locke. Minneapolis: Univ. of Minnesota Press.
Wright, E. 1984. Psychoanalytic criticism. London: Methuen.
Wulff, D. 1991. Psychology of religion. New York: Wiley.
Wuthnow, R.; J. Hunter; A. Bergesen; and E. Kurzwell. 1984. Cultural analysis. London: Routledge.
Yalom, I. 1980. Existential psychotherapy. New York: Basic.
Yogeshwarand Saraswati. 1972. Science of the soul. India: Yoga Niketan.
Young, D. 1991. Origins of the sacred. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Yuasa, Y. 1987. The body. Albany: SUNY Press.
Ywahoo, D. 1987. Voices of our ancestors. Boston: Shambhala.
Zadeh, L. 1987. Fuzy sets and applications. New York: Wiley.
Zaehner, R. 1957. Mysticism, sacred and profane. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
Zammito, J. 1992. The genesis of Kant’s critique of judgement. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press.
Zanardi, C., ed. 1990. Essential papers on the psychology of women. New York: New York Univ. Press.
Zimmerman, M. 1981. Eclipse of the self. Athens: Ohio Univ. Press.
Zimmerman, M. 1990. Heidegger’s confrontation with modernity. Bloomington: Indiana Univ. Press.
Zoeteman, K. 1991. Gaiasophy. Hudson, N.Y.: Lindisfarne.
Zohar, D. 1990. The quantum self. New York: Morrow.
Zweig, C., ed. 1990. To be a woman. Los Angeles: Tarcher.

Credits

The author thanks the publishers who granted permission to reprint material copyrighted or controlled by them:

From Evolution: The Grand Synthesis by Ervin Laszlo, © 1987 by Ervin Laszlo. Reprinted by permission of John
White.

Figures 24 and 28 from The Self-Organizing Universe: Scientific and Human Implications of the Emerging Paradigm of
Evolution by Erich Jantsch. Reprinted by permission of Elsevier Science Ltd, Pergamon Imprint, Oxford, England.

From Communication and the Evolution of Society by Jürgen Habermas, © 1979 by Beacon Press. Reprinted by
permission of Beacon Press.

From The Great Chain of Being: A Study of the History of an Idea by Arthur O. Lovejoy (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press), © 1936, 1964 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College. Reprinted by permission of Harvard
University Press.

From Sources of the Self: The Making of Modern Identity by Charles Taylor (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press), © 1989 by Charles Taylor. Reprinted by permission of Harvard University Press.

Index

Note: Index entries from the print edition of this book have been included for use as search terms. They can be
located by using the search feature of your e-book reader.

Abhinavagupta
Abraham, R.
Absolute, the. See also Emptiness; God; Spirit
Accommodation
Actual, the (Aristotle)
Actualization (telos)

new paradigm views on
push towards
See also Consciousness; Evolution; Omega points; Transcendence

Adaptation, in mental health
Adherences (Piaget)
Adorno, Theodor
Aesthetic-sensory cognition
Aesthetics, Romantic
Agape (compassion)

in nondual traditions
relation to Eros and Thanatos
in Western traditions

Age of Information. See Noosphere
Age of Reason. See Enlightenment paradigm
Agency (wholeness)

agency-in-communion
agency-versus-communion
and metaphor
See also Communion; Wholeness Agrarian societies

Agrippa von Nettescheim
Alienation
All, the. See Absolute, the; God; Spirit Alpha points. See Absolute, the; God; Spirit Alstad, Diana
Altruism. See also Agape
Ameinias
Anamorphosis (Woltereck)
Anarchy
Anatman (no-self) doctrine
Animal rights
Anthropic Principle (Roszak)
Anthropocentric identity (anthropocentrism)
Anthropology(ists)
Antimodernists

Aperspectival space (Gebser)
Apostolic Fathers
Apprehension
Archaeology (Foucault)
Archetypes. See also Myth Aristotle

developmental theories
and empiricism
God, view of
on hierarchies
on mythology
recognition of within

Art. See also Moral development; Science
Asanga, critique of
Ascending path (many-into-One)

in Christian traditions
dissociation from descending path, effects of
in evolution of consciousness
integration with descending path
See also Descending path; Left-Hand path; Transcendence; Vision-logic Asimov, Isaac

Astrology
Astronomy, plenitude and. See also Mathematics; Physics
Atman (Spirit)

and Brahman
See also Transcendence

Augustine, Saint

dualism in
nondual views

Aurobindo, Sri

Great Holarchy of Being
nondual views

Authenticity
Authoritarianism
Autonomy/freedom

and ego identity (self-determination)
link to ascending path
relationship to depth
repression of
See also Enlightenment paradigm; Liberation movements

Autopoesis. See also Systems theory(ists)
Awareness. See also Consciousness

Bain, Alexander
Ballmer, Thomas
Basic Moral Intuition. See BMI
Bataille, George
Bateson, Gregory
Beard, Mary
Beauty
Behaviorism

Bellah, Robert
Benn, Piers
Benoit, Henri
Bentham, Jeremy
Berger, Peter
Bergson, Henri
Berkeley, Geroge
Berman, Morris
Bertalanffy, Ludwig von. See also Systems theory(ists)
Biocentric identity
Bioequality, limits of
Biological communication
Biological sciences
Biosphere (life)

differentiation/dissociation from noosphere

and concept of libido
confusion of God and Nature (Gaia)
ecodevastation and
effect on gender roles

differentiation/dissociation from physiosphere
evolution/development of
nondual integration of
subservience of women/men to
See also Noosphere; Physiosphere

Birch, Charles
Birth trauma, in Tarnas’s work
Blanck, Gertrude and Rubin
Blumberg, Rae
Bly, Robert
BMI (Basic Moral Intuition). See also Consciousness; Moral development
Body, the

split with mind
views of
See also Biosphere; Physiosphere

Bolen, Jean
Bonnet, Charles
Boundaries, in holons
Brahe, Tyco
Brahman
Brain, the

and consciousness
evolution/development of
as exterior object
triune

Broughton, John
Brown, Daniel
Brown, G. Spencer
Brown, Norman O.
Bruno, Giordano

Buddha (subjective truth/ultimate “I”)
Buddhist traditions (Buddhism)

no-self doctrine
See also individual Buddhist schools

Cambridge Platonists
Campbell, Joseph
Capitalism
Capra, Fritjof
Carnot, Sadi
Carson, Rachel
Causal level (transpersonal development). See also Eckhart; Ramana
Causality
Centaur image. See also Vision-logic
Chafetz, Janet
Chagdud Tulku Rinpoche
Ch’an Buddhism
Chaos theory. See also Systems theory(ists)
Chomsky, Noam
Christ

handling of by church authorities
transpersonal awareness of

Christian (Judeo-Christian) traditions
Christian apologists, arguments of
codification and dogma
dominance over ascending pathway
mythic-rational thinking and

Citizenship
Clarke, Samuel
Clausius, Rudolf
Cobb, John
Coevolution of holons. See Evolution; Holons
Cognition/extension (Spinoza)
Cognitive development

cognitive maps
importance of
intersubjective structures of
and moral development
nonlinearity of
ontogenetic/phylogenetic parallels in
stages of (Piaget)

concrete operational stage (conop)
formal operational stage (formop)
preoperational stage (preop)
sensorimotor stage

waves, streams, and states defined
and worldview
See also Consciousness; Evolution; Piaget

Cognitive sciences (Cognitivism)

Collective structures, inheritance of
Communal confirmation
Communication, types of. See also Language
Communion (partness). See also Agency; Enlightenment paradigm; Holons
Compassion. See Agape; Moral development
Computational mind (Jackendoff)
Computers
Concrete operational stage (conop)
Consciousness

in Christian thought
and depth
direct versus mediated
early “maps” of
evolution/development of

ascending and descending pathways
nondual versus rational views
nonlinearity of
ontogenetic/phylogenetic parallels
pre/trans fallacy
rational awareness and
role identity in
transcendance and
tribal/kinship-based

holonic nature of
intersubjective (Kosmic)
research into
self (subjective)-consciousness
truth-measures for
waves, streams, and states of
See also Cognitive development; Spirituality

Context, shifting (discontinuities)

for holons
in relation to meaning and truth
See also Frameworks, IOU

Contradiction, in holons
Coomaraswamy, A. K.
Copernicus, Nicolaus
Copleston, Frederick
Cowan, Philip
Creativity (Whitehead). See also Eros
Critical Theory (Habermas)
Croll, Oscar
Culler, Jonathan
Cultural anthropology (Douglas)
Culture

confusion with Nature
cultural fit (shared worldspace)
cultural holons
cultural relativism

effect of mystical experience on
evolution of
in America
attendant pathologies
celebration of diversity
ego-rational stage (see also Enlightenment paradigm)
mythic-rational awareness systems
mythology-based stage
regression during
repression and violence during
studies of
systems theory(ists) and
tribal-kinship stage
validation criteria (truth-measures)
vision-logic/planetary stage

meaning/value of
repression and objectification in
in Western traditions
world (global)
See also Four Quadrants; Holons; Social holons; Worldspace

Cusanus, Nicolas
Cybernetic holism (Berman)
Cybernetic paradigms (Bellah)
Cyprian

Da Avabhasa
Darwin, Charles. See also Evolution
Dasein
Death. See Thanatos
Deconstructionism(ists)
Deep ecology(ists). See also Eco-Romanticism, Ecomasculinism
Deep structures (Wilber)
Dehumanization, and power drive. See also Power
Deism(ists)
Deleuze, Gilles
Depth (vertical/interior space)

collapse of, into span. (see also Enlightenment paradigm)
and consciousness
direct versus mediated experience
empirical knowledge of
Foucault on
and freedom/rights/responsibility
of holons
increase in during evolution
and interior development
and meaning (value)
and moral development
during postmodern period
relationship to transcendence

as the “within” of things
of worldspaces
See also Holons
Depth psychology
Derrida, Jacques

as deconstructionist
on differentiation/integration
grammatology of

Descartes, René

dualism in
post-Cartesian thinking
rationalism of

Descending path (One-into-many)

Agape and
Descended God of
dissociation from ascending path
domination over Western culture
efforts at integrating with ascending path
and evolution of consciousness
extroversion in
plenitude/materialism in
Thanatos and
thermodynamics as “proof” of
as Universal System
views on evil

Determinism, limits of
Devall, Bill
Development. See Cognitive development; Evolution
Developmental philosophy
Developmental psychology(ists)
Dharma (objective truth)
Dialectic/dialectical reasoning (Hegel)
Dickinson, Emily
Differentiation

of art, science, and morality (Big Three)
autonomy and
during cognitive development
and evolution
versus dissociation
See also Dissociation; Integration

Dionysius the Areopagite
Diremption (divorce). See Dissociation
Disorder, increase in (laws of thermodynamics)
Displacement (Freud)
Dissociation

of art, science, and morality (Big Three)
of ascending/descending paths
autonomy and
of biosphere and noosphere

versus differentiation
of Ego and Eco
during development
from sexuality
See also Differentiation; Integration; Pathology

Diversity
Dobert, Rainer
Domination holarchies. See also Pathology
Doore, Gary
Downward causation (Sheldrake)
Dreyfus, Hubert
Dualism. See also Differentiation; Dissociation
Dubos, René
Dynamic systems theory. See Systems theory(ists)
Dzogchen Buddhism

Each, the
Eccles, John
Eckhart, Meister

on consciousness
on duality of “real world”
on Godhead
on nature
See also Causal level; Transpersonal consciousness

Eco, the (“Eco camp”)

negative aspects

misuse of reason
nature as reality (mononature)
dissociation from the Ego

positive aspects

nondual potential
wholeness/communion with nature

proponents/critics
See also Eco-Romanticism; Enlightenment paradigm; Nature

Eco-movements
Eco-noetic identity
Eco-Romanticism

fallacies in
idealization of diversity
and new paradigm thinkers
return to nature as regression
sentiment (feeling) as knowledge
and sexual freedom
See also Enlightenment paradigm

Ecocentrism
Ecodevastation
Ecofeminism(ists). See also Feminism; Nature
Ecological awareness
Ecological sciences. See Systems theory(ists)

Ecomasculinism(ists)
Economic forces and cognitive development
Ecophilosophy(ers)

confusion of God and Nature
denial of the transpersonal
failure to develop environmental ethic
hierarchies among

Ecopsychology
Eder, Klaus
Efflux (involution). See also Plenitude
Ego, the (“Ego camp”)

dissociation/conflict with Eco camp
integration with Eco camp
negative aspects

immersion in mononature
reduction of NATURE to nature
repression and objectification

positive aspects
moral action
pluralism, altruism, freedom

See also Eco, the; Ego identity; Self-awareness

Ego-centaur identity. See Vision-logic; Worldcentric identity
Ego identity (self-ness)

compared with egocentric identity
evolution/development of
pure Ego/Self
and rationality
See also Ego, the; Self-awareness

Ego-rationalism. See also Eco-Romanticism
Egocentrism

during cognitive development
in Eco-Romanticism
in the new paradigm/quantum physics
rejection of during Enlightenment
in systems theory

Eisler, Riane
Elevationism (Berman)
Emergence, by holons. See also Evolution; Holons
Emerson, Ralph Waldo

criticisms of nature mysticism (ecophilosophy)
on history
on nature
Over-Soul concept
on reason
See also Psychic level; Transpersonal consciousness

Emotional development

differentiation from Biosphere
preoperational stage

Emotional expression (passion). See also Sentiment

Empire, and mythic-rational thinking
Empirical holism
Empiricism(ists), empirical-sensory understanding

cognition and
as definition of reality
deification of Nature and
ecocentrism in
emphasis on sensory experience (descending path)
focus on Right-Hand path
and hedonism
language and
and the transpersonal

Emptiness (shunyata), empty awareness

and causal awareness
and consciousness
and ego development
Form Body (rupakaya) of
Schelling’s Abyss and
transcendence and

Enactive paradigm (Varela)
“End of history.” See also Omega points
Engels, Friedrich
Engler, Jack
Enlightenment paradigm

biosphere/noosphere dissociation
Eros, elevation of
freedom and compassion
Great Chain of Being construct (diversity), idealization of
nature, deification of
one-sidedness (flatness) of
rationality as omega point of
regression (return to nature)
rejection of ethnocentrism
repression/objectification and
See also Depth; Empiricism; Eco-Romanticism; Span; Subtle reductionism

Entelechy (Aristotle)
Environment. See Biosphere; Eco, the; Physiosphere
Environmental ethics. See also Moral development
Environmental movement
Epiphenomenalism
Equalitarian societies
Equality. See also Autonomy/freedom; Liberation movements
Equilibration (Piaget)
Erikson, Erik
Eros (creative instinct)
and ascending path
Christian views on
dissociation into Phobos
elevation of during Enlightenment

Freud’s views on
male/female views on
as omega point source
Plotinus’ views on
Schelling’s views on
See also Agape; Phobos; Thanatos

Ethnocentric identity
Evidence. See Truth; Validation
Evil
Evolutionary processes
accelerating pace of
biology as destiny
coevolution of micro- and macro elements
depth and
destruction of holons during
discontinuities in
empirical evidence for (Evolutionary doctrine)
of emotion
hierarchical nature of (direction)
importance of
versus involutionary processes
natural selection in, limitations of
ontogenetic/phylogenetic (macro/micro) parallels in
pathologies/problems during
schemas for
of social holons
transformation and translation in
vision-logic/planetary awareness (interior evolution)
See also Consciousness; Cultural evolution; Human development

Evolutionary transcendance (Murphy)
Existential crisis (Grof)
Existential malaise
Exterior holons
Exterior space (span/horizontal)

boundaries and
collapse of Left-Hand path into
relation to interior space
See also Right-Hand path; Span

Extrinsic values, of holons

Family, fatherhood
Fear. See Phobos
Fechner, Gustav Theodor
Feeling. See Emotional development; Sentiment
Female(s)

as noospheric agents
Romantic view of
sexual/biological differentiation of
societal role of

value sphere of
as victims
See also Feminism

Feminine gender, as sociocultural role
Feminism(ists), feminist movements

on asymmetrical power arrangements (patriarchy)
debates among
and emergence of noosphere
hierarchical constructs among
response to men’s movement

Feuerbach, Ludwig
Feuerstein, Georg
Fichte, Johann

concept of Pure Ego/Subject
disagreements with Spinoza
on Great Holarchy of Being
vision-logic/planetary awareness in

Findlay, J. N.
Fish, Stanley
Fixations
Flatland paradigm. See also Descending pathway; Dissociation; Mononature; Pathology; Right-Hand path
Foraging societies
Forbes, Jack
Form/formlessness. See also Emptiness
Form Body (rupakaya)
Formal operational stage (formop). See also Cognitive development
Foucault, Michel

Age of Man concept
archaeology concept
on Descartes
on differentiation/integration
Dreyfus and Rabinow on
on language
on monological thinking
on nondual integration
on obsessive sexuality
on structuralism
on Thantos

Four quadrants (“Great Holarchy/Nest of Being”)

detailed views of
as map of consciousness
as paradigm for holonic structure
surface/deep dimensions of
transpersonal development and
and unconscious truth
See also Great Holarchy of Being

Fowler, James
Fox, Warwick
Frameworks

Freedom. See Autonomy/freedom
Freud, Sigmund

concept of “id”
concept of “the I” (ego)
depth psychology
fixation/obsession and
inability to see nondual context
influence of Schelling on
on metonym and metaphor
on mythic archeytpes
“pleasure principle”
pre/trans fallacy in
primary processes of
as reflection of interaction of Eco and Ego
separation of Eros and Thanatos

Frobenius, Leo
Fukuyama, Francis
Fulcrums of development. See also Cognitive development
Functional fit. See also Validation
Functionalism

Gaia

confusion of with God (Great Goddess)
See also Biosphere; Ecodevastation; Nature

Galileo
Gardner, Howard
Gebser, Jean
critique of
on integral-aperspectival mind (vision-logic)
stages of consciousness

Gender differences. See also Female(s); Male(s)
General System Theory
Genetic communication
Geocentric identity. See also Cognitive development
Gestalt psychology
Gilligan, Carol
Gimbutas, Maria
Global culture; global consciousness development process

global economies
multiculturalism/transnationalism
religion and
and tribal awareness
See also Worldspaces

Global syncretism (cognitive anthropology)
Gnostics, critiques of
God

as Alpha Source (Deist view)
Aristotle’s view of
Augustine’s view of

as basis for human connectedness
dissociation from in Western culture
deification of Nature/Gaia
determining truth of
nondual views of
Plato’s view of
Union with
See also Nondual traditions; Spirit

Gödel, Kurt
Godhead

Eckhart’s views on
nondual views of
Plotinus’ views on
transcendance into
See also God; Transcendence

Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von
Goldsmith, Edward
Good, the. See also Moral development
Grace
Gradation, grade. See Depth
Graef, Ortwin de
Grammatology (Derrida)
Great Chain of Being paradigm. See Great Holarchy of Being
Great Father myth
Great Goddess. See Ecofeminism; Gaia; God
Great Holarchy of Being (Great Chain of Being)

Aurobindo’s construct
empirical (collapsed) view of
humans in
as map of holonic potential
as map of Kosmic development
nondual constructs (nest image)
plenitude/continuity in
Plotinus’ construct of
See also Plotinus; Web of life

Great Mother myth
Great Nest of Being Greens movement
Groddeck, Georg
Grof, Stanislav
Gross reductionism(ists)
Ground value (of holons)
Guntrip, Harry
Gyatso, Geshe Kelsang

Habermas, Jürgen

on capitalism
on context
on cultural relativism
definition of modernity

on development of role/ego identities
dialectic of progress
on differentiation/integration
on disempowerment of myth
on evolution of consciousness
Foucault’s agreements with
on Horkheimer and Adorno
on human nature (dehumanization)
identical signification
on inner space
integrative vision of
on language and development
on limitations of tribal kinship systems
on magical-animistic awareness
on male/female division of labor
on monological thinking
on myth
on myth-based societies
on objectification and repression
ontogenetic/phylogenetic parallels in
on prehistoric tribal groups
on rationality
on self-defining systems
on social engineering
on systems theory
on telos
on transformation to patriarchy
on validity claims
Haeckel, Ernst von
Happiness, as a right. See also Eco-Romanticism
Hartley, David
Hartmann, Eduard von
Hedonism

Berman’s emphasis on
as motivator in empirical world
and Right-Hand path
See also Sexuality

Hegel, Georg

on contradictions in things
critique of Enlightenment thinking
critique of Kant
developmental philosophy of
on Great Holarchy of Being
on integration in Spirit
limitations of involutionary views
on “Reason” vs. understanding
vision-logic/planetary awareness in

Heidegger, Martin

hermaneutics

integrative vision (centaur image)
definition of modernity

Height (Foucault). See also Depth
Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle
Helvétius
Hermaneutics(ists)

Heidegger’s concept of
in linguistics
in literary criticism
surface/deep dimensions
of suspicion (Ricoeur)

Heterarchies
Hierarchies

among anti-hierarchical thinkers
development within
in holons/holarchies
needs hierarchies (Maslow)
pathology in
Roszak on
Whitehead on
See also Depth; Evolution; Holons; Span

Hillel
Hinduism. See Vedanta Hindu traditions
History, end of
Hobbes, Thomas
Hofstadter, Douglas
Holarchies

collapsed (empirical) view of
individual and social
nested hierachies
Right- and Left-Hand paths
schemata for
See also Evolution; Holons
Holbach, Paul-Henri-Dietrich
Hölderlin, Friedrich
Holocaust
Holons

archetypes
as basis of reality
boundaries
common features. (see also Twenty Tenets)

boundaries
Four Quadrants of
interior/exterior spaces
self-adaptation
self-preservation
self-transcendence
span and depth
transformation and translation

wholeness/partness (agency/communion; hierarchies) in

and consciousness
contexts for
contradictions/inconsistencies in
destruction of
evolution/development

coevolution
exterior
interior
preservation of during
surrender of exclusivity

image holons
intrinsic value
Koestler’s definition of
literary holons
pathological holarchies
relationship between organisms and environment
self-transcendence, capacity for
sensorimotor
shallow, false elevation of
as signs/signifiers
stability of
transcription/translation in
and worldspaces
See also Hierarchies; Holarchies

Horkheimer, Max
Horticultural societies
Huang Po
Human development
Berman’s view of
cultural development
effect of industrialization on
Gebser’s views on
gender differentiation
holonic destruction and
industrialization and
magical-animistic thinking
Marx’s views on
micro/macro development “missing links” in
mythic-rational awareness
ontogenetic/phylogenetic parallels
paradigms for
Piaget’s paradigm for
potential in
Roszak’s views on
vision-logic/planetary awareness
See also Evolution

Human nature, objectification of
Humanistic psychology

Humans, objectification of
Hume, David
Husserl, Edmund
Hutcheson, Francis
Huxley, Thomas

“I-I.” See Pure Ego; Witness
“I” language/awareness (interior individual holons). See also Ego identity
“Id” (Groddeck/Freud). See also Sexuality
Idealism(ists)
Identity

and moral development
nondual
overly narrow
See also Cognitive development; Ego identity; Worldview

Image holons, in noosphere
Incompleteness Theorem (Gödel)
Inconsistency, in holons
Indeterminacy
Indissociation
Individual holons

cognitive development in
consciousness structures
structure/form of
relation to social holons

Industrialization
Inge, William
Insincerity. See Self-deception; Truth
Instincts, and the reptilian brain
Instrumental awareness/value
Integral-aperspectival mind (Gebser)
Integration/reconciliation (of ascending/descending paths)

Eastern contributions
feminism and
Kant’s contributions
new planetary cultures and
in nondual traditions
as principal challenge of postmodern age
Schelling’s contributions

Interexistence (Laszlo)
Interior space (depth/vertical)
as autonomous subjectivity
awareness of
as basis for transcendence
collapsed (flatland) view of
correlation with exterior space
development of
of holons

boundaries and

rational awareness and
See also Consciousness; Depth; Transpersonal development

Intersubjective worldspace

examples of
Grof’s assumptions about
truthfulness and

Intrinsic value of holons
Intuition

devaluing of
and moral understanding
of Spirit
See also Truth; Validation

Involutionary theorists
IOU principle
“It” language/awareness (exterior holons)

characteristics of
in development of consciousness
in Great Nest of Being
the “id” as
historical models for
in Kant’s sphere of Pure Reason
Spinoza and
See also Empiricism; Enlightenment paradigm

Jackendoff, Ray
Jagger, Alison
Jakobson, Roman
James, William
Jantsch, Erich

on brain development
on differentiation/integration
on evolution (co-evolution of micro/macro)
on Gaia as social holon
on ontogenetic/phylogenetic parallels
on self-transcendence
critiques of
time/space relationships

Jaspers, Karl
Johnson, Mark
Johnson, Samuel
Judeo-Christian tradition. See Christian (Judeo-Christian) traditions
Jung, Carl
Justin Martyr

Kalweit, Holger
Kant, Immanuel
on autonomy
differentiation of art, science, and morality (critiques)
on evolution
Foucault on

Hegel’s criticism of
limitations of
on metaphysics
nondual views of
Spinoza and

Kaplan, Robert, on retribalization
Karuna (compassion), in Zen tradition. See also Agape
Katz, Steven
Kegon Buddhism
Kelvin, William
Kepler, Johannes
Kierkegaard, Søren
King, A.
Koestler, Arthur
Kohlberg, Lawrence
Kohut, Heinz
Kosmos

collapsed view (flatland)/cosmos
and Emptiness
evolution/development of
Plotinus’ paradigm for
holarchies/holons in
limitation of empirical approach to
rights and responsibilities in
whole view (vision-logic)
worldspaces in
See also God; Holons; Spirit

Kramer, Joel
Kuhn, Thomas
Kundalini

La Mettrie, Julien
Lacan, Jacques
Laing, R. D.
Language

childhood speech disorders
and consciousness
creative power of
differentiating process of
evolution/development of
expressing transcendent experience using
Foucault on
Gebser/Piaget hybrid terminology
and identity
paradoxes/inconsistencies in
as reflection of empirical world
as Right-Hand path elements
as signifier of experience, power and limitations of
signs and context in

transparency of
and transpersonal development
“universality” in
and validity claims
See also Cognitive development

Lao Tzu
Laszlo, Ervin
critique of
on evolution
on holons/hierarchies
on physical/biological science contradictions

Leclerc, Ivor
Left-Hand path

collapse into Right-Hand path
depth in
empathic knowledge of
evolution/development of
experiential knowledge of
importance of truthfulness to
and interior development
linguistic descriptors
proof of God’s existence
Rothberg’s explication of
surface/deep dimensions of
unconscious truths
See also Consciousness; Interior space; Transpersonal development

Leibniz, Gottfried

Bruno’s influence on
developmental philosophy
on infinity of life
opposition to anthropocentrism
recognition of within
system viewpoint

Lenski, G. E.
Levels. See Depth; Hierarchies; Holons
Lévi-Strauss, Claude
Lewontin, Richard
Liberation movements
and industrialization
rights movements
sexual freedom

Libido and regression. See also Sexuality
Lieh-tzu
Linear models. See also Nonlinear development
Linguistics. See also Language
Literary holons, paradox/inconsistency in
Locke, John
Loevinger, Jane
Logic (Hegel)

Logos (the Word)
Lovejoy, Arthur

on ascending/descending duality
critique of
on Eco-Romanticism
on evolution
on Great Chain theorists
on hierarchies
on Plato

Lovelock, James
Lovins, Amory
Lower-Left (LL) quadrant (cultural systems). See also Four Quadrants; Great Holarchy of Being
Lower-Right (LR) quadrant (social systems). See also Four Quadrants; Great Holarchy of Being
Loy, David
Luminosity/archetype
Lyotard, Jean-François

MacIntyre, Alasdair
MacLean, Paul Madhyamika tradition
Madsen, Richard
Magical-animistic awareness

cultural value
during preoperational stage
regression to

Mahayana Buddhism

on duality of “real world”
Nagarjuna’s influence on
nondual views in
proof of God’s existence
views of Godhead

Maimonides
Male(s)

co-creativity with female
pathology/dominator hierarchies
sexual differentiation

and fatherhood
functional basis for
value spheres of
See also Ecomasculinism; Men’s movement

Man, Paul de
Margulis, Lynn
Marx, Karl (Marxism)

literary criticism and
pre/trans fallacy
production paradigm
view of human development

Marxism, global scope of
Masculine gender, as sociocultural role
Maslow, Abraham

Material reductionism
Material state
Mathematics

and dominance of Right-Hand path
and involutionary theory
recognition of paradoxes/inconsistencies

Matrifocal societies
Maturana, Humberto
Mayr, Ernst
McCarthy, Thomas
Meaning. See also Depth
Medical psychiatry/pharmacology. See Mental health
Mediocrity, in modern culture
Meditation. See also Spirituality
Men. See Males
Men’s movement
Mental experience, devaluing of
Mental health

definitions of
medication/therapy dilemma

Merleau-Ponty, Maurice
Metabolic communication
Metaphysics, devaluing of
Metonym/metaphor, communion and. See also Language
Metzner, Ralph
Mill, John Stuart
Miller, J.
Mind

dissociation from body
existence of
in holarchic development
See also Awareness; Consciousness; Mental health

Mindlessness. See Emptiness
Modernism(ity). See also Empiricism; Rationality
Modes of production, and role of women. See also Industrialization
Monological analysis (empiric-analytic)
Mononature

entrenchment of
and homogenization/mediocrity
See also Dissociation; Eco, the; Flatland paradigm; Nature

Moral development

in American culture
Basic Moral Intuition (BMI)
and cognitive development
and global perspective/intersubjectivity
and moral autonomy
and transpersonal consciousness

Morphic units/fields (Sheldrake)
Mothers

Motivation. See Hedonism; Omega points; Telos
Multiculturalism
Mumford, Lewis
Murphy, Michael
Murti, T. R. V.
Mutual identity. See Over-Soul
Mystical experience, mysticism

in Christian (Judeo-Christian) traditions
as culturally determined
in the new (quantum) physics
Plato and
Plotinus and
in psychic/subtle levels
rarity of
shamanism and
See also Consciousness; Transcendence

Myth

allegorical interpretation of
as archetype
cultural rejection of
mythic-imperialism
reason in service of
spiritual awareness/transcendence and

Myth-based awareness systems
Mythic-rational awareness systems

inability to accept negation (nihilation)
replacement of by rational-logic
rise of religion and
violence in

Naess, Arne
Nagarjuna
Namkhai Norbu
Narcissism
Natural sciences, limits of
Natural selection
Nature

deification of (NATURE)
early views on
feeling (sentiment) for
“nature” and
relation to spirit
return to, as regression
sexual obsession and
split from human experience
women’s special connection to

Nazis, deconstructionist confusion about
Needs hierarchies (Maslow)
Nelson, John

Neomammalian brain (neocortex)
Neopaganism(ists)
Neoplatonism(ists). See also Plotinus
Neumann, John von
Neurosis. See also Pathology(ies)
New Age (new paradigm) theories(ists)
New Biology (Varela)
New Criticism
New Physics
Newton, Isaac
Nielsen, Joyce
Nietzsche, Friedrich
Nihilation (Berger)
Nirvikalpa samadhi (formless awareness)
No-self doctrine
Nonanthropocentric identity. See also Rationality
Nondual awareness level (transpersonal development/integration)
Nondual traditions

compassion and wisdom in
efforts to reestablish
freedom in
on God’s duality
as models for integration/reconciliation
Nagarjuna’s contributions to
negation/affirmation in
Platonic/Neoplatonic thinking and
Plotinus and
Schelling’s contributions to

Nonlinear development. See also Context
Noosphere (mind)

Age of, cultural institutions for
cultural dissociation from

and concept of libido
and deification of Nature
ecodevastation and

equality of males/females and
evolution/development of

attendant pathologies
elimination of biology as destiny
Jantsch’s schemas for

image holons
language and
in matrifocal societies
as part of biosphere/physiosphere
relative autonomy in
transcription in
See also Biosphere; Physiosphere; Transpersonal development; Vision-logic

Normative rightness
Nostalgia. See Regression

Objectification, dehumanization. See also Pathology
Objective System (Spinoza)
Objective truthfulness. See also Truth Validity
Objectivity. See also Empiricism; Flatland paradigm; Rationality
Oceanic adualism (Arieti)
Oken, Lorenz
Omega points

aborted, as basis for pathology
brain and
evolution as
morphic fields as
in nondual traditions
ultimate
See also Telos

One, the

differing definitions of
duality of, in nondual traditions
Plotinus’ views on
See also God; Godhead; Over-Soul; Spirit

One World vision. See Plotinus
Ontogenetic/phylogenetic parallels
Organization, increase in during evolution
Origen
Over-Soul

awareness of
commonality of
Emerson’s view of
Fichte’s view of
mutual identity
New Age theories
World Soul
See also Consciousness; God; Godhead; Transcendence

Padmasambhava
Paine, Thomas
Paleomammalian brain (limbic system)
Pantheism
Paradigms (Kuhn)
Paradise lost metaphor. See Nature; Regression
Parity, versus equality
Parmenides
Participation (Piaget)
Pascal, Blaise
Pathology(ies)

as aborted omega points
during cognitive development
during evolutionary development
fixations
fulcrum-based therapies for

preservation of
Roszak on

Patrifocal/patriarchal (androcentric) societies
Peak experiences. See also Actualization; Omega points; Telos
Penfield, Wilder
Perception. See also Truth; Validity
Perinatal matrices (Grof), critique of
Perspective and visibility
Phenomenalism(ology) (Berger)
Phobos (fear). See also Eros
Physical versus biological sciences
Physiocentric identity
Physiosphere (matter)

dependence of noosphere and biosphere on
differentiation/dissociation from biophere
early efforts to describe
evolution/development of reintegration with biosphere/noosphere

Piaget, Jean

cognitive development paradigm
concrete operational stage (conop)
cross-cultural applicability of
formal operational stage (formop)
moral development and
preoperational stage (preop), early phase
sensorimotor stage

Pierce, Charles
Pitt, William
Plant, Judith
Plato

versus Aristotle
as an ascender
concepts of “the One,” the Good
as a descender
on duality of “real world”
on Eros
hierarchies in
limitations of involutionary views
nature in
nondual views of
Nagarjuna and
underrating of empiricism

Plenitude (efflux/infinity of life) construct
and domination of descending pathway
and Empiricism
idealization of diversity
as manifestation of God

and systems theory
Pleromatic fusion (Jung)
Pleromatic worldspace

Plotinus

attack on Gnostics
concept of the One
on duality of “real world”
Great Holarchy of Being
on holonic/hierarchical relationships
influence of
involutionary views
life and death of
mystical experience of
nature, views on
nondual views of
Plow-based societies
Pluralism(ists)
Pneumaticism
Polanyi, Michael
Political atomism
Pope, Alexander
Popper, Karl
Porphyry
Positivism
Postconventional development stage
Postformal cognition Postmodernism(ists)

deconstruction among
discovery of intersubjective space
Feuerbach’s influence on
hierarchies among
idealization of diversity in
need for integration

Potential (Aristotle)
Power. See also Myth; Sexual asymmetry
Power feminism(ists)
Prajna (spiritual insight/intuition)
Prayer/meditation. See Meditation; Spirituality
Pre/trans fallacy
Prehension (Whitehead)
Preoperational stage (cognitive development)
Prepersonal consciousness
Prerational versus transrational consciousness
Pretribal consciousness, ecodevastation and
Prigogine, Ilya
Primary narcissism (Freud)
Proclus
Production paradigm
Propositional truth
Protoplasmic worldspace
Pseudo-Dionysius
Psychic level (transpersonal consciousness)

associated freedoms

language of vision and vibration
mystical experience and

Psychoanalysis, telos in
Psychology and rationality
Psychoses. See also Pathology(ies)
Punctuational evolutionary model (Eldredge and Gould)
Pure Ego/Absolute Self (Fichte)
Pure Substance/Absolute Object (Spinoza)
Pyramid of Development (Laszlo)
Pythagoreans

Quantifiable experience. See also Empiricism; Validation measures
Quantum evolution (Simpson)
Quantum physics

Rabinow, Paul
Radhakrishnan
Radical feminism(ists). See also Feminism
Radical pluralists, hierarchies among
Radical reflexivity
Ramana Maharshi, Sri

on transcendence
See also Transpersonal development

Rangdrol, Tsogdruk
Ranking. See Hierarchies
Rational awareness. See also Cognitive development
Rational-ego identity

evolution/development of
freedom and compassion in
as integral-aperspectival mind
language of
rejection of ascending pathway/myth
repression and objectification in

Rational perspectivism and relativity
Rationality (reason/reasonableness)
Christian church condemnation of
Emerson’s views of
Foucault’s views on
Habermas’s views on
industrialization and
limitations/negative aspects of

dissociation of art, science, and morality
dissociation of the Ego/the Eco
overemphasis on descending path
linearity of
rationalization, Holocaust example
rigidity

as omega point of Enlightenment
Plato/Plotinus views on
positive aspects of

allegorical interpretation of myth
dependence on evidence
depth of feeling/passion
ecological/relational worldview
ego identity
liberation/humanist movements
multiple perspectives

See also Empiricism; Enlightenment paradigm

Reality

“feeling” as basis for
and higher levels of consciousness
holons as basis of
knowing
Nagarjuna’s nondual views of
ontologic (Berman)
See also Truth; Validity

Recovery experiences
Reductionism
Referents
Reflection/representation paradigm
Reflux (Plotinus)
Regime/code/canon (Koestler)
Regression

hedonism as
return to nature as
in service of ego (Kris)
See also Descending pathway; Right-Hand path

Reich, Wilhelm
Relationship exchanges, same level
Relativity
Religion (religiousness)

Bellah’s work on
and mythic-imperialism
redefinitions of
See also Buddhism; Christian (Judeo-Christian) traditions; Myth; Nondual traditions

Representation (reflection) paradigm
Repression

Freud/Jung’s views on
and objectification of ego
of sexuality
See also Freud; Sexuality
Reptilian brain (brain stem)
Responsibility
Retribalization
Retro-Romanticism
Retrotension
Reunification. See Integration
Revolution and rationality. See also Autonomy/freedom; Liberation movements
Reynolds, Cecil R.

Ricoeur, Paul
Right-Hand path

domination over Left-Hand path
empirical knowledge and
God, proofs of
hedonism and
exclusion of interior space/development
language and
as the only reality
and repression/objectification
Rothberg’s explication of
surface (span) versus depth in

Rights
Role identity
Rolle de Hampole, Richard
Romanticism. See also Eco-Romanticism
Rorty, Richard
Rosch, Eleanor
Roszak, Theodore
Rothberg, Donald
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques
Russell, Bertrand
Russell, Julia
Russell, Peter

Saccas, Ammonius
Saints versus yogis
Salk, Jonas
Same-level exchanges
Sanday, Peggy
Sangha (intersubjective truth)
Sartre, Jean-Paul
Saussure, Ferdinand de
Schelling, Friedrich

concept of the Abyss (Emptiness)
critique of Fichte
on dissociation
on evolution
influence of
Kierkegaard’s critique of
on perception
Plotinus’ influence on
vision-logic in
Schiller, Johann
Schlegel, Friedrich
Schopenhauer, Arthur
Schrödinger, Erwin
Schumacher, E. F.
Science

and belief in Plenitude
empirical (scientific method)
and global culture
splits in
See also Empiricism

Second Law of Thermodynamics
Seed, John
Self-actualization. See Actualization; Omega points; Telos
Self-adaption
Self-awareness. See also Consciousness; Ego identity, Interior space
Self-deception. See also Spirituality; Truth
Self-dissolution
Self-esteem
Self-preservation
Self-sense, self-system, selfness. See Ego identity
Self-transcendence. See Transcendence
Sellars, Wilfrid, critique of
Sensorimotor holons
Sensorimotor stage (cognitive development)
Sentiment (feeling)
Sessions, George
Set theory, paradoxes in
Sexual asymmetry. See also Patriarchy
Sexuality
Shamanic vision. See also Mysticism
Shankara
Sheldrake, Rupert
Shelley, Mary
Shibayama
Shin Buddhism
Signs/signifiers
Sila (moral discipline)
Sin
Sincerity. See Truth
Single-boundary fallacy
Size, and evolution
Slavery
Smith, Huston
Snyder, Gary
Social consciousness. See Culture; Worldcentric identity
Social engineering
Social holons

and cultural holons
evolution/development of
and individual holons
structure/form of
See also Four Quadrants; Holons

Social integration
Social labor

Social sciences
Sociocentric identity
Sociocultural evolution. See Culture; Noosphere
Sociocultural nonequilibrium systems model
Socrates
Soul

Augustine’s view of
Eckhardt’s view of
Emerson’s view of
evolution/development of
Plato’s view of
Plotinus’ views on
Teresa’s view of

Span (horizontal)

and BMI (Basic Moral Intuition)
collapse of depth into
fallacy of
relation to evolutionary development
See also Depth; Descending pathway; Flatland paradigm

Spencer, Herbert
Spender, Dale
Sperry, Roger
Spinoza, Baruch

appeal to males
Bruno’s influence on
on desirability of uniformity
efforts to reconcile Kant/Fichte with
on God and Nature
opposition to anthropocentrism

Spirit

deification of mononature as
deification of sex as
evolution/development of
Godhead as
holonic nature of
intuiting/perceiving
as locus of integration/reconciliation
and moral understanding
Plotinus’ views on
Spirit-in-creation (Plato)
transrational nature of
See also Nondual traditions; Spirituality; Transcendence

Spiritual awareness (spirituality)
in children and dawn humans
legitimacy/authenticity of
shamanism and
spiritual marriage (Teresa)
training and practice for
See also Mystical experience; Noosphere; Transcendence; Vision-logic

Spretnak, Charlene
Stanton, Elizabeth Cady
State, as social holon
States (of consciousness)
Stebbins, G. Ledyard
Stent, Gunther
Streams (of consciousness)
Structural coupling (Varela)
Structural-functionalism. See Systems theory
Structural unconscious
Structuralism (Foucault)
Subconsciousness (pre-egoic awareness)
Subholons
Subjectivity

emergence of
need to integrate with objectivity
subjective space
and truthfulness
See also Ego identity; Egocentrism

Subtle level (transpersonal awareness)
Subtle reductionism(ists)

and Enlightenment paradigm
and functional truth-measures
and one-sided (flatland) worldview

Sufism
Sullivan, William
Superconsciousness (transegoic awareness)
Superholons
Surface structures. See also Exterior holons; Span
Suzuki, D. T.
Swindler, Ann
Synchronic structuralism
Synthesis. See Integration
Systems theory(ists)
and chaos theory
egocentrism in
emergence of
functional fit, rationality in
limited worldview of
metabiology
morality in
Plenitude without Spirit
subtle reductionism in

Tantric tradition
Taoist tradition
Tarnas, Richard, critique of
Tarski, Alfred
Taylor, Alastair

Taylor, Charles

critiques of Habermas
on cultural evolution
definition of modernity
on effects of Enlightenment paradigm
on emergence of subjectivity
on happiness contradiction
on hedonism
on Locke
radical reflexivity
on reflect/representation paradigm
on Utilitarians
view of Kosmos

Taylor, Harriet
Teilhard de Chardin, Pierre
Telos, as factor in evolution
Teresa of Ávila

Union with God
See also Subtle level; Transcendence

Tertullian
Thanatos (death)

and descending path
and dissociation from Agape into
Freud’s view of
and power drive

Theravada Buddhism
Thermodynamics, time and
Thomas Aquinas, Saint
Thompson, E.
Tibetan Buddhism
Tien Tai Buddhism
Tillich, Paul
Time. See also Evolution
Tipton, Steven
Titchener, Edward Bradford
Tocqueville, Alexis de
Tolerance, rational awareness and
Tolstoy, Leo
Trans-tribal awareness. See Mythology-based awareness systems
Transcendence

archetypes, myths, paradigms for
during cognitive development
and consciousness
self-transcendence
sexuality and
See also Actualization; Interior development; Spiritual awareness; Vision-logic

Transcreation (Leibnitz)
Transcriptions
Transformation

in holons
See also Actualization; Evolution

Translation
Transnationalism
Transpersonal consciousness

direct versus mediated experience
dissocation from
evolution/development of

causal level (Eckhardt)
nondual level (Eckhart, Ramana)
psychic level (Emerson)
subtle level (Teresa of Ávila)
interior development and
moral understanding and
nonlinearity of
See also Spiritual awareness; Vision-logic

Transrational consciousness
Tribal awareness (tribal-kinship groups)
Trungpa, Chögyam, Rinpoche
Truth, truthfulness

Christian definitions of
and consciousness
experiential, rational knowledge
persistence of
propositional
relativity of
spiritual knowledge/understanding
subjective, objective, intersubjective relationship
uniformity of and worldcentric identity
Zen definitions of
See also Validation

Twenty Tenets

holon characteristics
holonic evolution/development

Typhonic worldspace

Unconscious truths. See also Truth; Validity testing
“Unified consciousness” (Berman)
Union. See also Ascending path
Universal perspectivism
Universal pluralism
Universal System concept
Universe. See Kosmos
Upper-Left (UL) quadrant (intentional). See also Left-Hand path
Upper-Right (UR) quadrant (behavioral). See also Right-hand path
Uroboric worldspace
Utilitarians

Vajrayana Buddhism
Validation (truth-measures)

empirical, rational experience
injunctions, and knowledge
of interior experiences
meaning and
sincerity (self-truthfulness) and
See also Awareness; Empiricism; Intuition;

Truth

Value. See also Depth
Van Creveld
Varela, Francisco

autopoietic system theory of
on cognitivism
critique of
enactive paradigm of
on hierarchies

Vasubandhu
Vedanta Hindu traditions

Nagarjuna’s influence on
spiritual training and practice in
Western Vedanta

Victim feminism
Vijnanavada tradition
Violence
Vision-logic (planetary awareness)

associated freedoms
evolution/development of
language of
quest for
See also Left-Hand path; Transpersonal development

Voltaire

Wackenroder, Wilhelm
Wallace, Alfred
Wallon, Henri
Walsh, Neale
Warfare. See also Thanatos; Violence
Washburn, Michael
Waves (of consciousness). See Consciousness
“We” language (interior social awareness)

and consciousness
in Great Nest of Being
historical models for
Kant’s sphere of Practical Reason

Web of life constructs. See also Eco, the; Great Chain of Being; Mononature; Systems theory
Weber, Max
Weiss, Gerhard
Weizsacker, von, Ernst
Wharton, Thomas
Whitehead, Alfred North

on dullness of cosmos
on hierarchies
on integration drive (creativity)
on nature of God
on the “within”
vision-logic of
Whittaker. C. R.
Wholeness, wholes

correspondence among
and depth
and hierarchies
of individual holons
as omega point
reconciling with Autonomy
“Wholism,” limits/dangers of
See also Agency; Holarchies; Holons

Whyte, L. L.
Wiener, Norbert
Wilberforce, William
“Wild Men.” See Men’s movement
Winkelman, Michael
Wisdom, union with compassion
Witness (wakefulness). See also Emptiness; Spiritual awareness; Transpersonal Development
Wolf, Fred Alan
Wolff, Christian von
Wollstonecraft, Mary
Women. See Females
Women’s movement. See Feminism(ists)
Wordsworth, William
World Soul

growing awareness of
as a manifestation of self
misinterpretation of
and Over-Soul

Worldcentric identity

egocentrism, elitism of
morality and vision-logic of
and rationality
and utilitarians

Worldcentric pluralism
Worldspace(s)

and consciousness
intersubjective
linguistic structuring of

Worldview(s)

dualistic versus nondual
fractured
global, emergence of
magical, efforts to recreate

planetary consciousness
See also Cognitive development; Consciousness; Culture

Wundt, Wilhelm

Yogachara Buddhism
Yogis versus Saints

Zen Buddhism

boundaries in
Eros and Agape (karuna) in
Nagarjuna’s influence on
nondual awareness in
self-understanding
spiritual practice (zazen) in
negation/affirmation in

Zeno
Zimmerman, Michael
Zohar, Danah

Excerpt from The Essential Ken Wilber by Ken Wilber

eISBN  978-0-8348-2217-7

 
 

About This Book

Ken Wilber has been praised as one of the greatest thinkers of our time. His full-spectrum model of the stages of
human growth and development, from birth to enlightenment, have made him a leading theorist in the study of
human consciousness. Over the course of sixteen books, he has developed this theoretical system embracing the
essential truths of East and West, uniting ancient wisdom with modern science. It is the foundation for an integral
method of examining virtually any other field of study or endeavor: evolutionary theory, physics, anthropology,
sociology, psychoanalysis, religion, art,
in explaining complex
philosophical ideas, much of his work is written for a professional or academic audience and remains beyond the
reach of more casual readers. In this book, I have therefore excerpted short, accessible passages from his writings so
that people who have not read his more technical works might gain some appreciation for this important and
sometimes controversial thinker.

literature, and so on. But despite Wilber’s skill

This collection is not meant as a crash course in Ken Wilber; a complete and coherent picture of his thought would
be impossible to attain by reading short excerpts, since he has patiently developed his ideas over the course of
several books. However, there are many passages that can be enjoyed in themselves for informative, stimulating, or
inspirational reading.

As an appreciative reader who became acquainted with these writings in the course of my work as an editor for
Shambhala Publications, I selected nontechnical passages that impart the essence and flavor of Wilber’s writings and
that touch on his major concerns. I hope the selections will encourage readers to explore his ideas in greater depth.
An annotated list of his works at the back of this book is added as a guide for further reading.

Kendra Crossen Burroughs

The Divine Play

As Plotinus knew: Let the world be quiet. Let the heavens and the earth and the seas be still. Let the world be

waiting. Let the self-contraction relax into the empty ground of its own awareness, and let it there quietly die. See
how Spirit pours through each and every opening in the turmoil, and bestows new splendor on the setting Sun and
its glorious Earth and all its radiant inhabitants. See the Kosmos dance in Emptiness; see the play of light in all
creatures great and small; see finite worlds sing and rejoice in the play of the very Divine, floating on a Glory that
renders each transparent, flooded by a joy that refuses time or terror, that undoes the madness of the loveless self
and buries it in splendor.

Indeed, indeed: let the self-contraction relax into the empty ground of its own awareness, and let it there quietly
die. See the Kosmos arise in its place, dancing madly and divine, self-luminous and self-liberating, intoxicated by a
Light that never dawns nor ceases. See the worlds arise and fall, never caught in time or turmoil, transparent images
shimmering in the radiant Abyss. Watch the mountain walk on water, drink the Pacific in a single gulp, blink and a
billion universes rise and fall, breathe out and create a Kosmos, breathe in and watch it dissolve.

Let the ecstasy overflow and outshine the loveless self, driven mad with the torments of its self-embracing ways,
hugging mightily samsara’s spokes of endless agony, and sing instead triumphantly with Saint Catherine, “My being
is God, not by simple participation, but by a true transformation of my Being. My me is God!” And let the joy sing
with Dame Julian, “See! I am God! See! I am in all things! See! I do all things!” And let the joy shout with Hakuin,
“This very body is the Body of Buddha! and this very land the Pure Land!”

And this Earth becomes a blessed being, and every I becomes a God, and every We becomes God’s sincerest

worship, and every It becomes God’s most gracious temple.

And comes to rest that Godless search, tormented and tormenting. The knot in the Heart of the Kosmos relaxes to
allow its only God, and overflows the Spirit ravished and enraptured by the lost and found Beloved. And gone the
Godless destiny of death and desperation, and gone the madness of a life committed to uncare, and gone the tears
and terror of the brutal days and endless nights where time alone would rule.

And I-I rise to taste the dawn, and find that love alone will shine today. And the Shining says: to love it all, and love
it madly, and always endlessly, and ever fiercely, to love without choice and thus enter the All, to love it mindlessly
and thus be the All, embracing the only and radiant Divine: now as Emptiness, now as Form, together and forever,
the Godless search undone, and love alone will shine today.

[Sex, Ecology, Spirituality: 522–23]

The Message of the Mystics

The mystics ask you to take nothing on mere belief. Rather, they give you a set of experiments to test in your own

awareness and experience. The laboratory is your own mind, the experiment is meditation. You yourself try it, and
compare your test results with others who have also performed the experiment. Out of this consensually validated
pool of experiential knowledge, you arrive at certain laws of the spirit—at certain “profound truths,” if you will. And
the first is: God is. . . .

The stunning message of the mystics is that in the very core of your being, you are God. Strictly speaking, God is
neither within nor without—Spirit transcends all duality. But one discovers this by consistently looking within, until
“within” becomes “beyond.” The most famous version of this perennial truth occurs in the Chandogya Upanishad,
where it says, “In this very being of yours, you do not perceive the True; but there in fact it is. In that which is the
subtle essence of your own being, all that exists has its Self. An invisible and subtle essence is the Spirit of the whole
universe. That is the True, that is the Self, and thou, thou art That.”

Thou are That—tat tvam asi. Needless to say, the “thou” that is “That,” the you that is God, is not your individual
and isolated self or ego, this or that self, Mr. or Ms. So-and-so. In fact, the individual self or ego is precisely what
blocks the realization of the Supreme Identity in the first place. Rather, the “you” in question is the deepest part of
you—or, if you wish, the highest part of you—the subtle essence, as the Upanishad put it, that transcends your
mortal ego and directly partakes of the Divine. In Judaism it is called the ruach, the divine and supraindividual spirit
in each and every person, and not the nefesh, or the individual ego. In Christianity, it is the indwelling pneuma or
spirit that is of one essence with God, and not the individual psyche or soul, which at best can worship God. As
Coomaraswamy said, the distinction between a person’s immortal-eternal spirit and a person’s individual-mortal
soul (meaning ego) is a fundamental tenet of the perennial philosophy. I think this is the only way to understand, for
example, Christ’s otherwise strange remarks that a person could not be a true Christian “unless he hateth his own
soul.” It is only by “hating” or “throwing out” or “transcending” your mortal soul that you discover your immortal
spirit, one with All.

[Grace and Grit: 82]

What Is Meditation?

There are many ways to explain meditation, what it is, what it does, how it works. Meditation, it is said, is a way to

evoke the relaxation response. Meditation, others say, is a way to train and strengthen awareness; a method for
centering and focusing the self; a way to halt constant verbal thinking and relax the bodymind; a technique for
calming the central nervous system; a way to relieve stress, bolster self-esteem, reduce anxiety, and alleviate
depression.

All of those are true enough; meditation has been clinically demonstrated to do all of those things. But I would like
to emphasize that meditation itself is, and always has been, a spiritual practice. Meditation, whether Christian,
Buddhist, Hindu, Taoist, or Islamic, was invented as a way for the soul to venture inward, there ultimately to find a
supreme identity with Godhead. “The Kingdom of Heaven is within”—and meditation, from the very beginning, has
been the royal road to that Kingdom. Whatever else it does, and it does many beneficial things, meditation is first
and foremost a search for the God within.

I would say meditation is spiritual, but not religious. Spiritual has to do with actual experience, not mere beliefs;
with God as the Ground of Being, not a cosmic Daddy figure; with awakening to one’s true Self, not praying for one’s
little self; with the disciplining of awareness, not preachy and churchy moralisms about drinking and smoking and
sexing; with Spirit found in everyone’s Heart, not anything done in this or that church. . . .

Meditation is spiritual; prayer is religious. That is, petitionary prayer, in which I ask God to give me a new car, help
with my promotion, etc., is religious; it simply wishes to bolster the little ego in its wants and desires. Meditation, on
the other hand, seeks to go beyond the ego altogether; it asks nothing from God, real or imagined, but rather offers
itself up as a sacrifice toward a greater awareness.

Meditation, then, is not so much a part of this or that particular religion, but rather part of the universal spiritual
culture of all humankind—an effort to bring awareness to bear on all aspects of life. It is, in other words, part of what
has been called the perennial philosophy.

[Grace and Grit: 76]

The Perennial Philosophy

The perennial philosophy is the worldview that has been embraced by the vast majority of the world’s greatest

spiritual teachers, philosophers, thinkers, and even scientists. It’s called “perennial” or “universal” because it shows
up in virtually all cultures across the globe and across the ages. We find it in India, Mexico, China, Japan,
Mesopotamia, Egypt, Tibet, Germany, Greece. . . .

And wherever we find it, it has essentially similar features, it is in essential agreement the world over. We
moderns, who can hardly agree on anything, find this rather hard to believe. But as Alan Watts summarized the
available evidence: “Thus we are hardly aware of the extreme peculiarity of our own position, and find it difficult to
recognize the plain fact that there has otherwise been a single philosophical consensus of universal extent. It has
been held by [men and women] who report the same insights and teach the same essential doctrine whether living
today or six thousand years ago, whether from New Mexico in the Far West or from Japan in the Far East.”

This is really quite remarkable. I think, fundamentally, it’s a testament to the universal nature of these truths, to
the universal experience of a collective humanity that has everywhere agreed to certain profound truths about the
human condition and about its access to the Divine. . . .

So exactly what are some of the essentials of the perennial philosophy? How many profound truths or points of

agreement are there?

I’ll give seven of what I think are the most important. One, Spirit exists. Two, Spirit is found within. Three, most of
us don’t realize this Spirit within, however, because we are living in a world of sin, separation, and duality—that is,
we are living in a fallen or illusory state. Four, there is a way out of this fallen state of sin and illusion, there is a Path
to our liberation. Five, if we follow this Path to its conclusion, the result is a Rebirth or Enlightenment, a direct
experience
of Spirit within, a Supreme Liberation, which—six—marks the end of sin and suffering, and
which—seven—issues in social action of mercy and compassion on behalf of all sentient beings.

THE PERENNIAL PHILOSOPHY (the term was made famous by Huxley but coined by Leibniz)—the transcendental essence of
the great religions—has as its core the notion of advaita or advaya—“nonduality,” which means that reality is
neither one nor many, neither permanent nor dynamic, neither separate nor unified, neither pluralistic nor holistic.
It is entirely and radically above and prior to any form of conceptual elaboration. It is strictly unqualifiable. If it is to
be discussed at all, then, as W. T. Stace so carefully pointed out, it must involve paradoxical statements. So, it is true
that reality is one, but equally true that it is many; it is transcendent, but also immanent; it is prior to this world, but
it is not other to this world—and so on. Sri Ramana Maharshi had a perfect summary of the paradox of the ultimate:

[Grace and Grit: 77–78]

The world is illusory;
Brahman alone is real;
Brahman is the world.

For more information on this and other books from Shambhala, please visit www.shambhala.com.

[Eye to Eye: 153–54]

