PLANNING  AND  PREPARING 

MEASURING YOUR EXISTING SITE 

Transforming a bare or bedraggled yard  into 

a private paradise is more than a willy-nilly 

procedure.  It's  a step-by-step  operation  that in(cid:173)
volves  measuring  and  drawing  a  map  of  your 
site,  sketching  the  new  landscape  possibilities, 
choosing  a  final  plan,  and,  lastly,  staging  the 
work  according  to  personal  priorities,  logical 
work order,  and  budget. 

•  Taking  measurements 
A map of your lot may already exist. Check with 
the  builder  or  architect,  with  the  local  FHA, 
VA,  or  mortgage  office,  or  with  your  deed. 
Your town  or county  building department  may 
have  a property  survey  on  file,  too.  Check  any 
plan  for  accuracy,  especially  if it  is  old.  If you 
find  plans,  ask  also  for  any  topographical  data 
that may show grade changes  and drainage. 

If no plans  exist,  don't worry. Just follow the 
directions  below,  and  in  less  than  an  hour  you 
can do the measuring.  Or hire a surveyor (espe(cid:173)
cially  if  property  lines  are  in  question).  Most 
people, however, can do their yards themselves. 
Take  a notebook,  the  largest measuring tape 
you have,  and  a pen or pencil,  and  head  for the 
outdoors.  Someone to hold  your tape and  dou(cid:173)
ble-check  your  measurements  will  help  im(cid:173)
mensely, but you can do it alone. Just use an ice 
pick, a skewer, or a large rock to hold your tape. 
If  your  yard  is  large,  pace  off  the  measure(cid:173)
ments. To be most accurate, measure a strip  50 
or  100  feet  long.  Walk  this  and  count  your 
steps.  Then  convert  paces  into  feet  (for  exam(cid:173)
ple, 50 feet at 20 steps equals 21/2 feet per step). 
First,  make a rough  sketch of your house and 
property.  Next,  accurately  measure  property 
lines,  then  locate  the  house  by  measuring  from 
each  corner  perpendicular  to  the  two  nearest 
property  lines.  Finally,  measure  and  mark  all 
other structures  and  all  trees  and  plantings  you 
plan  to  keep.  Put  the  figures  on  your  rough 
sketch as you go. 

Now or later you will want to mark the eaves, 
first-floor doors and windows, downspouts,  me(cid:173)
ter  locations,  relevant  utility  and  water  lines, 
and  anything else  that may  affect your plans. 

38 

39 

PLANNING  AND  PREPARING 

DRAWING A MAP OF YOUR EXISTING SITE 

With  the  rough  sketch  of  your  property 

drawn  and  accurate  figures gathered  (see 

pages  38-39), you are well on the way to rede(cid:173)
signing  your  yard's  landscape.  Now,  go  back 
inside  and  turn  the  rough  sketch  of your  yard 
into a detailed, drawn-to-scale map. The sooner 
you do this,  the fewer trips you'll have to make 
back  out to  recheck any measurements. 

This base plan will give you a good picture of 

your yard as a whole. 

A drawing board  and T square will make the 

job easier, but they aren't essential. All you real(cid:173)
ly  need  are  any  flat  surface  (a  breadboard  or 
large  piece  of cardboard  makes  a  fine  portable 
one) and a piece of paper large enough to draw 
your yard on. Most yards up to a half acre can be 
drawn on graph paper  18 to 24 inches square or 
vellum  17  to 22  inches square. 

Use a scale of 1:4 (1  inch equals 4 feet or 1/4 
inch equals  1 foot) for a small yard down to 1:20 
(1  inch  equals  20  feet)  for  a  half-acre  lot.  The 
larger the second number of the scale, the small(cid:173)
er everything  will  appear on paper. 

Graph  paper  and  vellum  come  with  4,  8,  or 

10  light  grids  per  inch.  These  will  not  repro(cid:173)
duce  on  a blueprint  but will  be  helpful prior  to 
that stage. 

If your  yard  is  very  large,  you  may  want  to 
make one map of the whole yard at a small scale 

40 

Join  them  for  lines.  Mark  the  trunk  positions  of 
the  trees  and  shrubs  you  plan  to  keep.  You  also 
may  want  to  sketch  in  the  present  branch  lines 
with  thin  but  solid  lines  and  keep  the  possible 
future  spread  lines  in  mind. 

first,  then  later  make  separate  plans  of  individ(cid:173)
ual  areas  at  a  larger  scale. 

As  an  aid,  you  can  use  a  professional  scale 
(see photo, opposite, top).  An architect's scale is 
calibrated  in  eighths  of an  inch,  an engineer's  in 
tenths.  You  can  buy  one  scale  that  combines 
both.  Or  you  can  just  use  a  ruler. 

Tape  your paper  to  your  surface  with  a  sturdy 

but  removable  tape  such  as  masking  tape. 

Draw  an  arrow  pointing  north.  You  can,  of 
course,  fill  this  in  later,  but  it  is  best  to  have  the 
north  point  at  the  top  or  side  of your  paper  for 
quick  reference.  It  will  tell  you  much  about  the 
sun  patterns  and  govern  many  plant  and  placing 
decisions  (see  pages  96-113). 

Then,  using  pencil,  draw  your  map,  starting 
with  the  property  lines.  Fill  in  the  lines  of  the 
house  and  other  structures.  Measure  with  scale, 
compass,  or  ruler  and  make  dots  on  the  plan. 

41 

PLANNING  AND  PREPARING 

DRAWING A MAP OF YOUR EXISTING SITE 

Having drawn your base map, you now have 

done  more  professional  landscaping  than 
most people ever accomplish. The next step is to 
tape a piece of tracing paper over your base plan 
and  go  outside  again. 

This  time,  on  the  tracing  paper,  make  notes 
about your yard,  similar to  those shown  below. 
Indicate  any  feature  that  may  affect  your  land(cid:173)
scape decisions:  sun, wind, good and bad views, 
privacy  needs,  soil,  topography,  and  any  other 
problems or special features your yard presents. 
Put in arrows to indicate directions or intensity. 
Also include here any notes about the adjoin(cid:173)
ing properties that may be relevant to your plan: 
nearby trees,  for example,  or noise,  erosion,  or 
drainage problems. 

Next, to make sure you fully analyze your lot, 
go back indoors.  Check the views from the win(cid:173)
dows  in  the  rooms  where  you  spend  the  most 

time,  and  from  your  entry  ways,  noting  all  the 
pluses and  minuses  of each view. 

Get  out  any  lists  of likes  and  dislikes  you've 
noted  about your yard  over the years  (see page 
22).  Write  everything  of  importance  on  the 
piece  of tracing paper. 

If you  are  doing this  plan  after studying  your 
yard for a full cycle of seasons,  you are ready to 
proceed.  If  not,  the  plan  will  help  you  notice 
more keenly how such features as sun, shadows, 
wind,  and  views  change  with  the  time  of  day 
and time- of year. Put your plan in a handy spot 
so you can add  to it as  needed. 

Only  after doing  such  a plan  can  you put the 
information  in  the  rest  of  this  book  into  the 
climate  and  context of your  yard.  Combine  the 
possibilities  with  your  own  realities,  and  you 
will  make  decisions  that  will  enhance  the  best 
and  change  the  worst  landscaping  features. 

42 

DESIGNING YOUR NEW LANDSCAPE 

The initial design stage is the most important, 

creative,  exciting,  and  forgiving  of  all  the 
landscaping steps. Let it be the most fun as well. 
The process is a simple one: Lay tracing paper 
over  your  base  plan,  sketch  all  sorts  of  ideas, 
then  select or change  ideas  based  on  how  they 
fit together and how they solve the problems or 
accent  the  features  you  highlighted  on  your 
problem plan  (see  opposite). 

•  Ideas 
Be sure to give your plan time to evolve. You'll 
find that ideas may seem limited at first, but that 
they  multiply  as  you  play  with  them  and  they 
interact with  each  other.  (See  pages  22  and  24 
for  hints  on generating  ideas.) 

You'll  want  to  decide  early  on  if  there's  a 
single  landscape  style—formal,  natural,  English 
cottage,  etc.—you'd  like  to adopt.  To  help you 

with  this  decision,  check  to  see  whether  your 
ideas seem to be tending in one direction. Once 
you've  selected  a  style,  you  can  more  readily 
choose and reject ideas. This saves you time and 
helps you  develop  a more unified  design. 

•  Bubble  tracings 
At  the  start,  instead  of  sketching  specific  ideas 
on the tracing paper, draw bubbles representing 
the  possible  general  use  areas  you  see  for  the 
yard:  entry,  outdoor  living,  service,  etc.  (see 
illustration,  below).  Most  of the  front  and  per(cid:173)
haps  some  of  the  side,  for  example,  could  be 
entry area.  Most of the back and perhaps part of 
a side yard could  be reserved  for outdoor living 
and  entertaining.  Drawing  such  bubbles  keeps 
you  from  thinking  in  too  many  specifics  too 
early on in the process. 

43 

PLANNING  AND  PREPARING 

DESIGNING YOUR NEW LANDSCAPE, 

As  you  do  your  bubble  tracings  of general 

use  areas,  you  may  also  want  to  cut  out 
some  smaller  bubbles—from  any  kind  of slight(cid:173)
ly  thicker  paper—to  represent  areas  that  will 
have  a  specific  use,  say  a  patio,  deck,  or  pool. 
You can move these patterns around  easily,  try(cid:173)
ing  different  arrangements  within  the  broader 
space you've allotted  to  that general use. 

Be sure when you're considering the general 
uses  for your yard  that you  set aside  space for a 
service area or two (see pages 232-251). These 
are  the areas  in your landscape  that will accom(cid:173)
modate  everything  from  trash  cans,  boats,  and 
drying clothes,  to pets and  fireplace wood.  Try 
to  put  these  service  areas  in  the  least  conspicu(cid:173)
ous  but most convenient spots possible. 

As you sketch the bubbles and as you begin to 
draw more  specific ideas  on  your tracing paper, 
don't forget  to  refer  to  your problem  plan  (see 
page  42).  Double-check  all  dimensions  to  be 
sure the pieces  you're  considering still fit in the 
whole.  Refer, too, to any lists you made of your 
family's  outdoor needs.  Ask often  what the  rest 
of the family thinks about the plan.  Considering 
everyone's ideas  and  desires  will help in assess(cid:173)
ing and  implementing  the plan,  and  in  the  ulti(cid:173)
mate  success  of the  landscape. 

Concentrate on problems and solutions at this 
stage,  not  fine  detail.  Think  of  the  plants  as 
architectural  forms:  background  or  specimen 
trees,  high  or  low  screens.  Save  the  decisions 
about varieties  for later. 

•  Three-dimensional  thinking 
Remember that your scale plan  is  accurate,  but 
flat.  Expand  on  it  by  walking  around  the  yard 
and pacing off proposed  changes,  and  by sitting 
on  the  step  and  visualizing the finished  scene. 
Use  some  props,  too.  Lay  out  hoses  to  indi(cid:173)
cate  the  edges  of patios.  Put up  sheets  to  mark 
the height offences.  Go out after dark and  shine 
a flashlight to give the  effect of night lighting. 

44 

Draw  some  simple  elevation  sketches.  They 
don't  have  to  be  as  accurate  as  those  shown 
below,  though  you  can  use  the  same  tools  and 
methods  you  used  for  your  base  plan  to  make 
your  elevation  sketches  just  as  detailed;  and  the 
greater the  detail,  the  easier  it  will  be  for  you  to 
picture  the  results. 

Or,  for  a  quick  elevation  view,  blow  up  a 
photo  of  your  house,  lay  tracing  paper  over  it, 
then  sketch  in  possible  changes  (see  bottom 
photo,  opposite). 

This  may  be  a  good  time  to  make  separate, 
large-scale  plans  of various  sections  of the  yard. 

At  some  point,  you  also  may  want  to  draw  up 
specific  plans  indicating  lighting,  drainage,  or 
other special  construction  needs.  These  detailed 
plans  will  greatly  help  those  doing  the  work. 

•  Long-term  t h i n k i ng 
When  testing  the  pros  and  cons  of  all  ideas, 
think of how  things  will  look  not just at  the  time 
the  work  is  completed,  but  also  in  five  years,  in 
10  years,  in  25  years.  Consider,  too,  how  your 
landscaping  needs  may  change  over  time.  After 
all,  landscaping  is  an evolutionary art form  that's 
never  really  finished. 

VSimple elevation 
drawings like these can 
help you make decisions 
and better visualize the 
results of the plans. 
Note how the height 
and spread of planting 
materials relate to the 
size of the house. 

45 

PLANNING  AND  PREPARING 

SCHEDULING THE WORK 

Now you are ready to get down to the work. 

The  beauty  of  having  a  plan  is  that  you 
know where you are going. Even if it takes years 
to get there,  all  of your work and  expense  will 
be taking you  in  the  right direction.  Relax  and 
enjoy  the process. 

•  Where  to  start 
Common  sense  will  dictate  some  of  the  work 
schedule you now should add to your notebook. 
Most  work  in  most  climates  will  be  seasonal, 
with major planting in spring and fall.  Here are 
some guidelines. 
•  If  landscape  destruction  is  involved,  do  that 
first.  Clear the  site. 
•  Do  rough  grading  and  the  installation  of  a 
swimming pool, drainage system, and all under(cid:173)
ground utilities next.  Prepare any large areas of 
soil while you  have the equipment there. 
•  If possible,  build  structures  next.  If they  are 
on  the  waiting  list,  keep  their areas  and  equip(cid:173)
ment needs in mind as you plant. 

•  Trees  take  time 
All the money in the world cannot buy the years 
it takes to grow a large tree. Protect any existing 
choice trees.  You  may want to keep less-choice 
trees for the time being or plant temporary, fast-
growing  trees  until  better  kinds  grow  large 
enough.  You  may  also  want  to  move  existing 
plants  that are  small  enough  to  withstand  trans(cid:173)
planting (you can circle the fingers of one hand 
around  their trunks;  see page 61). 

When  buying  those  vital  trees  for  framing 
and shade, get the largest you can afford as soon 
as  you  can.  They  can  settle  in  and  grow  while 
you are doing the  other work. 

In  distant  spots,  start  smaller  trees  and  put 
mulch,  ground  covers,  flowers,  or  vegetables 
around  them  until  they  spread. 

•  Consider  costs 
You  probably  have  been  gauging  costs  instinc(cid:173)
tively during the planning stages. Now it is time 
to  work  up  specific  figures. 

50 

Real-estate  agents  consider  it  reasonable  to 
spend  10  to  15  percent of the cost of the house 
and lot on landscaping, not including such large 
improvements as pools and patio roofs. 

If  you  keep  your  landscaping  costs  in  this 
range, most of the expense is likely to boost the 
value of your property.  Some  of the  work,  too, 
will  immediately or eventually  reduce  the  costs 
of  heating  and  cooling.  And  all  will  make  an 
appreciable  difference  in  your  quality  of  life, 
comfort,  and  health. 

Most  plans  will  call  for  some  work  that  is 
beyond  the  capability,  time,  or  desire  of  the 
homeowner  to  do  personally.  See  page  28  for 
available  help.  Then  check  your  local  Yellow 
Pages.  Begin  talking  to  contractors  or  doing 
some  comparison  shopping for materials. 

To  get  a  realistic  picture  of  costs,  generally 
you're  best off doubling any  number you  come 
up with initially.  Figure you can save about half 
of the hired cost if you do a job yourself, if you 
can.  Stinting on  such  things  as  erosion  control, 
walls,  utilities,  and  such could  cost you more in 
the  long  run  or jeopardize  your family's  safety. 

•  Work in  stages 
Whether  you  do  your  landscaping  work  over  a 
series of weekends or years,  breaking large jobs 
into small segments makes your goals attainable. 
Personal  priorities  can  prevail.  Ask  yourself 
these questions: 
•  What existing conditions can I live with long(cid:173)
est?  In  a  new  home,  a  lawn  will  reduce  glare, 
summer  temperatures,  erosion,  and  tracking 
into  the  house.  An  old  lawn,  however  weedy, 
may do until the patio and walks are in place. 
•  Which  improvements  will  contribute  most  to 
my  use  and  enjoyment  of  my  yard?  You  will 
need  a service area right away. 
•  Will  a new entryway that visitors and passers-
by see every day mean  more,  or should  I  build 
the deck that will expand my house and outdoor 
living? The most satisfaction and success usually 
comes from concentrating on one area at a time. 
Then  let  your  enjoyment  of that  area  spur  you 
on  to and  through  the next stage. 

51 

PLANNING  AND  PREPARING 

SOLVING DRAINAGE PROBLEMS 

Faulty drainage can play havoc with the best-

laid landscaping plan,  so pay close attention 
to  where  water  on  your  property  is  coming 
from,  and  where  it's  going.  Correct  any  drain(cid:173)
age  difficulties  before  you  begin  a project,  and 
consider  how  the  project  will  affect  existing 
drainage patterns  when  it's  completed. 

Where you live determines,  in part,  your ap(cid:173)
proach to drainage. In dry regions, you'll proba(cid:173)
bly  want  your  site  to  retain  as  much  rainfall  as 
possible; in temperate climates, you may need to 
get  rid  of excess  runoff. 

Though water may  be water to most of us, to 
landscapers  it  falls  into  two  categories:  surface 
water,  which  flows  on  top  of the  ground,  and 
subsurface water, which seeps through the soil. 

•  On  the  surface 
The  best  way  to  check  out  the  surface-water 
situation  at  your  house  is  to  wait  for  a  heavy 
rain,  then  go  out  and  get  your  feet  wet.  The 
illustration  at  left  identifies  the  points  where 
you  might  find  water  either  puddling  or  run(cid:173)
ning off.  Follow runoff to see if it's coursing into 
a  natural  drainage  system  (such  as  a  stream), 
ending  up  in  a  storm  sewer,  or  turning  a  low 
spot in your yard  into a swampy pond. 

Sculpting  the  terrain  so  it diverts  the  flow  or 
installing  drainage  pipe,  as  explained  opposite 
and  on page  54,  will correct most surface-water 
problems, especially around the foundation.  For 
solutions to more severe drainage situations, see 
page  55.  And  to  learn  how  to  check  erosion 
caused  by surface water,  see pages 62-77. 

Snow,  driven  by  prevailing  winds,  also  can 
create drainage problems. Tramp around after a 
winter storm and note whether drifts and ice are 
building up at points around the outside of your 
house.  Consider  buffering  these  with  fencing, 
plantings,  or both. 

52 

•  Going  underground 
Surface  water  that  doesn't  run  off  soon  perco(cid:173)
lates  through  the  soil  to become subsurface wa(cid:173)
ter.  Even  though  you  can't  see  it,  subsurface 
drainage still affects  your landscaping scheme. 

One  way  to  assess  subsurface  drainage  is  to 
test  your  soil's  porosity.  To  do  this,  dig  a  hole 
about 2 feet deep and fill it with water. After the 
water  drains  out,  fill  the  hole  again.  If all  the 
water disappears within 24 hours, the soil is too 
porous.  If water remains after 48 hours, the soil 
is  too  dense.  If the  water  level  gradually  rises, 
the water table is too high. 

Some  subsurface  drainage  problems  can  be 

cured  by  improving  surface  drainage—direct(cid:173)
ing  runoff  to  parched  areas,  for  example,  or 
away  from  low  spots.  Other  subsurface  prob(cid:173)
lems call for below-the-surface solutions, such as 
correcting  soil  that  drains  too  poorly  or  too 
quickly,  or  installing  underground  drain  lines, 
as  shown  at  lower  right  and  discussed  in  more 
detail on page  54. 

•  Wet  basement 
If the floor or walls of your basement are chroni(cid:173)
cally  wet, 
improving  surface  or  subsurface 
drainage,  or  a  combination  of  the  two,  could 
dry them  out.  The  box at right shows  the  steps 
to  take.  But first,  here's  how  to evaluate  which 
steps  are  appropriate  for your  situation. 
•  Seepage oozing through a basement wall at or 
near grade level is probably the result of a grade 
or downspout problem, both easily corrected, as 
shown at right. 
•  Leaks  farther  down  the  wall  or  at  floor  level 
usually indicate that subsurface water is building 
up around the foundation and forcing its way in 
through  cracks.  Dig  down  to  the  level  of  the 
leaks—to the footings for floor-level leaks—and 
install perforated  drain  lines  to  carry  the  excess 
water away. 
•  Subterranean water starts out as a thin, barely 
visible  film  of moisture  on  the  basement  floor. 
A spring or high water table is forcing water up 
from  below  under  high  pressure,  turning  your 
basement  into  a  well.  Drain  lines  around  the 
footings  may  help  reduce  subterranean  water, 
but you also may need to install a sump pump. 

53 

PLANNING  AND  PREPARING 

SOLVING DRAINAGE PROBLEMS 

Pages  52-53  help identify areas where good 

landscaping  could  improve  surface  or  sub(cid:173)
surface  drainage.  Here,  let's  look  at  specific 
ways you can recontour the terrain or siphon off 
underground  water. 

•  Reshaping  slopes 
Plan  carefully  before  you  cut into  a  slope.  Aim 
to either slow runoff or redirect it; attempting to 
dam  up  water  only  causes  flooding.  If  you're 
redirecting  runoff,  make  sure  you  don't  dis(cid:173)
charge it onto a neighbor's property, which may 
be a code violation  and  could  cause ill feelings. 
Most  codes  permit  dumping  rainwater  into  a 
storm  sewer,  but not a sanitary sewer. 

Locate  swales  at  the  top  and  bottom  of  a 
slope,  as  shown  at  upper  left.  Make  trenches 
about  as  wide  as  a  spade,  using  the  earth  you 
excavate to create berms along the swales' lower 
edges.  If swales  will  cause  a  mowing problem, 
plant  them  with  a hardy ground  cover. 

Baffles  impede  water's  descent,  giving  it 
more time to soak into the slope. Install them as 
shown  at  lower  left.  Baffles  also  can  control 
erosion,  as  can  bevels  and  contours  (for  more 
information,  see pages  66-69). 

•  Installing  drain  lines 
Flexible  plastic  drainpipe  (see  page  53)  offers 
one good  material for underground  drain  lines. 
Clay  tiles  are  another.  For  either,  dig  a  trench 
about  4  inches  wider  than  the  pipe's  diameter 
and at least a foot deep. Slope the trench 1/8 inch 
or  more  per foot  of horizontal  run. 

Lay  2  inches  of  gravel  in  the  trench,  then 
install  the pipe.  If it's  perforated,  lay pipe  with 
the  holes  down  to  keep  soil  from  clogging  the 
line.  Set clay tiles  end  to end  and  cover tops of 
the joints  with roofing paper to keep out soil. 

After  installing  drain  lines,  cover  them  with 
several  more  inches  of gravel,  then  replace  soil 
and  sod.  As  an  alternative,  you  can  dispense 
with  the  soil  and  sod  and  fill  the  trench  to  the 
brim with gravel. 

54 

DEALING WITH  SPECIAL DRAINAGE PROBLEMS 
Contouring  and  installing  underground 
drain  lines  remedy  most  drainage  prob(cid:173)
lems,  but  some  situations  require  more 
extensive  measures. 

What  do  you  do,  for example,  about  a 
low  spot  where  water  chronically  collects? 
What  if your  yard  has  compacted,  poorly 
draining  soil,  or  a  discharge  from  drain 
lines that can't reach  a disposal area?  Is 
your  soil  too  dry  to  support  plants? 

Each  of these  situations  calls  for  one  of 

the  special  approaches  listed  below. 

•  Catch  basins 
Drain  a  swampy  low  spot  with  a catch  ba(cid:173)
sin  like  the  one  illustrated  at  right.  Water 
falls  through  a grate  at ground  level  and 
collects until a sloping (1/8 inch per foot of 
run)  drainpipe  can carry  it off to  a  proper 
discharge area.  A  sediment trap  snags 
leaves  and  other  debris  that  also  wash 
through  the  grate. 

You  can  buy  a ready-made  catch  basin 

or  you  can  form  and  pour  your  own. 
Choose  its  location  and  the  location  of the 
drainpipe carefully,  as  well  as  the dis(cid:173)
charge  point. 

Because  sediment  piles  up  in  catch  ba(cid:173)

sins,  they  need  periodic  cleaning. 

•  Drainage  chimneys 
Improve  the  absorbency  of dense,  slow-
draining  soil  with  drainage  chimneys.  Dig 
8- to  12-inch-diameter  holes,  spaced  2  to 
4  feet apart.  Make  each  hole  deep  enough 
to penetrate  the  hard  soil  up  top,  but 
don't go  down  to  the  water  table.  Fill  the 
holes  with  gravel  or  crushed  rock.  To 
hide  the  chimneys  from view  and  give 
your  yard  a  finished  look,  top  off  the. 
holes  with  sod  or  other plants. 

•  Dry  wells 
What  can  you  do  with  drain  lines—from 
downspouts,  for  instance,  or  along  a  foun(cid:173)
dation—that  can't  be  emptied  into  a  storm 
sewer  or  natural  drainage  area?  Answer: 
Connect  them  to  a  dry  well,  which  is  sim(cid:173)
ply  a  large  hole  filled  with  rock  and  cov(cid:173)
ered  with  a  concrete  slab  or  other 
impervious  material. 

Local  codes,  pegged  to  regional  rainfall 
data,  dictate  the  size  of dry wells,  but 2  to 
4  feet  wide  by  3  feet  deep  is  typical. 

•  Irrigation 
Contouring  and  underground  drain  lines 
can  bring  water  to  dry  areas  of your  lot, 
but  if there's  simply  not  enough  rainfall 
to  keep  your  lawn  and  gardens  green, 
you'll  need  to  irrigate  them.  One  good 
way  to  do  this  is  with  an  underground 
sprinkler  system  that automatically  sup(cid:173)
plies  moisture  at  optimum  times  of day. 
To  learn  about  installing  an  underground 
sprinkler system,  see  pages  262-265. 

55 

PLANNING  AND  PREPARING 

CORRECTING THE  GRADE 

Improving  surface-water  drainage,  adding 

contours  to a flat site,  and  digging for a new 
walk  or  patio  all  require  some  remodeling  of 
your lot's topography. Making changes in grade 
is  the necessary—and  sometimes  arduous—first 
step in a wide variety of landscaping projects. 

Work  out  a  complete  grading  plan,  from  lot 
line  to  lot  line,  before  you  begin  excavating. 
This  way  you  can  conserve  soil  and  effort  by 
moving  earth  from  high  spots  to  low  ones.  A 
comprehensive grading plan also can save mon(cid:173)
ey  if  you  must  order  additional  soil  or  have 
excess  hauled  away;  many  suppliers  and  truck(cid:173)
ers  add  a surcharge  for quantities  of less  than  5 
cubic yards (for more about purchasing soil,  see 
the opposite page). 

For  safety's  sake,  mark  the  locations  of  all 
underground telephone, gas,  sewer,  water, and 
other  utility  lines  before  digging.  Many  utility 
companies  will  come  out  and  mark  their  lines 
for  you,  usually  at  no  charge.  Also,  file  with 
your  building  department  for  any  permits  you 
might  need. 

•  Moving  earth 
All  but  very  major  regrading  can  be  accom(cid:173)
plished with a pick,  shovel,  rake,  wheelbarrow, 
and  other  simple  hand  tools.  To  make  the  job 
easier,  consider  renting  equipment  such  as  a 
power  tiller  to  break  up  the  soil  or a  front-end-
loading garden  tractor to push  it around. 

If you decide to do  the job the old-fashioned 
way  (and  give  your  body  a  modern-day  work(cid:173)
out), plan short sessions of digging and hauling. 
Spread them out over several weekends,  if need 
be.  Dig  when  soil  is  slightly  moist,  neither 
heavily laden with water nor caked and unyield(cid:173)
ing.  To  conserve  strength,  don't  overload  the 
shovel or wheelbarrow, and lay a path of planks 
from excavation  to fill  sites. 

Professional excavators can move a surprising 

amount of earth in a few days.  Be warned, how(cid:173)
ever,  that heavy machinery  can  do lots  of dam(cid:173)
age  to  landscaping  around  the  area  to  be 

56 

excavated—not  a  problem  for  jobs  with  easy 
street access, such as a driveway, but you proba(cid:173)
bly  wouldn't  want  a  heavy  tractor  crunching 
across an established  lawn or garden. 

•  Laying out a slope 
To  drain  properly,  any  grading  you  do  must 
slope away from the  house or other structure at 
a  rate  of  no  less  than  lA  inch  per  foot.  With 
rough  recontouring  projects,  you  can  visually 
estimate  the  fall,  making  sure  that  it  doesn't 
drain toward  areas  where water would puddle. 
For greater precision, use stakes, string, and a 
level,  as  shown  opposite  and  on  pages  74-75. 
Drive  stakes  at  the  top  and  bottom  of the  new 
slope, stretch string between the stakes, and lev(cid:173)
el  it.  Measure  the  string's  length.  Finally,  slide 
the string down the lower stake at least 1/4 inch 
for every foot of length.  Bear in mind  that even 
a nearly level project, such as a patio, must have 
some pitch to it. 

•  Making the  grade 
After you've determined the slope, grading pro(cid:173)
ceeds  in  three  phases.  First  you  strip  away  the 
sod,  if any,  shovel  up  topsoil,  and  set  the  two 
aside  for  reuse.  Next,  you  establish  the  rough 
grade  by  removing  or  adding  subsoil.  Finally, 
you  replace  the topsoil,  smooth  it,  then  lay  sod 
or  plant. 

Skim  sod  by  slicing  into  it  with  a  pointed 

spade  held  almost parallel  to  the ground.  Sepa(cid:173)
rate  sod  from  the  soil  underneath  with  short, 
jabbing  strokes,  rolling  it  up  as  you go.  If you 
have  lots  of  sod  to  deal  with,  rent  a  power-
driven sod cutter.  As you remove topsoil under 
the sod, chop it up to destroy any grass roots. 

Attack subsoil next, driving the spade into the 

earth at about a 45-degree angle.  Push the han(cid:173)
dle  downward,  then  lift  and  pitch  soil  into  a 
wheelbarrow or low spot. After moving the sub(cid:173)
soil,  break it up  into chunks  measuring an  inch 
or less. If you encounter rocks, split them with a 

sledge or use them as fill.  Mound  the fill slight(cid:173)
ly, then compact it until it's even with surround(cid:173)
ing undisturbed  soil. 

After  you're  satisfied  with  the  rough  grade, 
spread out the topsoil you've saved  and  smooth 
it with a steel rake. 

•  Purchasing  soil 
If  your  grading  project  will  require  extensive 
filling,  you  may  need  to  buy  additional  earth. 
First, determine how many cubic yards to order; 
1  cubic  yard  will  cover  300  square  feet  to  a 
depth of 1  inch. 

Look for soil that approximates the texture of 
the  existing  soil.  Differing  textures  can  cause 
drainage  problems  because  water  does  not 
move  easily  from  one  soil  texture  to  another. 
Soil  quality  and  prices  vary  widely,  so  check 
with several suppliers, and be sure to take a look 
at the  merchandise. 

Test  soil  by  crumbling  it  in  your  hand.  Soil 
that  breaks  down  easily  into  uniform  particles 
works  best.  Avoid  compacted,  sandy,  or  poor-
quality  earth,  which  could  be  contaminated  by 
weed  seeds  and  other soil problems. 

Before  the  soil  is  delivered,  plan  a  route  for 
the  truck  so  you  can  get  the  load  as  near  as 
possible to the work site.  If a truck can back into 
the  site,  the  driver  can  spread  out  the  earth, 
saving you  lots  of work. 

57 

PLANNING  AND  PREPARING 

LAYING OUT PROJECT SITES 

Now—after  you've  assessed  your  landscap(cid:173)

ing  needs,  developed  a  plan,  and  solved 
any  drainage  problems  your  lot  might  have— 
comes the moment when you  begin  to get your 
ideas  off the  ground.  The  chapters  that  follow 
proceed  step-by-step  through  dozens  of  land(cid:173)
scaping  projects—everything  from  rustic  paths 
to  raised  decks.  But  all  start  in  the  same  way: 
You  mark  the  site,  then  square  and  stake  cor(cid:173)
ners.  Let's take a look at how to lay the ground(cid:173)
work  for  a  successful  project. 

•  Siting basics 
To lay out the site for a landscaping project, arm 
yourself with  two  50-=foot  tape  measures,  chalk 
line, a line level, mason's level, plumb bob, car(cid:173)
penter's square, sledge, and stakes made by cut(cid:173)
ting points on the ends of 1x3s. You'll also need 
a  helper  and  chalk,  lime,  or  sand.  The  job 
doesn't  take  long,  but  don't  rush:  A  measure(cid:173)
ment  that's  off by just  an  inch  at  the  outset  can 
compound  itself into  feet  down  the  line. 

Begin  by marking an  approximate outline of 
the project's  boundaries  with  stakes  and  string. 
Use  rope  or  garden  hose  to  mark  curves.  This 
outline  gives  you  your  first  full-scale  look  at 

58 

how  a new  fence,  patio,  or other improvement 
will  affect  its  surroundings.  If  you  don't  like 
what you see, making changes at this point is as 
easy  as  pulling  up  stakes  and  erasing  a  line  on 
your landscape plan. 

Once  you're  ready  to  formally  measure  and 
mark the layout, consider using batter boards to 
locate  any  corners,  as  shown  opposite,  bottom 
right.  Batter  boards  make  special  sense  for 
decks,  fences,  and  other projects  where  height 
or  slope  is  a factor.  Batter  boards  also  come  in 
handy  for  in-ground  projects  like  patios  if you 
prefer  to  remove  the  strings  for  digging,  then 
put them up again to see if edges have strayed. 
Just  run  string  from  batter  board  to  batter 
board,  and—if  you're  building  an  attached 
structure—from  batter  boards  to  the  house. 

If your terrain is level and  so is  your project, 
you can dispense with  batter boards and  lay out 
the  project  with  strings  and  stakes.  In  fact,  if 
your design has a curve or two, this is just about 
the  only  way  to  go.  For  straight  edges,  simply 
stretch  strings  from  stakes  at  each  end.  For 
curves,  stake garden  hose  in position.  For pre(cid:173)
cisely radiused curves, use a stake and string as a 
compass.  Locate  the  stake  equidistant from  the 
beginning and end of the curve,  then swing the 
string in an arc, driving stakes at 1-foot intervals. 
(Note:  When putting  up  strings  for concrete 
patios and  walks and other projects  that require 
forms, be sure to mark a perimeter several inch(cid:173)
es outside the actual planned slab to allow room 
for form  boards  and  stakes.) 

•  Checking  corners 
Whether  you  lay  out  your  project  with  simple 
stakes  or  use  batter  boards,  you'll  want  to  be 
sure  that  any  corners  are  exactly  square  before 
proceeding.  Use a simple geometric formula. 

As you probably recall learning in school, the 
square  of  the  hypotenuse  in  a  right  triangle 
equals the sum of the squares of the two shorter 
sides.  This  means  that  if one  leg  of a  triangle 
measures 3 feet (3 squared  =  9) and the other 4 
feet (4 squared  =  16), the diagonal hypotenuse 
must be exactly  5  feet (square root of 9  +  16). 

Using  the  principle  of  the  3-4-5  triangle,  you 
can check a corner for square as shown at upper 
right.  If necessary, adjust strings and remeasure. 

After you turn a second  corner and plot loca(cid:173)

tions for a third  run of posts, as you would with 
a square or rectangular structure such as a deck, 
measure  diagonally  from  both  sets  of opposite 
corners; these measurements must be equal. 

•  Marking  for  digging 
For patios  and  other projects  requiring  excava(cid:173)
tion,  once  you  know  the  corners  are  at  right 
angles,  sprinkle powdered  chalk,  lime,  or  sand 
along  the  strings,  as  shown  opposite.  These 
marks will guide you as you dig. Also adjust the 
string to the proper grade so you can use it as a 
reference  when  determining  how  deep  to  dig. 
For projects that require posts, measure along 
the strings, drop a plumb bob, and drive stakes. 

59 

PLANNING  AND  PREPARING 

ERECTING POSTS 

After the site is  laid  out, the next step in  the 

construction  of  many  landscaping  projects 

is  the erection of posts. 

Posts  for  a  deck,  fence,  or  other  structure 
must  be  absolutely plumb  and  firmly  rooted  in 
the  earth  or  bolted  to  a  concrete  footing.  To 
ward  off rot,  posts  should  be  of heartwood  or 
pressure-treated  lumber,  and  steps  should  be 
taken  to assure  that water drains  away from  the 
posts.  To prevent the posts from  heaving,  post-
holes must extend  below  the  local frost line. 

•  Step-by-step 
Begin  by  digging  holes  at  the  points  you've 
staked  (see pages  58-59).  Choose your digging 
equipment  based  partly  on  how  hard  or  rocky 
your soil is, and partly on how deep you must go 
to reach your area's frost line.  For shallow holes 
in soft earth,  use a clamshell digger like the one 
in the photo at upper right; for hard soil or holes 
deeper  than  about  30  inches,  you'll  need  a 
hand- or motor-powered auger. Most rental out(cid:173)
lets offer all  three  of these tools. 

Next,  you'll  need  to  determine  whether you 
want  to  set  the  posts  in  the  ground,  as  shown 
here,  or  on  top  of  separate  footings.  Separate 
footings  require  more  concrete  because  you 
must  completely  fill  the  postholes.  You'll  also 
need  to  insert  anchors  into  the  tops  of the  wet 
footings  (see pages  100  and  159).  Local  codes 
may dictate one method  or the other. 

To  set  posts  in  the  ground,  first  soak  the 
holes,  then drop in 2  to 3  inches  of gravel.  Put 
tubular forms in the holes, if you like, so you can 
extend the concrete above ground, which helps 
keep  surface  water away from  the posts. 

After you set each post in place, adjust until it 
is plumb in two directions, then secure the post 
with  two  diagonal  braces  nailed  to  the  post.  If 
necessary,  use  string tied  to  end  posts  to  check 
the alignment of intermediate posts. 

Recheck that  the posts  are plumb,  then pour 
concrete  into  the  holes,  poking  with  a  rod  to 
remove  air  pockets.  At  the  top  of the  hole  or 
form,  round  off the  concrete.  Let  the  concrete 
cure  24  hours  before  doing any  other work. 

60 

Most  sizable  landscaping  projects  demand 

that you  first  tear  out  a  sizable  amount of 
existing  landscaping.  Aim  to  reuse  what  you 
can—and  decide  in  advance what you're going 
to  do  with  the  debris  you  don't  need.  If more 
than  a  few  cubic  yards  of  branches,  bushes, 
earth,  or  other  materials  must  go  to  a  landfill, 
consider renting  a refuse  container. 

Leave  big  or  dangerous  jobs,  such  as  major 

grading  and  removing  big  trees,  to  profession(cid:173)
als with the equipment and know-how to handle 
them.  You  can  also  rent  a  power-driven  sod 
cutter,  mulcher,  small  tractor,  or other machin(cid:173)
ery to make clearing  jobs easier. 

Spray  plant  materials  with  herbicide  several 
weeks  before  removing  them,  then  water  well 
so chemicals seep into the soil and kill the roots. 
The best time to remove weeds and many other 
plants is in early spring,  before they go to seed. 
Clear  ground  covers  by  mowing  them  flat 
with  a  rotary  mower  or  cutting  off tops  with  a 
sickle, hedge shears, or weed trimmer. Then dig 
up the roots  with  a spade or power tiller. 

•  Transplanting 
Want  to  relocate  choice  shrubs  and  trees?  You 
may  need  help  lifting  them  out  of the  ground 
and setting them in again, but shrubs of medium 
size  and  trees  no  taller  than  6  feet,  with  trunks 
no  larger  than  1  inch  in  diameter,  lend  them(cid:173)
selves to amateur transplanting.  And,  with pro(cid:173)
fessional  help,  you  can  safely  transplant  trees 
many  feet  taller. 

Spring  and  fall  are  the  best  times  to  move 
shrubs and trees, but if you keep the roots moist, 
you can shift plants in the summer,  too. 

Use  a  sharp  spade  to  cut  a  circle  around  the 
roots,  then  shape  them  and  surrounding  soil 
into  a  ball  by  undercutting  lower  roots.  When 
the  ball  is  free  and  can  be  rocked  to  one  side, 
wrap it in burlap,  then fasten with twine. 

After  you've  set  the  plant  in  its  new  home, 
remove the twine. Fill around the roots and give 
them  a good  soaking.  In  hot  weather,  mist  the 
plant daily  with  a  hose  for  the  next two  weeks; 
avoid  overwatering.  Then water weekly. 

61 

SLOPE 

SOLUTIONS 

ilt your world  a 
bit  and you get  a whole  new landscaping 

perspective,  invigorating  and challenging.  The first 

rule of designing new surroundings  is  to study 

and  work with  site  conditions.  If your land  includes 

slopes,  your design begins  and certainly will  end 

with a more interesting scene. Take full advantage of 

the sometimes  superlative views or the feeling 
of enclosure.  Let initial problems push you to 

creative solutions. 

62 

SLOPE  SOLUTIONS 

ASSESSING SLOPE SOLUTIONS 

If  you  have  slopes  on  your  property,  you 

know that they can pose landscaping difficul(cid:173)
ties.  But  be  assured  that they also  can  offer  tre(cid:173)
mendous  opportunities. 

Properly  used,  slopes  add  interest  to  a  land(cid:173)

scaping  plan.  They  can  screen  views,  buffer 
noise,  and direct the eye.  They can even create 
illusions:  a  rail  fence  along  the  top  of a gentle 
slope  can  make  the  yard  within  seem  to  extend 
to the  edge of the  world. 

A  sloping  yard  also  gives  you  more  planting 
ground  in  the  same  lateral  space,  and  slopes 
sometimes  create  microclimates—sunny  south-
facing  slopes,  shady  northward  ones—that  en(cid:173)
able you  to grow a wider variety of plants. 

Some  flat  lots,  in  fact,  could  use  artificially 

created  mounds  to generate a little interest. 

Slopes, though, can be limiting.  For instance, 
if your  site  slopes  so  much  that  you'd  use  the 
word  "hillside"  to  describe  it,  you'll  want  to 
choose  a  natural,  flowing  landscape  design  in(cid:173)
stead  of a symmetrical,  formal plan. 

And  slopes,  if left  untreated,  can  create  ero(cid:173)
sion  problems,  limit  outdoor  living  space,  and 
hinder plant growth. 

•  Controlling  erosion 
All lots must have at least some slope. The land 
must  slope  away  from  your  house  at  least  4 
inches  every  10  feet  to  assure  that  water  does 
not  seep  into  the  basement.  To  learn  how  to 
determine  slope,  see  page  39-  For  solutions  to 
drainage problems, see pages  52-55. 

If your  concern  is  slowing  water  to  prevent 
erosion,  rather than  diverting water to improve 
drainage,  you'll  want  to  add  plantings,  baffles, 
terraces,  or retaining walls  to your slopes. 

Plantings,  at  least  those  with  root  structures 
that  bind  banks,  usually  are  the  easiest—and 
least expensive—erosion-control measure to in(cid:173)
stall  (see  pages  66-67).  Ground  covers  and 
low-growing shrubs  are the  best choices. 

On slopes where plantings may not stem ero(cid:173)

sion,  consider  installing  rows  of  stones  called 
riprap,  or plastic or wood  baffles  (see pages  66-
67).  The  baffles  or  riprap  act  as  small  dams, 
slowing water and encouraging soil to build up. 

64 

To  check  the  soil  on  medium-grade  slopes, 
put in contours or bevels—two types of miniter-
races  (see pages  68-69). 

For  sharply  sloping  land,  retaining  walls  are 

the  best option,  despite  their expense and  engi(cid:173)
neering demands (see pages 70-73). They take 
less room than a bank and are easier to maintain. 
They also yield level space for play or plantings. 
Keep in mind, though, that retaining walls must 
be  carefully  built  if  they  are  to  withstand  the 
tremendous  pressure  put  on  them  by  the  soil 
they hold  back. 

Position  retaining  walls  so  they  disrupt  the 
site  as  little  as  possible.  Be  sure  the  walls  you 
build  are in scale and  harmony with your house 
and  the  rest  of  your  garden.  Brick  or  stucco 
walls  work  well  in  formal  gardens  or  near 
houses of the same materials.  Rock walls fit into 
more-natural  plans.  Wood  can  blend  with  ei(cid:173)
ther. In general, the simpler its construction, the 
better a wall looks. 

Select materials  for strength,  too,  not just ap(cid:173)
pearance. Wood walls can't be as big as masonry 
walls because they can't hold back as much dirt. 
Uncut  stones  work  without  mortar  or  footings 
unless  the  wall  is  taller  than  a  couple  of feet. 
Poured  concrete  yields  the strongest walls. 

Because  low  walls  are  cheaper  to  build  and 
their design is less crucial (they retain less dirt), 
you're  better  off stepping  a  series  of low  walls 
down a hill than  building one high  wall. 

•  Outdoor  living 
If slopes limit your outdoor play space, consider 
decks, paved  or unpaved  terraces  (basically, pa(cid:173)
tios or retaining walls),  and  steps. 
informal 

Decks  fit  best 

landscaping 

into 

styles; paved  terraces or patios work best in for(cid:173)
mal landscape designs.  (See Chapter  8,  "Patios 
and Decks," pages  148-189. For decks, also see 
pages  74-75.) 

To save on  time  and  money,  build  decks  and 
patios  that  fit  rather  than  fight  the  existing 
slopes.  For  decks,  if you  plan  several  levels  in(cid:173)
stead of one, you'll use fewer materials; for pati(cid:173)
os, you'll move less soil. 

Steps,  besides  allowing  access  to  areas  above 
or  below,  can  act  as  erosion-controlling  bevels. 
Any necessary landings can act as terraces.  Make 
garden  steps  less  steep  than  indoor  stairs  and  as 
wide  as  the  walk  that  leads  to  them  (see  pages 
117  and  124-125).  Again,  use  material  that 
harmonizes. 

If you're  building your house  new,  situate  the 
floor  levels  of  your  house  to  adjoin  the  flat  ar(cid:173)
eas,  if  possible.  Locate  your  gardens,  service 
areas,  and  play  areas  on  the  flats  and  use  the 
rising  slopes  as  gentle  walls  to  enclose  or  the 
falling  slopes  as  windows  to  open  vistas. 

To  install  a  pool,  you  may  have  to  do  some 
grade  changing.  Use  any  soil  you  dig  out  to  fill 
necessary  grade  changes  or  create  interesting 
new  ones. 

Plan driveways and  walks  to  make use of level 
land  or  gentle  slopes.  Neither  should  exceed  a 
10  percent grade.  If you  let your driveway  wind 
across  the  contour  of a  slope,  it  will  slow  water 
runoff  and  help  hold  the  hillside.  Be  sure  the 
drive  surface  slopes  for  good  drainage  to  pre(cid:173)
vent ice formation.  Grade  to make the  approach 
to  the  road  one  with  full  vision  both  ways,  and 
make a turnaround,  if possible,  to  avoid  backing 
into  traffic  (see  pages  2 4 0 - 2 4 5 ). 

For  fencing,  choose  an  open  style,  such  as  a 
split-rail  fence,  if your  slope  is  steep.  For gently 
rolling  terrain,  choose  a  slightly  open  fence 
style,  such  as  one  using  lattice  or  louvers;  avoid 
a  closed  style. 

To create a secret nook or cranny,  put a bench 
or  arbor  at  the  top  or  bottom  of  a  hill,  perhaps 
out  of sight  of  the  house. 

•  Plantings  on  slopes 
Lawns  are  fine  on  slopes,  except those  too  steep 
for  mowing.  You  can  safely  mow  an  incline  as 
long  as  the  ground  does  not  rise  more  than  1 
foot  for  every  3  feet  of horizontal  slope. 

To  establish  turf on  a  hillside,  use  sod.  If you 
can't  afford  sod  and  plan  to  use  seeds,  the  grass 
is  more  likely  to  become  established  if you  first 
divert  the  surface  water  at  the  top  of  the  slope 
by  running a turf gutter—a slight ditch with  a lip 

on  the  downhill  side—across  the  slope.  Then, 
to  further  slow  water  runoff,  lay  a  few  strips  of 
sod  across  the  slope  at  intervals  of 4  to  6  feet  all 
the  way  down. 

For  extensive  slopes,  consider  using  a process 
called hydroseeding. Mixes of grass seed or various 
flowers  are  combined  with  fertilizer  and  a wood 
fiber  to  make  a  spray-on  slurry.  Transportation 
departments  use  this  method  to  plant  highway 
embankments. 

If your slope  makes  mowing dangerous,  plant 
ground  covers  (see pages  6 6 - 6 7,  2 6 0 - 2 6 1,  and 
317-319  for  recommendations).  They're  easy 
and  inexpensive  to  start.  If  your  slope  is  very 
steep  or  long,  or  your  soil  is  heavy  clay  that 
could  wash  down,  seek  advice  from  experts. 

landscaping  plans  require  you 

H e re  are  some  other  tips  for  planting  slopes: 
•  Land  too  steep  for a lawn  is great  not only for 
ground  covers,  but  for  trees,  shrubs,  and  wild-
flowers,  too.  Put  bird  feeders  and  a  birdbath  on 
the  edge  nearest  the  house  for  the  best  bird 
watching. 
•  Gentle  slopes,  particularly 
those  facing  a 
house  or  patio,  look  great  with  crocuses,  other 
bulbs,  or  wildflowers  planted  among  the  grass. 
•  If  your 
to 
change  grades,  build  walls  or  wells  around  the 
roots  of choice  mature  trees  to  avoid  damage. 
•  For  cultivated  plants,  use  beds  that  follow  the 
contours  of the  slopes.  Or,  create  terraces. 
•  If  you  have  a  slope  facing  south,  use  it  to 
stretch  your  growing  season.  With  more  sun 
and  natural  wind  protection,  the  south-facing 
slope  will  warm  earlier  in  the  spring,  enabling 
you 
like  dogwoods, 
where 
they  otherwise  might  not  be  hardy. 
Watch  out,  though,  because  that  same  spring 
sun  will  lure  some  early  bloomers  into  prema(cid:173)
ture  growth,  and  a  late  frost  may  take  a  greater 
toll.  Avoid  peach,  almond,  and  other  early-
trees  on  south-facing  slopes. 
blooming  fruit 
Grow 
instead  on  north-facing  slopes, 
where  they  will  stay  safely  dormant  until  spring 
truly  arrives. 
•  Because  cold  air  collects  in  low-lying  areas, 
don't  plant  frost-sensitive  fruit  trees  there. 

to  grow  tender  plants, 

them 

SLOPE  SOLUTIONS 

CONTROLLING MINOR EROSION 

If erosion is a problem on a gentler slope,  try 

one  of  these  four  techniques  to  keep  soil 

from  washing  away. 

Baffles work well on slight to medium slopes 
and  can vary from  small pieces of plastic edging 
to  landscape  timbers.  Partly  buried  across  the 
hillside,  they  slow  runoff water,  giving  it more 
time  to  soak  into  the  ground.  Use  a  trowel  to 
install  small,  lightweight baffles by hand  as you 
plant. For large timbers, dig a slight ditch with a 
spade  and  put  the  soil  removed  on  the  uphill 
side.  Position  the  baffle  before planting. 

Use retaining cloth on slopes where the erosion 
is  more  severe.  It  can  be  any  porous  material 
from burlap to the mesh used  on steep highway 
banks. The latter is rather expensive, but topsoil 
is  beyond  price.  The  greenkeeper  at  a  nearby 
golf course  can give  you  a  source.  Avoid  using 
plastic on steep slopes because it drastically cuts 

rainwater penetration into the soil. Planting will 
be  easier  if you  soak  the  ground  well,  remove 
unwanted  growth,  and  loosen  and  smooth  the 
soil before laying the cloth. 

Mulch,  good on flat land,  slows runoff on mi(cid:173)
nor  slopes.  It  also  keeps  down  weeds,  and,  if 
organic,  adds  humus.  Spread  it thick,  at  least 4 
to 5  inches, and renew organic mulch often. On 
slight  slopes,  use  mulch  alone;  on  steeper 
slopes,  use mulch with  baffles. 

Stone  riprap  can  be  made  with  handpicked 
rocks  or  concrete  rubble,  and  can  cover  the 
steepest area of a hillside or the whole expanse. 
The  rocks  act  as  a  permanent  mulch  and  slow 
water runoff.  Plant roots will wind  through and 
under the  rocks  to further hold  soil  in place. 

Remember,  when  setting  out  plants  on  a 
slope,  always  leave  water-catching  lips  on  the 
downhill side  to conserve precious water. 

SLOPE  SOLUTIONS 

BUILDING CONTOURS AND BEVELS 

To  check  erosion  on  an  intermediate  slope, 

you can ripple it with contours or terrace it 
with  bevels  cut  into  the  hillside  and  fitted  with 
wood  planters.  Contours  intercept  the  flow  of 
water  and  direct  it  elsewhere.  The  planters 
serve  as  miniretaining  walls.  Both  can  add  de(cid:173)
sign interest to  your landscaping plan. 

•  Contour  basics 
Building contours calls  for little more skill  than 
expertise with a shovel, rake, and wheelbarrow. 
Give  thought,  however,  to  where  water  ab(cid:173)
sorbed by the contours will go. Drain lines must 
slope away from the house, and codes (as well as 
courtesy)  probably  prohibit  dumping  water 
onto a neighbor's property. 

For  the  drain  lines  inside  our  contours,  we 
drilled  V2-inch  holes  in  4-inch-diameter  rigid 
PVC  pipe,  which  can  be  solvent-welded  into 
runs  of  any  length.  You  also  can  buy  flexible 
plastic  drainpipe,  which  shapes  easily 
into 
bends, but could collapse under heavy pressure. 
To  assure  that  the  line  doesn't  clog  up  with 
silt,  plan  a  drop  of  at  least 1/8 inch  per  foot  of 
length.  Cover  the  upper  end  of  the  run  with 
screening and leave it accessible so you can  flush 
or use a snake to  rout out any debris  that might 
build  up inside. 

•  Bevel  basics 
Bevels  call  for very elementary carpentry skills. 
You  construct  a  series  of  bottomless  boxes, 
notch them into the hillside,  fill with earth, and 
plant with flowers or ground  cover. 

For  the  boxes,  buy  only  construction-heart 
redwood,  construction-heart  cedar,  or  ground-
contact,  pressure-treated  common  lumber;  any(cid:173)
thing  else  will  rot  away  in  just  a few  years.  To 
retard  rust,  assemble  the  boxes  with galvanized 
nails,  screws,  and  corner brackets 

Excavate  bevels  carefully,  keeping  all  cuts 
straight both horizontally and vertically.  Set soil 
aside  and  use  it  to  fill  the  planters  after  you've 
set them in place. 

68 

69 

SLOPE  SOLUTIONS 

BUILDING RETAINING WALLS 

72 

73 

SLOPE  SOLUTIONS 

BUILDING STRUCTURES OVER SLOPES 

Thinking  about  sinking  posts  for  a  fence, 

deck,  gazebo,  porch,  or  other  structure? 
Unless  the  terrain  is absolutely level,  you need 
to  locate  several  points  that  are,  literally,  in 
midair—and  sometimes  at quite  widely varying 
heights  from  the  ground.  How  can  you  deter(cid:173)
mine  how  high  each post should  be?  And  how 
can you  be certain your layout is square? 

Actually,  neither  job  is  as  difficult  as  you 
might  think.  First  you  establish  points  where 
you'll  want  posts.  Then  you  dig  holes  and  set 
posts that are taller than they need to be. Finally, 
you cut off the  tops  of the posts  so all will  be at 
the  same  level.  At  corners,  some  elementary 
geometry assures  that rows of posts will  be pre(cid:173)
cisely at right angles  to each other. 

•  3-D  layout 
To plot a structure  that will  be  built on  a slope, 
you  need  the  same  tools  required  for  a  level-
ground  layout  (see  pages  58-59),  plus  several 
stakes  that  are  about  two  feet  longer  than  the 
elevation at the downhill  edge. 

Start  at  the  uphill  edge.  If you're  building  a 
deck  or  other  project  that  will  attach  to  the 
house,  tack strings  to its ledger (see page  172). 
For a gazebo,  shed,  or other freestanding struc(cid:173)
ture, drive stakes and tie strings to them, as we 
did  at right. 

At  the  downhill  edge,  maneuver  the  taller 
stakes until they are at perfect right angles to the 
house  or—for  a  freestanding  structure—the 
string that marks the uphill edge. To be sure the 
corners are square, use the principle of the 3-4-5 
triangle, as explained opposite and on page  59-
After  you've  found  all  four  corners,  double-
check  that  they  are  square  by  measuring  from 
each  corner  to  the  corner  opposite  it.  If  the 
corners are square, these diagonals will be equal 
in  length.  If  they  are  not,  go  back  and  check 
each  corner  with  the  3-4-5  triangle  principle 
until you find  the one that's out of square,  then 
readjust  the  layout. 

74 

75 

PRIVACY 

AND SECURITY 

he greater your 

measure  of seclusion,  the  more  personal  and 

individual  your  environment  becomes. 

What  walls,  roof,  and  window  coverings  are  to  the 

house,  privacy  plantings  and  structures  are  to 

the  property  as  a  whole.  Outdoor  living,  no  matter 
how  innocent,  is  limited  by  exposure  to  the  eyes 
of neighbors.  Outside,  as  well  as  indoors,  we  want 

to  be  able  to  see  the  world,  but  we  don't 

want  the  world  to  see  us. 

PRIVACY  AND  SECURITY 

ASSESSING PRIVACY SOLUTIONS 

Traditionally,  enclosing  gardens  in  America 

seemed  both  unfriendly  and  unpopular. 
People  sat  out  to  be  seen  and  to  visit.  Yards 
were substitutes for the European public square. 
As  modern  traffic  changed  neighborhoods, 
and  life-styles  became  more  individual  and  in(cid:173)
tense, yards began to change.  Most people now 
have  an  overdose  of public  exposure  and  need 
areas for retreat, outdoors as well as in. 

Don't  be  afraid  to  demand  and  design  for 

privacy.  It starts  with planning. 

•  A good start 
Your  first  step  should  be  to  figure  out  where 
you need privacy and what visual intrusions you 
need  to  block.  Usually,  that means  the  areas of 
your  backyard  where you'll relax and  entertain. 
Your  property  also  might  dictate  the  need  for 
blocking views  into  front  or side  windows.  Or, 
you  may  want  to  separate  parts  of your garden 
from  one  another  (do  this  carefully,  especially 
where  space  is  limited,  because  too  much  divi(cid:173)
sion can  cause confusion  and  crowding). 

Next  choose  the  method.  Privacy  most  often 

is obtained with plantings, fences, or screens. 

And  always  remember  the  golden  rule.  If 
your  plans  will  affect  your  neighbors,  talk  to 
them  early  in  the  planning  stage.  For  instance, 
where  fences  are  few,  people  may  just  need 
reassurance  that  your  intentions  are  not  un(cid:173)
friendly. The neighbors  may be as amenable  to 
the idea as you and even agree to share the cost. 
If a tree  that will give your patio privacy also 
will  block  your  uphill  neighbor's  view,  try  an(cid:173)
other solution,  such as an overhead arbor. 

Before  starting  to  build  or plant,  it  always  is 
best  to  know  exactly  where  property  lines  lie. 
Check laws and regulations, too, concerning the 
placement and height offences, walls, and other 
permanent  structures. 

•  Methods 
Whether  you  choose  fences,  screens,  or  plant(cid:173)
ings  to  obtain  privacy,  you'll  more  than  likely 
want  a  plant  or  structure  that's  just  above  eye 
level  or  taller.  Six feet usually  is  a good  height 

80 

for  a  privacy  fence.  If  your  concern  is  privacy 
only when  sitting,  say for patio dining,  3- or 4-
foot  plants  or  structures  will  work.  Worst  is 
something just below  eye  level—5  feet or so— 
because of its  distracting  height. 

Plantings  usually are a cheaper way to obtain 
privacy than fences or screens.  Maintenance de(cid:173)
mands depend  on  the  type  of project:  a clipped 
hedge is more work than a weathered fence, but 
a painted  fence  is  more  work  than  an  informal 
shrub  border. 

Shrubs  and  trees,  of course,  provide  a lovely 
green  type  of  privacy,  but  fences  and  screens 
can do the same if they're climbed  by a vine or 
used  as  a backdrop for flowers,  ground  covers, 
and  smaller shrubs  (see pages  90-91). 

If  you  must  always  be  assured  of  complete 
privacy,  plantings  alone  may  not  be  a  good 
choice because diseases and other problems can 
create  future gaps. 

Screens,  which can be anything from sections 
of  fence  to  individually  designed  panels,  are 
particularly  effective  when  you  desire  a  lighter 
look  than  fencing would  provide. 

•  Plantings 
For maximum privacy using plants, you'll usual(cid:173)
ly  want  to  grow  a  border  or  hedge  of  shrubs 
(see  pages  82-83  and  307-313).  If your  need 
for privacy extends  into  the  winter,  you'll  want 
to choose evergreen,  not deciduous, plants. 

Shrub  borders  can  be  formal  and  clipped  or 
informal and mixed. The first has the advantage 
of being narrow,  but requires trimming, a time-
consuming  and  often-repeated 
task.  Formal 
hedges  usually offer only a foliage  background. 
Untrimmed  shrub  borders,  on  the  other 
hand,  can  spread  to  8  feet  or  more.  They  will 
need  less  maintenance  at  longer  intervals  and 
can  offer flowers,  fruit,  and  fall  color,  as well as 
a variety  of forms. 

Choose  shrubs  carefully,  paying  particular 
attention  to  ease  of  maintenance.  Make  sure, 
too,  that  the  mature  size  of plants  won't  over(cid:173)
power your house or landscape. Where space is 

limited—in  a  side  yard,  for  example—use  nar(cid:173)
row,  columnar-shaped  shrubs. 

When  mixing  shrubs  in  a  border,  select  no 
more than three compatible species, with at least 
two or three of each  type. 

Don't  limit yourself to  shrubs,  though,  when 
seeking  privacy.  Vines  on  trellises  can  yield 
quick,  inexpensive  privacy  and  are  especially 
effective  in  narrow  spaces  (see  pages  106-111 
and  314-316). 

Even single trees or shrubs, carefully situated, 
can  solve  many  privacy  problems.  Or  choose 
flowers,  particularly  tall  ones  or those  suited  to 
raised beds. The seasonal privacy they offer may 
be  sufficient for a patio  or summer  cottage. 

•  Fences 
Unlike  plants,  fences  give  instant  privacy,  and 
they can offer great architectural interest.  Select 
from  a  wide  variety  of  ready-made  panels  or 
design your own (see pages 84-85  and  88-89). 
When planning a fence, you'll want to keep a 

number of considerations  in  mind. 

Solid  fencing  yields  the  most  privacy,  but  it 
also  cuts  off  light  and  breezes.  Slightly  open 
fences,  such  as  those  with  louvers  or  lattice(cid:173)
work,  can  let  in  the  sun  and  the  wind,  yet  still 
screen  views  into  a  yard.  The  slight  openness 
also  can  provide  an  inviting  transition  from 
street to garden. 

Some  homeowners  combine  the  best of both 
and  erect  a  fence  with  a  solid  bottom  and  an 
open  top. 

To be most neighborly, you'll want to choose 
a  design  that  looks  as  good  from  your  neigh(cid:173)
bors' yards as it does from yours. Keep in mind, 
too,  that  if you're  enclosing  a  large  area,  you 
might want to  incorporate occasional  variations 
in your fence so it doesn't become monotonous. 
And,  to  make  a large  expanse  of fence  less  im(cid:173)
prisoning, add plantings. 

Be  sure  your fence  style  matches  your  house 
style:  red-brick  homes  go  well  with  redwood 
fences;  clapboard  homes  gain  with  fences  of 
similar boarding.  If your fence will run close  to 
or  abut  your  house,  consider  painting  it  the 
same color or a complementary one. 

Pay  attention,  too,  to  the  character  of  your 
neighborhood.  Whether  it's  rustic  or  sophisti(cid:173)
cated  may go a long way toward  dictating fence 
style—weathered  or painted,  open  or  closed. 

•  Gates 
When  designing  your  fence,  carefully  plan  the 
location and  style  of gates  (see page  85). 

Points  of  access,  of  course—whether  from 
front  yard  to  backyard  or  from  your  yard  to  a 
neighbor's—will  determine  location. 

The style of gate you choose depends on how 
much  attention you want  it to  draw.  To  extend 
an  invitation  to  passersby,  design  your  gate  to 
contrast with the fencing. Change the spacing or 
size  of  the  boards,  make  the  gate  taller,  add 
color,  or cap  it with  an arch.  If privacy  is para(cid:173)
mount, build a gate that blends with the fencing. 
Finally,  consider  width.  Will  a  riding  lawn 
mower pass through the gate? How about cars? 

•  Screens 
Screens  usually  are  used  within  the  yard  rather 
than as boundary markers. As with fences, they 
can  block  views  from  outside  in  or  from  one 
section  of  yard  to  another.  But  they  take  less 
room,  allow  more  feeling  of openness,  and  re(cid:173)
strict air  movement less  than  fences.  In  design, 
they can be taller than fences, yet still be lighter 
in appearance  and  weight (see pages  86-89). 

81 

PRIVACY  AND  SECURITY 

BUILDING FENCES AND GATES 

Putting  up  a fence  is  a satisfying project that 

doesn't  require  any  special  skills  or  tools. 
The hardest part is digging the holes; after that, 
the structure takes shape quickly. Besides a rent(cid:173)
ed  posthole  digger,  you'll  need  only  a circular 
saw and  ordinary carpentry  tools. 

Designs vary widely,  but just about all fences 
consist  of the  same  basic  elements:  A  series  of 
posts sunk into the ground and connected by rails 
top,  bottom,  and  usually in  the middle as  well; 
and fencing boards or panels that are nailed to the 
rails to give the fence its character. 

Privacy fences usually require 4x4 posts.  Rail 

and  fencing lumber can  be almost any  size. 

Lumberyards  sell  prefab  sections  of fence  in 
many styles, but custom design and construction 
usually yield a better-looking fence. See page 88 
for some  sample fence  styles. 

•  Check  codes 
Before  proceeding,  check  community  building 
and zoning codes. Many specify maximum fence 
height,  distances  you  can  build  from  property 
lines and  the street,  and  even  the  materials  you 
can and  can't use. 

Once you've chosen a design  and  established 
a location,  stake  out and  measure  the  site.  Plot 
post  spacing  for  the  most  efficient  use  of  lum(cid:173)
ber. Six- or 7-foot spans usually work well; nev(cid:173)
er set privacy-fence posts more than 8 feet apart. 
If you're  building your fence on a slope, plan 
to  step  the  fence  down  the  hill,  setting  each 
section lower than the one preceding it.  Only if 
the  slope  is  slight—and  the  fence  design  won't 
suffer—should  you  follow  the  contour. 

•  Fence  materials 
When  you  order  lumber,  specify  construction-
heart  redwood  or  cedar  or  ground-contact, 
pressure-treated  wood  for  all  posts  and  bottom 
rails;  upper rails  and  fencing can  be less  expen(cid:173)
sive grades of rot-resistant lumber. To minimize 
rust,  buy hot-dip galvanized  nails and fittings. 

If you want to paint or stain your fence,  apply 
the finish to posts,  rails, and fencing before you 
nail  up  the  fencing.  Besides  saving  time,  you'll 
get better coverage. 

84 

85 

PRIVACY  AND  SECURITY 

BUILDING LATTICEWORK SCREENS 

Designs  for  wooden  privacy  screens  can  be 

as  varied  as  those  for  wooden  fences.  A 
screen,  after all,  is really just a section of fence. 
But  for  a  particularly  striking  effect,  consider 
lacy latticework  screens,  which provide privacy 
without blocking balmy breezes.  Lattice screens 
also  offer  sound  support  for  climbing  plants, 
which  increases privacy even  more. 

Lattice is inexpensive and demands no special 
expertise  to  build—you  can  install  it  with  only 
simple hand  tools and  an  electric drill/driver. 

The term latticework refers  to any decorative 
pattern  made  with  narrow,  thin  strips  of wood 
(drawings  on  page  89  show  four  typical  pat(cid:173)
terns). Latticework designed to give privacy has 
lV2-inch  openings;  with  garden-spaced  lattice, 
the openings are 3  inches. 

•  Prefab  versus  homemade 
Most  lumberyards  and  home  centers  sell  4x8-
foot  prefabricated  lattice  panels  for  a  cost  that 
often  is  less  than  that for  the  lath  alone.  These 
panels are easy to install because the cutting and 
nailing already has  been done. 

Inspect  prefab  latticework  carefully  before 
you  buy,  however.  Cheaper  varieties  often  are 
made  with  lath  much  thinner  than  that  sold  in 
individual pieces,  and  the staples holding cheap 
lattice together may be thin and dislodge easily. 
For the photographs on these pages,  we used 
a prefab panel.  To  make  your own  latticework, 
build  a  frame  like  the  one  shown  at  top  right. 
Then, if desired, paint or stain the frame and the 
strips  of  lath  you'll  use  for  the  lattice.  If  you 
prefer to  leave  the  wood  natural,  coat  it  with  a 
wood  preservative. 

Once the paint is dry,  lay the lath against the 
frame diagonally, placing the strips so each strip 
touches  the  next  to  form  a  solid  screen.  Nail 
every  other  strip,  then  remove  the  pieces  not 
nailed.  Repeat  this  process  for  the  second 
course of lattice, starting in the opposite corner. 
For garden-spaced  lattice,  nail  every third  strip. 
To  avoid  splitting  the  extra-thin  strips,  blunt 
the  tips  of  nails  by  pounding  on  them  with  a 
hammer.  After  nailing  all  strips  to  the  frame, 
trim  the ends  with  a crosscut or circular saw. 

86 

87 

PRIVACY  AND  SECURITY 

CHOOSING A FENCE OR SCREEN STYLE 

FENCE AND SCREEN STYLES 

88 

LATTICEWORK STYLES 

JOINERY TECHNIQUES 
If you  don't  like  the  looks  of the  metal 
rail  connectors  shown  on  page  84,  attach 
rails  to posts  with  one  of the  joints  shown 
here.  All  work equally well.  Choose 
based  on  your tools  and  skills.  To  make  a 
dado joint, cut away part of the post so the 
rail  will  be  flush  (or  nearly  flush)  with  the 
post. For a block joint, nail a short piece of 
2x2  to  the post,  rest  the  rail  on  top  of it, 
and  toenail  through  the  block  into  the 
post. For a butt and toenail joint, drive nails 
at an  angle  through  the  rail  into  the post. 

PRIVACY  AND  SECURITY 

FENCE AND SCREEN PLANTINGS 

Besides  providing  the  perfect  backdrop  for 

plants, fences and screens need plantings to 

soften  their  angular  appearance.  Working  to(cid:173)
gether,  plants,  fences,  and  screens  can  set  the 
mood  for  a  garden.  Roses  on  a  post-and-rail 
fence sing one song; on a picket fence, a slightly 
different  tune. 

•  Plant  pointers 
Keep the following in mind when deciding how 
best to use plants  near your fence  or screen. 
•  Your yard  will seem larger if you group flow(cid:173)
ers and shrubs as near to the structure as practi(cid:173)
cal,  leaving  an  open  central  area.  Place  the 
tallest plants  in  back  and  graduate  down  to  the 
shortest in front (see  chart at right). 
•  Shrubs  and  trees  can  overpower  a  fence.  Se(cid:173)
lect  open  and  narrow  varieties  for  minimum 
pruning,  and  plant  them  far  enough  from  a 
fence  for  uncramped  development. 
•  Vines  are  especially  good  on  fences  and 
screens.  They will climb wire or thin  trellis  un(cid:173)
aided. To get some of them  to grow up a wood 
surface,  you  may need  to attach string support. 
Vines  can  completely  cover  a  chain-link 
fence,  but  more-elegant  structures  look  better 
with vines that accent, not hide, them. Also con(cid:173)
sider  the  strength  of the  fence  or  screen  when 
selecting vines.  (See pages  106-107  and  314— 
316  for more  information  on  choosing vines.) 
•  Colors  come  alive  against  a  fence  or  screen. 
Blue  delphiniums,  lost  without  a  background, 
stand  out when  displayed  against white. 
•  Fences  and  screens  can  create  new  microcli(cid:173)
mates,  resulting  in  new growing  opportunities. 
For  example,  a  solid  structure  protects  down(cid:173)
wind  plants  for an  area equal  to  its  height.  Lat(cid:173)
ticework  allows  some  wind  penetration,  but 
protects a larger area. Heat is reflected or stored 
depending  on  color and  material. 

•  Maintenance 
Since  mowing  or  hoeing  under  a  fence  is  diffi(cid:173)
cult,  remove  all  plants  and  roots  before  you 
build. To keep out new roots, bury edging a few 
inches  from  the  fence.  Or  place  plastic  or  tar 
paper covered  with gravel  under the fence. 

90 

PRIVACY  AND  SECURITY 

INSTALLING SECURITY LIGHTING 

Effective  outdoor  lighting  brings  four  bene(cid:173)

fits  to  a landscaping  scheme:  1)  It  discour(cid:173)
ages  intruders;  2)  It  prevents  accidents;  3) 
When done creatively, it can enhance your land(cid:173)
scaping  scheme;  and  4)  Perhaps  best  of all,  it 
increases  the  time  you  can  enjoy  your  outdoor 
surroundings.  (For  more  information  on  light(cid:173)
ing for aesthetic reasons,  see pages  212-215.) 

•  How  much? 
The illustration at right identifies points on your 
property that need  illumination for security pur(cid:173)
poses.  In  general,  don't  be  afraid  to  install  too 
many  lights.  Outdoor  fixtures  are  not  terribly 
expensive,  especially  if  you  install  them  your(cid:173)
self.  Operating outdoor lights,  however, can be 
costly, so try to provide separate switching, per(cid:173)
haps with a master switch that controls all. 

When  you  shop  for  outdoor  fixtures,  you'll 
find an abundance of choices. Post lights illumi(cid:173)
nate walks and  drives.  Step lights prevent stum(cid:173)
bles. Floodlights mount on poles, in trees, or high 
on house sides and back. In-ground lights, placed 
below plants, can erase burglar-hiding shadows. 

•  Installation 
Check  your  community's  electrical  code  before 
ordering materials for a  120-volt project such as 
the  one  opposite.  Some  codes  allow  the  use  of 
UF  cable  buried  in  a  trench  at  least  12  inches 
deep; the cable, however, must be protected by 
conduit at points  where it is  out of the ground. 
Other  localities  require  that  all  outdoor  wiring 
run  through  plastic,  thin-wall  EMT  conduit,  or 
heavy-wall  rigid  conduit;  rigid  conduit requires 
a trench only 6  inches  deep. 

Most  codes  also  require  you  to  protect  out(cid:173)

door  lights  and  receptacles  with  a  ground fault 
circuit interrupter (GFCI), a device that senses any 
shock hazard  and  shuts down a circuit.  A GFCI 
in your home's  service panel protects all outlets 
on that circuit.  If you decide to tap into an exist(cid:173)
ing outdoor receptacle,  a GFCI  there will serve 
the receptacle  and  all outlets  beyond  it. 

Much  simpler  to  install  but  less  versatile  is 
12-volt  lighting.  For  more  information  on  this 
option, see pages 214-215. 

92 

93 

SUN AND 

SHADE 

he pattern  of sun 

and shade on your yard  and house is vital to your 

personal world.  It determines  not only the 

placement  of every plant  and  landscape  feature,  but 

often,  too,  your outlook on life.  Yet that pattern 

changes subtly with time of day, season of year, growth 
of plants,  and  addition  or removal  of structures.  The 
ultimate  enjoyment  of your  surroundings  depends  on 

using  sun  and shade well.  Too much of either 

throws your environment—and you—out  of harmony. 

96 

SUN  AND  SHADE 

ASSESSING SUN AND SHADE SOLUTIONS 

Ayard  needs  both  sun  and  shade  to  modify 

otherwise  uncomfortable  weather.  Sitting 
in the sun on a crisp autumn afternoon is uplift(cid:173)
ing  and  invigorating.  But if fated  to  spend  that 
time  in  shade,  we'd  soon  retreat  indoors  for 
needed warmth.  On a hot summer day, though, 
the exact opposite is true. 

How  best  to  plan  then  for  ideal  sun  and 
shade? As with most landscaping decisions, take 
your time and  study the given conditions first. 

Trees,  of course,  take  much  longer.  But as  a 
stopgap  measure,  you  can  plant  fast-growing 
species  like  poplar,  silver  maple,  willow,  and 
Chinese  elm.  Unfortunately,  most  of  these 
quick-maturing  trees  are  weak  wooded,  short(cid:173)
lived,  and  inferior  in  quality.  Plan  on  planting 
them among slower-growing trees,  then cutting 
them out as the better trees grow tall.  (To pre(cid:173)
vent  clogged  pipes,  keep  willows  or  poplars 
away from  water pipes or septic  fields.) 

•  A full  year 
You may get a pretty good  idea whether a yard 
needs  more  sun  or  shade  the  minute  the  real-
estate  agent  drives  you  up  in  front.  But  do  not 
make expensive, irrevocable decisions until you 
have  studied  sun  and  shade  patterns  in  your 
yard  for a full  year. 

The  homeowner  who  considers  only  the  un(cid:173)

comfortable  heat  of the  high  summer  sun  may 
miss  an  opportunity  to  take  advantage  of  the 
low,  warmth-giving  winter  sun.  Winter-sun 
watchers  may  not give  a  thought  to  what  their 
problems will  be  in summer.  Besides,  knowing 
the  sun  and  shade  patterns  on  a  yard  (from 
spring  to  fall,  at  least)  is  essential  to  knowing 
what plants  will grow where. 

First,  orient  yourself to  the  north  point  and 
other  compass  points  of your yard.  Then  make 
notes  of  sunrise  and  -set  and  the  shadows  on 
different parts  of the  yard  at  different  times  of 
the day and  year. 

In  the  meantime,  if you  have  spots  that  just 
must have some shade, plant vines or even some 
of the tallest annual flowers and vegetables,  like 
sunflower.  These plants provide  shade  within  a 
single  summer.  Many  vines  can  be  trained  on 
makeshift stakes or wires until you're sure about 
the placement of elaborate  trellises  and  arbors. 
Shrubs  are  almost  as  fast growing.  To  avoid 
constant pruning,  select shrubs  with the  mature 
height  and  width  you  want  and  set  them  far 
enough  from  walls,  walks,  patios,  and  property 
lines.  Most deciduous -shrubs  will reach  mature 
height  within  three  growing  seasons;  ever(cid:173)
greens take a little longer. 

•  Options 
Once armed  with  the  knowledge  of year-round 
sun  and  shade  patterns,  you  can  start  consider(cid:173)
ing your options. 

If your  problem  is  too  much  shade,  be  glad 
that  you  can  remedy  the  problem  quickly.  But 
do  not do  it rashly.  Call  in  a tree  specialist and 
discuss which, if any, trees should  be removed. 
Careful  pruning  can  work  wonders.  By  hav(cid:173)
ing lower branches removed from large trees or 
doing  it  yourself  from  smaller  ones,  you  can 
open  new  vistas  and  increase  the  light  and  air 
circulation  that  reaches  your  living  areas,  in(cid:173)
doors  and  out.  By raising the canopy of leaves, 
you preserve the shade you need and the health 
and  shape of the trees. 

If your  problem  is  too  little  shade,  consider 
capturing some  with  either structures  or plants. 
For  instant  and  permanent  shade,  build  an 
overhead sunshade (see pages  100-103), arbor 
(see pages  104-105), or trellis.  Such structures 
are  particularly  appropriate  if  you  have  just  a 
small area to shield or if you don't plan to stay in 
your  house  long  enough  for  a  tree  to  grow. 
They can be built over patios, decks, paths, or a 
corner  of  the  garden;  they  can  be  attached  to 
your  house  or  freestanding. 

A  well-designed,  well-positioned  sun  struc(cid:173)
ture  screens  out  the  summer  sun,  yet  lets  the 
winter rays stream through.  Match the material, 
size,  and  shape  of any  structure  to  your  house, 
lot,  and  other landscape features.  As  with  most 
projects,  the simpler the  design,  the  better. 

If you  build  an  overhead  structure,  choose  a 
canopy  that  fits  your  sun  or  shade  needs  (see 

98 

page  103).  Loosely  spaced  boards  let  in  more 
sun;  tightly spaced  boards  do  the  opposite.  Or, 
for even more sun protection,  select a solid  ma(cid:173)
terial like canvas  or fiberglass. 

To  soften  a structure's  lines  and  obtain  addi(cid:173)
tional shade, drape it with vines (see pages  106-
107). In winter, vines vanish, letting in warmth. 

•  Trees 
The  most  graceful  and  natural  way  to  obtain 
shade, of course,  is with a tree or large shrub. 

If you're  building a  new  house  on  a  lot with 
existing  trees,  decide  which  ones  are  keepers 
and  spare  no  expense  to  protect  them.  Money 
cannot buy  their years  of growth. 

If you're faced  with  an empty yard,  resist the 
temptation  to  plant  lots  of  young  trees  and 
shrubs close to walls and each other. Unless you 
think about the mature sizes of plants, your bare 
yard can quickly become a jungle. 

When choosing shade plants (see pages  108-
111  and  301-316),  consider  how  their  shape, 
texture, and color will blend with the rest of the 
landscape.  Make  sure their mature  sizes will be 
in scale.  Weigh maintenance needs. 

Decide whether the plants you're considering 
provide  the  type  of shade  you  want:  Large-leaf 
species  like  maple  and  sycamore  may  shade  so 
much  that  little  else  will  grow  near  them;  fine-
leaf trees  like  honey locust or mountain ash,  on 
the other hand, provide filtered shade. A decid(cid:173)
uous tree on a house's south side blocks summer 
sun,  then  sheds  its  leaves  and  admits  winter 
light.  An evergreen  shields  light year-round. 
Give  prime  consideration,  too,  to  the  grow(cid:173)

ing  conditions  in  your  area.  Seek  the  advice  of 
local nursery workers and extension-service per(cid:173)
sonnel.  Use reliable native trees. 

•  Position 
When  positioning  shade  trees,  keep  in  mind 
that  they  will  spread  their  branches  about  as 
wide  as  their height  and  send  their  roots  much 
farther. So, in general, for ideal growth, allow as 
much  as  65  feet  between  spreading  trees,  35 
feet  between  nonspreaders. 

A walk in any timber, however, will show you 
how  nature  adapts.  With  careful  pruning  and 
control,  and  planned  crowding,  you  can  plant 
many more trees or smaller trees in a yard. Just 
plan on cutting some of them out as they grow. 
(With  weeping  trees,  avoid  any  thought  of 
crowding lest their  special  effect  be  lost.) 

Plant  shrubs  at  least  3  to  4  feet  from  the 

house, making sure to check the drip line. With(cid:173)
in  it,  you  will  have  to  water  the  plant  more 
often.  Right  under  it,  the  plant  could  drown  if 
no  gutter  catches  the  runoff from  the  roof. 

•  Care 
Your  woody  plants  will  grow  faster  and  claim 
their own space sooner if surrounded  by mulch. 
Cultivated  plants  are  the  next-best  choice  for 
around the trunk. They will remind you to feed 
and water the plant, and soften the emptiness of 
the  new  landscape  at  the  same  time.  Lawns  or 
wild  plants  are  the  worst  early  companions. 
They  lead  to  lawn-mower damage  or  neglect. 
Don't  hesitate  to  have  a  trained  and  well-
recommended  tree  expert  treat  pests,  diseases, 
and  wounds.  Get a second  opinion  if an  expert 
suggests removal too quickly. Tree care is more 
important  than  most  homeowners  realize.  The 
loss  of  a  mature  tree  can  devastate  the  best-
planned  landscape and  take decades  to replace. 

•  Plants  in  sun  and  shade 
As your landscape plan develops and the woody 
plants  grow,  you  will  have  to  adjust  your  gar(cid:173)
dening below and around them.  Every plant has 
different sun and  shade needs.  Some thrive in a 
wide  range  of light  conditions;  others  perish  in 
the wrong exposure.  Some survive in shade but 
need  sun  to  bloom  and  bear fruit. 

Take  maximum  advantage  of the  conditions 
at any given time.  Put shade-loving plants—like 
hostas  and  woodland  wildflowers  (see  page 
323)—in  the  darkest  spots.  Place  adaptable 
plants—daylilies,  for example—in partial-shade 
areas.  Save  the  bright  spots  for  vegetables  and 
sun-loving flowers.  If need  be,  plant sun  lovers 
in containers  and  move them  around. 

99 

SUN  AND  SHADE 

BUILDING OVERHEAD SUNSHADES 

The best time to think about an overhead sun 

structure  is  while  planning  a  new  patio  or 
deck.  Then  you  can  provide  footings  for  its 
posts,  or  simply  extend  a deck's posts  8  feet or 
so to carry the load. 

If you need to shade an existing patio or deck, 
check  out  the  drawings  at  lower  left  for  post 
basics,  then  assemble the framing as  shown  op(cid:173)
posite and  on pages  102-103. 

Because  no  one  will  be  walking  around  up 
there and because canopy materials are relative(cid:173)
ly  lightweight,  framing  for  a  sunshade  needn't 
be as strong as  the underpinnings for a deck.  It 
must  be  sturdy  enough,  though,  to  withstand 
strong  winds  and  avert  a potentially  dangerous 
collapse, especially in snowy areas. 

•  Two  ways  to  go 
Like  decks,  sunshades  can  be  joined  to  your 
house with a ledger or be freestanding (see box, 
opposite).  Where  you  attach  the  ledger  de(cid:173)
pends, in part, on whether your house is one or 
two stories high (see illustrations, top left).  Our 
photos  depict  an  attached  sunshade  going  to(cid:173)
gether;  for  a  freestanding  version,  substitute 
posts  and  another  beam  for  the  ledger. 

•  Shades  of difference 
Give thought, too, to the sort of canopy material 
you'd  like  to  top  your  sunshade  with.  The  box 
on  page  103  discusses  five  popular alternatives 
to  the  2x2  treatment we  used,  and  there  are  at 
least  a  dozen  others—ranging  from  a  simple, 
eggcrate layout to angled louvers to snow fence. 
Aesthetics will play a big role in your choice, 
of course,  but consider  several practical  matters 
as well. First, just how much shade do you need? 
A deck or patio on a treeless southern exposure 
could require protection all day long; a deck on 
an east or west side can get by with only partial 
shade.  Assess,  too,  whether  a  covering  you're 
thinking  about  will  allow  adequate  ventilation 
or darken  interior spaces  too much. 

SUN  AND  SHADE 

BUILDING OVERHEAD SUNSHADES 

102 

CANOPY  ALTERNATIVES 
Lattice:  Crisscrossed  slats  of lath  offer 
a  lacy  effect  (see  pages  86-87  and  89). 
Paint  the  strips  or  use  inexpensive 
grape-stake  lattice,  which  has  a  rough, 
furry  texture. 
Reed or  bamboo:  These  inexpensive 
materials  have  a limited  life  span. 
Prolong  their use  by  rolling  them  up  and 
storing  them  inside  during  winter. 
Shade  cloth:  Meshed  fabric  coverings 
provide  filtered  shade  from  sunlight,  but 
let  air  and  moisture  through. 
Canvas:  Heavy  cotton  duck  provides 
some  protection  against  rain,  but  must  be 
stretched  taut  so  water  won't  collect. 
Fiberglass:  Corrugated  plastic  panels  are 
easy  to  cut and  nail.  Slope  the  canopy  so 
water  will  run  off. 

SUN  AND  SHADE 

BUILDING ARBORS 

If you're  looking  for  a  leafy  way  to  put  a  spe(cid:173)

cial  part  of  your  yard  in  the  shade,  why  not 
construct  an  arbor  and  drape  it  with  a  gracious 
canopy  of vining  plants? 

To give  you  an  idea of the  variety  of shapes  an 
arbor  can  take,  we  built  two.  Our  teahouse  ver(cid:173)
sion  at right goes  together like  a miniature  barn, 
complete  with  roof  trusses;  the  much  simpler 
structure  shown  on  the  opposite page  consists  of 
just  two  posts  topped  off  with  a  2-foot-wide 
slatted  sunshade. 

Add  a  bench  or  two  to  the  teahouse,  and  it 
becomes  a  mini-gazebo.  The  simple  arbor  can 
frame  a  special  view,  serve  as  an  inviting  gate(cid:173)
way,  or  provide  a  verdant  boundary  for  a  patio 
or  deck. 

•  Arbor  basics 
Erecting  either  structure  takes  only  a  couple  of 
days,  several  days  apart:  one  to  dig  postholes 
and  set  the  posts,  another—after  the  concrete 
cures—to  cut  and  assemble  the  components. 
We  used  pressure-treated  4x4s  for  the  posts 
and,  to add  to  the  beauty  of the  arbors,  redwood 
for  the  superstructures. 

Making the  teahouse's  trusses  isn't as  tricky as 
you  might  think:  You  simply  miter  one  end  of 
two  rafters,  lay  them  out  on  a  flat  surface,  then 
measure  and  cut  the  cross  brace.  For  the  short, 
vertical  stud,  make  two  miter  cuts  on  one  end. 
This  creates  a  point  that  fits  up  into  the  peak, 
providing  rigidity. 

Secure  the 

joints  with  special  galvanized-
metal  truss  nailing  plates,  available  at  most  lum(cid:173)
beryards  and  home  centers.  Some  plates  come 
with  separate  nails;  others  have  sharp  prongs 
that  you  pound  into  the  wood. 

Space  the  posts  for  either  of  these  arbors  no 
more than  6  feet apart.  If you  want  to  extend  the 
distance  to  8  feet,  increase  beam  sizes  from  2x6 
to  2x8. 

To  learn  about  selecting  the  right  vines  for 
your arbor and  training  them  to grow  on  it,  turn 
to  pages  106-107.  (Also  see  pages  109,  111, 
166,  and  314-316.) 

104 

The  vine-covered  arbor  or  trellis  makes  a 

cool  garden  wall,  curtained  in  green  and 
decorated  with  dappled  sunlight  and  fragrant 
flowers.  The  privacy  and  shade  it  offers  rival 
those  of a tree,  but in  a half season  instead  of a 
decade and in a width as narrow as a single foot. 

The  secret to enjoying vines,  instead  of fight(cid:173)
ing them, is to understand their individual traits, 
then  match  the  right  vines  to  your  needs— 
whether that be cottage garden fragrance, a for(cid:173)
mal  feeling,  spring  bloom,  fall  color,  fruit  pro(cid:173)
duction, or to frame a view or screen it. Keep in 
mind a vine's soil preference, hardiness, and sun 
or shade requirements,  too. 

Most  vines  grow  fast,  but  annuals  such  as 
morning-glory take until mid- to late summer to 
provide much shade.  Perennial vines have roots 
and wood in place and give shade by late spring. 
A combination  of the two often works well. 

Some  vines  run  rampant  and  need  frequent 
pruning; most provide dense shade. Where you 
want  filtered  screening  or  delicate  holding,  as 
on a screened porch, choose clematis, the choice 
honeysuckles,  mandevilla,  or Virginia creeper. 

•  Climbing 
Vines  can  be  divided  into  three  basic  groups, 
depending on how they climb. 

Twining  vines  need  at  least  a  finger-thin 
means  of support  to  climb  a  flat  surface.  They 
climb  in  only  one  direction:  bittersweet  and 
kiwi  counterclockwise,  honeysuckle  and  Japa(cid:173)
nese wisteria clockwise.  For ease of work when 
painting or making repairs near these vines, sim(cid:173)
ply take down  their supports. 

Some  vines  climb  by  winding  tendrils  or 
modified  leaf stalks  around  whatever  they  can. 
Clematis, grape, melon, pea, passion vines, and 
creepers all climb this way. 

Vines like Boston ivy cling by attaching small, 
rootlike  grips,  usually  to  a  wall.  These  vines 
should  not  be planted  on  frame  houses  because 
the holdfasts may penetrate and damage the sid(cid:173)
ing.  They  also  are  difficult  to  tear  away  when 
the  house  needs  paint  or  repairs.  Vines  with 
holdfasts  are  ideal  for  brick  or stone. 

106 

SUN  AND  SHADE 

CHOOSING PLANTS TO PROVIDE DENSE SHADE 

TREES 

CRAB  APPLE 
Malus  species and  hybrids 

Type: Deciduous 
Height:  15-25  feet 
Zones:  3-8 
Soil:  Rich,  well  drained;  tolerant 
Light: Full sun 

Comments:  Crab  apples,  with  their  profusion  of fragrant 
spring  flowers  and  fall  fruit,  are  among  the  best  of 
trees.  Much  fruit  stays  on  the  trees  throughout  winter, 
providing  food  for  birds  and  a  nice  decoration  when 
crowned  with  snow.  Some  is good  for  jams  and  jellies. 
Crab  apples  need  regular  spraying,  pruning,  and  borer 
control.  'Transcendent'  and  'Dolgo'  are  best for  eating. 
May  bear  more  fruit  every  other  year. 

DOGWOOD 
Cornus florida 

Type: Deciduous 
Height:  15-30  feet 
Zones:  5-9 
Soil:  Rich,  slightly acid,  moist 
Light:  Prefers  some  shade 

Comments:  One  of the  most  beautiful  and  useful 
flowering  trees,  the  dogwood  offers  spring  bloom,  good 
summer  foliage,  dark  red  autumn  color,  berries,  and, 
with  its  horizontal  branches  and  crownlike  buds,  winter 
interest.  Red  and  pink  varieties  are  available. Japanese 
dogwood {Cornus kousa) blooms later with pointed  bracts. 
The  other  dogwoods  all  are good  ornamentals  with 
attractive  foliage  and  berries,  but  inconspicuous  flowers. 

MAPLE 
Acer species 

Type: Deciduous 
Height:  To  80  feet  and  more 
Zones:  3-8 
Soil:  Any good;  prefers  moist 
Light:  Full  sun  or light  shade 

Comments:  Ninety  species  of maple  vary  in  habit,  rate  of 
growth,  and  size  and  color of leaves.  Spring  and  summer 
foliage  can  be  maroon-red  or  many  shades  of green  with 
white,  yellow,  or pink  markings,  or  silver  undersides. 
The  fiery  autumn  color  of New  England  is  largely  from 
maples  in  brilliant  red,  yellow,  and  orange.  Easily grown; 
few  serious pest  or  disease problems.  Sugar  maple  and 
several  others give  syrup. 

OAK 
Quercus species 

Type: Mostly deciduous 
Height:  50  feet  to  much  higher 
Zones:  4-9 
Soil: Acid,  moist,  well drained 
Light:  Sun  or  light  shade 

Comments:  Oaks  make  excellent  shade  and  specimen 
trees,  especially  where  they  have plenty  of room.  The 
many  species  vary greatly  in  leaves,  color,  and  acorns, 
which  are  good  for  wildlife.  Valued  for  their  sturdy 
growth  and  wide-spreading  branches  at  maturity,  some 
have  brilliant  autumn  color  and  some  are  evergreen. 
Many  keep  their  leaves  long  into  winter.  Difficult  to 
transplant;  some  disease  threat. 

108 

SPRUCE 
Picea species 

Type:  Coniferous  evergreen 
Height:  Most  100  feet  or  more 
Zones:  2-9 
Soil:  Prefers  cool,  moist 
Light: Full sun 

Comments:  Spruces  are  stiff,  formal  trees  with  cones  that 
hang  down.  They  eventually  grow  to  great  heights  and 
can  grow  out  of scale.  Blue  spruces  are  greatly  prized  for 
their  color.  Older  spruces  often  lose  their  lower  branches, 
changing  their  shape,  but  opening  up  the  yard  to  traffic, 
views,  and  more  air circulation.  Red  and  black  spruces  are 
less  choice.  Can  have  spruce gall  and  aphids. 

TULIP  TREE 
Liriodendron tulipifera 

Type: Deciduous 
Height:  7 5  feet or more 
Zones:  5-9 
Soil:  Deep,  rich,  acid,  moist 
Light:  Full  sun  or  light  shade 

Comments:  Tulip  trees  are  fast growing.  They  have  a 
pyramidal  shape,  green  leaves  like  squared-off maple 
leaves,  yellow  autumn  color,  and  tulip-shaped  green 
flowers  with  a  band  of yellow  and  orange  in  late  spring. 
The  flowers  hide  among  the  foliage  but  are  beautiful 
from  a  treetop  deck  or  upstairs  window.  Seedpods  dry  in 
tulip  shape  for  winter.  Can  drop  sooty  mold  or  honeydew 
from  aphids;  use  away  from  patios  or  driveways. 

ANDROMEDA 
Pirns species 

Type:  Broad-leaved  evergreen 
Height:  2-9  feet 
Zones:  4-8 
Soil:  Sandy,  acid,  moist 
Light:  Sun  to partial  shade 

Comments:  An  excellent  shrub,  andromeda has  lustrous, 
dark green  foliage  with  much  bronze  in  the  new  leaves. 
Buds  are  showy  all  winter.  Nodding  clusters  of lily-of-the-
valley-like  flowers,  white  to  pinkish,  cover  the  shrub  in 
the  spring.  Floribunda is  hardier  than  japonica.  Plant  both 
in  more  sheltered  spots  in  the  North.  Fine  entrance  or 
accent plants.  Few problems.  Will  produce  more  flowers 
in  sun  than  in  shade. 

SILVER-LACE  VINE 
Polygonum auberti 

Type:  Woody perennial 
Length:  25  feet 
Zones:  4-8 
Soil:  Average;  tolerates  dry 
Light:  Full  sun  best 

Comments:  Rapid  growing,  silver-lace  vine  has  fragrant, 
greenish  white  flowers  in  long  erect  or  drooping  clusters 
in  late  summer  and  early  fall  when  few  woody  plants  are 
blooming.  Good,  dense,  bright green  foliage.  A  member 
of the  knotweed  family,  it  climbs  by  twining.  Prune 
severely  in  late  winter  to  control  vigorous  growth.  Easy  to 
grow  from  seeds,  root  divisions,  or  ripe  wood  cuttings. 
Also  called  fleece  vine. 

109 

SHRUBS 

VINES 

SUN  AND  SHADE 

CHOOSING PLANTS TO PROVIDE FILTERED SHADE 

BIRCH 
Betula  species 

Type:  Deciduous 
Height:  2 5 - 90  feet 
Zones:  2-10 
Soil:  Moist 
Light:  Full  sun  to  light  shade 

CHERRY,  PLUM,  PEACH 
Prunus  species 

Type:  Deciduous 
Height:  Mostly  20-25  feet 
Zones:  2-10 
Soil:  Well  drained 
Light:  Full  sun 

G I N K GO 
Ginkgo biloba 

Type:  Deciduous 
Height:  50-80  feet 
Zones:  5-10 
Soil:  Deep,  loose 
Light:  Full  sun  to  part  shade 

Comments:  Birches  are  widely  planted,  often  in  clumps, 
for  their  interesting  gray,  white,  black,  or  reddish 
brown  bark  that  splits  and  hangs  like  wrapping  paper. 
The  weeping  birch  is  valued  for  its  shape.  All  have  early 
catkin  blooms  that  herald  spring  and  leaves  that  turn 
yellow  in  autumn.  All  are  short-lived  and  subject  to  many 
pests.  River  birch  needs  more  moisture  but  resists 
problems  better.  'Heritage'  is  an  improved  cultivar. 

Comments:  The  prunus  group,  with  more  than  400 
species,  includes  all  the  stone  fruits,  from  chokecherry  to 
cherry  laurel.  Many  of  these  are  excellent  choices  for 
edible  landscaping.  If you  don't  want  fruit,  use  purely 
ornamental  kinds.  Most  are  low  growing  and  decorative, 
with  clouds  of  spring  flowers,  single  or  double,  in  white, 
pink,  or  rose.  Some  have  bronze  foliage  or  glossy  red 
bark;  a  few  are  evergreen.  Shade  density  varies. 

Comments:  Hardy  and  slow  growing,  ginkgo  trees  are 
one  of the  oldest  plants  in  cultivation.  They  are  ideal  as 
lawn  or  street  trees  because  they're  pest  free,  widely 
adaptable,  and  tolerant  of  smoke  and  pollution.  Provide 
extra  watering  after  planting.  The  male  tree  is  neater; 
berries  have  a  rancid  odor  when  crushed.  Fan-shaped 
leaves  turn  golden  yellow  in  autumn  and  all  fall  at  once, 
making  raking  a  one-time  affair. 

PINE 
Pinus  species 

Type:  Coniferous  evergreen 
Height:  3 0 - 1 00  feet 
Zones:  3-9 
Soil:  Well  drained,  low  fertility 
Light:  Full  sun  to  timber  shade 

Comments:  The  pine  group  of  needled  evergreens 
contains  few  shrubs,  mostly  tall  trees.  They  vary  in  height, 
hardiness,  and  shape.  Prune  for  thicker  growth  by 
snapping  tender  candles  of  new  growth  in  half  in  spring. 
Select  best  varieties  for  your  area  and  landscape  mood. 
Scotch  pine  has  open  shape  and  red  bark;  white  pine  has 
fine-textured  needles.  Austrian  pine  has  stiff  foliage, 
spreading  habit,  and  round  top. 

TREES 

110 

SHRUBS 

VINES 

FORSYTHIA 
Forsythia species 

Type:  Deciduous 
Height:  2-12  feet 
Zones:  4-8 
Soil:  Any,  except  very  dry 
Light:  Full  sun 

LILAC 
Syringa  species 

Type:  Deciduous 
Height:  3-20  feet 
Zones:  2-9 
Soil:  Well  drained,  rich 
Light:  Full  sun 

Comments:  Forsythia's  early-spring  golden  showers  on 
arching  or  upright  branches  make  it  hard  to  resist.  The 
plant  is  much  hardier  than  the  buds.  Give  it  plenty  of 
room;  plant  8  to  10  feet  from  walk  or  patio.  Never  prune 
until  after  bloom.  Then  remove  unwanted  canes  at  the 
ground.  Forsythia  can  claim  more  room  than  its  limited 
season  merits.  Extra-hardy  varieties  are  'Northern  Sun' 
and  'Ottawa.' 

Comments:  Lilac's  fabulous  clusters  of  fragrant  flowers 
in  shades  of white,  pink,  blue,  purple,  and  rose  in  mid-
spring  make  it  popular  despite  its  limited  season  of 
interest.  Prune  seedpods  after  bloom  and  limit  shoots 
coming  from  the  crown.  Good  near  front  entry,  sunny 
patio,  open  windows,  and  as  background  hedge  or  accent 
plant.  Lengthen  season  of  bloom  by  choosing  several 
different  species. 

CLEMATIS 
Clematis  species  and  hybrids 

Type:  Perennial 
Length:  5-30  feet 
Zones:  4 -9 
Soil:  Sandy,  slightly  alkaline 
Light:  Full  sun  to  light  shade 

Comments:  Beautiful  plants,  clematis  species  and  hybrids 
vary  widely  in  bloom  type,  color,  fragrance,  and  season. 
The  large,  star-shaped  flowers  of  the  hybrids  are 
spectacular  in  early  summer.  Sweet  autumn  clematis  has 
fragrant  flowers  in  fall  with  feathery  seedpods.  Plant  in 
humus-rich  soil  with  a  little  lime,  and  mulch  well  to  keep 
the  soil  cool  and  moist.  Shade  the  roots.  Needs  little 
pruning;  wait  until  it  leafs  out  completely. 

MORNING-GLORY 
Ipomea purpurea 

Type:  Mostly  annual 
Length:  8-10  feet 
Zones:  4 - 10 
Soil:  N ot  too  high  in  nitrogen 
Light:  Full  sun 

Comments:  One  of  the  most  loved  and  easily  grown 
vines,  morning-glory  blooms  from  early  summer  until 
frost.  Soak  seeds  overnight  or  notch  before  sowing;  sow 
after  danger  of frost  passes.  Train  on  strings  against  a  wall 
or  on  a  fence.  Plant  improved  varieties  like  'Heavenly 
Blue,'  'Pearly  Gates,'  and  'Scarlet  Star.'  Though  fast 
growing,  morning-glory  is  best  combined  with  a  perennial 
or  woody  vine  for  shade. 

FRONT  YARDS 

BUILDING WALKS AND PATHS 

Constructing  a  walk  or  path  offers  an  excel(cid:173)

lent  introduction  to  the  basics  of  garden 
paving.  Unlike  the  bigger  jobs  of  pouring  a 
patio  (pages  158-161)  or  building  a  driveway 
(pages  242-245),  you  needn't  move  a  lot  of 
earth,  prepare  extensive  footings,  or  wrestle 
with  large  volumes  of tricky  materials.  Best  of 
all—even  for  a  project  as  rigorous  as  the 
exposed-aggregate  walk  shown  at  right—you 
can work at your own pace,  completing several 
sections one weekend,  more the next. 

Note,  too,  that here we show only two of the 
myriad  possibilities  for  walkway paving  materi(cid:173)
als.  For  others,  see  pages  124-125,  130,  and 
162-163.  And  if you  already  have  a  concrete 
walk  that's  sound  but  drab  looking,  consider 
veneering it with tile, flagstones,  brick, or other 
materials, as detailed on pages  164-165. 

•  Exposing  aggregate 
To  achieve  the  rustic,  skidproof  texture  of  an 
exposed-aggregate  walk,  use  one  of two  meth(cid:173)
ods.  You  can  either pour concrete  with  the  ag(cid:173)
gregate  mixed  in  it,  then,  after  the  concrete 
begins to set, scrub some of it away.  This is the 
method  we  used  at  right.  Or,  you  can  seed  ag(cid:173)
gregate on  top  of a just-poured  slab,  screed  the 
stone into the concrete, and then scrub. 

Masonry  dealers  offer a variety  of aggregates 

that  vary  by  region.  We  used  pea  gravel  uni(cid:173)
form  in  size,  but  you  might  prefer  the  look  of 
river pebbles, granite  chips,  or another option. 
As  with  any  concrete  project,  timing plays  a 

critical role in the outcome of an exposed-aggre(cid:173)
gate  finish.  Don't  try  to  scrape  away  the  con(cid:173)
crete  until  the  aggregate  holds  firm.  If weather 
conditions  are  right,  this  stage  should  occur  in 
about 1 1/2 hours,  but  it  could  take  up  to  six 
hours.  To  test,  lay  a  board  on  the  surface  and 
kneel  on  the  board;  if the  board  leaves  marks, 
allow  more  time.  If  any  aggregate  dislodges 
when  you  start  brushing,  stop  and  let  the  con(cid:173)
crete set some more. 

Finally, slow curing is what gives concrete its 
strength, so wait a week or so before walking on 
it. Also, dampen the concrete daily as it cures. 

FRONT  YARDS 

BUILDING STEPS 

Properly  constructed  garden  steps  not  only 

take a walk or path into another dimension, 
they also serve as a retaining wall, holding back 
soil erosion.  This means you need  to plan care(cid:173)
fully,  and  securely  anchor  them  into  the  slope 
they  ascend. 

Select materials to match or contrast with the 
walkways  at  top  and  bottom.  Besides  the  brick 
and  timber versions  shown  here,  you  can  build 
steps entirely of concrete (just dispense with the 
bricks),  set  bricks  or concrete  slabs  into  a sand 
base,  mix  stone  or  concrete  treads  with  brick 
risers, or terrace the slope with timber risers and 
surface  the  treads  with  gravel,  wood  chips,  or 
other  loose  fill. 

•  Laying  out 
Whatever  materials  you  choose,  you  first  must 
decide how many steps you will need, how deep 
each  horizontal  tread will  be,  and  how  high  to 
make  each  vertical  riser.  Here's  a  useful  rule: 
The  tread  dimension  plus  the  riser  dimension 
should equal about  17  inches. Try to make your 
riser  dimension  no  more  than  7  inches  and  no 
less  than  4  inches.  No  matter  how  you  juggle 
the figures,  just be sure all treads and risers will 
be  exactly  the  same  depth  and  height:  Changes 
break a person's stride and cause stumbles. Also, 
be  sure  to  take  into  account the  depth  of tread-
finishing  materials  and  mortar,  if  any,  when 
planning  a concrete  foundation. 

Use stakes  and  a  level  string or  board  to  de(cid:173)
termine the total rise your steps will ascend and 
the total run they will traverse (see page 39). To 
determine  how  many  steps  you  will  need,  di(cid:173)
vide  these  measurements  by  combinations  of 
tread  and  riser  sizes  until  you  come  out  with 
equal-size steps. 

A caution: Building codes usually place limits 

on  tread  and  riser  sizes  and  other  stairway  di(cid:173)
mensions, so check with local authorities before 
finalizing your plans.  Codes also mandate hand(cid:173)
rails  in  some  situations.  More  about  these  on 
page  127. 

124 

FRONT  YARDS 

BUILDING RAMPS 

Aramp  makes  a  gentle  transition  from  one 

level  to  another,  smoothing  the  path  for 
everything from tricycles  to wheelbarrows  to— 
most especially—wheelchairs.  If your family  in(cid:173)
cludes  someone  who  relies  on  a wheelchair for 
mobility,  you'll  most  certainly  need  a  ramp  to 
one or more of your home's entrances, and may(cid:173)
be to outdoor living areas as well. 

We poured concrete for the ramp at right, but 
you can use a variety of other materials,  includ(cid:173)
ing wood,  or  even  earth  topped  with  fine grav(cid:173)
el.  Whatever  material  you  use,  make  sure  the 
surface  the  chair  will  ride  on  is  nonskid.  Tex(cid:173)
tured  rubber  toppings  (see  page  185)  and  tex(cid:173)
tured  concrete (see opposite)  work well. 

•  Ramp  basics 
Safety  and  ease  of use  are  the  prime  consider(cid:173)
ations for any ramp.  Appearance, though, plays 
a  part,  too,  especially  for  a  ramp  visible  from 
the  street. 

Regardless  of the  design  you  come  up  with, 
certain norms apply. Slope a wheelchair ramp at 
a rise of no more than  1  foot per  12  feet of run. 
This  standard  can  make  for  some  incredibly 
long  ramps—a total  rise  of 2  feet,  for example, 
requires  a total  length  of at least 24  feet.  But a 
gentle grade is  essential for a ramp to  be useful 
to the people who need  it most. 

Even if your ramp won't be used by anyone in 
a wheelchair, slope it no more than about  1  foot 
for every  7  feet of run. 

For wheelchair use, include handrails on both 
sides of your ramp (see opposite), and make the 
ramp  wide  enough  so the  distance  between  the 
handrails is at least 36 inches.  Also, any incline 
longer  than  30  feet  needs  a  landing  where  a 
wheelchair  user  can  rest  and  maneuver  the 
chair.  Whether your plan  calls  for an  L-shaped, 
switchback,  or  broken  straight-run  ramp,  all 
landings  must measure at least  5x5  feet.  Where 
doors  open  outward,  the  adjacent landing  must 
be at least 5x6 1/2 feet; this gives wheelchair users 
room  to move  back when the door is opened. 

126 

INSTALLING  HANDRAILS 
If you're  building  a  ramp,  outfit  both 
sides  of it  with  handrails  to  allow 
wheelchair  users  to pull  themselves  up  the 
ramp.  For  steps,  put  a  rail  on  one  side. 
Handrails  for  ramps  should  be  about 
32  inches  high.  If people  in  wheelchairs 
will  use  your  ramp,  install  rails  that  have  a 
grip width of about 1 1/2 inches. Along 
stairways,  set  handrails  about  30  inches 
high;  at  stairway  landings,  34  inches  high. 

Similarly,  for  concrete  steps,  attach  rail 
brackets  to  the  treads.  But  for  wood  steps, 
attach  the  balusters  to  the  structure. 

Below,  we  show  a  metal  railing  being 

attached  to  a  concrete  curb  that  runs 
alongside  a  ramp.  To  attach  wooden 
railings  to  a  wooden  ramp,  see  the 
instructions  for  deck  railings  on  pages 
176-181.  Particularly  important is  that 
balusters  be  securely  attached  to  a  wood 
ramp's  structure,  not  its  surface. 

127 

FRONT  YARDS 

INSTALLING WALK EDGINGS 

Looking  for  a  way  to  dress  up  a  plain-Jane 

path,  provide  crisp  lines  between  paving 
and  landscaping  materials,  or  hold  masonry 
units in line? 

Edging can do all  these jobs—and  more—for 
only a modest investment of time and money. In 
most  cases,  you  simply  decide  on  the  material 
you'd  like  to  use,  excavate  shallow  trenches  on 
either  side  of  the  walk,  and  stake  or  set  the 
edging  in place.  (One  exception  is  the  integral 
concrete  edging,  shown  opposite.  It's  installed 
at the same time as a new walk.) 

•  Mowing  strips 
Edging materials are every bit as various as the 
pavings  they  border.  Choose  from  concrete, 
brick,  stone,  tile,  wood,  and  vinyl.  Edging 
styles,  however, fall into just two broad catego(cid:173)
ries.  A raised edging puts a lip at each side of a 
walk or path.  A mowing strip  installs  flush  with 
the  walk  so  you  can  run  one  wheel  of a mower 
along it. 

Make  mowing  strips  6  to  12  inches  wide. 
Concrete,  brick,  tile,  and  other  smooth-surface 
masonry  materials  are  best  for  mowing  strips. 
You  can  use  timbers,  but  be  warned  that  these 
are easily nicked  by the mower blade. 

•  Raised  edgings 
A  raised  edging keeps aggressive ground  cover 
from  overgrowing  a  walk,  channels  water  run(cid:173)
off,  and  makes  a  clean  break  between  differing 
surfaces.  If  you're  planning  a  path  of  gravel, 
mulch, or other loose-fill material, a raised  edg(cid:173)
ing is the only way to go. 

Keep  a  raised  edging  low, 1/2 inch  or  so,  or 
make  it  3  or  more  inches  high.  Anything  in 
between poses a tripping hazard.  The photos at 
right and  opposite show how to install two pop(cid:173)
ular  types  of  raised  edgings;  page  131  shows 
several alternatives. 

Give  thought,  too,  to  the  type  of plantings 
you select for alongside a walk or path. The box 
on  the  opposite  page  shows  four  good  choices 
that are easy to keep in bounds. 

128 

129 

FRONT  YARDS 

CHOOSING WALK AND EDGING MATERIALS 

WALK  MATERIALS 

LOOSE  FILL 
Description:  Aggregate  (shown),  pebbles, 
crushed  rock,  sand,  shredded  bark,  nutshells, 
seashells,  and  pine  straw  go  directly  on  the 
surface  you  want  to  cover. 
Effect:  Organic  loose fills add  a  rustic  look 
and  interesting  texture  to  lightly  used  areas. 
Mineral  ones  have  a more  formal  appearance. 

Cost:  Among  the  most economical  walk 
materials,  but  because  loose  fill  is  prone  to 
erosion  and  tends  to  overflow  its  boundaries, 
it  needs  replenishing periodically. 
Comments:  Drains  well,  conforms  to 
contours,  and  is  easily  installed  over com(cid:173)
pacted  sand  (see  page  123).  To  keep  fill 
from  spreading,  confine  with  edging. 

WOOD  PLANKS 
Description:  Docklike  strips  of decking  you 
can  lay  on  a  sand  or gravel  base  or atop  an 
existing  masonry  walk. 
Effect:  Warm,  rustic,"  and  an  especially good 
choice  if you  want  to  extend  an  on-grade  or 
raised  deck  out  into  your  yard. 

Cost:  Less  than  brick,  stone,  or tile;  more than 
concrete  or  loose  fill. 
Comments:  Use pressure-treated  lumber  or 
naturally  rot-resistant  redwood,  cedar,  or 
cypress.  Keep  out  of contact  with  vegetation. 
Leave  drainage  spaces  between  boards. 
Construct  as  for  on-grade  deck  shown  on 
pages  172-175,  but  omit posts  and  footings. 

WOOD  ROUNDS  OR  BLOCKS 
Description:  Slices  of logs  or  timbers  set  in  a 
bed  of sand  or  loose  fill,  or  simply  cut  into 
sod  and  surrounded  by grass. 
Effect:  Similar  to  stepping-stones,  but  even 
more, organic  in  appearance.  An  ideal  choice 
for  a  romantic  country garden  or  a  mean(cid:173)
dering  forest  path. 

Cost: Very  cheap,  if you have  wood  and  a 
chain  saw,  and  set  rounds  or  blocks  in  sand. 
Otherwise,  a  little  more  than  cost  of loose  fill. 
Comments:  Rounds  or  blocks,  when  used 
with  loose  fill,  aren't  a good  choice  for 
heavily  traveled  paths,  especially  any  that  lead 
directly to  your  home:  Fill  materials  can  stick 
to  shoes  and  travel  indoors. 

BRICK 
Description:  Any  of a  vast variety  of clay-
based  materials  set  in  sand  or  mortared  to  a 
concrete  base. 
Effect:  With  bricks  you  can  create  almost  any 
look  you  want,  from  an  arrow-straight  front 
entry walk  to  a  serpentine  cobblestone path 
through  clumps  of wildflowers. 

Cost:  Relatively  expensive  but very  durable. 
Comments:  For  an  idea  of how  versatile  brick 
garden  paving  can  be,  check  the pattern 
possibilities  on  the  opposite  page.  For  more 
design  interest,  consider  using  two  or  more 
colors.  To  learn  about  working  with  brick, 
see pages  124-125  and  154-157.  Bricks  set 
in  sand  may  need  leveling  every  so  often. 

EDGING  MATERIALS 
VINYL 
Description:  Flexible  strips  of solid  or  metal-
capped  plastic  that  can  be  set  into  the ground 
with  or  without  staking. 
Effect:  Because  it's  so  easily  shaped,  vinyl 
edging negotiates  curves with  ease.  Comes  in 
a  limited  range  of colors,  but  harmonizes  with 
just  about  any  surfacing  material. 

Cost:  Moderate,  especially  when  you  consider 
that  vinyl  lasts  practically  forever. 
Comments:  The  easiest  edging  to  install. 
Simply  slice  cuts  next  to paving  with  a  spade 
and  press  or stake  the  vinyl  in  place.  Keep 
the  mower  away  from  this  material. 

BRICK 
Description:  Paving bricks  set on  edge,  on 
end,  or  at  an  angle  for  a  sawtooth  effect. 
Effect:  Probably  the  most  popular  edging 
material,  brick makes  an  excellent  border for 
concrete,  loose fill,  and,  of course,  brick 
paving.  Choose  colors  that  match  or  contrast 
with  the  walk's  surface. 

Cost:  Moderate  to  expensive,  depending  on 
the  type  you  select.  If you're  willing  to  take 
time  to  chip  mortar  off them,  you  can  save 
some  money  with  used  bricks. 
Comments:  Set bricks  in  sand  (see  pages 
154-157)  or  mortar  them  to  a  concrete  base 
(see  pages  124-125). 

PATIOS 

AND DECKS 

ne of the best 

ways to civilize your yard is to add a patio 

or deck.  With  the  addition of either, 

you'll soon be escaping to the great outdoors 

at every possible chance.  As  a bonus,  you'll find 

that a patio or deck enriches  life within 

the home,  too.  The new inside-looking-out views 

will  visually  expand  crowded  indoor 

rooms, plus help assuage fits of cabin fever by stirring 

memories  of pleasant  moments  spent outside. 

148 

PATIOS  AND  DECKS 

ASSESSING PATIO AND DECK OPTIONS 

Ahouse  needs  more 

than  four  walls,  a 
floor,  and  a  ceiling  for  living.  Outdoors, 
then,  why settle for just four boundaries, grass, 
and  trees?  Yards,  like indoor rooms,  should  of(cid:173)
fer an irresistible invitation to wander,  rest, eat, 
and  enjoy. 

One of the primary ways to bring this about is 
with  a patio,  a deck,  or a combination  of both. 
These cost much less to build than indoor rooms 
and  barely  disrupt  the  household  during  the 
construction process.  You can build  the simpler 
ones  yourself. 

Start  by  thinking  about  your  family's  needs 
and your landscape style, then imagine which of 
the  many  variations  pictured  in  this  chapter 
might  work  best. 

•  At the  start 
Check  local  building  codes,  regulations,  and 
zoning restrictions first.  It may be that overhead 
sunshades  need  approval,  that power lines  can(cid:173)
not pass  over,  or that footings,  spans,  and  deck 
railings  over  slopes  must  conform  to  specific 
standards.  Property lines and easements will re(cid:173)
duce your options, too. So will any deed restric(cid:173)
tions and  the location  of a septic tank. 

Where  you  place  your  patio  or  deck  is  most 
important.  Access  to  kitchen,  living  room,  or 
family  room  will  make  a  big  difference  to  out(cid:173)
door  use  and  indoor  appreciation.  Entry  from 
more  than  one  room  or  a  pass-through  at  the 
kitchen window will make a patio or deck more 
useful,  too. 

Patios  and  decks  on  the  north  and  east  will 
have less sun and more cooling breezes in warm 
climates and warm weather. Those on the south 
and  west  will  receive  much-appreciated  extra 
sun in cooler climates and seasons. Take time to 
study  wind  and  rain  directions  in  your yard,  as 
well as  sun  and  shadow patterns.  See  how  they 
vary with  the seasons  before choosing a site. 

Remember  that  cool  air  moves  downward 
over  land.  If you  build  your  deck  on  the  uphill 
side  of your  house,  you  will  be  more  comfort(cid:173)
able on  chilly evenings. 

150 

Depending on your climate, you may want to 

make provisions for rain protection, either over(cid:173)
head or from the direction summer rains usually 
blow.  Anchor  your  deck  against  wind  blasts, 
and  make  sure  it will  support the  weight of the 
expected  snowfall. 

If  space  or  privacy  dictate  that  you  build 
where  climate  is  less  favorable,  overhead  sun(cid:173)
shades,  screens,  or  well-placed  trees  can  make 
your  outdoor  room  much  more  comfortable. 
Remember  that  deciduous  trees  will  cool  the 
scene in  summer yet not block the winter sun. 

•  Compare  the  options 
Decks are more part of the  house;  patios,  more 
part  of the garden. 

Decks have a soft look and are more in accord 
with  a  wooden  house  or  a  rustic  setting.  They 
do  not  reflect unwanted  heat and  light. 

Patios  have a more permanent look and  feel. 
And  their  reflected  heat  feels  great  in  the 
spring.  Because  of  the  wide  variety  of paving 
materials  available,  patios  can  complement any 
style  of house  and  landscape.  They  do  require 
level ground, though.  (If your yard is complete(cid:173)
ly flat, you might consider excavating for a sunk(cid:173)
en  patio  to  add  interest.  Such  a  patio  will  be 
cooler  in  summer,  give  a  different  view  of the 
surroundings,  and  provide  privacy.  It  also  will 
cost  more  because  of  the  need  to  dig  and  to 
retain  the  surrounding area.) 

The  greatest  advantage  of decks  is  that,  be(cid:173)
cause  they  do  not  require  level  land,  they  can 
make a terrible terrain lovely and useful.  Decks 
also  can  be  built  over  old,  cracked  concrete 
without the  expense  or work of tearing it out. 

A  good  combination  is  a  deck  at  the  floor 
level of the house, with steps leading down to a 
patio in the garden. 

Either project will be enjoyed for weeks long(cid:173)
er on  both  sides of summer if you  build  around 
a fire pit. Some fire pits can double as low tables 
in hot weather. 

Renters or those who want an instant outdoor 
room  while  forming  their  landscaping  plans 
should consider building a portable deck. These 

units  can  be  built  in  a  day,  moved  from  sun  to 
shade  with  the  season,  and  stored  away  for  the 
winter.  Later,  they can  be placed permanently. 
Modular deck walkways can be useful, too, in 
a  new  yard.  When final plans  are  made,  move 
the units  or arrange them into a deck. 

As  a rule,  freestanding  decks  will  not get as 
much use as  those  attached  to  the  house.  But a 
small  freestanding  deck  at  the  edge  of the  yard 
or in a clump of trees and shrubs can be an ideal 
hideaway.  Add  a  gazebo—now  or  later—and 
the  freestanding  deck  can  become  a focal point 
for  the  yard  (see  pages  192-197),  particularly 
when inviting paths or steps direct visitors. 

The wood of decks blends well with hot tubs, 
while  the  solid  surface  of a  patio  works  better 
around  most  swimming  pools  (see  pages  204-
211),  though  there  can  be exceptions.  Because 
of its formality, a patio best fits most ornamental 
pools  or fountains  (see pages  198-203).  Decks 
easily  expand  to  include  sandboxes  and  play 
structures  (see pages  216-219). 

You may want to build some sort of overhead 
sunshade  to  frame the view,  shade the  interior, 
or  protect  from  the  elements  (see  pages  100-
103).  While still in the planning stage,  remem(cid:173)
ber to include needed lighting (see pages 92-93 
and  212-215)  and  electrical  outlets.  Consider 
your storage  needs,  too,  because  decks,  bench(cid:173)
es,  and  raised  planters  are  perfect  places  for 
built-in  hideaways. 

To avoid puddling problems, be sure to leave 
or  build  in  ways  for  water  to  drain  off  your 
patio.  Don't block all of the  deck edges,  either; 
leave  some  open  for  when  you  hose  down  or 
sweep your  deck. 

•  Decide  on  size 
Keep all aspects of your deck or patio in scale as 
you plan.  Outdoor rooms  need  to  be about the 
same size as  the largest indoor rooms.  Measure 
your patio  furniture  and  add  enough  room  for 
pulling out chairs  and  walking  around. 

A  minimum  of  5  feet  by  6  feet  allows  two 
people  to  sit  and  relax  beside  a  table,  but  it  is 
cramped  if anyone  else  comes  along.  Put  such 

small patios  and  decks  away from  the  house for 
solitude. Or start small and add on as family size, 
time,  energy,  and  budget dictate. 

For an attached patio,  15  by 25  feet is proba(cid:173)
bly  a  good  minimum  size.  It  provides  ample 
room  for  furniture,  a  grill,  and  some  storage. 
Multiple  units,  perhaps  connected  by  steps  or 
paved  walks,  are  often  more  satisfactory  than 
one large one;  each unit can function as a sepa(cid:173)
rate  room  and  offer  its  own view. 

•  Other  considerations 
As  your  outdoor  room  progresses  from  dream 
to reality,  you'll  need  to weigh  such choices as 
pavings,  railings,  and  benches,  all  of which  are 
discussed  in the  next few pages. 

Since you  may well  choose  your location  be(cid:173)
cause  of  the  shade  and  beauty  of  surrounding 
trees,  you'll want to take every measure to pre(cid:173)
serve  them.  The  major  root  systems  of  most 
trees extend  to the drip line  of the  branches.  If 
you wish to use a masonry surface over this area, 
loose gravel  or bricks  set on  sand  will allow  air 
and water to  reach the roots.  Concrete won't. 

If you  grade  or  fill  more  than  3  to  6  inches 
within  a tree's  drip  line,  serious  damage  to  the 
roots could cause the eventual death of the tree. 
Here, a deck has the advantage. You need only 
build around the trunk, and the tree lives happi(cid:173)
ly ever after.  But that means  it grows,  so make 
the hole's framework large enough that you can 
cut off board  edges  as  needed. 

If you decide on more drastic grade changes, 
check  with  a  tree  specialist  for  details  about 
building a raised  bed  or a dry-well. 

When your plan assumes definite dimensions, 
make a final check to eliminate costly and disap(cid:173)
pointing  mistakes.  Stake  off  the  area  and  con(cid:173)
nect  the  stakes  with  string.  Hang  sheets  to 
simulate  privacy  screens.  Mentally  or  actually 
put  your  patio  furniture  in  place.  Visualize  the 
height of the benches and  railings; check every(cid:173)
thing for scale and  unity.  Adjust your landscape 
plan as needed. And before construction begins, 
remove the topsoil to  other parts  of the yard or 
stockpile  it for use around  your patio or deck. 

PATIOS  AND  DECKS 

CREATING THE ULTIMATE PATIO 

Build  the  perfect  patio  and  your  summers 

will  be  filled  with  breezy  afternoons,  out(cid:173)
door suppers, and gentle evenings with children 
chasing fireflies while adults  relax and  watch. 
This ideal patio is  visible indoors from  door(cid:173)

ways  and  windows,  gently  inviting  you  to  go 
outside, if only for stolen moments. It is so easily 
reached  from  the  kitchen  and  family  room  that 
it  becomes  an  extension  of both. 

It has  enough privacy and  comfortable, prac(cid:173)
tical furniture to make it as cozy as the den. Yet 
it also has  space for a breath  of fresh air and  for 
entertaining a crowd  with  special flair. 

The  surface  drains  and  dries  quickly  after  a 
rain,  though  certain  flagstones,  when  wet,  give 
off a lovely reflection that amplifies the garden's 
appeal.  Most  important,  the  surface  must  be 
safe,  nonskidding,  and  comfortable  underfoot. 
Softer materials will do for paths, but more-solid 
surfaces  are  better for feet mostly at rest. 

The perfect patio is a focal point of beauty for 
both  house  and  garden.  The  choicest  plants 
grow  around  it,  so  you  can  pull  weeds,  plant 
seeds,  or pull  off spent  flowers  from  your chair 
if you wish.  You are close enough to notice the 
butterflies  on  the  marigolds  and  to water easily 
at  the  first sign  of wilting. 

While  you  have  the hose  out,  you  can  whisk 
away  any  dirt  or  debris.  Patio  work  should  be 
mostly  pleasant puttering. 

Children can play here safely.  You can watch 
them  from  indoors  or  out  without  squelching 
their imaginary worlds  or caring how  rowdy or 
rambunctious  they get. 

The  ultimate  patio  blends  the  beauty  of the 

garden  with  the  comfort  of the  house.  Bloom(cid:173)
ing flowers and visiting birds at feeders or bird-
baths  entice  even  the  most  indoor  person  to 
venture  out. 

The ideal patio  has  a natural  feeling of being 
part  of  a  magnificent  landscape,  as  if  it  grew 
there, and the owners simply were wise enough 
to make  the  most of such  a pleasurable site. 

• This all-brick  outdoor 
area with latticed gate 
elegantly enhances the 
adjoining house. 
Retaining walls enclose 
the patio, and wide steps 
lead to the grassy slope 
and the pleasantly 
elevated garden beyond. 

152 

PATIOS  AND  DECKS 

BUILDING SAND-BASE PATIOS 

Laying bricks, flagstones, or other paving ma(cid:173)

terials  on  a  sand  base,  then  packing  more 
sand  between them,  creates a surprisingly dura(cid:173)
ble patio  surface—one  that's flexible enough  to 
ride  out  all  but  the  severest  frost  heave  and 
settlement. 

Laying a sand-base patio is easy, too, because 
you  need  only  excavate  deep  enough  to  make 
room  for  a  thin  layer  of crushed  rock,  about  2 
inches  of sand,  and  the  bricks  themselves.  Best 
of all,  you needn't mix and pour one cubic inch 
of concrete.  Contrast  this  with  the  much  more 
arduous process of constructing a concrete patio 
detailed  on pages  158-161. 

•  Panoply  of  choices 
Patio  bricks  come  in  a  myriad  of sizes,  shapes, 
and colors—and you can lay them in a variety of 
patterns  (see page  131).  If you  live  in  a north(cid:173)
ern  climate,  order  SW  (severe  weathering) 
bricks.  For  milder  zones  not  subject  to  freeze-
thaw  cycles,  buy  MW  (moderate  weathering) 
grade.  No  matter  where  you  live,  however, 
don't use NW (no weathering) bricks outdoors; 
they won't stand  up  to the elements. 

How  many  bricks  will  you  need?  Compute 
the  area  of your  new  patio  in  square  feet  and 
take  this  measurement,  along  with  your  patio 
plan,  to the  brickyard.  Dealers  have tables  that 
tell how many bricks of a given size you'll need 
per  square  foot. 

•  Other  materials 
Brick  isn't  the  only  topping  you  can  lay  over  a 
sand  base.  Stone  comes  in  three  main  types: 
rubble  (round  rocks),  flagstone  (irregular-size 
flat  pieces),  and  ashlar  (dimension-cut  stone 
sliced  into  uniform  pieces).  The  box  on  page 
157 depicts several other possibilities for a sand-
base patio. Installation procedures are the same, 
except  that  in  some  cases  you  may  want  to  fill 
spaces  between  masonry  units  with  mortar,  as 
explained  on page  157. 

PATIOS  AND  DECKS 

BUILDING SAND-BASE PATIOS 

156 

157 

PATIOS  AND  DECKS 

BUILDING CONCRETE PATIOS 

Compared to the task of laying bricks or oth(cid:173)

er  paving  materials  on  a  sand  base,  con(cid:173)
structing a concrete patio  is  a more demanding 
project.  First,  you  must  excavate  and  build 
forms  to  contain  the  concrete.  Then  you  must 
pour  the  concrete,  strike  off  the  excess,  level, 
and trowel a smooth surface—all within the sev(cid:173)
eral hours it takes for concrete to set up.  For all 
your  pains,  however,  you'll  be  rewarded  with 
an  absolutely  flat,  durable  surface  that  will  last 
for decades  with  little  or  no  maintenance. 

•  Tools  for concrete work 
Besides  ordinary  carpentry  and  garden" tools, 
you  will  need  to  improvise,  rent,  or  purchase 
several  specialized  items:  a tamper for compact(cid:173)
ing  earth,  a  darby  or  bull float  to  smooth  wet 
concrete, an edging trowel to round off edges and 
separate them from the forms, & jointer to groove 
control  joints  into  the  slab,  and  a  rectangular 
concrete trowel to finish the surface. 

Once  concrete  starts  to  flow,  it's  too  late  to 
alter  the  forms,  run  for  tools,  or  look  for  more 
help.  So,  before  you  start mixing  or  the  ready-
mix  truck  arrives,  make  extra  sure  you  have 
everything and  everyone  you  need  on hand. 

•  Building  forms 
Patio  slabs  typically  measure  4  inches  thick,  so 
construct forms  with  smooth,  straight 2x4s,  set(cid:173)
ting  their  tops  about  an  inch  above  lawn  level. 
Wet  concrete  exerts  tremendous  pressure,  so 
brace  forms  well.  If  you're  in  doubt  about 
whether  your  forms  are  rigid  enough,  drive  a 
few extra stakes  and  install added  braces. 

For proper drainage, slope your patio 1/4 inch 

per foot away  from  the  house. 

If you  want  to  edge  your  patio  with  wood, 
construct  permanent  forms  with  redwood,  ce(cid:173)
dar, or pressure-treated lumber.  Apply a coat of 
sealer to further enhance the wood's  natural  rot 
resistance, then put masking or duct tape on the 
top  edges  to  keep  cement  from  staining  or 
scratching the  wood.  (See pages  122-123.) 

158 

PATIOS AND DECKS 

BUILDING CONCRETE PATIOS 

160 

161 

PATIOS  AND  DECKS 

CHOOSING A SPECIAL CONCRETE SURFACE 

162 

WEATHERPROOFING  PATIOS 
Water  is  the  natural  enemy  of all  masonry 
materials.  Moisture  finds  its  way  into tiny 
crevices,  then  freezes,  turning  the  cracks 
into  open  wounds.  Water  also  weakens 
masonry  by  dissolving  salts  and  leaching 
out  binders.  A  good  paint  or  clear  sealer 
will  keep  out  water  and  maintain  the 
strength  of your  new  patio. 

When painting  your patio,  choose  an 

alkyd  masonry  paint.  Water-thinned  latex 
masonry  paints  perform  well  on  vertical 
masonry  surfaces,  but  alkyds  stand  up 
better  to  the  normal  wear  and  abrasion  a 
patio  is  subjected  to. 

Clear  sealants go  on  fast  and  protect 

masonry  through  the  rainiest  season. 
Apply  the  clear  sealer  of your  choice 
annually,  and  your patio  will  maintain  its 
youth  almost  indefinitely. 

If weather  or  stains  have  already  taken 
a toll  on  a patio  at your  house,  revive  it 
by  scrubbing  with  a  5-percent  solution  of 
muriatic  acid.  Wear gloves  and  protective 
clothing,  and  rinse  well.  Wait a  week  or 
so,  then  apply  paint  or  a clear  sealer. 

163 

PATIOS  AND  DECKS 

SURFACING EXISTING CONCRETE PATIOS 

Looking for a way to dress up a boring slab of 

concrete?  Consider  veneering  it  with  flag(cid:173)
stones, slate, or ceramic, mosaic, quarry, or pav(cid:173)
er tiles. You simply clean the concrete, spread a 
thin  layer of mortar onto  the  slab,  set stones  or 
tiles  into  the  mortar,  then  fill  spaces  between 
them  with  mortar or grout. 

•  Surface  choices 
Unlike  indoor  tiles,  outdoor  versions  are  un-
glazed  and  stand  up  to  the  elements  much  bet(cid:173)
ter.  Ceramic  tiles  (the  kind  we  used  here) 
typically  measure  6  inches  square  by 1/4 inch 
thick.  Mosaic tiles are  1  or 2  inches square, 1/4 
inch  thick,  and  come  mounted  in  groups  on 
large pieces of paper or mesh. Quarry and paver 
tiles are 6 or 8 inches on a side by 3/8or 1/2 inch 
thick.  Pavers  have  slightly  rounded  edges; 
edges of quarry tiles consist of crisp right angles. 
Besides tiles, you can veneer a walk with flag(cid:173)
stones or rough-cut slate. These materials aren't 
uniformly  thick,  so  you  need  to  set  them  in  a 
thicker  mortar  bed. 

•  Preparing  the  base 
To start, patch any cracks in the existing surface 
with patching cement (see pages  268-269).  To 
check for low  spots,  roll  a length  of pipe  across 
the concrete and  mark any spots where you can 
see light under the pipe. Fill these with patching 
cement and level with a straightedge. To ensure 
proper adhesion for the mortar, scrub the entire 
patio with  a  5-percent solution of muriatic acid. 
Rinse  well  before  applying  mortar. 

•  Grip 
To  improve  adhesion,  mix  latex  bonding  ce(cid:173)
ment  into  the  mortar or  brush  bonding  cement 
onto the acid-cleaned patio as directed. 

The  secret  to  successfully  working  with  mor(cid:173)
tar is to keep everything wet.  Very slow evapo(cid:173)
ration during the curing process gives mortar its 
strength.  Spray  concrete  well  before  applying 
mortar.  Soak tiles  in  water before  setting them. 
Periodically  sprinkle  water  over  everything  as 
you  work. 

164 

165 

PATIOS  AND  DECKS 

PATIO PLANTINGS 

Patios offer ideal conditions for plants.  Typi(cid:173)

cally, these areas are protected from winter 
winds  and  summer  sun,  and  nearby  structures 
often  reflect springtime  warmth  and  sunshine. 
Still,  you'll  want  to  choose  what  you  grow 
near  your patio  carefully,  because  nowhere  are 
plants  more  the  focus  of attention. 

Select  only  tidy,  long-blooming  plants  that 
grow  to size  quickly,  then  stay  in  scale without 
constant  pruning.  Relegate  plants  that  have  a 
short season of interest, a season of excess seedi-
ness,  or  a  coarse  appearance  to  more-distant 
parts  of the  yard. 

All of the principles of design assume greater 
importance  near  a  patio.  Color  clashes  you 
could  live  with  in  a  border  at  the  back  of your 
yard/Will dizzy you if they appear at the edge of 
your patio.  Form and  texture,  too,  are accentu(cid:173)
ated,  especially  when  the  plants  are  brought 
closer to eye level in raised beds. 

Fragrances,  which  often  go  undetected  away 
from  the  house,  are  easily  sniffed  around  the 
patio.  Especially  good  choices  are  the  fragrant 
plants—like  moonflower  vine,  evening  prim(cid:173)
rose,  and  angel's-trumpet—that open  widest  in 
the  evening,  when  you're  most  likely  to  be 
using your patio. 

To add a dramatic accent to your patio, select 
a spot nearby to espalier a tree, arrange a vine in 
tracery  shape,  or grow  a  rose  or  shrub  in  stan(cid:173)
dard  form.  For  a delightful  evening  show,  sur(cid:173)
round  your patio  with  white-bloomed  plants. 

•  The  nitty-gritty 
Lawns  and  planting  beds  around  patios  should 
be an inch or more below the level of the paving 
to allow for digging and  stirring in  soil  amend(cid:173)
ments without having soil wash onto the paving. 
Planting  beds  above  the  patio  level  need  to  be 
held  back  with  some  sort  of  retaining  wall. 
Good drainage in either case is vital. 

Set  plantings  far  enough  from  patios  so  that 
their  growth  won't  encroach  on  the  paved 
space. To avoid cracked concrete later on, select 
trees with small root systems. 

166 

PATIOS  AND  DECKS 

CREATING THE ULTIMATE DECK 

The  best  decks  make  outdoor  living  so  like 

indoor  comfort  that  they  become  extra 
rooms,  with  the  added  advantages  of easy  care 
and  natural  surroundings. 

The well-designed deck starts at the floor lev(cid:173)
el  of the  adjacent  indoor  room,  enabling  users 
to  step  out without  stepping  up  or  down.  And, 
since  we  tend  to  look  up  and  away  rather  than 
down and  around  when we  move from  indoors 
out,  the  well-placed  deck  takes  maximum  ad(cid:173)
vantage of any treetop views or distant vistas. 

For  the  function  and  feeling  of  separate 
rooms, decks often are built with varying levels. 
At  right,  a  cooking  area  lies  only  three  steps 
above the main level, yet seems quite removed. 
Decks  and  steps  can  be  combined  in  any  num(cid:173)
ber of ways  to  lead  to all  of a yard's attractions. 
Privacy is crucial, for few people are comfort(cid:173)
able on stage.  Screens can provide needed sanc(cid:173)
tuary.  If made of lattice—and perhaps entwined 
with  vines  of  fragrant  flowers  or  clusters  of 
grapes—they  impart  a  romantic  effect. 

•  Design  counts 
Although decks seem simple, their design is im(cid:173)
portant.  Unimaginative planning can  result in a 
deck  that  looks  like  a  large  box.  To  avoid  this 
and  to  add  interest,  alter  the  square  or  rectan(cid:173)
gle—even the slightest bit—by cutting off a cor(cid:173)
ner diagonally or adding a point or a half circle. 
Repeat architectural  elements from your house. 
Railings  or  surrounding  benches  or  planters 
can  set  the  mood  of  this  outdoor  room,  too, 
while  adding  comfort,  storage,  and  safety.  Be 
sure  that  lazing  adults  or  monkeyshining  chil(cid:173)
dren won't have to worry about falling over the 
edge,  even  if this would  be only a foot or two. 
Though  you  are  less  likely  to  garden  from  a 
deck than you are from a patio, bright blooming 
containers  are  a  necessary  accessory.  Where 
arbors,  screens,  or  overhanging  tree  branches 
offer  anchorage,  hanging  pots  are  appropriate. 
Use ground covers, flowers, and shrubs, too, to 
tie your deck to its site. 

For do-it-yourselfers, on-grade decks are easy 
to build. The higher your raised deck, the more 
likely you are to need  professional advice. 

170 

PATIOS  AND  DECKS 

BUILDING GRADE-LEVEL DECKS 

Agrade-level  deck,  which  stands  on 

its 
own just a few inches above the ground,  is 
considerably  easier  to  build  than  its  elevated 
cousin,  the  raised  deck.  The  simple design  of a 
grade-level  deck  spares  you  the  intricacies  of 
constructing  the  stairs,  railings,  and  structural 
bracing  required  for  even  the  most-basic  raised 
deck. And with a freestanding, grade-level deck 
you  needn't  worry  about  securely  attaching  the 
structure to your house. 

You can  situate  a grade-level deck  just about 
anywhere:  adjacent  to  the  house  or,  if  you'd 
rather,  in a shady corner of the yard.  Build  one 
over  an  existing,  too-small  patio,  or  stair-step 
two or three of them down a gentle slope.  And, 
just because a deck is grade level doesn't mean it 
has  to  be  only  a plain-Jane platform.  Dress  one 
up  with  a  distinctive  decking  pattern,  railing 
style,  or built-in  bench (see pages  180-183). 

Use  the project we get off the ground  on  the 

next  three  pages  as  an  introduction  to  the  de(cid:173)

lights  of deck  building.  Once  you  see  how  ev(cid:173)
erything  goes  together,  you  might  be  tempted 
to take  on the  bigger challenge of a raised  deck 
(detailed  on pages  176-179). 

•  Getting  started 
A  sturdy  deck  begins  with  a  sound  plan  and 
high-quality  lumber.  After  you've  sketched  out 
the  platform  you'd  like  to  build,  consult  the 
span table on page  185  to determine the dimen(cid:173)
sions  and  amounts  of lumber and  other compo(cid:173)
nents  you  will  need,  adding  10  percent  for 
waste.  Then  refer  to  the  descriptions  of  deck 
materials  on  pages  184-185  to  decide  what 
kind  of wood  to  use  for your deck. 

As you select lumber at the yard or as it comes 
off the  truck,  examine each piece and  reject any 
that  are  split  or  badly  twisted.  Don't  worry 
about  boards  with  minor warping  and  cupping, 
though;  nailing  these  in  place  will  straighten 
them  out for  you. 

172 

PATIOS AND  DECKS 

BUILDING GRADE-LEVEL DECKS 

175 

PATIOS  AND  DECKS 

BUILDING RAISED DECKS 

Though  more  formidable  than  a grade-level 

deck,  constructing a raised  deck is still pos(cid:173)
sible for a do-it-yourselfer equipped with a ham(cid:173)
mer,  circular  saw,  electric  drill,  and  socket 
wrench set. The wrenches are for tightening lag 
screws  and  bolts,  which provide  more  strength 
than nails and  are used  at critical junctures. 

One  of these  critical points  is  the  ledger  that 
fastens  the  deck to  your house and  serves as  its 
starting  point.  This  board  must  be  absolutely 
level and  securely fastened to your home's floor 
framing with 51/2-inch lag screws spaced 24 inch(cid:173)
es  apart.  To  attach  a  ledger  to  a  masonry  wall, 
drill  holes  with  a  masonry  bit  and  drive  lag 
screws into expansion shields.  Check your local 
building  code  before  finalizing  structural  de(cid:173)
tails. Some require 2x8 ledgers, others 2x10s. 

•  Stairs  and  railings 
Most  codes  also  mandate  a  step  or  steps  for 
outdoor access from any deck more than 8 inch(cid:173)
es  above  grade.  If  the  deck  is  more  than  30 
inches  high,  you  also  must  provide  railings  at 
least  3  feet  high,  with  no  more  than  9  inches 
between horizontal  rails  or vertical  balusters. 
When you lay out a stairway, familiarize your(cid:173)
self with the rise and run  information  shown on 
page  179 and juggle figures until you come out 
with  steps  that  are  exactly  equal  in  height;  one 
that's  higher  or  lower  than  the  others  could 
cause a serious  stumbling accident. 

For attaching railings,  either extend  the posts 
above  the  decking  or  bolt  verticals  to  the  deck 
beams  as  we  did  on page  179.  (To  learn  more 
about railing styles,  see page  181.) 

•  Selecting  materials 
Pages  184-185  present your  materials  options. 
No  law  says  you  must  use  the  same  grade  or 
species of wood  throughout a project.  For econ(cid:173)
omy,  we  used  pressure-treated  lumber  for  all 
the  structural  members  of our  raised  deck.  For 
appearance'  sake,  we  used  redwood  for  the 
decking, skirting, railings, and stairs. 

Finish  your  raised  deck  by  laying  polyethyl(cid:173)
ene underneath and topping it with gravel. Add 
wood or plastic edging to hold the rock in place. 

176 

PATIOS  AND  DECKS 

BUILDING RAISED DECKS 

178 

179 

PATIOS  AND  DECKS 

CHOOSING A DECKING OR RAILING STYLE 

DECKING STYLES 

180 

RAILING  STYLES 

PATIOS  AND  DECKS 

BUILDING DECK BENCHES 

Provide  your  deck  with  one  or  more  com(cid:173)

fortable benches and  you just might end  up 
with  some  of  the  best  seats  in—or  out  of— 
the house. 

Orient benches  so sitters take in an attractive 
view—or turn  their backs on one  that's not.  To 
define  the  edge  of a  grade-level  deck  without 
blocking  your  line  of  sight,  build  a  backless 
bench,  like  the  one  shown  in  the  illustration 
opposite, top right.  On a higher deck, integrate 
the  bench  and  railing,  as  we  did  with  the  one 
shown going together at  right. 

•  Bench  basics 
As you plan  benches, refer to the standard  seat(cid:173)
ing  dimensions  in  the  box  at  the  bottom  of the 
opposite page,  allowing  30  inches  of width per 
person.  Make  the  backs  slightly  lower  if  you 
want  an  unimpeded  view,  slightly  higher  for 
privacy. Open, slatted construction lets air circu(cid:173)
late and  also  discourages  water from puddling. 
As  with  railings,  you  can  secure  benches  to 
the  same  posts  that  support  the  deck  or  fasten 
uprights  to  joists.  Unlike  rails,  you  also  can  at(cid:173)
tach  benches  to  decking.  For  safety's  sake,  be 
sure to use bolts, not nails, at all critical structur(cid:173)
al points. 

Consider,  too,  whether  permanently  anchor(cid:173)
ing your benches  really is necessary.  Freestand(cid:173)
ing  benches,  built  of the  same  materials  as  the 
deck  itself,  can  be  easily  moved  around  to  ac(cid:173)
commodate  different  functions.  Come  winter, 
you  can  put your freestanding  benches  away or 
use  them  indoors.  On  higher  decks,  of course, 
you  should  butt  any  nonanchored  benches 
against a firmly  attached  railing. 

•  Beyond  the  bench 
While  you're  planning  your  benches,  think 
about  how  you  might  integrate  benches  with 
structures other than railings.  Two benches and 
a table, for example, could  be built diner-booth 
style.  Add  a  trellis  or  sunscreen  overhead  (see 
pages  100-105) and create an inviting open-air 
spot where every summer meal will taste better. 

182 

PATIOS  AND  DECKS 

CHOOSING DECK MATERIALS 

REDWOOD 
Description:  Handsome  and  naturally  rot 
resistant.  Use  common-grade  redwood  for 
framing  members,  decking,  and  railings;  use 
construction-  or  clear-heart  for  posts  and  for 
near-ground  structural  members. 
Appearance:  Redwood's  distinctive  red  hue 
weathers  to  a  brown-gray.  Preserve  original 
color  by  applying  sealer  every  other  year. 

Cost: The  most expensive way  to go.  To save 
money  you  might  want  to  use  redwood  only 
for parts  that  show,  as  we  did  with  the  raised 
deck  on pages  176—179-
Comments:  Redwood  boards  go  down  flat 
and  stay  flat,  and  because  they  contain  little 
or  no  pitch  or  resin,  they  are  easier  to  saw, 
drill,  and  shape  than  treated  lumber. 

PRESSURE-TREATED  LUMBER 
Description:  Fir,  pine,  and  other  softwoods 
saturated  with  chromated  copper  arsenate. 
Above ground,  use  wood  treated  to  .25 
pounds  per  cubic  foot  (pcf).  Posts  and  other 
ground-level  members  need  .40  pcf wood. 
Appearance:  Some  comes  prestained  to 
resemble  redwood  or cedar.  Most has  a 
greenish  cast  that  weathers  to  a  silvery  gray. 

Cost:  About  30  percent  less  than  redwood. 
Comments:  The  densest  lumber  you  can  buy, 
which  makes  it  heavier  and  stronger  than 
any  of the  others.  Treated  lumber poses  no 
danger  to  plants  or groundwater,  but  it 
contains  a toxic chemical,  so  saw outside, 
wear  a  mask  over  your  mouth,  and  do  not 
burn  scraps. 

CEDAR 
Description:  Naturally  rot-resistant  wood 
noted  for  its  strength,  light  weight,  straight 
grain,  and  freedom  from  knots.  Use  common-
grade  cedar  above  ground,  heartwood  for 
ledgers, posts,  and  near-ground  members. 
Appearance:  Cedar  weathers  from  tan 
to  silvery  gray;  use  a  sealer if you  want  to 
prevent  the  weathering. 

Cost:  About  10  to  20  percent  less  than 
redwood,  depending on  local  availability.  A 
good  alternative  to  redwood,  especially  in 
regions  far  from  the  South  and  West  Coast. 
Comments:  Because  of its  greater  density, 
cedar is  somewhat stronger  than  redwood. 
Compared  with  treated  lumber,  however,  its 
shock  resistance  is  quite  low. 

CYPRESS 
Description:  Naturally  rot-resistant  lumber 
that  is  logged  in  the  Southeast,  where  cypress 
is  a popular alternative  to cedar.  As  with 
redwood  and  cedar,  use  common-grade  above 
ground  and  heartwood  for  elements  where 
rot  could  set  in. 
Appearance:  Slightly  lighter  than  cedar;  has  a 
strong grain pattern.  Weathers  to  a pale  gray. 

Cost:  Slightly  less  than  cedar in  the  South, 
slightly  more  elsewhere.  Not  distributed  in 
every  region. 
Comments:  Lightweight,  soft,  and  easily 
worked.  As  with  redwood,  consider using 
cypress  for  appearance  items  and  pressure-
treated  wood  where  strength  counts. 

184 

TOPPINGS 
Description:  Skid-resistant  polymer  or  plastic 
coatings  that  are  applied  with  a  trowel  or 
roller  to  plywood  decking.  Also  rolls  of 
textured  rubber,  in  various  widths,  that are 
glued  to  plywood  with  a  special  adhesive. 
Appearance:  Polymer  and  rubber  toppings 
come  in  several  colors.  Neutral-shaded 
polymer  coating  can  be  tinted. 

Cost:  $ 1  to  $4 a square foot. 
Comments:  Use  where  slipperiness  could  be 
a problem.  Because  it's  self-flashing,  polymer 
coating  can  make  a  deck  waterproof.  Solvent-
weld  the  seams  of rubber  rolls  to  turn  your 
raised  deck  into  what  amounts  to  a  roof—the 
perfect  topper  for  a patio  below.  Pitch 
plywood 1/4 inch per foot for drainage. Use 
3/4-inch  exterior-  or  marine-grade  plywood. 

FASTENERS 
Decks  seem  to  eat  nails.  For every  40 
square  feet  of deck,  you'll  need  1  pound 
of  16-penny  common  nails  (for  joists)  and 
2  pounds  of  12-penny  common  nails  (for 
decking).  Use  only  hot-dipped,  stainless-
steel,  or aluminum  nails;  ordinary  steel 
rusts  and  stains  the  lumber. 

Galvanized  nails  cost  the  least. 

Aluminum  nails  resist rust  better,  but  they 
cost  more  and  bend  easily.  Stainless-steel 
nails  are  the  most costly and  resist  rust 
best.  Spiral-shank or  coated  nails  grip 
better  than  ordinary  types. 

Bolts,  nuts,  washers,  and  screws  also 

should  be  galvanized.  Bolts  should 
be  as  long as  the  total  thickness  of the 
materials  being joined, plus  3/4  inch. 
Screws  should  be  long  enough  so  that 
two-thirds  of their  length  goes  into  the 
member  you're  fastening  to. 

PATIOS  AND  DECKS 

DECK  PLANTINGS 

Deck plantings,  like  their patio counterparts 

(seepages  166-167),  assume great impor(cid:173)
tance  in  a  landscaping  scheme.  The  trees, 
shrubs,  and  flowers  immediately surrounding  a 
deck  should  offer  the  greatest  interest  for  the 
longest  season  while  having  the  fewest  faults 
possible.  Although  maintenance  is  convenient 
in an area so close to the water source, give low-
maintenance  deck  plantings  prime  consider(cid:173)
ation.  After  all,  you  shouldn't  feel  obliged  to 
toil when  you  are working hard  at relaxing. 

•  What to  consider 
Before  choosing  plantings  for  your  deck  area, 
keep in mind the landscaping role they will play. 
Edging  plants,  for  example,  are  especially  im(cid:173)
portant to tie a deck to its surroundings. Around 
a grade-level  deck, plant neat ground  covers or 
low flowers or shrubs.  Use ground-hugging ev(cid:173)
ergreens  for  textural  variety.  Around  a  raised 
deck,  take advantage of the bird's-eye view and 
plant  flowers,  shrubs,  and  small  trees  that  will 
look good  from  above. 

The underside of your deck may need  shrubs 
of  appropriate  height  to  screen  from  view  the 
void or storage space below. For a low deck, try 
dwarf winged  euonymus,  barberry,  viburnum, 
floribunda  rose,  dwarf pfitzer  juniper,  spread(cid:173)
ing yew, or azalea.  For a high deck, try upright 
juniper and  yew,  or rhododendron.  Where  the 
ground  slopes  steeply,  the  plants  also  must 
check erosion (see pages 66-67). 

Container  plants  often  are  called  upon  to 
bring  needed  color  to  decks  (see  box  at upper 
right).  Use soil substitutes that have less weight 
and  more  water retention  so  you  can  move  the 
containers  as  desired.  Remember,  too,  that the 
smaller  a pot  is  or  the  brighter  the  sunshine  it 
receives,  the more often you will need to water 
the plant. Containers in full sun on hot days may 
need  to  be  checked  twice  a  day.  Large  pots  in 
shade may need  checking only twice a week. 

Herbs are ideal on decks. Many release lovely 

odors when you barely brush against them. 

See pages  301-323, plus the charts sprinkled 

throughout the  book,  for more plant ideas. 

186 

BEYOND  THE  BASICS 

CREATING THE ULTIMATE GAZEBO 

From  the  footings  below  to  the  cupola  on 

top,  a  gazebo's  design  and  use  can  vary 

greatly from  yard  to  yard. 

Yours  could  be an  Oriental teahouse,  a Vic(cid:173)
torian  summer  room,  or  a  geodesic  dome.  It 
could  be  round,  square,  hexagonal,  octagonal, 
or almost  any  other  shape.  (Octagonals  are  the 
most popular;  squares,  the easiest to build.) 

A  gazebo  can  be  a  rather  substantial  struc(cid:173)
ture—with  timbers  or  brick—or,  more  typical(cid:173)
ly,  a light and  whimsical  one—with  lattice  rails 
and  scrollwork  under  the  eaves.  A  variety  of 
designs is available in precut kits; or, for a chal(cid:173)
lenge, design your own.  Choose the design that 
matches the mood of your garden and the struc(cid:173)
ture's  intended  use.  Consider  borrowing  ele(cid:173)
ments  from  your  house's  architecture. 

Provide a minimum diameter of 10 feet if you 
plan  to  use  the  gazebo  for  entertaining.  Make 
the  floors  and  benches  nonskidding  and  quick 
drying.  Choose  the  floor  material  that  best  fits 
your  gazebo's  style.  Choices  include  wood, 
gravel, flagstone, tile, concrete, slate, and brick. 
The  roof  can  be  slatted  to  protect  from  the 
sun  only,  or  solid—with  shakes,  shingles, 
thatch, tile, or tin—to protect from the rain. The 
gazebo  itself can  be  open,  screened,  or glazed. 
A barbecue, spa, or storage nook can be built in. 

•  Location 
Because  a  gazebo  provides  such  a  strong  focal 
point in  any  landscape  setting,  its  location is  as 
important as its design. 

Gazebos  ordinarily  are  set  some  distance 
from  the  house;  if you  plan  to  use  yours  as  an 
outdoor dining room,  however,  make sure it is 
near, or easily accessible to, the kitchen. Consid(cid:173)
er,  too, wind  direction,  sun and  shade patterns, 
nearness to neighbors, and  the views of the gar(cid:173)
den each  side of the gazebo will frame. 

Usually  a  gazebo  is  freestanding,  but  it  also 
can  adjoin  a patio,  deck,  or possibly  a fence.  It 
doesn't need much planting around it; it's deco(cid:173)
rative  enough  in  itself.  A  freestanding  gazebo 
does  need  to  be  connected  with  the  house  and 
garden  by an  easy and  inviting path. 

192 

193 

BEYOND  THE  BASICS 

BUILDING GAZEBOS 

To  construct  a  bell-roofed,  eight-sided  Vic(cid:173)

torian gazebo like the one at right, you can: 
A)  Painstakingly  compute,  cut,  and  assemble  a 
hundred  or  so  complicated  angle  joints;  or  B) 
Let  a  prefab  manufacturer  do  the  intricate  ge(cid:173)
ometry  for  you,  allowing  you  to  put  the  whole 
thing together in just a few enjoyable hours. 
We  opted  for  the  second  course of action. 
The  kit  you  see  us  putting  together  on  this 
page  and  the  next  three  came  from  Vintage 
Wood Works in Quinlan, Texas. Kits, of course, 
vary  greatly  in  design,  but  our  experience  can 
give you a general  idea of the work involved. 

Our  kit  consisted  of eight preassembled  side 
panels,  eight  triangular  roof  panels,  a  finialed 
octagonal king post for the point where the roof 
panels converge, miscellaneous trim pieces, plus 
all  the  bolts  and  other  hardware  needed  to  fas(cid:173)
ten the components  to each other. 

Tools?  We  managed  the  entire  job  with  an 
automotive-type  socket  wrench  set,  stepladder, 
framing square, mason's line, tape measure, pli(cid:173)
ers, hammer, C-clamp, and electric drill. 

•  Anchors 
We  bolted  our gazebo's  posts  to  6x6  pressure-
treated  wood  piers.  You  also  could  use  precast 
concrete piers, pour concrete footings (see page 
60), or screw mobile-home soil anchors into the 
ground. Whatever anchoring system you decide 
on,  you'll  need  eight  anchors,  leveled  as  ex(cid:173)
plained on pages 74-75.  Step 2 on the opposite 
page shows  how to  lay out the footings. 

If  your  kit  has  a  roof  overhang,  be  sure  it 

won't collide with trees,  buildings,  or other po(cid:173)
tential  obstructions. 

•  Personal  design 
If you're a dedicated woodworker,  blessed  with 
an abundance  of power tools  and  patience,  you 
might prefer  to  design  and  construct your  own 
gazebo.  To simplify figuring the angles, consid(cid:173)
er  scaling  back  from  eight  sides  to  six.  If you'd 
like  your gazebo  to  have  a wood  floor,  build  it 
like  a deck  (see pages  172-189)  with  extra-tall 
posts and a roof. 

194 

BEYOND  THE  BASICS 

BUILDING GAZEBOS  (continued) 

196 

197 

BEYOND  THE  BASICS 

CREATING THE ULTIMATE GARDEN POOL 

The  shimmering  surface  of the  ideal  garden 

pool  should  reflect  peace  and  tranquillity, 
as well as the surrounding foliage, flowers,  sky, 
clouds, and sunsets.  Sound too visionary? Well, 
water  features  are  adaptable  to  more  garden 
situations than  most people  ever consider. 

And despite the new realms of plant, fish, and 
wildlife  pleasures  offered  by  these  pools,  they 
need  not require great time or money.  You can 
learn  enough  to  begin  the  venture  in  just  one 
evening  with  a  catalog.  And  the  typical  water 
garden  requires  no  more  work  and  little  more 
cost than  the  standard  flower  border. 

•  Design 
Pages  18-19  discuss  many  of the  elements  that 
make  a  garden  pool  ideal.  To  test  your  ideas, 
shape a garden hose on your lawn. 

To  keep  fish,  a  pool  needs  to  be  at  least  as 
large as a bathtub; a surface area of 50 or more 
square feet—a 7-foot square,  an 8-foot-diameter 

circle, or a 5x10-foot rectangle—is best. Smaller 
ponds get too hot in summer, which can lead to 
algae problems. A depth of 1 1/2 to 2 feet works 
for most goldfish. Japanese koi  need  3  feet. 

•  Maintenance 
Most pools  can  be  filled  with  a  hose  and  emp(cid:173)
tied  by  siphon  or  bucket.  Where  winters  are 
severe,  transfer  fish  and  tender  plants  indoors. 
In  mild  climates  or  with  added  heat,  fish  will 
live under a foot of ice as long as  an air hole  is 
kept  open.  Don't  do  this  by  smashing  the  sur(cid:173)
face,  however;  the concussion could  damage or 
kill  the  fish.  A  floating  deicer  will  do  the  job. 
Wherever  ice  forms,  put  a  log  in  the  pool  in 
winter to absorb  the  thrust of the  ice. 

Every few years, drain and clean your pool in 
the  spring.  If algae  builds  up,  ask  at  your  pet 
store  for  algae-killing  chemicals  that  will  not 
harm  fish.  Use  them  and  add  more plants.  Re(cid:173)
filling to take care of algae is  seldom  advisable. 

198 

BEYOND THE  BASICS 

BUILDING GARDEN POOLS 

Basically,  a garden pool  is  a hole  filled  with 

water;  but when it comes to choosing what 
to  interpose  between  the  water  and  the  earth 
underneath,  you  have  a  number  of  options. 
Let's  look at the pros and  cons  of each. 

Preformed pools  usually  are  made  of  plastic 

reinforced  with  fiberglass.  They're  easy  to  in(cid:173)
stall,  and  sturdy  ones  needn't  be  sunk  entirely 
into  the  ground.  Shapes  are  limited,  though— 
usually  kidney,  square,  or  round—and  smaller 
preformed  pools  are  algae prone. 

Polyvinyl chloride  (PVC)  liners  mold  themselves 
to any shape, and you can buy them in just about 
any  size.  To  install  a  PVC  liner,  simply  dig  a 
hole,  lay the liner in position,  weight its  edges, 
and  fill  the  pool  with  water.  Later,  however, 
after  the  liner  has  settled,  you  must  cover  its 
edges, usually by building a stone or brick cop(cid:173)
ing  around  the pool's perimeter. 

Galvanized  livestock  tanks  are  inexpensive  and 
easy to install. Buy one at least 2 feet deep. Paint 
the  outside  with  roofing  tar  to  protect  against 
rust, and  line the interior with heavy black plas(cid:173)
tic.  Stock tanks come in even fewer shapes than 
preformed  pools. 

Concrete pools have been around for centuries 
and are still a favorite with landscapers. Though 
a  bit more  work  to  install  than  the  other  types, 
concrete is inexpensive and as versatile as any of 
the other materials. The photos at right take you 
through the steps  of building a concrete pool. 

•  Pool  particulars 
All pools, regardless of type, must have a 1- to 2-
inch-high rim around the edges so groundwater 
can't flood  the pool  during  heavy  rains. 

Because  water  seeks  its  own  level,  you 
needn't  worry  about  keeping  the  bottom  of  a 
pool  absolutely  flat,  but  its  rim  must  be  even 
from end  to end  and  side to side. 

A pump to recirculate water usually isn't nec(cid:173)

essary,  unless  you  want  a fountain  or waterfall. 
See page  202  for more details. 

As  for  all  construction  projects,  check  local 
codes  first.  Even  a  shallow  pool  poses  a  safety 
hazard for a small child. 

200 

7 Excavate, then compact earth, particularly 

on sides.  Dig to the depth you want the pool 
to be, plus 4 inches for concrete. Cut back sod to 
make room for a rim. If your plans include a 
pump (see page 202), make provisions now for 
the electrical cord, including laying any necessary 
conduit. For a waterfall or remote fountain, 
make plans for a water-return line. 

After all concrete has been poured and 

4. smoothed,  cover the pond with polyethylene. 
This further slows the curing process and keeps 
rain- or surface water out of the pool until the 
concrete has completely hardened. 

201 

BEYOND  THE  BASICS 

INSTALLING PUMPS, FOUNTAINS, AND WATERFALLS 

Want  a  pond  that  stirs  silently  beneath  the 

surface,  with  scarcely  a  ripple  above?  A 
dramatic  fountain  that  arcs  a jet  of water  above 
your  pool  or  even  from  a  remote  location?  A 
waterfall that burbles down  a steep  slope into a 
lily-speckled  catch  basin  below?  With  a  sub(cid:173)
mersible  recirculating  pump,  you  can  put  your 
pool's water into motion in a variety of ways. 

A submersible pump pulls in water through a 
screen that snags leaves and debris, and expels a 
steady  stream  through  its  outlet.  To  gently 
move water and keep it from stagnating (usually 
not a necessity),  just set the pump  a few  inches 
above  the  pool  bottom  (perhaps  on  a  brick  or 
two) and connect it to a source of electricity. For 
an in-pool fountain, attach any of several nozzles 
to  the  outlet  (see  illustration,  below,  top).  To 
pump  water  from  the pool  to  a waterfall  or  re(cid:173)

mote  fountain,  run  flexible  vinyl  tubing  from 
the outlet to wherever you want the water to go 
(see illustration,  below,  bottom). 

To help you  choose a pump,  your dealer will 
need  to know the height at which you  want the 
water  to  discharge  and  the  volume  of water  in 
your pool. 

•  Safety  musts 
Check  with  an  electrician  or  consult  your  local 
community's  electrical  codes  before  bringing 
power  to  a  submersible  pump.  Most  codes  re(cid:173)
quire  that  a  pump  be  plugged  into  a  weather(cid:173)
proof  receptacle  located  within  6  feet  of  the 
pump  and  18  inches  above  the  ground.  This 
receptacle  should  be  protected  by  a  ground-
fault  circuit  interupter  (GFCI);  a  GFCI  shuts 
down the circuit instantaneously should a poten(cid:173)
tially  dangerous  malfunction  occur. 

Check the code, too, to learn the components 
required  for  underground  wiring  in  your  area. 
Most  call  for  underground  feeder  (UF)  cable, 
rigid  conduit,  or  a  combination  of  both— 
conduit  above ground,  UF  cable  below.  Codes 
also specify how deep cable and conduit must be 
buried.  Neglect these  regulations  at your peril: 
electricity  and  water  can  be  a  lethal  combina(cid:173)
tion,  especially outdoors. 

202 

CREATING WATER GARDENS 

Plant  your  water  garden  after  the  weather 

warms  in  spring.  You  can  plant  in  bottom 
mud,  but  containers  allow  flexibility  in  depth 
and  position  and  make  cleaning  easier.  Use  a 
mix  of garden  loam  and  aquatic plant fertilizer. 
Do  not use  swamp  muck,  compost,  peat  moss, 
or dry  manure. 

First, add submerged oxygenating plants: wa(cid:173)
ter milfoil,  waterweed,  underwater grasses.  Fill 
several  5-inch  pots  or  shallow  containers  with 
soil,  topping  off the  uppermost  inch  with  sand. 
Root  several  oxygenators  per  pot  by  pushing 
them a third  of the way into  the  soil. 

Plant  only  one  water  lily  per  20-inch  pot; 
pygmy  varieties  need  only  8-inch  containers. 
Plant hardy varieties at an angle against the pot 
side;  in  harsh  winter  climates,  store  them  in(cid:173)
doors during the cold  months. 

Plant tropical water lilies only after the nights 
grow warm. Set each tuber in the center of a pot 
with the crown at the soil line.  Sink pots 6 to 8 
inches  below  the  water  surface.  Treat  these 
plants as annuals and order new roots each year. 
Edibles like lotus, water chestnut,  and water(cid:173)
cress can grow in a pool; cranberry, natal plum, 
banana, citrus, clump bamboo, sorrel, and many 
herbs do well on the moist banks.  Lotus can  be 
invasive. 

•  Fish  facts 
Add  one  fish per  2  square  feet of pond  surface. 
You  can  choose  from  many  colorful  goldfish, 
such as  calicoes,  comets,  black moors,  and  fan-
tails.  If  your  pool  is  large  and  at  least  3  feet 
deep, you can add Japanese koi. 

Do not let the bags the fish come in get hot in 
the sun.  Before freeing fish, float the bags in the 
pond  for a half hour  to  equalize  temperatures. 
Feed  pet  store  food  every  one  to  three  days. 
Remove  any  food  left  after  five  to  10  minutes. 
Give  extra  protein  food  in  the  fall  and  none 
from  November  until  March,  a  natural  resting 
period  for  the  fish. 

Welcome  any  snails,  frogs,  toads,  or  turtles 
that  come.  You  also  can  buy  these.  With  the 
fish, they help control insects and algae growth. 

203 

BEYOND  THEBASICS 

CREATING THE ULTIMATE SWIMMING POOL 

Apersonal swimming pool offers the ultimate 

in backyard recreation. It can accommodate 
a  brisk  before-breakfast  dip  or  a  few  healthful 
laps  at  lunchtime—all  without  requiring  a long 
trip to the local swimming hole. 

And  for  those  of us  who  wouldn't  be  caught 
dead  at  a  crowded  beach,  a  home-based  pool 
allows  family  swim  time,  an  enjoyment  that 
would  go  unexperienced  otherwise. 

There was a time when even baths were pub(cid:173)

lic facilities. Now, the swimming pool has made 
the  transition  to  private  grounds.  The  trend 
started in the Sunbelt.  Still, Southerners seldom 
swim  before May  or  much  after September,  ex(cid:173)
cept in heated pools.  Summers in South Dakota 
get just as  hot,  and  a swimming pool  there  can 
add just as much pleasure to outdoor living. 

To  be  ideal,  a pool  should  be  integrated  into 
the  landscape.  Patios,  decks,  and  nearby  plant(cid:173)
ings  should  be carefully planned  to enhance the 
scene's  beauty  and  enjoyment,  yielding  an  ad(cid:173)

joining  space  for sunbathing  and  a shaded  area 
where nonswimmers can relax and avoid splash(cid:173)
es.  A drinking fountain and door to a bathroom 
or shower add  great  convenience. 

Many in-ground pools are designed  to be the 
focal  point  of view  from  both  indoor  and  out(cid:173)
door  rooms;  some  are  visible  through  a  foyer 
from  the  front  door,  adding  to  the  grandeur of 
the  entryway.  Even  during  winter,  these  pools 
can give visual  refreshment and  reflection. 

Some  homeowners,  however,  prefer  not  to 
see  their  pool  in  the  dead  of  winter;  if  you 
agree, plan your pool's location accordingly. Or 
use plantings  or surrounding materials  to  make 
the winter scene as pleasant as possible. 

Some  pools,  especially  in  yards  with  over(cid:173)
hanging trees,  are enclosed  with screen  to  keep 
out  falling  leaves,  insects,  and  blowing  debris. 
Screening also cuts down somewhat on the sun's 
intensity,  a  benefit  in  summer.  But  the  water 
will be colder in spring and fall. 

BEYOND  THE  BASICS 

ASSESSING SWIMMING-POOL OPTIONS 

The  addition  of  a  swimming  pool  to  your 

yard is a big decision. Read pages 16-17, as 
well  as  this  section,  and  consider  all  of the  op(cid:173)
tions.  Also,  talk  with  people  who  have  pools, 
trying  to  learn  all  you  can  about  what  kind, 
shape,  and  size  of pool might be  best for you. 

A pool will provide years of summer fun, sun, 

exercise, and relaxation;  and, with the right de(cid:173)
cisions,  it will  increase  dramatically your yard's 
beauty, value, and use. 

If you  decide  that  a  pool  isn't  right  for  you 
now  but may  be  in  the  future,  plan present use 
of  the  space  for  easy  changeover:  a  lawn  or 
flower  garden,  not  a  patio  or  clump  of  trees. 
Also,  remember  to  leave  access  for  heavy  ma(cid:173)
chinery. In areas where swimming pools are the 
norm—if not  almost  mandatory—lack  of access 
for  pool  construction  could  be  a  serious  draw(cid:173)
back to would-be buyers someday. 

Pools today can be installed quickly—:by pro(cid:173)
fessionals,  that  is;  as  you  research  the  work  re(cid:173)
quired to build a pool, you'll quickly realize that 
this  is  not a do-it-yourself project 

•  Safety  and  cost 
A  pool  can  be  as  safe  or  as  dangerous  as  the 
family car, but it isn't as essential. You can post(cid:173)
pone  building  a pool  until  the  children  are  old 
enough  to  ease  the  worry  (though  at  no  age 
should  you  allow  them  to  swim  or  play  in  the 
pool  unsupervised).  Begin planning and  saving 
now,  and  you'll  enjoy  your  pool  all  the  more 
later  on. 

The  cost  of  the  pool  itself  represents  only 
from  50  to  60  percent  of the  total  outlay;  the 
fencing,  decking,  and  surrounding  plantings 
that will  transform  the pool  from  the  visual  ap(cid:173)
pearance  of a raw wound  to  that of a luxurious 
landscape constitute the remaining expenses. 

This  cost  comes 

into  better  perspective, 
though,  if you  realize  that,  when  you  sell  your 
home, you can largely recover the money spent 
on  a  professionally  built  pool  if the  pool  does 
not exceed  10 percent of property value. 

206 

Besides  cost,  consider,  too,  the  maintenance 
demands a pool will put on you (see pages 210-
211). Time spent maintaining water quality and 
equipment will seem minimal as long as you and 
your family enjoy the pool.  If your leisure inter(cid:173)
ests  turn  elsewhere,  however,  maintenance  can 
become a major pain. 

•  Site 
There  isn't a great deal  of choice  in  most yards 
for  where  to  put  something  as  big  as  a  swim(cid:173)
ming pool.  But if you do  have a choice of sites, 
consider these points. 
•  Will  the  foundation  of existing  buildings  be 
weakened by the excavation? Will the slope and 
grade  accommodate  the  pool?  Often  the  grade 
can  be  built  up  around  the  pool,  thus  reducing 
the  hole's  depth  and  the  cost of carting  off soil. 
•  How  about  the  soil  type  and  the  drainage? 
The soil has to bear the weight of pool materials 
and water, and it must drain well enough so that 
the pool  won't float out  of the ground. 
•  What about  sun  and  wind  patterns?  These  af(cid:173)
fect  both  warmth  and  cleaning.  Too  much  sun 
could  promote  algae  growth.  If  possible,  the 
prevailing  wind  should  drive  all  floating  debris 
toward the skimmers. A strong wind against the 
flow  decreases  efficiency.  You  can  build  wind 
baffles  and  screens,  if necessary. 
•  Do  you  prefer  to  swim  in  the  morning  or 
evening,  in  sun  or  shade?  If possible,  choose 
your site  accordingly. 
•  Will the pool  be far enough from  trees, flow(cid:173)
ering shrubs, and hedges to avoid leaf drop and 
birds  overhead?  Don't  let  the  lawn  come  too 
close either; otherwise, grass cuttings will blow 
or get tracked  into  the  water. 
•  Is  there  access  to  electrical  and  water  lines, 
and  proper  drainage  for  overflow.  Filters  are 
best kept as near to the deep end of the pool as 
possible so suction pipes are short. 
•  How  do  relevant  zoning  and  fencing  regula(cid:173)
tions affect your plans? Often,  self-latching gates 
are  required. 
•  Finally, for safety's  sake,  will the pool be visi(cid:173)
ble from  the  house? 

•  Types 
Pools are installed either in the ground or above 
it.  Your  site  selection  may  determine  which  is 
better  for  you  (see  photo,  page  204).  Above-
ground  pools  may  not  seem  as  luxurious  as  in-
ground pools, but they offer certain advantages. 
•  They are less expensive. True, they take some 
landscaping to fit, but an in-ground pool usually 
requires  more. 
•  They  are  not  as  permanent.  If  you  change 
your mind, you can move or get rid of an above-
ground  pool.  If  you  are  not  so  sure  that  you 
want  a  pool,  you  can  afford  to  try  an  above-
ground  one while you  decide. 
•  They can be safer, because very small children 
usually  must climb  before  they  can  fall  into  the 
water.  Some  quite  attractive  decking  and  fenc(cid:173)
ing right around the pool can add to its safety, as 
well as to its enjoyment and visual appeal. 

In-ground  pools,  on  the  other  hand,  should 
be  considered  major  investments.  Planning  for 
them  is  more  important  than  it  is  for  above-
ground pools  because  they are  not only perma(cid:173)
nent  but  also prominent. 

•  Shapes  and  materials 
Swimming  pools  today  come  in  just  about  any 
shape,  from  free-form  to  kidney,  oval,  L,  and 
coffin.  Rectangular is  the  most economical. 

Your site selection and choice of pool materi(cid:173)

al  may  help  decide  your pool  shape.  Fiberglass 
pools—perhaps the least expensive—are limited 
to  preformed  shapes.  So  are  vinyl-lined  pools. 
Gunite  or  concrete  pools  can  be  built  in  any 
shape and generally are  more  durable. 

Knowing  how  you'll  use  the  pool  will  help 
determine  its  shape,  too.  Lap  pools  should  be 
long and narrow; often they are shallow. Diving 
pools  take  more  room  and  depth  where  divers 
enter  the  water.  Rectangular  shapes  work  best 
for  pools  used  mainly  for  recreational  games 
such as water volleyball. 

207 

BEYOND  THE  BASICS 

ASSESSING  SWIMMING-POOL  OPTIONS 

Once  you've  decided  on  the  site  and  shape 

of your pool (see pages  206-207),  consid(cid:173)

er carefully  its  size.  Some  families  are  happy  to 
have  the  pool  dominate  the  landscape.  They 
plan  the  surrounding  deck  and  plantings  to 
eliminate  lawn  mowing  altogether.  Others pre(cid:173)
fer the pool  to  be  secondary in  size  and  impor(cid:173)
tance  to  other  aspects  of  the  garden.  Often, 
however,  pool  size  will  be  determined  by  the 
available space and  by budget. 

As  a rule of thumb,  allow  100  square feet of 
pool surface for each diver, 24 to 36 square feet 
for each  swimmer,  and  10  square  feet  for  each 
splashing  child.  If you  intend  to  use  your  pool 
for  a  variety  of activities,  plan  on  one  that's  at 
least  16x32 feet.  Remember, though, the small(cid:173)
er your pool,  the lower the maintenance  costs. 
Families  may want a shallow section for wad(cid:173)
ers.  Underwater  benches  around  the  edge  of a 
pool can add to the relaxation and provide foot(cid:173)
ing for visiting  babies. 

•  Pool  lights 
You  will  want  both  exterior  and  underwater 
lights  for  your  pool  to  extend  the  enjoyment 
and  the  beauty into warm summer nights.  Such 
lights are good  safety and  security features,  too. 
Choose both light and  location to avoid glare 

in a diver's face or into the house. 

Underwater  lighting,  like  garden  lighting 
(see  pages  92-93  and  212-215),  can  be  either 
the  regular  120-volt  or  the  lower  12-volt  sys(cid:173)
tem.  The  latter  is  safe,  even  if it  should  short, 
and thus is recommended. 

Underwater lamps can be in either wet or dry 
niches.  A  wet  assembly  is  sealed  and  can  be 
changed  underwater.  A  dry  niche  requires  that 
the  water  level  of  the  pool  be  dropped  to 
change the lamp. 

As a general rule,  use one lamp for every 24 
to  30  linear  feet  of pool  side.  In  a  l6x32-foot 
pool, for example,  you might have three lamps: 
one  on  each  side  and  one  under  the  diving 
board.  Put one of the side lights near the ladder 
or steps. 

You also can buy a portable underwater light 
that is safe, runs on low voltage, and operates up 
to six hours  on  its  own  rechargeable  battery.  If 
you have a pool without lighting that's less than 
20x30  feet  in  size,  one  of these  portable  lights 
can  yield  lovely  nighttime  effects. 

Decorative  floating  lights  and  candles  are 
striking  when  people  are  gathered  around  but 
not in a pool. 

Other  pool  components  to  consider  buying 
are  ladders,  steps,  grab  rails,  diving  and  jump(cid:173)
ing  equipment,  floating  ropes  to  mark  off  the 
deep  end,  floats  for  both  relaxation  and  safety, 
and  in-pool  play  equipment  for  basketball,  vol(cid:173)
leyball,  or the like. 

•  Decking 
The  solid  surface  surrounding  your  pool  re(cid:173)
quires  both  careful  planning  and  its  share  of 
expense.  It  can  add  or  detract  from  the  eye 
appeal  and  enjoyment of the pool. 

The  width  of  the  solid  surface  should  be  a 
minimum  of 3  feet;  6  to  8  feet is  much  better. 
More activity will occur around the shallow end 
of the pool,  so  if there  is  to  be  a  wider area of 
surrounding decking,  make it there. 

Concrete  decking  is  used  most  often.  It  is 

both  practical  and  economical.  Exposed  aggre(cid:173)
gate  (see  pages  122-123)  can  add  nonskid, 
nonglare  safety  and  comfort,  as  well  as  a  rich(cid:173)
ness  of  color  and  texture.  Both  concrete  and 
aggregate  can  get  hot  from  the  searing  sun, 
though; a troweled-on cooling surface that costs 
more but saves soles is available. 

Other pool decking possibilities include mod(cid:173)
ular paving tiles, blocks, bricks, stones like blue-
stone, and granite. 

Wood  decking  works  well  where  the  grade 
level  around  a  pool  changes.  Use  wood  along 
with  concrete  for  a pleasant contrast. 

The  material  and  prominence  of the  coping 
that immediately surrounds  the pool are largely 
matters  of personal preference.  The coping can 
be  a  definite,  dominating  line,  or  the  decking 
can extend  right up to  the pool's  edge. 

208 

the  professional  you  hire  has  liability  insurance 
and  worker's  compensation,  and  check  with 
your  own  insurance  company  to  see  if you  need 
added  coverage  while  work  is  under  way. 

Draw  up  a  contract  that  says  who  is  responsi(cid:173)

ble  for  zoning  compliance  and  building permits. 
The  contract  should  include  a  drawn-to-scale 
plan  of  the  location,  shape,  and  dimensions  of 
the  pool  and  its  support  system.  Have  an  attor(cid:173)
ney  check  for  specifications  such  as  work  to  be 
done,  materials  to  be  used,  equipment  to  be 
installed,  and  dates  to  start and  finish,  as  well  as 
the cost of relocating utility lines,  clearing access 
to  the  site,  final  grading,  and  cleaning  up. 

Proper  drainage  of  the  decking  area  is  vital. 
Puddles  can  cause  falls  in  summer  and  freezing 
and  cracking  in  winter.  Runoff of treated  water 
into  adjacent  plant  beds  could  cause  trouble. 

•  Pool  plantings 
Plants  near  pools  should  be  of  the  low-care, 
high-drama variety.  For  the  most part,  plantings 
should  be  somewhat  separated  from  the  pool 
itself.  But  placing  a  few  plants  so  they  cast  a 
reflection  on  the  water  will  relieve  the  flat  sur(cid:173)
face  and  increase  the  effect.  A  raised  bed  or two 
right  at  the  water's  edge  will  do  this  nicely. 

Trees  and  shrubs  can  be  fairly  distant  from 
the  pool  and  still  cast  interesting  shadows  and 
reflections.  If planted  on  the  north  or  west  side, 
these  also  can  reduce  chilling  breezes  without 
blocking  the  sun's  warmth. 

Avoid  trees  with  extensive  or  invasive  root 
systems.  Don't  plant  trees  with  leaves  so  tiny 
that  they  escape  skimmers,  nor  plants  with  slip(cid:173)
pery fruit or small  litter;  pine  needles  and  bottle-
brush  stamens  can  clog  filters. 

Most  plants  thrive  in  the  increased  humidity 
near  a  pool,  but  some  are  much  more  sensitive 
to  chemical  splashes  than  others.  Fragrance  is 
lovely  wafting  across  the  pool,  but  don't  plant 
bee-bringers  nearby.  The  bees  probably  would 
be  harmless  enough,  but  could  cause  panic. 

Avoid  plants  that  are  fussy  in  any  way,  that 

need  spraying,  or  that  drop  messy  leaves,  blos(cid:173)
soms,  or  fruits.  Among 
limited  edible 
choices,  bamboo,  natal  plum,  and  some  herbs 
are  especially  good. 

the 

Container  plants  can  be  moved  in  or  out  as 

their  condition  and  the  occasion  requires. 

•  Professional  h e lp 
When  building  a pool,  most  homeowners  work 
with  a pool  contractor  and  perhaps  an  architect, 
landscape  architect,  or  landscape  designer.  The 
person  you  hire  will  depend  on  your  budget, 
the  person's  background,  and  your  yard. 

Interview  and  get  bids  from  several  recom(cid:173)

mended  professionals.  Ask  to  see  their previous 
work  and  talk  with  their  clients.  Make  sure  that 

BEYOND  THE  BASICS 

EQUIPPING AND MAINTAINING YOUR POOL 

Pool  water  is  seldom  drained.  Rather  it  is 

maintained in healthful cleanliness by circu(cid:173)
lation through a system of skimmers, filter, heat(cid:173)
er  (if  there  is  one),  lint  trap,  pump  motor, 
piping, and valves. All of the water in your pool 
should  so  circulate  at  least  once  every  eight  to 
12 hours. 

To  accomplish  this,  both  the  pump  and  the 
filter  need  to  be  of the proper  size  for  the  vol(cid:173)
ume  of  water  in  your  pool.  Oversized,  they 
waste  money  and  electricity.  Undersized,  they 
won't do  the  job and  eventually will  burn out. 
To  be  safe  from  puddling  and  easily  accessi(cid:173)
ble for draining, the pump and filter need  to be 
24  inches  above  ground  level.  To  save  on 
plumbing and piping costs,  place  them  close  to 
the pool. Include ventilation in any housing you 
provide  for  the  equipment. 

All  pools  must  have  at  least  one  skimmer. 
More  are  required  for  odd-shaped  pools  than 
for simple rectangular ones.  Maintain the water 
level at the middle mark  of the  skimmer. 

•  Filter  options 
Three  types  of filters  are  available,  all  of which 
clean by straining the water through a tank con(cid:173)
taining material  that catches  dirt and  debris. 

Diatomaceous  earth  (D.E.)  filters  remove 
particles as small as a half micron. They require 
the  addition  of  powder.  Cartridge  filters  re(cid:173)
move  particles  of 20  microns  and  larger.  They 
must  be  cleaned  or  replaced.  Sand  filters  re(cid:173)
move  particles  only  as  small  as  40  microns. 
Some of the dirt is recycled. To clean these, you 
must flip a valve to backwash water through the 
sand and out into a drainage system. 

The kind  of water you have may dictate your 
choice  of filter.  Hard  water,  for example,  often 
clogs a D.E.  filter. 

Hoses  are  used  only  on  aboveground  pools 
(all  in-ground  pools  have  hard  plumbing). 
These  hoses  should  be changed  yearly  whether 
they  need  it  or  not.  Usually,  people  wait  until 
their hose springs a leak.  But at that point,  their 
pool is half empty,  and water is everywhere. 

210 

ELECTRICAL  NEEDS 
A  swimming  pool  requires  electricity 
for  the  water  circulation  system,  for 
lighting,  and  possibly  for  heating  and 
nearby  outdoor  power  outlets.  For 
maximum  economy  and  efficiency,  think 
of your  electrical  needs  and  wants 
thoroughly  when  planning  your  pool. 

Strictly  follow  code  requirements  for 

the  wiring  and  grounding  of all 
equipment  associated  with  a  swimming 
pool,  and  the  bonding  and  grounding 
of all  metallic  additions.  Power  out(cid:173)
lets  must  be  at  least  18  inches  above 
the  level  of the  pool  apron  and  fully 
protected.  The  electrical  service  to  the 
pool  must  have  its  own  circuit;  so  must 
the  pump  and  filter.  An  electrician  or 
your  pool  contractor  can  check  your 
current  amperage  capacity  to  ensure  it's 
adequate  for  your  pump. 

•  Pool  heaters 
Three  methods  are  most  commonly  used  for 
heating pool  water:  solar  heating,  conventional 
heating, and  solar covers. 

Solar heating requires that the water be circu(cid:173)

lated  through  solar-collector  panels  that  face 
south  or just  east of south. 

A  solar  heater  works  only  with  ample  sun(cid:173)
shine.  If typically  more  than  half of the  days  in 
your  area  are  cloudy  (check  with  your  local 
weather bureau),  you may need  a backup  heat(cid:173)
er.  Some systems will switch automatically. 

Conventional  heaters  include  gas-  and  oil-

fired  heaters  and  heat pumps. 

Solar covers  or  blankets  can  raise pool-water 

temperature  by  10  degrees  or  more,  at  a  frac(cid:173)
tion  of the  cost  of other  heating methods.  The 
covers  also  lessen  the  amount  of  water  lost 
through  evaporation.  Because  they  help  keep 
debris out of the pool, they reduce the wear and 
tear on filters  and  save on chemicals. 

Covers—whether  solar  or  not—can  be  made 
to  blend  in  fairly  well  with  pool  decor.  They 
also can  be installed  on tracks for easy removal. 
Some  pool  blankets—with  properly  restrained 
edges—can  support  several  adults  and  possibly 
save  a  small  child  from  drowning.  If  a  person 
falls  on  a free-floating cover,  however,  it  could 
add  to  the  danger  of  drowning  by  wrapping 
around  and  pulling  the person  under. 

Special chemicals also are available to help cut 

heating costs.  These chemicals increase the sur(cid:173)
face tension of the water and form a thin, invisi(cid:173)
ble layer that reduces heat loss and evaporation. 

•  Other  needs 
To keep your pool clean, you will need a net for 
skimming  the  occasional  leaf or  dead  bug  from 
the  surface. 

A  must,  too,  is  some type of vacuum  cleaner 
to remove any debris  that escapes  the filter and 
settles  to  the  bottom.  These  vary  in  price  and 
use from a simple brush and hose attachment for 
the  filter to a separate  robot that crawls  around 
the pool  bottom. 

•  Winter 
Pool winterizing chores vary by climate. Where 
pool  water  freezes,  lower  its  level  to  2  to  3 
inches  below  the  bottom  skimmer  face  plate  in 
an  in-ground  pool.  In  an  aboveground  pool, 
lower  the  water  surface  to  24  inches  below  its 
usual level. 

Clean  and  treat  the  water.  Drain  pipes  and 
place  winter plugs  in  the  suction  and  return  fit(cid:173)
tings.  Remove  and  store  ladders,  slides,  and 
such.  Put  an  empty  barrel  in  the  water  to  help 
protect walls  against the  expansion  of freezing. 
Covers  will  prevent  evaporation  and  help 
keep  dirt  and  leaves  out.  Water  out  of  sight, 
however,  often  is  neglected.  In  the  South,  pull 
back the cover at least every month and treat the 
water as needed. 

When  removing  a cover,  take  care  not to  let 
the  accumulated  gunk  and  untreated  water that 
collects on top of the cover get into the pool. 

POOL  CHEMICALS 
You  can  have  pool  experts  come 
weekly  to  check  and  add  pool 
chemicals,  or  you  can  do  it  yourself 
with  the  aid  of a  simple  test  kit. 

Chlorine—in  the  form  of powders, 

tablets,  or  other  stabilized  types—is 
added  to  pools  on  a  day-to-day  basis 
to  meet  regular  needs.  It's  also  added 
at  intervals—after  heavy  rains,  for 
example—in shock form. 

Such  shock  treatments  work  better  if 
you  check  and  adjust  the  pH  level  first 
(see  below).  That  way,  the  chlorine 
immediately  attacks  and  destroys  bac(cid:173)
teria and  algae,  and  is  quickly  expend(cid:173)
ed  or  exhausted  in  the  process. 

Shock  your  water  after,  not  imme(cid:173)
diately  before,  swimming.  Besides 
following  heavy  rains,  apply  the 
treatment  after  heavy  use  or  whenever 
the  color  of the  pool  water  begins  to 
turn  green  or  brown,  an  indication  of 
algae growth.  If the  water does  not 
return  to  its  clear,  clean  color,  you  may 
need  to  add  an  algicide. 

Milder  sanitizing  chemicals  that  take 
longer  to  work  but  have  a  less  irritating 
effect  on  the  skin  and  eyes  of extra-
sensitive  people  are  available. 

Also  test  weekly  the  balance  of the 
pH  levels  in  the  pool.  Do  this  more 
often  in  very  hot  weather  or  with  heavy 
use.  If the  reading  is  below  7.2  or 
above  7.6,  add  the  needed  chemicals. 

Total  alkalinity  in  the  water  is  the 

measure  of carbonates  and  bicarbonates. 
This  measure  should  range  from  60  to 
100  ppm  for  best  chlorine  effectiveness 
and  scale  control,  minimum  eye  and 
skin  irritation,  and  least  corrosion. 

211 

BEYOND  THE  BASICS 

CREATING THE ULTIMATE LIGHTING SCHEME 

When  Louis  XVI  strolled  with  his  courtiers 

through  the  gardens  of  Versailles,  thou(cid:173)
sands  of  torches  lit  the  way.  Today,  you  don't 
have  to  be  royalty  to  enjoy  the  wonder  of  the 
garden  at  night.  After  sunset,  even  the  most 
modest  of gardens  can  assume  a  regal  enchant(cid:173)
ment,  thanks  to  skillfully  used  lighting. 

Most  outdoor  settings,  however,  remain  basi(cid:173)
cally  dark  when  the  sun  goes  down.  Sometimes, 
they  even  lack  enough  lighting  to  satisfy  safety 
and  security  requirements  (see  pages  92-93). 

The  benefits  of  the  right  decorative  lighting 
scheme  are  numerous.  With  today's  busy  sched(cid:173)
ules,  people  do  most  of their relaxing  and  enter(cid:173)
taining  after  nightfall.  Garden 
lighting  can 
stretch the hours of outdoor living,  as well as  the 
seasons  of garden  enjoyment.  Few  activities  are 
more  exciting  for  children  or  adults  than  to  go 
out  in  the  first  snowfall  of the  season  or  to  step 
outdoors  after  supper  on  an  unusually  warm 
evening  in  February. 

When  done  well,  garden  lighting  also  creates 
a living  mural  beyond  your windows,  which you 
can  enjoy  without  venturing  outdoors  in  rain, 
ice,  or  cold.  Well-placed  and  -chosen  fixtures 
can  create  dramatic  pools  of light  near  plants  or 
structures  and  direct  the  patterns  of  shadows. 
Interesting  textures  and  forms—whether  of  fo(cid:173)
liage  or  branches—can  be  played  up. 

N ew  or  evolving  gardens  sometimes  benefit 
the most from lighting.  Fixtures  can  be placed  to 
illuminate  the garden's  outstanding features  and 
cast  the  rest  into  darkness. 

Even  if you cherish  the peace darkness brings, 
you  can  enjoy  the  diffused,  perimeter  lighting 
of garden  features.  A  wide  variety  of fixtures  is 
available  that  offer  glow  without  glare. 

Best  of  all,  today's  low-voltage  kits  let  you 
lights  quickly 

install  energy-efficient  garden 
with  minimal  expense,  no  electrician,  and  com(cid:173)
plete  safety.  See  the  next two pages  for  more  on 
selecting,  placing,  and  installing  outdoor  lights. 

BEYOND  THE  BASICS 

ASSESSING LIGHTING OPTIONS 

Study  the  exciting  possibilities  for  outdoor 

lights carefully before you buy the first bulb. 
Decide  what  effect  will  add  the  most  enjoy(cid:173)
ment—both  visual  and  recreational—to  each 
area  of your  yard. 

To  begin,  go  outside  at dusk  and  again  after 
dark  with  a  strong  flashlight  or  a  trouble  light 
on a long extension cord.  Shine the light differ(cid:173)
ent  directions,  trying  to  play  up  moods.  Don't 
simulate  daylight. 

Lights pointing down can give a broad,  natu(cid:173)
ral  highlight  to  interesting  features  of the  yard. 
Upward  lights  can give  a glow to  leaves.  Back(cid:173)
lighting can accent the drama of a tree  or struc(cid:173)
ture, particularly  if the  lighted  object is in front 
of a plain  surface. 

Lights  diffused  with  translucent  screens  can 
shine down subtly from high in a tree or the side 
of  a  house,  mimicking  moonlight.  Lights  that 
graze or wash across an interesting architectural 
surface, like a fence or chimney, can be striking. 
The height and brightness of a light, as well as 
the  direction  of  its  reflector,  will  change  the 
effect.  Avoid  glare  in  a  stroller's  eyes  or  on 
nearby properties,  especially  into windows. 

•  Drawing  a plan 
Once you've developed  your lighting ideas,  lay 
tracing  paper  over  your  landscape  plan  and 
mark which light types you want placed where. 
Try to visualize the overall look. The goal of the 
plan at left was to highlight certain use areas and 
visual  elements  in  the  landscape,  while  at  the 
same time provide a low level of light through(cid:173)
out so that the site has warmth and charm. 

If your house is in the planning stage,  let the 
electrician  who  wires  the  house  install  major 
fixtures  like  door  lights,  floodlights,  and  post 
lights.  These  will  be  bright-burning  lights  that 
operate  on  the  same  120-volt  system  as  your 
house.  If your  house  and  yard  are  established, 
hire  an  electrician;  tackle  simpler  120-volt  in(cid:173)
stallations  yourself,  if  local  code  allows  (see 
pages 92-93  and  288-291);  or work with easy-
to-install,  but  less  versatile  12-volt  lighting  sys(cid:173)
tems (more details on the next page) 

214 

Put  switches  indoors,  if at  all  possible.  That 
way,  you  can  enjoy  the  sight  of  your  garden 
long hours  later or  in  weather when  you  really 
don't  want  to  go  outside  to  turn  lights  on  and 
off.  Also,  consider  whether  you  want  a  central 
switch to command all lights, several so you can 
use  them  separately,  or  an  automatic  timer.  If 
you have a  120-volt system and only one central 
switch, be prepared for some high electric bills. 

•  Low-voltage  lowdown 
Low-voltage  fixtures  let  you  light  up  the  night 
without  burning  out  the  budget—either  for  in(cid:173)
stallation or operation. Their secret is the trans(cid:173)
former or power pack.  It reduces to  12 volts the 
120-volt  current  from  any grounded  outlet. 

Few  code  restrictions  apply,  so  you  usually 
can  set  up  these  lamps  without  an  electrician. 
The wiring is  so safe that it need  not always  be 
buried, and it never needs encasing in conduit. 
There  are  drawbacks.  The  transformers  usu(cid:173)

ally  can  handle  only  five  or  six  fixtures,  with 
bulbs no brighter than 75  watts. Also, the long(cid:173)
er the run of wire,  the dimmer the light. 

To  install,  just  securely  mount  the  transform(cid:173)
er near an outlet. Put it as close to the fixtures as 
possible. If the kit includes a photosensitive con(cid:173)
trol that turns lights on at dusk and  off at dawn, 
be sure to position the sensor so it's  exposed  to 
daylight but not to  artificial light at night. 

After  hanging  the  transformer,  lay  the  cable 
where desired, then snap the fixtures to it. Spike 
each fixture  into  the ground. 

Before  burying  the  cable  or  covering  it  with 
mulch,  turn  the  system  on  to  check  if  the  fix(cid:173)
tures  cast  light  the  way  you  want.  If  not,  just 
snap them elsewhere  on the cable. 

Bury  the  cable  with  enough  soil  or  mulch  to 
hide it and prevent tripping. In turf, dig out a V-
shaped  wedge  of sod,  place  the  cable  beneath, 
then  replace  the  sod.  Under shrubbery,  the  ca(cid:173)
ble can lie on  the ground or under mulch. 

To  minimize  the  effects  of  frost  heave,  fill 
around  the  fixtures  with gravel.  Raise  or lower 
the bulb to expand  or reduce the circle of light. 
For best  illumination,  keep  foliage  trimmed. 

215 

BEYOND  THE  BASICS 

CREATING THE ULTIMATE PLAY AREA 

However  lovely,  yards  must  always  be  pri(cid:173)

marily a place  to  play  for family  members 

of all ages. 

The  same  children  who  drive  you  crazy  in(cid:173)
doors  can  delight  you  with  their  wonder  and 
imaginations  outside.  Teenagers  can  spend 
hours  shooting  baskets  or giggling  on  a distant 
private  swing.  Grown-and-gone  young  adults 
will  return  periodically  and  want  a  lively  game 
of  volleyball  or  badminton.  Old  cronies  can 
pitch  horseshoes  or  play  shuffleboard,  or  just 
enjoy each other's  company on a porch  swing. 

•  Planning 
The ideal play area does not develop haphazard(cid:173)
ly.  It  is  designed  and  situated  so  it  directs  kid 
traffic  away  from  a  potential  danger,  such  as  a 
busy  street,  to  the  desired  avenue  of  escape, 
such as a tree house.  It is fashioned so it neither 
violates nor dominates the rest of the landscape. 
The  play  area  should  allow  room  to  roam 
without  fear  of unplanned  encounters  with  ob(cid:173)
stacles. That's easy, of course, in a big yard. But 
even  the  smallest outdoor space can  become  an 
ideal  play  area  with  the  right  planning  and 
equipment. After all, a single swing hung from a 
tree branch can provide hours of entertainment. 
The ideal play area also  should  offer children 
and  adults  special  places  for  private  retreats 
(though,  for  children,  it  should  be  somewhere 
they can be seen). 

•  Growth  and play 
Because  children grow  quickly  and  adult inter(cid:173)
ests  change  as  well,  the  ideal  play  area  relies 
more on convertible and multifunction uses and 
fixtures  than  on  permanent,  unchangeable  in(cid:173)
stallations like tennis courts. 

A  good  play  area  offers  something  for  chil(cid:173)
dren in a range of ages or of one age for several 
years.  When choosing a play structure, look for 
one  with  many  possible  uses;  it  will  hold  chil(cid:173)
dren's attention longer. Once swinging is passe, 
the kids  can  slide or play house on a platform. 

216 

217 

BEYOND  THE  BASICS 

ASSESSING PLAY-AREA OPTIONS 

Location of play areas is important. They will 

be  used  more  hours  of the  day  and  seasons 
of  the  year  if  they  have  some  sun  and  some 
shade.  A sense of seclusion and some wind pro(cid:173)
tection also are  important. 

Few  yards  have  as  much  space  for  play  as 
could  be desired,  but games  can  be condensed. 
An area as small as 20 by 40 feet can work if you 
make  a point not to  plant a tree  in  the  middle. 
You  can  set  short  pieces  of tile  or  pipe  in  con(cid:173)
crete  in  the  ground  and  take  down  or  put  up 
poles or stakes as needed. 

Concentrating  plants  around  the  edges  of  a 
yard will yield the most open play space. Be sure 
to  surround  play  areas  with  expendable  plants. 
If games  are  infrequent and  space is at a premi(cid:173)
um,  try  putting  tender  plants  in  movable  con(cid:173)
tainers and  planting  only the  most rugged  ones 
in the ground. 

Use tough grass such as tall fescue or St.  Au(cid:173)
gustine where the neighborhood kids gather for 
football  or  baseball.  Around  play  structures,  a 
soft surface underfoot is best.  This can be grass, 
though  it  will  become  spotted  from  wear  and 
tear, feet will get wet, and mowing will be more 
difficult.  If  you  use  sand  or  mulches  like  pea 
gravel  or  tanbark,  you  may  want  to  lay  plastic 
underneath  and  make  the  mulch  thick  enough 
so weeds  will  not grow through. 

As children grow older, you can emphasize to 

them  how  their  strength  and  skill  have  out(cid:173)
grown the yard, and strongly suggest, even rule, 
that they must move  on  to  the  nearest park.  Or 
you  may  turn  the  greensward  into  a  swimming 
pool at that time. 

•  Play  structures 
Design  and  build  your  own  play  structure,  or 
assemble  one  using  architect's  plans  or  a  kit. 
When  selecting  equipment,  consider  first  the 
ages  of  your  children  and  what  will  best  help 
them develop  muscular coordination,  self-confi(cid:173)
dence,  and  creativity. 

Locate play structures where they will be used 
and  where  adults  can  check  on  children  often 
from  indoor  rooms.  Passive  supervision  allows 

218 

for  more  creative  play  yet  fewer  accidents  for 
kids  and  greater peace  of mind  for parents. 

Leave plenty of room for swing clearance and 
slide  landing (see  right).  Check often for rough 
edges, splinters, or protruding pieces that could 
cut  or  scratch.  All  bolts  should  have  smooth 
heads  and  covered  ends.  Firmly  anchor  the 
bases  in  concrete.  Ask  children  to  report  any 
damages  and  involve  them  in  frequent  mainte(cid:173)
nance checks. 

Check  that  swings,  ladder  rungs,  and  ropes 
are  at  usable  heights.  On  many  units,  you  can 
add  additional  features  as  children  grow,  thus 
keeping  their interest and  spreading your costs. 

Equipment that is beyond little ones' capabili(cid:173)

ties  should  be  safely  out  of  their  reach  and  is 
better  out  of their  sight. 

•  Sand  castles 
Sand provides great entertainment for kids of all 
ages,  whether it's in a tractor tire,  a sunken pit, 
or  a  veritable  backyard  beach.  Provide  good 
drainage  under  in-ground  boxes  by  lining  the 
bottom  with gravel  or flagstones. 

A retaining edge can serve as a seat or a dry(cid:173)
ing surface for sand pies—plus keep the bulk of 
the sand inside.  Put the box far enough from the 
house so  that the sand  kids carry out of the  box 
on their clothes has  a chance  to sift off.  A cover 
is nice, especially if cats are around. 

Sandboxes, which can occupy unused corners 
as  long as  they are  in view from  the  house,  are 
easily converted  back to gardens when the time 
is right. 

•  Private  worlds 
Hiding places  are great for children  of all ages. 
These  can  be  as  elaborate  as  tree  houses  and 
playhouses  or  as  simple  as  a  cubby  under  the 
deck  or  on  the  far  side  of  a  sheltering  tree. 
Shrubs  and  trees,  especially  those  with  pendu(cid:173)
lous  or  weeping  branches,  are  great  for  games 
of  hide-and-seek.  A  pole  tepee  or  little  house 
covered  with  beans  or  flowering  vines  also  can 
make an inexpensive playhouse. 

CONTROLLING 

INSECTS 

ey  to  controlling 
the  people-stinging  pests  and  plant-eating  bugs 

that  can  waste  a  landscape  if their  numbers 

grow  too  large  is  to  accept  that  insects  are  a  part  of 

nature.  If you  appreciate  and  protect  the  good 

ones  while  working  to  outwit  the  undesirable  ones, 

you'll  preserve  both  peace  of mind  and  an 

ecological  balance. 

CONTROLLING  INSECTS 

ASSESSING INSECT-CONTROL SOLUTIONS 

Many insects are great garden friends.  Lady-

bugs and  lacewings gobble  up  aphids  and 
mealybugs.  Ground,  or  carabid,  beetles  hide 
under stones and  eat caterpillars  and  slugs.  The 
hover fly, cousin to the sweat bee, is parasitic to 
many  caterpillars  and  helps  control  gypsy 
moths.  Dragonflies  and  damselflies  dine  on 
mosquitoes.  Many other insects are harmless. 

The  few  pesky  bugs  that  have  gained  the 
group its nasty reputation can be separated  into 
two classes:  the ones that pester people and  the 
vegetarians  that prefer  to  eat our plants. 

•  People  pests 
Although  flesh-seeking  bugs  may  outnumber 
us,  and  they  may pack more punch per particle 
than we do,  we still can outwit them. 

Among the possibilities: Place your patio on a 
breezy  hillside  instead  of  a  hollow.  Shade  the 
kitchen  door.  Plant  herbs  and  shoo-fly  around 
the deck and  bee-attracting plants at a distance. 
Locate  service  areas—trash  cans  and  bright 
lights  may  attract  insects—well  away  from  out(cid:173)
door  living  areas.  Because  a  working  compost 
pile  draws  fewer flies  than  a garbage  can,  com(cid:173)
post  your  spoiled  food  instead  of  throwing  it 
away.  (See page  235  for more on composting.) 
Clean animal pens often, working at the cool(cid:173)

est,  driest  times  available.  Compost  the  wastes 
or spread  them at a distance from the house. 

Plant carefully so as not to block breezes  that 

blow  bugs  away.  Prune  to  let  breezes  in.  Re(cid:173)
move  all  sources  of  standing  water  that  could 
offer breeding grounds  for mosquitoes.  Put fish 
in  your ponds,  empty  the  plastic  wading  pool, 
and  fill  tree  hollows with  sand. 

You  can  fog or mist your yard  with commer(cid:173)

cially  available  chemicals,  but  the  relief will  be 
temporary at best,  and  the chemicals may bump 
off friendly  insects,  too.  Layers  of clothing  and 
possibly a shot of repellent are  much preferred. 
Scented  coils  and  candles,  and  a  variety  of 
other products,  also  are  available.  Try  to get  a 
guarantee  of satisfaction  before  buying. 

•  Birds 
Birds, because of their love for insect meals, can 
be among your greatest allies in the battle of the 
bug.  If  you  encourage  them  to  come  to  your 
yard  with  food,  water,  and  nesting places,  you 
can quickly and  significantly best the average of 
only four  birds  per acre. 

To provide  the  food  birds  need,  plant  berry-
producing trees, shrubs, and vines; keep feeders 
well  stocked;  and  grow  certain  annual  and  pe(cid:173)
rennial  flowers  (calendula,  coreopsis,  grasses, 
and  sunflower,  among  others).  A  birdbath  or 
shallow  saucer  can  fulfill  the  water  needs. Just 
be  sure  to  set  the  containers  near  enough  to 
trees  and  shrubs  so  birds  can  quickly  retreat 
when  they  sense  approaching  predators.  And 
keep  the  containers  clean  and  filled—even  dur(cid:173)
ing  the  winter,  if  possible.  For  nesting  sites, 
plant plenty of trees and shrubs. To attract some 
bird  species,  though,  you'll  need  to  install  a 
birdhouse  or two. 

Check your library or a bookstore for specific 
advice on how to attract the  birds  that will help 
you  the most. 

Less delightful but almost as effective as a bird 
is  a  toad.  Some  toads  eat  as  many  as  15,000 
insects  a  year.  Provide  a  shallow  container  of 
water to encourage toads  to stay. 

•  Pest-chasing  plants 
Plant Nicandra physalodes, or shoo-fly plant, near 
your  outdoor  living  area  and  you  can  reduce  a 
fly population of hundreds to a swattable dozen. 
As  a  bonus,  the  plant  produces  little  lavender 
flowers and forms five-sided paper-lantern  seed-
pods.  An  annual  that usually  self-sows,  shoo-fly 
grows as easily as its cousin, the tomato plant. 

Sweet  basil,  pennyroyal,  sassafras,  garlic, 
mint,  dill,  horseradish,  and  rhubarb  leaves,  as 
well as nasturtium, marigold, and painted daisy, 
all  are  variously  deterrent to  different pests. 

•  Blessed  screens 
One  of  the  greatest  of  modern  inventions  is 
screening.  Imagine  not  having  it  for  windows 
and  doors.  To  make  an  outdoor  room  as  bug-

222 

free as the indoors, screen in a porch or gazebo, 
or  perhaps  a  walk-out  patio  that  lies  below  a 
deck (see pages 230-231). Or, add an enclosed 
sun-room to your house (see pages  226-229). 
You  can  screen  in  any  existing  porch  by  at(cid:173)
taching the screening directly to the porch struc(cid:173)
ture  if it  has  vertical  supports  no  more  than  5 
feet  apart  and  enough  of a  knee  wall  for- hori(cid:173)
zontal  support. 

Or you can frame the screening and then set it 
just  outside  the  present  structure.  Your  porch 
railing  will  not  show  quite  as  clearly  from  the 
street, but it still will add charm inside and hold 
pots  and  brief visitors. 

To  save  money,  screen  only part  of a  larger 
porch or patio.  If you do, you'll be able to enjoy 
both open  outdoors  and  enclosed  comfort. 

•  Plant pests 
Because  healthy  plants  are  far  less  likely  to  be 
damaged  by  bugs  than  weak  ones,  your  first 
steps in controlling plant pests  should  be to im(cid:173)
prove  your  soil,  mulch  around  plants,  compost 
or bury  dropped  fruit,  and  control  weeds.  Sup(cid:173)
ply plants with ample amounts  of nutrients,  wa(cid:173)
ter,  and  sunlight.  And  choose  native  plants 
suited  to  your conditions. 

Select insect-resistant varieties  of fruits,  vege(cid:173)
tables, and ornamentals. Where pests have been 
a problem,  plant  what  they  don't  like.  In  years 
when  beetles  eat  a  bite  of  every  green  bean, 
they often leave  the purple kinds whole. 

Fool flower and vegetable pests with compan(cid:173)
ion planting—setting chive  or garlic  among  the 
roses,  for example—and  crop  rotation. 

Inspect  your  plants  daily  for  predators;  pick 
off the first few  before  they  become a hundred. 
If  you're  squeamish,  handpicking  may  at  first 
seem  repulsive;  but  that  feeling will  fade  when 
you  see  how  much  more  effective  and  less  pol(cid:173)
luting it is than spraying.  Wear a pair of gloves, 
if you like. 

Keep  your plantings  diverse  so  you'll  attract 
as  many  of the  beneficial  insects  mentioned  in 
the first paragraph on the opposite page as possi(cid:173)

ble.  Or,  purchase  them  from  garden  catalogs. 
Once  released  in  your  yard,  these  bugs  will 
quickly go  to  work. 

•  When  nature  fails 
Weather  conditions  and  other  uncontrollable 
situations  sometimes  disturb  nature's  balance 
and  leave  you  with  a  burgeoning  pest  popula(cid:173)
tion that calls for drastic measures. 

Zappers,  traps,  netting,  and  row  covers  are 
now  available  for  mechanical  insect  control. 
Don't  buy  until  you  see—and  hear—these  in 
action,  or get a guarantee. 

Sometimes  a  strong  mist  or  spray  from  the 

garden  hose will dislodge and  drown aphids. 

Before  you  resort  to  stronger  chemicals  and 
possible  poisons,  see  if  soapy  water—1  table(cid:173)
spoon  dishwashing  liquid  per quart—can purge 
the  infestation.  Wash  the  soap  off  with  clear 
water a day after the  last treatment.  Or,  use the 
new insecticidal soaps. 

Try  a  biological  control;  these  are  proving 
more  useful  as  well  as  much  safer  than  broad-
spectrum chemicals. Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt)— 
in spray or dust form under trade names such as 
Dipel and Thuricide—causes  a disease that kills 
caterpillars. Bacilluspopiliae (milky spore disease) 
helps  control Japanese  beetle  grubs.  A  disease 
called Nosema locustae controls grasshoppers; ju(cid:173)
venile  hormone  analogues  (JHAs)  affect  some 
flies, 
scales,  whiteflies, 
aphids, and mealybugs while remaining nontox(cid:173)
ic  to  birds  and  animals.  A  new  control  called 
neem acts systemically—it's added to the soil and 
spreads through  the plant—and  may largely re(cid:173)
place conventional insecticides  for home use. 

fleas,  mosquitoes, 

If you  resort to  chemical  insecticides,  choose 
the ones  least toxic and  most selective,  and  fol(cid:173)
low label directions to the letter.  The chemicals 
will  do  less  damage  to  beneficial  insects  if you 
use  them  in  late  afternoon  or  when  the  fewest 
bees  are  buzzing—after  mowing  the  dande(cid:173)
lions,  not during  the  fruit-tree  bloom. 

223 

CONTROLLING  INSECTS 

CHOOSING AN ORGANIC OR CHEMICAL CONTROL 

PEOPLE  PESTS 
Insect 
Ants 

Description  and  Trouble  Signs 
Most  ants  are  only  pesky  and  a  nuisance  in  food  and 
cupboards.  Tiny  fire  ants  and  large  harvester  ants 
make  mounds  in  the  yard.  Their  bites  can  hurt;  can 
be  serious  to  sensitive  individuals. 

Control 
Spread  red  pepper  on  shelves  or  counters;  plant  pen(cid:173)
nyroyal  or  tansy  near  doorways  or  strew  leaves  along 
ant  runs.  Buy  ant  traps  or  sprays  for  fire  ants.  Cover 
feet  and  legs. 

These  stinging  insects—which  take  on  many  shapes— 
are  beneficial,  necessary  for  pollination,  and  non-
threatening  unless  disturbed,  stepped  on  accidentally, 
or  blocked  from  entering  their  hive  or  nest.  Study 
their  habits  and  relax  around  them. 

If one  lands  on  you,  just  stand  still  until  it  flies  away. 
Put  bee-attracting  plants  far  from  outdoor  living  ar(cid:173)
eas.  Provide  water  in  a  birdbath  so  these  bugs  won't 
hover  in  thirst.  Scrape  stinger  from  sting,  wash  with 
soap,  then  apply  ice  and  baking-soda  paste. 

So  small  they're  almost  invisible,  these  mites  cling  to 
grass,  hay,  and  blackberry  bushes.  They  attach  them(cid:173)
selves  to  animals  and  people.  Bites  aren't  felt  at  the 
time,  and  they  usually  are  not  dangerous,  but  they 
can  cause  intense  itching  later. 

Feed  lawn  with  nitrogen.  Treat  lawn  and  shrubs  once 
a  month  with  1  ounce  of liquid  dish  detergent  dis(cid:173)
solved  in  16  gallons  of water.  Avoid  sitting  on  infest(cid:173)
ed  grass.  Some  repellents  help  some  people  (see 
gnats,  below). 

Usually  more  bothersome  to  people's  pets  than  peo(cid:173)
ple  themselves,  these  insects  are  brown,  flat,  and 
wingless,  with  hard  bodies  and  long,  slender  legs. 
They  move  by  jumping.  Sand  fleas  can  infest  an 
entire  house. 

To  expel  sand  fleas,  turn  on  heat  briefly  in  summer, 
or  apply  oil  of  lavender.  Scatter  fresh  or  dried  sprigs 
of pennyroyal  or  tansy.  Use  cocoa  shells  as  bedding 
for  pets.  Spray  area  or  bathe  animals  with  solution  of 
wormwood  or  cloves,  or  with  alcohol.  Use  collars. 

These  pests  need  no  description.  They  cling  to 
screens  and  some  enter  each  time  the  door  opens. 
Although  they  seem  to  bite  only  in  certain  weather, 
they  are  always  dirty  and  pesky,  and  can  sometimes 
carry  diseases. 

Plant  Nicandra physalodes,  or  shoo-fly,  plant  by  doors, 
animal  pens,  and  compost  piles.  Separate  animal  areas 
from  entry  areas  as  much  as  possible.  Shade  doors. 
Swat  or  use  fly  strips  for  mechanical  control.  Sprays 
are  only  temporarily  effective. 

Luckily,  these  tiny,  mosquitolike  flies  are  seasonal. 
While  they  are  biting,  apply  a  repellent  before  going 
out  to  garden.  Try  pure  vanilla  extract,  certain  bath 
oils,  or  mosquito  spray. 

If  you're  bitten  by  any  bug,  wash  the  site  with  soap 
and  water  and  apply  an  antiseptic.  Juice  from  broken 
aloe  leaf  relieves  itching.  Doses  of  aspirin  or  antihis(cid:173)
tamine  reduce  pain. 

The  mosquito  has  a  round  head,  slender  proboscis, 
long  legs,  and  transparent  wings.  Unfortunately,  its 
humming  warning  does  not  always  precede  the 
immediate  piercing  of  its  bite.  Mosquitoes  attack 
most  often  at  dusk  or  in  damp  weather,  and  they  can 
carry  several  severe  diseases. 

Most  ticks  are  small,  round,  and  hard-shelled  crea(cid:173)
tures—not  true  insects—that  bury  their  heads  in  the 
flesh,  often  in  the  scalp.  Incidents  are  rare  in  most  lo(cid:173)
cales  and  usually  are  more  frightening  than  harmful. 

Remove  or  treat  all  standing  water  to  prevent  breed(cid:173)
ing.  Attract  birds,  add  fish  to  ponds,  and  welcome 
toads  and  lizards.  Rub  your  skin  with  leaves  or  oil  of 
citronella,  pennyroyal,  basil,  castor  beans,  garlic,  sas(cid:173)
safras,  or  tansy,  or  with  deterrents  for  gnats  (see 
above).  Treat  bites  with  aloe.  Thiamine  or  vitamin 
Bj  taken  orally  helps  some  people. 

To  release  the  hold,  light  a  match,  extinguish  it,  then 
press  the  hot  tip  against  the  insect  body.  Or  apply  a 
drop  of  alcohol  or  gasoline. 

Bees,  w a s p s, 
h o r n e t s, 
b u m b l e b e es 

Chiggers 

Fleas 

Flies 

Gnats,  m i d g e s, 
blackflies, 
a nd  o t h er 
n o - s e e - u ms 

Mosquitoes 

Ticks 

224 

PLANT  PESTS 
Insect 
Aphids 

Description  and. Trouble  Signs 
Aphids  are  small,  soft-bodied,  sap-sucking  insects  that 
can  be  black,  green,  red,  or  brown.  They  form  colo(cid:173)
nies  along  buds  and  new growth,  and  can  exude  a 
sticky  honeydew. 

Control 
Use  fingers,  a  strong  spray  from  a  hose,  or  soapy 
water  to  dislodge.  Import  predators  like  ladybugs  or 
lacewings.  Kill  the  ants  that  raise  aphids  for  the  hon(cid:173)
eydew.  Plant  nasturtium  around  infested  plants. 

Borers 

The  larvae  of several  borer  species  tunnel  into  trees, 
especially  birch,  dogwood,  and  fruit.  A  gummy  sub(cid:173)
stance  marks  their presence.  Sometimes,  sawdust 
comes  from  the  holes.  They  can  greatly  weaken  or 
even  kill  trees. 

Let gum  remain  until  you  cut  out  or  kill  borers  with 
knife  or  wire.  Prune  beneath  swellings  in  roses. 
Wrap  young  trees  with  masking  tape  at  the  soil  line; 
pull  soil  back  in  winter  to  give  cold  and  birds  access 
to  the  borers. 

Caterpillars 

Armyworms  eat grass  at  the  soil,  leaving  dead  spots. 
Gypsy-moth  larvae  and  tent  caterpillars  can  quickly 
defoliate  a  branch  or  tree. 

Keep  lawn  healthy.  Spray  at  first  sign  with  soapy  wa(cid:173)
ter  (see  chinch  bugs).  Handpick  or  knock  down  from 
trees  in  evening.  Use  sticky  band  like  Tanglefoot 
around  trunk.  Use  Bt  or  carbaryl  when  desperate. 

Chinch  bugs 

These tiny—1/3 inch  at  longest—black  and  white  in(cid:173)
sects  have  red  legs.  They  attack grasses  in  summer, 
causing  patches  of brown,  dead  lawn.  To  detect, 
press  a  bottomless  can  into  the  lawn  and  add  water. 

Keep  the  lawn  well  fed.  Control  thatch.  At  the  first 
sign,  spread  gypsum  or  spray  with  1  cup  dish  soap  to 
10  gallons  of water.  If they  persist,  treat  lawn  in June 
and  August  with  Oftanol  and  replant  bare  spots. 

Grubs 

Moles 

Grubs  are  thick,  whitish  beetle  larvae  that  stretch  up 
to 1 1/2 inches long, though they're usually rolled into 
a C  shape.  Found  underground,  they  kill grass  in 
spring  and  fall.  Worst  damage  may  come  from  small 
animals  that  tear up  the  lawn  to  eat  the  grubs. 

Water  well,  then  apply  diazinon  or  isofenphos  as  di(cid:173)
rected.  Water  thoroughly  again.  Do  not  allow  runoff. 
Treat Japanese beetle grubs with Bacillus popiliae, 
milky  spore  disease. 

Not an  insect,  but just as  destructive,  these  small, 
burrowing  rodents  have  very  small  eyes  and  ears  and 
pointed  noses.  They  eat  earthworms,  often  raising  a 
series  of unsightly  tunnels  in  lawns  and  undermining 
roots  in  flower  and  vegetable  gardens. 

Trapping  is  most  effective.  Castor  beans  will  discour(cid:173)
age  moles  but  also  are  poisonous  to  children.  Blend 
2  ounces  castor oil  with  1  ounce detergent,  then  add 
equal volume  of water.  Apply  1  tablespoon  mixed 
with  2  gallons  of warm  water  around  garden  areas. 

Slugs  and  snails 

These  fat,  wormlike  insects  (snails  have  shells)  come 
out  at  night  to  eat  jagged  holes  in  the  leaves  of flow(cid:173)
ers  and  vegetables,  leaving  a  slimy  trail  behind. 

Some  gardeners  now  raise  these  for  restaurants.  To 
kill,  handpick  or  place  saucers  of beer  or  poison  bait 
nearby.  With  the  latter,  be  sure  to  protect  pets. 

Spider  mites 

Thrips 

Almost  invisible,  these  tiny  bugs  suck plant  juices  un(cid:173)
til  leaves  look  tarnished  or  turn  yellow  or  brown, 
then  drop  off.  They  like  dry  conditions.  Look  closely 
for  webs. 

Prevent  with  dormant  oil  spray.  Spray  severe  infesta(cid:173)
tions  with  water,  soapy  water,  miticide,  diazinon,  or 
malathion.  Avoid  heavy  feeding  of plant.  Ladybugs 
and  lacewings  will  help. 

Thrips  are  barely  visible  black  insects  that  hide 
among  flower  petals  and  suck  juices,  causing  distort(cid:173)
ed  buds  that  may  not  open,  smaller  flowers,  and 
quicker  fading.  They  prefer  white  and  pastel  flowers. 

Cut  and  remove  flowers  at  the  first  sign  of infesta(cid:173)
tion.  Apply  insecticidal  soap,  soapy water,  strong wa(cid:173)
ter  spray,  or  insecticide  to  the  tops  of plants  like  rose 
and  gardenia. 

225 

CONTROLLING  INSECTS 

ADDING  SUN-ROOMS 

Constructing a screened room can be as sim(cid:173)

ple  as  fitting  screen  panels  to  an  existing 
porch or as complex as adding an entire room to 
your home. Which route you choose depends in 
part,  of course,  on whether you  already  have  a 
porch  or  protected  patio.  It  also  depends  on 
whether  you  would  like  to  use  the  room  year-
round  or just during  the warm  months. 

Photos here and  on pages  228-229  take you 
through  the  steps  involved  in  building  an  all-
seasons  sun-room from  scratch.  Pages  230-231 
show how to screen in an existing porch for bug-
free  summer  use. 

•  The  preliminaries 
Unless you've had  extensive  construction expe(cid:173)
rience, you'll probably want to hire a contractor 
to build all or part of a sun-room. And since any 
addition at the front, side, or back of your house 
will  change  its  appearance,  you  may  need  an 
architect  as  well.  You  most  certainly  will  be 
required  to  apply  for  a  building  permit  and 
prove  that  your  new  room  will  satisfy  setback 
and  code  stipulations. 

As you plan your sun-room, pay special atten(cid:173)
tion  to  how  it  will  relate  to  the  rest  of  your 
home,  both  in  terms  of appearance  and  conve(cid:173)
nience.  Also  think  about  how  you  will  get  into 
and  out of the new room.  For our addition,  the 
old  back door worked  just fine.  At your house, 
you may need to cut a new doorway or replace a 
window with  a door. 

•  Bundling  up 
When it comes time to insulate the floor,  walls, 
and  ceiling  of your  sun-room,  aim  to  meet  or 
exceed  the  R-factor  norms  for  your  region. 
Large  expanses  of  north-,  east-,  or  west-facing 
glass  make a room  chilly during winter. 

A heating specialist can tell you whether your 
present  heating  plant  has  enough  capacity  to 
handle another room. If not,  consider installing 
a  wood-burning  stove,  through-the-wall  fur(cid:173)
nace,  or  other  independent  heat  source.  That 
way,  you  can  conserve  energy  during  periods 
when  you're  not using  your sun-room. 

226 

227 

CONTROLLING  INSECTS 

ADDING SUN-ROOMS  (continued) 

228 

229 

CONTROLLING  INSECTS 

SCREENING IN A PORCH 

If you already have an open porch—or a patio 

that's  sheltered  by  a  deck  above—the  best 
way to win the bug battle is to put up screens. 
In  some  cases,  you  can  simply  staple  screen(cid:173)
ing to  support members,  then cover the  staples 
with strips of lattice or a special molding—called 
screen bead—designed specifically for such uses. 
Another  way  to  put  up  screening  is  to  con(cid:173)

struct  framed  screens  and  screw  them  in  place, 
as  we  did  for  the  under-deck  patio  shown  on 
these two pages. Framed screen panels are more 
work,  but they're easy  to  remove for repairs or 
wintertime  storage. 

•  Screening  candidates 
For the mesh, you can choose aluminum, plastic, 
fiberglass,  copper,  or  bronze.  Let  appearance 
and upkeep be your guides. Aluminum is incon(cid:173)
spicuous  but  subject  to  staining;  plastic  and  fi(cid:173)
berglass  won't  stain,  but  their  filaments  are 
thicker,  which  reduces  visibility;  copper  and 
bronze must be coated with spar varnish period(cid:173)
ically to prevent staining. 

Buy  18/14  mesh  or finer (the  numbers  refer 
to  the  quantity  of horizontal  and  vertical  wires 
per  inch)  in  widths  of  24,  36,  48,  60,  or  12 
inches.  Aluminum  screening  comes  in  green, 
charcoal,  or natural finish;  plastic and  fiberglass 
screening include these colors, plus a few more. 

If your porch or under-deck patio has a south(cid:173)
ern  or  western  exposure,  consider  using  fiber(cid:173)
glass  solar  screening.  It  filters  out  up  to  two-
thirds  of  harsh  sunlight,  with  a  commensurate 
loss in visibility. 

•  Screen  door 
Home centers and millwork dealers offer wood(cid:173)
en  screen  doors  in  a variety of sizes  and  several 
different  styles.  Unlike  a  conventional  door,  a 
screen door doesn't need a jamb.  You can hang 
it  directly  from  a  post  with  surface-mounted, 
spring-loaded hinges. Just nail a 2x4 header be(cid:173)
tween posts  on  either side  of the  door.  If there 
are  no  posts  at  the  spot  where  you  want  your 
door, install a set with 4x4s or doubled-up 2x4s 
and  hang  the  door from  one  of them. 

230 

231 

SERVICE 
AREAS 

ike  a  smash  hit 

at  the  theater,  an  enchanting  landscape  relies  as 

much  on  what  happens  behind  the  scenes 

as  it  does  on  the  drama  before  your  eyes.  A  yard's 

backstage—its  service  areas—should 

organize  tools  and  trash,  cars  and  compost, 

vegetable  and  cutting  gardens,  even  places  for pets, 

so  that  each  gives  its  all  to  the  performance. 

SERVICE  AREAS 

ASSESSING SERVICE-AREA OPTIONS 

Tired  of backing  out  the  car  every  time  the 

lawn  needs  mowing?  Making  visitors  hike 
from  the  street  because  there's  no  place  for 
them  to  park  on  your  property?  Tethering  the 
dog with a chain that soon tangles? Though not 
the  most  glamorous  parts  of  a  landscaping 
scheme,  service  areas—convenient  but  incon(cid:173)
spicuous—should  be  intrinsic  elements  in  your 
yard's master plan. 

The  pages  that  follow  shed  light  on  the pro(cid:173)

cess  of  planning  and  building  storage  sheds, 
driveways,  and  kennels.  Here  are  some  other 
points  to  ponder  as  you  plan  ways  to  put  your 
yard  at your service. 

•  Paving  options 
For  driveways  and  other  service  areas,  you'll 
need  sturdy, good-looking surfaces  that  require 
minimal  upkeep  from  year  to  year.  Here  are 
your major  service-area paving  choices. 
•  Concrete lasts for years with little maintenance. 
It  also  offers  you  many  ways  to  introduce  tex(cid:173)
ture,  pattern,  and  color  to  your  landscaping 
scheme.  For more information on working with 
concrete,  see  pages  122-129,  158-163,  242-
245,  248-249, and  282-287. 
•  Asphalt costs somewhat less than concrete, but 
working  with  large  expanses  of it  requires  ex(cid:173)
pertise and equipment beyond the reach of most 
do-it-yourselfers.  The final  surface texture of an 
asphalt installation depends for the most part on 
the  size  of  the  aggregate  used  by  the  asphalt 
supplier.  Color  usually  varies  only  with  age. 
When first installed, asphalt is a rich black; after 
a  few  years,  it  weathers  to  a  medium-to-light 
gray, unless you reseal with a tar-based coating. 
Asphalt  can  be  tinted,  but  you'll  probably  find 
the cost of doing  that prohibitive. 
•  Loose fills—including materials like rock, peb(cid:173)
bles,  and  sand—can  be  installed  with  less grad(cid:173)
ing  and 
than 
concrete  or  asphalt,  and  they  cost  less  than  ei(cid:173)
ther. Also, loose fills that have been in place for 
several  years  make  an  excellent  base  for  con(cid:173)
crete  or asphalt paving. 

less  subsurface  preparation 

234 

The most economical loose fill to use depends 
on  the  materials  readily  available  in  your  area. 
Loose fills come in a variety of colors,  too. The 
biggest  problem  with  them  is  that  they  don't 
always  stay  in  place.  Besides  migrating  to  the 
lawn  when  children  are  around,  loose  fill  can 
stick  to  shoes  and  the  treads  of car  tires,  wash 
away during rainstorms, or be shoveled up with 
snow  in  winter.  Loose  fill  also  is  not  a  good 
choice  for a  steep  drive.  To  learn  about install(cid:173)
ing loose fill,  see page  123. 
•  Brick  makes  an  elegant surfacing material  for 
service areas.  Cost ranges from moderate,  if the 
bricks  are  set  in  sand  (see  pages  154-157),  to 
very costly, if you decide to first pour a concrete 
slab, then mortar the bricks to it (see pages  124-
125).  Some  bricks  can  become  quite  slippery 
when  they're  wet;  these  are  not  a good  choice 
for  steep  drives. 

•  Vegetable  gardens 
Raising  even  a  few  juicy  tomatoes  or  crunchy 
radishes is an enjoyable, delicious, and informa(cid:173)
tive experience  for  the  entire  family. 

As you plan the crops for a vegetable garden, 
bear  in  mind  that  some  plants  require  much 
more  space  than  others  in  proportion  to  their 
yield.  Corn,  for  instance,  though  nearly  every(cid:173)
one's  favorite,  produces  relatively  few  ears  per 
square  foot  of garden.  Tomatoes,  on  the  other 
hand, produce pounds of succulent fruit in  only 
a few  square yards  of space. 

Location  is  the  key  to  a  successful  vegetable 
garden. Vegetables need lots of sun—at least six 
hours  of full  sun per day for warm-season  crops 
such  as  melons,  corn,  and  tomatoes.  Plant  tall 
crops  where  they  will  not  cast  a  shadow  over 
smaller plants. Perennials, such as asparagus and 
rhubarb,  should  get a  spot  that  is  free  of traffic 
and  undisturbed  by the plow or tiller. 

The  quality  and  nature  of  the  soil  also  are 
important to a vegetable garden's-success.  Most 
plants  do  best  in  slightly  acid  soil.  To  test  for 

this, and for the soil's fertility,  use a soil-testing 
kit,  available  from  most  garden-supply  outlets. 
Your  county  extension  office  also  can  arrange 
for a test at the nearest soil-testing station.  Even 
the  poorest  soil  is  easily  improved  by  adding 
compost, manure, and other organic matter. See 
below for more  about compost  heaps. 

•  Cutting  gardens 
Tempted to bring the beauty of a flower garden 
inside?  To  enjoy  your  own  cut  flowers  without 
giving  up  the  wealth  of  color  outside,  plant  a 
cutting  garden. 

The best place for a cutting garden  is  a sepa(cid:173)
rate  and  relatively  unseen  site  set  aside  specifi(cid:173)
cally  for growing  indoor  bouquets.  It  could  be 
in  a  backyard,  or  simply  tucked  behind  a taller 
flower  bed  that's  intended  for  show.  If space  is 
tight,  or if you just don't have  time  to tend  two 
gardens,  design  a  single  garden  that's  so  well 
planned,  varied,  and  abundant  that  flowers  cut 
from carefully chosen  sections  won't  be  missed. 
Or combine  your cutting garden  with  a vegeta(cid:173)
ble planting area. 

To  assure  a  steady  supply  of  cut  flowers 

throughout the growing season, make your cut(cid:173)
ting garden a time-share proposition:  In the fall, 
plant  a  spring  cutting  garden  of  bulbs.  When 
they  blossom,  plant  annuals.  By  the  time  the 
annuals  fill  out  and  claim  the  space,  the  bulb 
foliage  will  have  matured  and  withered. 

For a listing of popular landscape flowers,  see 

pages 320-323. 

•  Compost  heaps 
As  mentioned  earlier,  a compost heap provides 
a thrifty  way  to  organically  nourish  any  type  of 
garden—and  lets  you  recycle  leaves,  clippings, 
and  food  wastes 
that  would  otherwise  be 
thrown  out. 

Give  careful  attention  to  the  location  of  a 
compost  heap.  You'll  need  a  fairly  level  spot 
with  reasonably  good  drainage.  Avoid  placing 
the  heap  in  a  depression  where  the  compost 
could become waterlogged during a wet season. 

Your location also should  be close to a water 
supply—or  at  least  within  reach  of  a  garden 
hose—so  if the  compost  becomes  too  dry,  you 
can easily sprinkle it down. 

A  shady  spot is  preferable  because  too  much 
sun  will  dry  out  the  pile  too  frequently.  The 
heap also should be close to your garden, acces(cid:173)
sible to a wheelbarrow,  and  screened  from  out(cid:173)
door living areas. 

Though  not  absolutely  necessary,  an  enclo(cid:173)
sure  around  your  compost  heap  makes  the pile 
much  easier  to  build  and  maintain.  An  enclo(cid:173)
sure also  helps  keep loose materials  from  blow(cid:173)
ing around  your yard. 

The  type  of  bin  you  build  can  be  simple  or 

elaborate,  depending on the construction mate(cid:173)
rials  you  decide  on.  Bricks,  concrete  blocks, 
wire,  snow fencing,  and  wood  all work well.  If 
you  use  wood,  however,  bear  in  mind  that  the 
same  bacteria working  in  the  compost pile  also 
will  be  trying  to  break  down  the  wood,  so  use 
only  cedar,  cypress,  redwood,  or  pressure-
treated  lumber. 

Construct  a  three-sided  enclosure  with  re(cid:173)

movable  slats  or  boards  on  the  fourth  side  so 
you  can  reach  the  pile  to  turn  or  remove  com(cid:173)
post. Don't use the side of a building as one side 
of the enclosure.  This,  too, could decay. 

Also remember to build your enclosure so air 
can get in to nourish  the bacteria.  Lay concrete 
blocks  so  the  holes  are  horizontal;  if  you  use 
wood,  leave space between the boards. 

The most common size for a compost bin is 4 
feet square by 3 to 4 feet high. A pile less than 3 
feet high  tends  to  dry out;  one  that's  taller than 
4  feet  is  difficult  to  turn.  If  you  need  more 
room, you'll find two small side-by-side bins are 
much  easier to  manage  than  one  large  one,  es(cid:173)
pecially when  it's  time  to  turn  the compost. 

You  needn't  worry  about  adding  a  floor  or 
cover  to  the  bin.  Microbes  and  earthworms 
coming  up  from  the  soil  beneath  the  pile  are 
necessary players in the process. And if your pile 
is  rained on,  the shower will  save yon  the trou(cid:173)
ble of hosing it down. 

235 

SERVICE  AREAS 

CREATING THE ULTIMATE STORAGE UNIT 

Efficient,  good-looking  storage  units  don't 

just happen.  In fact, planning one is an evo(cid:173)
lutionary process that should unfold over a peri(cid:173)
od  of  time.  First,  you  need  to  inventory  the 
items you want to keep in it.  Next, ask yourself 
what  other  jobs  your  storage  unit  might  do. 
Then,  decide  where  to  locate  it.  Finally,  come 
up  with  a design  that will  harmonize  with  your 
house and  overall  landscaping scheme. 

•  Taking  stock 
Bicycles,  trash  cans,  garden  tools,  patio  furni(cid:173)
ture,  the  lawn  mower,  barbecue  equipment, 
sports gear,  ladders—the  candidates  for  shelter 
in a storage unit could  (and sometimes do) fill a 
two-car garage. As you list the things you'd like 
to get out from under foot,  note the dimensions 
of  each  and  add  them  all  together  for  the  ap(cid:173)
proximate  number  of cubic  feet  your  structure 
should  contain. 

Realize,  too,  that space  alone is  not enough. 
Organization  is  at  least  as  important:  Garden(cid:173)
ing, outdoor cooking and entertaining, and fam(cid:173)
ily  activities  go  more  smoothly  when  the  items 
you  need  are  properly  stored  so  they're  ready 
when you  are. 

Perhaps when  your inventory is  done,  you'll 
realize  that you  don't  need  a full-blown  storage 
unit at all.  If so, look for tuck-away spaces under 
decks or benches, or in  handy corners. 

•  Think  multipurpose 
The  best  storage  units  do  a  lot  more  than  just 
hold  things.  They  also  solve  other  problems, 
such  as  creating privacy  or providing  a protect(cid:173)
ed  place  to  nurture  seedlings.  The  examples 
shown at right and on the opposite page are five 
cases in point. 

Your shed  can  be freestanding or attached  to 
a  house,  garage,  carport,  or  other  outbuilding. 
It  should  be  sited  and  styled  so  it's  not  only 
convenient and  accessibile,  but  also  compatible 
with  its  surroundings.  Keep  the  structure  in 
scale  with  your  house  and  yard,  and  develop  a 
design  that  complements  rather  than  competes 
with  the  architectural  styling  of your  home. 

236 

237 

SERVICE AREAS 

BUILDING SHEDS 

Constructing  a  shed  is  much  like  building  a 

very  small  house.  You  sink  support  posts 
into  concrete  footings,  build  a  platform  floor, 
put up wall studs and  rafters,  then close it all in 
with  siding and  roofing.  Once  the  concrete  has 
cured,  the  carpentry  can  be  accomplished  in  a 
weekend  or  two,  depending  on  your  level  of 
skill  and  the  complexity of the  structure you've 
chosen to  tackle. 

For tools you'll need  a hammer, portable cir(cid:173)
cular saw,  hand-  or jigsaw,  drill/driver,  combi(cid:173)
nation  square,  and—last  but  far  from  least—a 
level.  Use  this  often  to  assure  that  everything 
comes  out perfectly  level  and  plumb. 

•  Structural  alternatives 
The  2x4-stud  system shown  here  works for just 
about  any  design,  but  there  are  other  shapes  a 
shed can take,  as well as  other ways a shed  can 
take shape. One of the simplest examples of both 
is  the  A-frame.  Because  its  roof and  walls  are 
one and the same, you need only put up a series 
of  triangular  rafters,  plus  stud  walls  front  and 
back.  Unfortunately,  with  an  A-frame, 
the 
roof's slope limits the height of items that can be 
stored at the sides. 

Or, consider using posts and beams instead of 
studs  and  plates.  Post-and-beam  construction 
uses fewer but thicker vertical members.  For the 
basics  of post-and-beam  construction,  see pages 
100-103,  172-179,  and  226-229. 

•  Bird's-mouth  cuts 
Rafters  for  a  shed  roof  must  be  notched  at  or 
near  their  down-slope  ends  so  they'll  fit  neatly 
atop the wall's  top plate,  as shown in  the photo 
opposite,  far  right.  To  mark  these  cuts,  known 
as  bird's-mouth,  have  a  helper  hold  one  rafter 
against the end of the wall, overlapping it by 1 1/2 
inches.  Draw  a  vertical  line  for  the  heel  of the 
cut  and  a  horizontal  line  to  the  forward  edge. 
Cut this bird's-mouth and use it as a template for 
the  others.  You  might  find  it  easiest  to  cut 
bird's-mouths with  a hand-  or jigsaw. 

238 

SERVICE  AREAS 

CREATING THE ULTIMATE AREA FOR VEHICLES 

At most homes,  the  driveway  and  perhaps  an 

additional  parking  area  are  already  well-
ensconced  parts  of  the  landscape.  Removing 
them  and  paving  a  different  route  from  street  to 
garage are  expensive and  often  impossible  prop(cid:173)
ositions.  N o ne  of  this  is  to  say,  however,  that 
you can't add  to  your  driveway,  resurface  it with 
a  more  pleasing  material,  or  reshape  its  edges. 
Captions  on  the  site  plan  at  left  identify  the 
main  points  to  consider  when  thinking  about 
driveway  and  parking-area  changes.  Use  these 
to  prepare  a  traffic  report  about  the  situation  at 
your  house,  and  as  a  source  of  ideas  for  im(cid:173)
provements  that  might  be  needed. 

•  I m p r o v i ng  an  e x i s t i ng  drive 
Start with  the width  of your drive.  Builders  typi(cid:173)
cally  stick  to  absolute  minimums  of 6  to  8  feet, 
rather  than  the  10  to  12  feet  recommended  at 
left.  If  your  drive  doesn't  measure  up,  you 
needn't widen it along the entire length,  just the 
points  at  which  people  will  be  alighting. 

Also,  there's  no  rule  that says  you  must  match 
the  driveway's  current  surface  when  you  widen 
it.  Instead,  why  not  add  a  distinctive  walk  area 
to  one  or  both  sides  of  your  driveway?  Pages 
122-123  show  how  and  page  130  presents 
walkway  material  options. 

Next,  consider  surfacing  your  entire  drive(cid:173)

way  with  a  different  material,  especially  if your 
drive  is  due  for  a  resurfacing  anyway.  Loose  fill 
could  give  way  to  concrete,  perhaps  tinted  to 
pick  up  a  hue  from  your  home's  exterior  or 
textured  to  improve traction.  See page  234  for a 
comparison  of driveway  surfacing  materials. 

Or  maybe  all  your  drive  needs  is  a  new  edge 
treatment.  Page  245  shows  how  to  pour  con(cid:173)
crete curbing.  Pages  128-129  and page  131  tell 
about  other  edging  materials. 

•  Building  a  n ew  drive 
If the  only  answer  to  your  family's  traffic  jam  is 
an entirely new driveway, parking area,  or both, 
prepare  yourself for  a  big,  costly,  but  rewarding 
project.  Pages  242-245  take  you  through  the 
process  of pouring  a  new  concrete  driveway. 

240 

SERVICE AREAS 

BUILDING DRIVEWAYS AND PARKING AREAS 

Think long and  hard  before  deciding to con(cid:173)

struct  your  own  driveway.  Even  if  you 

don't  need  to  move  much  earth,  mixing,  pour(cid:173)
ing,  screeding,  floating,  and  troweling  that 
much  concrete  is  backbreaking  labor—and  it 
can  drag  on  for  weekend  after  weekend  while 
your car or cars  sit out on  the street. 

This  doesn't  mean  that  you  can't  save  a  con(cid:173)
siderable  amount  of money  by  laying  out  your 
own  drive  and  even  building  the  forms  for  it. 
Here and on the three pages that follow we take 
you  step  by  step  through  the  entire  process— 
useful  information,  regardless  of  whether  you 
do  the  work or a contractor does. 

•  Laying  out 
Consult the illustration at left for the dimensions 
you  need  to  know.  As  noted  on  page  240,  10 
feet is  the  minimum  recommended  width  for  a 
single-car driveway;  12  feet is better.  Make the 
radius of any curves  16 feet, except those where 
the drive meets with the street. These can have a 
15-foot  minimum  radius. 

The  maximum  grade  for  a  drive  should  not 
exceed 1 3/4 inches per foot. Any more than that 
and  cars  will  bottom  out  on  humps  or  drag  at 
street level. 

Also,  for  proper  drainage,  the  drive  must 
slope away from the garage, carport, or house at 
a rate of about 1/4 inch per foot. If the terrain is 
flatter  than  this,  provide  your  drive  with  a 
crown,  as  illustrated  on  page  245.  A  garage 
situated  below  street  level  requires  a  concave, 
gutter center and  a large  drain  directly  in  front 
of the garage  door. 

•  Getting  started 
If the  ground  on  which  you'll  place  the  drive(cid:173)
way is firm and has good drainage, don't disturb 
the  soil.  Just  skim  off  all  vegetation,  set  the 
forms,  lay  down  a  bed  of gravel,  top  with  rein(cid:173)
forcing  mesh,  then  pour  the  concrete. 

If the  earth  is  not  solid,  you'll  have  to  add  a 
base—from  4  to  6  inches  thick—depending  on 
soil conditions  and  code requirements. 

242 

SERVICE AREAS 

BUILDING DRIVEWAYS AND PARKING AREAS 

244 

If  your  dog  has  taken  over  your  home  and 

yard, build him or her a personal kennel that 
includes a fenced-in run for playful romping and 
a cozy  house  for shelter from  the  elements. 

•  Kennel  basics 
Situate  your  kennel  within  barking  distance  of 
outdoor  living  areas,  so  your  dog  can  keep  in 
touch  with  family  activities.  Don't,  however, 
choose a spot where he or she might annoy you 
while you  sleep or neighbors  anytime. 

Try, too, to find a location that receives some 
sun and  some  shade,  with good  ventilation  and 
good  drainage. 

The size of your kennel depends partly on the 
available  space  in  your yard  and  partly on  your 
dog's  size  and  exercise  needs.  A  6-foot  mini(cid:173)
mum width for the run is generally recommend(cid:173)
ed.  Make the enclosure at least 5  feet high, of a 
material  that's  not  easily  clawed  to  pieces  or 
tunneled  under. 

For  the  house,  you  can  buy  a  ready-made 
version,  as  the  owners  of the  kennel  shown  at 
right  did,  or  build  your  own,  as  we  show  on 
pages  250-251. Just  be  sure  that  the  house  is 
only  slightly  larger  than  the  animal  that  will 
occupy  it:  A  snug  doghouse  conserves  body 
heat—and pets seem to feel more secure in one. 
Site  a  doghouse  with  its  opening  away  from 
prevailing  winds. 

•  Other  considerations 
As  you  plan  your  kennel,  consider  incorporat(cid:173)
ing these amenities. 
•  A  hose  bibb  in  or  near  the  kennel  not  only 
provides  drinking  water,  but  also  simplifies 
cleanup. 
•  For  the  kennel's  surface,  choose  a  material 
that's easy to clean and kind to tender paws. The 
example at right features pea gravel; the one we 
built on pages  248-2 51  uses concrete. 
•  A  storage  cabinet  for  dog  food,  grooming 
aids,  and  other pet  needs  saves  trips  from  dog(cid:173)
house  to  your  house.  (To  learn  about  building 

246 

SERVICE  AREAS 

BUILDING  KENNELS 

If you live in a northern climate, check with a 

veterinarian  about your breed  of dog's  toler(cid:173)

ance  for  cold  nights.  You  might  be  surprised 
to  learn  that  many  breeds  can  safely  and  com(cid:173)
fortably  endure  temperatures  to  well  below 
freezing—provided  the  dog  is  properly  shel(cid:173)
tered  from  the  elements.  Insulate  the  walls, 
floor,  and  roof of a  doghouse  and  your  pooch 
may  never need  to  spend  the  night in  the  base(cid:173)
ment or garage,  regardless  of the  weather. 

We  insulated  the  house  that  takes  shape  on 
pages 250-251  with blankets of R-l 1  fiberglass. 
Half-inch particleboard  sheathing  on  the  interi(cid:173)
or walls and lap siding on the exterior add sever(cid:173)
al more points to the overall R-value. 

Our doghouse sits at one end of a rectangular 
concrete pad. Chain link fencing at the sides and 
a gate at the other end  complete the enclosure. 

•  Chain  link 
Chain link fencing enables you to close in a dog 
run  in a matter of hours.  You  simply drive gal(cid:173)
vanized posts into the ground, secure them with 
concrete (you'll have to let the concrete cure) or 
special underground anchors, bolt on rails, then 
stretch  mesh  between  the posts. 

The job requires a few specialized tools: fence 

pliers, cutters for the mesh, a. stretcher bar that holds 
the mesh while you pull it taut, and a pair of cable 
jacks  to  do  the  pulling.  Many  fencing  dealers 
rent this  equipment. 

A  dealer  also  can  help  you  work  up  a  list  of 
the  components  required  for  the  installation 
you have in mind. Terminal posts anchor the ends, 
corners, and gates. Slimmer line posts,  spaced at 
intervals  of  no  more  than  10  feet,  go  in  be(cid:173)
tween.  A  variety  of  special  fittings  attach  rails 
and  mesh  to the posts. 

Galvanized  chain  link  fencing  is  rustproof, 
petproof,  and lasts for decades.  If you don't like 
the  plain-pipe  color  of galvanized  fencing,  you 
also can buy mesh and posts with a white or dark 
green vinyl  coating. 

248 

249 

SERVICE AREAS 

BUILDING KENNELS  (continued) 

250 

251 

MAINTAINING 

YOUR 

LANDSCAPE 

ou've  designed  your 
landscape;  you've built  and planted  it.  Now  it's  time 

to  take  care  of your  creation.  Fortunately, 

with  careful  planning,  you  can  shape  a  landscape 
that  matches  your  ability  and  desire  to  maintain  it. 

For  the  most  part,  you  can  schedule  and  pace 

the  work  to  fit  your  life-style.  And,  if nothing  else, 

this  outdoor  work  gives  you  a  great  excuse 

for  skipping  other  work  that  isn't  nearly  as  pleasant 

253 

MAINTAINING  YOUR  LANDSCAPE 

OUTDOOR TASKS  MONTH  BY MONTH 

COLD-WINTER  CLIMATES 
Month 
J a n u a r y-
February 

Tasks 
Enjoy  indoor  gardening  and  rest.  Read  nursery 
catalogs.  Order  seeds  and  plants.  Start  slow growers 
like  geranium,  delphinium,  and  pansy  indoors.  Check 
tubers  of stored  dahlias;  if too  dry,  sprinkle  with 

water.  Inspect all  stored  bulbs,  corms,  and  tubers, 
and  cut  off any  decayed  parts.  Sweep  snow  off 
evergreens  before  it  has  a  chance  to  break  branches. 
Use  deicing  salt  sparingly. 

Begin  pruning  roses  and  fruit;  feed  all.  Prune  early-
flowering  shrubs  only  after  bloom.  Plant  bare-root 
woody  plants.  Spray  fruit  trees  with  dormant oil 
when  temperature  exceeds  40  degrees  and  before 

they  leaf out.  Remove  rose  cones  when  forsythia 
blooms;  remove mounded  soil gradually.  Take  leaves 
from  beds  in  stages  on  dark  days.  Plant grass  and 
hardy  annuals  outdoors.  Check  structures  for  damage. 

Clean  up.  Spread  compost  around  trees  and  shrubs. 
Pull  mulch  back  from  the  crowns  of perennials. 
Begin  transplanting  indoor  seedlings  outside;  harden 
them  off first  with  several  short  days  outdoors. 

Watch  seedlings  carefully  for  wilting;  protect  from 
wind. Start mowing when grass reaches 2 1/2 inches. 
Spread  preemergence  herbicide  to  control  crabgrass. 
Divide  late-blooming  perennials. 

Plant  tender  bulbs.  Water  new  trees  and  shrubs 
deeply.  Sprinkle  seedbeds  to  keep  surface  soil  moist. 
Check  the  date  of your  area's  last  expected  frost; 

begin  planting  tender plants,  seeds,  and  bulbs 
accordingly.  Remove  deadheads  from  spring  bulbs; 
let foliage  die  down  naturally.  Stake  plants  early. 

Water as  needed.  Feed  roses.  Remove  spent roses 
by  cutting  back  to  a  five-leaflet  leaf.  Spread  and 
deepen  mulch.  Sweep  decks  and  patios  often.  Check 
container plants  daily  for  moistness.  Pinch  back 

mum,  petunia,  and  most  annuals  for  low  bushy 
growth.  Break pine  candles  in  half;  prune  other 
evergreens  back  to  desired  size.  Trim  clipped 
deciduous  hedges  before  growth  hardens. 

Divide  iris  if overcrowded.  Dig  with  fork.  Trim 
decayed  or  corky  ends;  trim  foliage  to  fan  shape. 
Replant  with  rhizome  near  or  on  the  surface  and 
roots  well  buried.  Bury  sections  of branches  of low-

growing  shrubs  and  vines  so  they  can  form  roots  for 
new  plants.  Harvest  bush  fruits  daily.  Check pool 
every  few  days  and  after  every  rain  for  chemical 
balance.  Set  mower  blade  higher  in  dry  weather. 

Move  chrysanthemum  plants  to  center  stage  as  they 
begin  to  flower.  Shear  deadheads  and  feed  annuals. 
Feed  roses  before  mid-month  so  you  won't 

encourage  late,  winter-tender growth.  Potted  trees 
and  shrubs  can  be planted  anytime,  but  the  longer 
they  settle  before  winter,  the  better. 

This  is  the  best  time  for  seeding  or  repairing  lawns. 
Combine  post-  and  preemergence  herbicide.  Plant 
trees  and  shrubs  in  mild  climates.  Divide  early-
blooming perennials.  Take  cuttings  for  winter 

houseplants.  Gather  and  compost  all  fallen  fruits  and 
nuts.  Plant  daffodils.  Check  structures  again.  Bring  in 
houseplants  before  frost.  Have  covers  ready  to 
protect  tender  blooms  from  early  frost. 

Dig  and  store  tender  bulbs.  Rake  leaves;  compost or 
use  as  mulch.  Bag  some  leaves  for insulation  around 
foundations.  Plant  spring  bulbs.  Add  a pinch  of 

bonemeal  to  every  hole.  Prepare pools  and  ponds  for 
winter  by  lowering  water  level,  adding  floating  logs, 
and  covering.  Mulch  perennials. 

Water  plants  well  before  freeze.  Mulch  to  prevent 
freezing  and  thawing.  Mound  up  soil  around  base  of 
roses  even  under cones.  Clean  and  oil  tools.  Feed 

birds  and  provide  water.  Spray  evergreens,  Christmas 
trees,  and  treasured  plants  with  antitranspirant  spray. 
Save  wood  ashes  to  add  to  soil  next  spring. 

March 

April 

May 

J u ne 

J u ly 

August 

September 

October 

November-
December 

254 

WARM-WINTER  CLIMATES 
Month 
January-
February 

Tasks 
Place  catalog  orders.  Prune  roses  and  fruit  trees; 
move  woody plants  while  dormant.  Seed  cool-
weather annuals  like  alyssum,  stock,  sweet pea,  and 
larkspur  outdoors;  set  out  seedlings  of pansy,  petunia, 

snapdragon,  and  calendula.  Spray  full-strength 
dormant  oil  on  fruit  and  deciduous  trees;  use  half-
strength  spray  on  broad-leaved  evergreens.  Get 
lawn  furniture  and  tools  ready. 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

September 

October 

November-
December 

Plant  tender  bulbs  and  annuals  outdoors  when  trees 
leaf out.  Pick  old  blooms,  feed  blooming plants. 
Divide  fall-blooming perennials.  Plant  seeds  of 

astilbe,  delphinium,  hollyhock,  and  other  biennials  or 
perennials  indoors.  Feed  lawn;  mow grass  when  it's 
above 21/2 inches. Check structures for damage. 

Plant  rest  of tender  plants  after  danger  of frost 
passes.  Feed  lawn;  aerate  it anytime.  Pinch  mums 
until  midsummer  to  keep  bushy.  Also  pinch  most 
annuals.  Finish  feeding  or give  booster  to  all 

plants.  Spread  mulch.  Prune  spring-flowering  shrubs 
after  bloom.  Shorten  pine  candles;  prune  other 
evergreens  just  before  growth  starts.  Remove  dis(cid:173)
eased  plants.  Thin  crowded  fruit. 

Sow  seed,  lay  sod,  or plant plugs  of warm-season 
grasses  now  through  summer.  Keep  watered  until 
settled.  Plant  heat-resistant  annuals  like  vinca, 

portulaca,  celosia,  and  cosmos;  use  impatiens  and 
coleus  for  shady  spots.  Start  oleander  from  cuttings 
of mature  wood.  Stake  large  plants. 

Prune  and  thin  spring-blooming  shrubs.  Transplant 
when  rainy  season  starts.  Watch  for  insects;  wash  or 
pick  them  off plants  before  they  can  multiply.  Use 
fungicide  where  diseases  usually  are  a  problem, 

especially  on  roses.  Expose  graft  junctions  of roses. 
Mow  lawn  as  needed;  dethatch  now  for  fast  re(cid:173)
covery;  treat chinch  bugs.  Continue  to  water plants 
as  needed,  especially  newly  set trees  and  shrubs. 

Water  and  work  outdoors  in  early  morning  or 
evening.  Check pool  chemicals  every  few  days  and 
after  every  rain.  Sweep  deck  and  patio  often. 

Check  evergreens  for  red  spider  and  bagworm.  For 
spiders,  spray  with  miticide  twice  at  two-week 
intervals.  Plant  evergreens  toward  end  of summer. 

Layer  or  take  cuttings  from  plants  during  rainy 
season.  Feed  roses  again.  Renew  mulches.  Start pan-
sies  and  other  cool-weather  annuals  indoors  for 
transplanting  outside  after  summer  heat.  Move  mums 

into  empty  spots  for  fall  bloom.  Now  through  late 
fall,  cut  back  selectively  the  new  buds  along  the 
branch  sides  of firs  and  spruces.  Give  last  trim  to 
deciduous  hedges;  trim  evergreen  hedges. 

Plant  sweet pea  in  deeply  worked  soil  in  sunny  spot. 
Sow  in  trench  4  inches  deep.  Cover with  2  inches of 
soil.  As  plants grow,  mound  soil  around  roots  and 

train  tops  up  a  fence.  Sow  winter-blooming plants  in 
Sunbelt.  Plant  new  trees  and  shrubs  and  spring  bulbs. 
Make  major  lawn  repairs;  feed  and  lime  old  lawns. 

Plant  anemone  and  ranunculus  tubers  with  the  claws 
down.  Plant  biennials  and  spring-flowering  bulbs. 
Gather  and  compost  or  bag  leaves.  Wrap  young 
trees.  Protect  trunks  from  rabbits  with  loose 

wire  wraps.  Pull  mulch  back  about  4  inches  from 
trunks  to  discourage  mice.  Continue  to  mow  so grass 
won't go  into  winter  too  long.  Prepare  pools  and 
ponds  for  winter. 

Mulch  perennials  for  winter.  Use  herbicide  for 
winter  weeds  when  lawn  is  dormant.  Update  your 
landscape  plan  for  any  needed  changes.  Check 
structures  again.  Clean  and  oil  tools.  Dig  and  store 

tender  bulbs  before  frost.  Keep  camellias  moist  to 
prevent  bud  drop.  Be  ready  with  frost  protection  to 
save  plants  of borderline  hardiness.  Water plants  well 
and  mulch  before  freeze. 

255 

MAINTAINING  YOUR  LANDSCAPE 

MAINTAINING LAWNS 

The secret to a successful lawn is constant and 

consistent  care.  If  you  make  the  work  a 
pleasant  habit  instead  of  a  dreaded  chore,  the 
right work will get done easily at the right time. 

•  Water 
Water deeply and thoroughly,  1 inch a week, or 
not at all. Dig down to be sure you are soaking 6 
to  12  inches of soil.  Sandy soils need  less water 
more often.  The more  humus  you have in  your 
soil, the more it will soak up and retain water. A 
bluish  tint,  loss  of resiliency so footprints  show, 
and  slower growth  all  indicate  thirst.  But  even 
when  grasses  are  allowed  to  go  dormant  for  a 
whole  summer,  they  usually  green  up  quickly 
once  rains  return. 

•  Feeding 
Proper  applications  of  fertilizer  make  grass 
plants  strong and  healthy  so they  can withstand 
drought and  traffic and crowd  out weeds.  In the 
spring, use a fertilizer with a 2:1:1  ratio of nitro(cid:173)
gen  to  phosphorus  and  potash.  In  fall,  use  a 
fertilizer  with  a  1:2:2  ratio  for  healthy  root 
growth  during  winter.  Apply  about  4  pounds 
per  1,000  square  feet.  Slow-release  fertilizer  is 
the  best form. 

•  Weed and pest  control 
Thriving grass  is the best control for weeds  and 
pests.  If problems  do  appear,  begin  treatment 
immediately.  Check  with  your  extension  office 
for advice  on  effective  and  safe  solutions. 

Mowing  is  a  critical  part of lawn  care  and 
yard  neatness.  Match  your  schedule  to  the 
growth  rate  of your grass:  perhaps  every 
five  days  in  a wet  season,  every  10  to  14 
days  during  dry  times. 

Cut grass  to  the  ideal  height  specified 
for  the  kind.  For  bluegrasses,  ryegrasses, 
and  fescues,  that's  usually  about  2  inches 
during  active growth,  3  inches  otherwise. 
Bent,  Bermuda,  and  zoysia  grasses  can  go 
as low as 3/4 to 1 1/4 inches. Mow tall 
fescues,  St.  Augustine  grasses,  and  bahia 
grass higher, from 3 to 3 1/2 inches. 

Get  a  mower  you  can push,  turn,  and 
change  blade  heights  on  easily.  Sharpen 
blades  monthly,  more  often  if you  hit 
stones  or  sticks.  Dull  blades  wound  and 
tear grass. 

As  long  as  you  mow  often  enough, 
clippings  can  stay  on  the  lawn.  Short 
pieces  will  settle  among  new growth,  de(cid:173)
compose  quickly,  and  add  nutrients  and 
humus  to  the  soil. 

Edging  and  trimming  are  easy  with 

256 

mowing  strips  and  power  equipment.  Be 
careful  not  to  damage  tree  bark. 

•  Leveling 
Level  your  lawn  wherever  freezing  and  thaw(cid:173)
ing, worm activity, or planting changes like tree 
removal leave you with humps or dips that inter(cid:173)
fere  with  mowing. 

Raise  low  spots  by spreading a weedless  mix 
of soil or sand and peat right on top of the grass, 
but no more than1/4 inch at a time.  Smooth  the 
soil,  then  repeat  twice  a  year  until  level.  For 
deeper hollows,  slice  and  roll  back  the  existing 
sod.  Fill  the  depression  with  clean,  rich  soil. 
Smooth and  tamp it firmly,  then spread  the sod 
back in place. Top-dress with 1/4 inch of soil or 
peat;  water deeply. 

Remove humps  by  taking out wedges  of turf 
6  inches deep.  Repeat at  10-inch  intervals over 
the entire mound.  Soak,  roll,  and  repeat spring 
and fall until the  hump disappears. 

•  Bare  spots 
Reseed  bare  spots  in  early  fall  or  spring.  At 
other times,  use sod  or plugs. 

To  seed, prepare  the soil  by  raking away de(cid:173)
bris and getting rid of weeds.  If you use a herbi(cid:173)
cide,  wait  as  directed  before  proceeding. 
Loosen  the  soil,  then  add  humus  and  a  light 
application  of  balanced  fertilizer.  Rake  soil 
smooth,  spread  good  seed,  tamp  down,  and 
keep soil moist until seed germinates.  See pages 
296-297  for details  on  starting a new  lawn. 

257 

MAINTAINING  YOUR  LANDSCAPE 

MINIMIZING LAWN  MAINTENANCE 

Alawn,  the  most  prevalent  part  of  many 

yards,  also  is  the  part  that  takes  the  most 
work.  Lighten  your  lawn-maintenance  load  by 
taking steps to make  mowing easier and  reduce 
the amount of grass  you  need  to mow. 

•  Making  mowing  easier 
Your mower will  move  more  effortlessly  about 
your yard  if you  try  some  of the following. 
•  Plant  trees  in  groups,  in  swaths  of mulch  or 
ground  cover,  or  in  gardens.  A  lawn  dotted 
with trees is a challenge to mow. Trees are safer 
anyway if lawn  mowers  never go  near  them. 
•  As trees grow taller,  prune their lower limbs. 
Continue to do this until the canopy of leaves is 
high enough for you  to walk and  mow under it 
comfortably.  Such  pruning  also  lets  more  light 
to your lawn and allows gentle breezes to reach 
your patio. 
•  Install  mowing  strips:  bands  of  concrete, 
brick,  or  other  material  on  which  the  mower 
wheel  can  travel.  These  edges  speed  mowing 
and  reduce  trimming  chores.  They  also  can 
serve  as  attractive  outlines  in  your  landscape. 
Crucial to an effective mowing strip is  that it be 
placed  low  to  the  ground.  Locate  sprinkler 
heads  in  the  center  of these  bands  to  put  them 
out of harm's  and  the mower's way. 
•  Design  your  areas  of  lawn  so  that  you  can 
easily  get  the  mower  from  one  to  another.  In 
reducing  the  size  of the  lawn  with  other plant(cid:173)
ings, don't leave islands of grass. 
•  Do  lawn  chores  as  needed:  cut  the  grass  be(cid:173)
fore  it  needs  raking,  feed  it  before  it  needs  re-
seeding, and treat pests and diseases before they 
do  extensive  damage.  A  lovely  lawn  is  easily 
maintained  if you  take  the  work  in  stride.  Fall 
behind  and  the problems  can  overwhelm you. 

•  Lawn  alternatives 
Lawns began as status symbols for pastoral peo(cid:173)
ple  who  could  finally  afford  to  have  a  bit  of 
pasture  without  any  animals  on  it.  The  whole 
concept  has  since  gotten  so  out  of  hand  that 

258 

Americans  now  use  more  fuel  and  fertilizer  on 
their lawns  than  some  countries  spend  for their 
entire agricultural  economies. 

You  can  cut  your  lawn  to  a  sensible  size  in 
several  ways.  Concentrate  first  on  the  areas 
where  the  grass  is  unsightly  or  does  not grow 
well anyway. 

•  Mulches 
Removing  unwanted  sod  and  spreading  a 
mulch—shredded bark or leaves, straw, or grass 
clippings,  for  example—in  its  place  cuts  your 
maintenance  chores  right  away.  It  also  condi(cid:173)
tions  the  soil  for  future  plantings.  Keep  the 
mulch  neat and  safe  with  edging.  Be  careful  of 
mower-thrown stones  and  sticks. 

Put mulch where you're thinking of later add(cid:173)

ing a walk or patio so you can test the location. If 
you  change  your  mind,  it  costs  very  little  to 
restore the lawn and  move the mulch. 

To  eliminate  unwanted  lawn  without  tilling, 
spread  overlapping  newspapers  over  the  area, 
then  top  these  with  grass  clippings,  leaves,  or 
any other organic mulch.  Water well to hold all 
in place and  speed  decomposition. 

Plant through these layers  right away  by dig(cid:173)
ging  the  holes  needed  for  trees  or  shrubs  as 
usual.  Plant  smaller  plants  right  on  top  of  the 
newspapers;  just  place  enough  potting  soil 
around the roots or over the seeds to cover. The 
roots  will grow  right through the papers  (roots 
can  split  a  rock),  but  weeds  will  not  have  the 
light they  need  to push  up  from  underneath. 

Consider using plastic under more  expensive 
mulches  like  stone  or bark to  keep  weeds  from 
pushing through  the  shallow layer you're likely 
to use.  Don't lay plastic,  though,  if you plan  to 
put  a  lot  of  plants  in  the  area;  you'll  tire  of 
cutting through the plastic. 

Many  mulches  are  available  free.  Ask  your 
neighbors to save leaves and grass clippings. As 
new  laws  banish  these  products  from  landfills, 
people will be glad to get someone to take them 
for free.  Many  utilities  will  dump  truckloads  of 
wood chips. Other by-products may be available 
in your area,  too. 

•  Ground  covers 
While  mulches  are  not  unattractive,  ground 
covers make absolutely lovely carpets of various 
colors  and  textures  with  seasonal  changes  of 
bloom,  fruit,  or foliage  color. 

For  best  results,  use  plants  that  do  well  in 
your climate.  Set cuttings or divisions in mulch. 
The  closer  you  set  the  plants,  the  sooner  they 
will  cover the area.  With plants  6  inches  apart, 
100 will cover 25  square feet.  Do a section at a 
time and divide the plants as they multiply. 

Pull  weeds  by  hand  until  the  ground  cover 
fills  the  area.  After  that,  the  bed  is  self-sustain(cid:173)
ing.  For  an  extra season  of bloom,  plant  spring 
bulbs  among  ivy  or  pachysandra.  See  the  next 
two pages, pages 66-67, and pages 317-319 for 
more details on ground  covers. 

•  Trees  and  shrubs 
Plant  trees  and  shrubs,  too,  to  take  up  lawn 
space.  Set them among the mulch and  they will 
grow  faster. 

Include ground  covers or shade-loving hostas 
or  flowers  under  large  trees;  plant  sun  lovers 
under smaller trees until  they cast more  shade. 

259 

MAINTAINING  YOUR  LANDSCAPE 

INSTALLING IRRIGATION  SYSTEMS 

Tired  of  dragging  hoses  around  your  yard, 

returning  from  vacation  to  a  parched  lawn, 
or  waking  up  to  a  marsh  because  you  forgot  to 
turn  off  the  sprinkler  last  night?  Go  under(cid:173)
ground  with  a  subterranean  irrigation  system 
that  gives  your  landscaping  exactly  the  amount 
of water  it  needs,  when  it  needs  it. 

In-ground  irrigation  networks  fall  into  two 

categories:  drip  systems  and  sprinklers.  Drip  ir(cid:173)
rigation  carries  water  directly  to  trees,  shrubs, 
and  ground  covers,  bringing 
them  a  slow, 
steady trickle that sinks deep into the soil.  Sprin(cid:173)
klers  toss  water  into  the  air,  treating  vegetation 
to  a  gentle  shower.  Drip  systems  are  best  for 
deep-rooted  plants.  Lawns  require  sprinklers. 
Your  landscaping  might  benefit  from  a  combi(cid:173)
nation  of the  two. 

•  P l a n n i ng 
In-ground  irrigation  systems  are  more  afford(cid:173)
able  than  ever,  thanks  to  easily  assembled  com(cid:173)
ponents  that  let  you  do  most  or  all  of  the 
installation  work  yourself.  Planning  the  job  can 
be  tricky,  however,  so  consult  with  a  sprinkler 
parts  dealer  to  determine  the  layout  and  equip(cid:173)
ment  that  will  work  best  for  you. 

The  dealer  will  need  a  detailed  site  plan  that 
identifies all plant materials,  soil  conditions,  and 
the  like,  along  with  the  water  pressure  at  your 
house in gallons per hour.  This can  be measured 
with  a  simple gauge  that  screws  onto  an  outside 
hose cock.  Most dealers  will  lend  you  a pressure 
gauge  for  a  few  days. 

Pressure  is  important  because  the  flow  rate 
from  all  the  heads  in  a  system  must  not  total 
more  than  75  percent  of available  pressure;  60 
percent  is  better.  Need  more  heads  than  that? 
Break your system into  separate  circuits,  as does 
the  plan  at  left,  then  turn  on  each  circuit  at  a 
different  time  of day. 

Manual  sprinkler  controls  are  inexpensive, 

but  require  that  you  do  the  turning  on  and  turn(cid:173)
ing  off.  More  costly  controls  consist  of  servo(cid:173)
motors  activated  by  programmable 
timers. 
These provide  automatic,  worry-free  sprinkling. 

262 

263 

MAINTAINING  YOUR  LANDSCAPE 

INSTALLING IRRIGATION SYSTEMS 

264 

265 

MAINTAINING  YOUR  LANDSCAPE 

MAINTAINING  PLANTS 

•  Feeding 
Feed  all plants  at least once  in  early spring,  an(cid:173)
nuals  and  woody plants again  in  the  summer or 
after  any  pruning,  perennials  whenever  buds 
form,  and  bulbs  at planting time.  Feed  again  as 
needed, depending upon the soil, the amount of 
rainfall  that  washes  the  nutrients  away,  and  the 
type of plant. Let a soil test and advice from your 
county  extension  office  be  your guide. 

•  Mulches 
Mulching  is  the  surest  step  anyone  can  take  to 
promote  faster,  easier,  and  more  vigorous 
growth.  A  layer  of mulch  lets  the  soil  soak  up 
and  retain  moisture  longer.  Soil  temperatures 
stay more even,  earthworm and  bacterial action 
increase,  and weeds are less of a problem. 

To prevent pests  and  diseases,  do all  you can 
to  keep  your  plants  vigorous  in  the  first  place. 
Watch carefully for the first signs of damage and 
treat  before  any  problems  intensify. 

The  amount  of  yard  work  you  have  to  do 

depends  largely  on  the  kind  of plants  you 
have,  the climate you  live  in,  and  how well the 
two suit each other.  On these two pages,  you'll 
find  a few  tips  for  maintaining  common  plants. 
See  pages  256-257  for  details  on  keeping  a 
lawn in shape. 

•  Watering 
Water plants deeply whenever you get less  than 
one  inch  of rain  a  week  during  active  growth. 
Do this in the early morning or in the late after(cid:173)
noon; allow foliage to dry by nightfall. Drip and 
soaking  systems  are  most efficient. 

Water  any  newly  set  plants  more  often  be(cid:173)
cause  of the  damage  to  root  systems  caused  by 
even  the  most  careful  transplanting.  Each  new 
tree can take five gallons of water weekly. Trees 
may  take  up  to  three  years  to  reestablish  good 
root systems. 

•  Young  trees 
Stake  young  trees  if  necessary  to  keep  them 
straight,  but,  because  trees  need  to  get  used  to 
some  wind,  use  a  minimum  amount  of support 
for  only  a  few  seasons.  Wrap  trunks  of young 
trees with tree wrap or heavy paper during their 
first  winter. 

Prune  ornamental  trees  very  little,  mostly  to 
begin a proper shape.  Generally, prune trees to 
a  central  leader;  do  not  top  trees  unless  you 
want  shrubby  growth.  Remove  any  branches 
that form  too  low  or  at too  narrow  angles  with 
the  trunk.  Because  lower  branches  are  usually 
removed as a tree grows, shorten any lower side 
branches  that  might  take  over  too  much  of the 
tree  and  leave  an  unsightly  canopy  when  later 
cut away. 

Shrubs  need  only  enough  pruning  to  make 
them  the  shape  you  want.  Remove  unwanted, 
broken,  crowding,  or  diseased  branches  when(cid:173)
ever  necessary.  Vines  may  need  some  pruning 
all season long to keep them in place. 

Weed ground covers until they spread.  Sepa(cid:173)
rate perennials  every several years.  Replant an(cid:173)
nuals  every spring.  Remove  dead  flowers. 

266 

267 

MAINTAINING  YOUR  LANDSCAPE 

MAINTAINING CONCRETE,  MASONRY STRUCTURES 

Concrete and  masonry promise permanence, 

but even  the  best-built walls,  patios,  drive(cid:173)
ways,  and  other  structures  require  attention 
from time to time.  Fortunately, most repairs can 
be  accomplished  in  an  hour  or  two,  with  no 
special skills and  just a few hand tools. 

Before you set out to make concrete and  ma(cid:173)
sonry  repairs,  try  to  diagnose  what  caused  the 
damage. Water, especially ice, usually is the cul(cid:173)
prit.  Frost  in  the  ground  causes  heaving  and 
settlement; water coursing down a wall or stand(cid:173)
ing in low spots on a patio can leach away mor(cid:173)
tar  and  concrete,  seep  into  joints,  and  wreck 
masonry  units.  The  tactics  shown  at  right  and 
opposite  cure  minor  concrete  and  masonry  ail(cid:173)
ments.  If the  deterioration  is  chronic  or  exten(cid:173)
sive,  you  may  need  to  solve  an  underlying 
drainage problem first.  (To learn about improv(cid:173)
ing drainage,  see pages  52-55.) 

•  Patching  concrete 
Repairing  concrete  is  a  lot  like  dentistry:  You 
clean the cavity, then fill it. To fill shallow cracks 
and  chips,  use a commercial  latex,  vinyl,  or ep-
oxy patching compound mixed  according to the 
manufacturer's 
instructions.  These  patching 
compounds  hold  better  than  conventional  ce(cid:173)
ment-sand  mixtures  and  they require  you  to  do 
far less preparatory work to  the old  surface. 

For  deeper  cavities,  apply  the  patching  com(cid:173)
pound  in  several  thin  layers.  Or  use  a  conven(cid:173)
tional  cement-sand  mixture,  making  sure  to 
apply  a  bonding  agent  (available  at  building 
centers)  first.  If you  use  concrete  to  fill  a deep 
cavity, undercut the edges around the perimeter 
of the damaged  area so that the crack or hole is 
somewhat  wider  at  the  bottom  than  at  the  sur(cid:173)
face.  After  you  pack  in  the  new  concrete,  the 
existing concrete helps hold  it in place. 

•  Tools 
For  most  concrete  and  masonry  repairs,  you'll 
need  a  two-pound  sledge,  brick  chisel,  trowel, 
wire brush,  and  a bucket.  When you chip away 
old material, protect your eyes with safety glass(cid:173)
es.  For removing stains, wear rubber gloves. 

268 

269 

MAINTAINING  YOUR  LANDSCAPE 

MAINTAINING WOOD  STRUCTURES 

Rot is wood's worst enemy, so closely scruti(cid:173)

nize decks,  sheds, fences, and other wood(cid:173)

en  structures  every  spring  and  fall,  paying 
special attention  to  members  at or near ground 
level or anywhere else moisture might collect. If 
you  detect any  signs  of rot  (poke  with  a screw(cid:173)
driver if you're  not  sure),  take  immediate  steps 
to remedy  the problem  before it gets worse. 

Catch rot early and  you may be able to arrest 
it by saturating the area with wood preservative. 
For  more  severe  damage,  you'll  need  to  cut 
away  the  affected  element  and  replace  it.  Use 
only  redwood,  cedar,  or  pressure-treated  lum(cid:173)
ber  for  repairs. 

During  your  semiannual 

inspection,  also 
keep an eye out for decking boards,  railings, or 
other  items  that  might  be  pulling  loose.  These 
pose  a  safety  hazard  and  should  be  hammered 
back in place right away. 

•  Termites 
Termites fall into two groups: subterranean ones 
eat  wood  but  live  underground,  usually  com(cid:173)
muting  back  and  forth  via  mud  shelter  tubes; 
nonsubterranean types live in the wood itself. 

Nonsubterranean  wood-boring 

insects— 
which  include powder-post  beetles  and  carpen(cid:173)
ter  ants  as  well  as  several  termite  species—dig 
across  the  grain  of  the  wood  and  sometimes 
break through  the  surface,  leaving  telltale piles 
of sawdust  pellets.  Subterranean  termites  bore 
along  the  grain  of  the  wood  and  often  leave 
nothing but a shell  behind. 

If you  suspect  termites,  call  a  licensed  exter(cid:173)
minator.  To  eliminate  subterranean  termites, 
exterminators inject chemicals into the soil.  For 
nonsubterranean  termites,  extermination  con(cid:173)
sists of boring holes into the wood and injecting 
a liquid  or powdered  chemical. 

271 

CONSTRUCTION 
AND  PLANTING 

BASICS 

ow  long  a  nail 

do  you  need?  What  are  the  correct  proportions 

for  mixing  concrete  or  mortar?  When's  the  best  time 
to  start  a  lawn?  Tackle  any  of the  projects  covered 
earlier  in  this  book  and  you  may  puzzle  over  ques(cid:173)
tions  like  these.  For  answers,  turn  to  the  pages 

that follow.  Here you'll  find  a concise compendium of 

information  about  hardware  and  fasteners, 
wood,  concrete,  masonry,  wiring,  and  plants. 

HARDWARE AND FASTENERS 

The hardware and fasteners you choose for a 

building project are just as important as the 
lumber  and  other  materials  they  join.  On  this 
page,  we  look  at  nails,  the  fasteners  you'll  use 
most  often.  Then,  on  pages  274-275,  we  turn 
to screws,  bolts, plates, and other hardware. 

•  The  right  nail 
The  chart  at  right  depicts  a  dozen  nail  types, 
each engineered  for a specific purpose.  Starting 
from  the  top: 
•  Doubleheaded nails, also known as scaffold nails, 
are  good  choices  for  temporary  nailing  jobs, 
such  as  building  forms  or  attaching  braces  to  a 
post.  The  second  head  makes  the  nail  easy  to 
pull when you  no longer need  it. 
•  Masonry  nails  are  specially  hardened  so  that 
they  can penetrate into concrete or mortar. 
•  Spiral  and  ring-shanked  nails  provide  more 
holding power in wood.  Spiral nails are  thread(cid:173)
ed, somewhat like screws, and twist into materi(cid:173)
als; ring-shanked nails have barbs. 
•  Corrugated fasteners, or wiggiy nails, are used 
mainly  to  strengthen  already-fastened  joints. 
You also can  use  them alone for light-duty jobs 
such as  building frames for screens. 
•  Brads  are  miniature  finishing  nails,  good  for 
molding  and  finishing  jobs. 
•  Finishing and casing nails have small heads that 
are  easily  countersunk (set  below  the surface). 
•  Roofing  nails  have  wide,  thin  heads  to  hold 
down  shingles  and  roofing paper. 
•  Box and common nails are similar, but common 
nails have a thicker shank; this increases holding 
power but can cause splits in some boards. 

•  Nail  sizes 
The  scale  at the  bottom  of the  illustration com(cid:173)
pares nail sizes in pennies, a system still used by 
a few manufacturers, and inches. The higher the 
penny number (d),  the longer the  nail. 

To  determine  the  size  nail  you  should  use, 
multiply  the  thickness  of  the  material  you  will 
be  nailing  through  by  three.  A  3/4-inch-thick 
board, for example, calls for a 2 1/4-inch nail. (See 
page  280  for more details.) 

•  Nail  coatings 
All  nails  used  for  outdoor  construction  should 
be  rust-resistant  so  they  won't  discolor  the 
wood. Stainless steel and aluminum nails assure 
resistance  to  rust,  but  both  are  expensive,  and 
aluminum nails bend easily.  For economical rust 
protection,  choose galvanized  steel  nails. 

One other coating deserves mention. Cement-
coated nails have an adhesive film that bonds to 
wood  fibers  under  the  heat and  friction  of driv(cid:173)
ing.  Use  these for superior holding power. 

CONSTRUCTION  AND  PLANTING  BASICS 

HARDWARE AND FASTENERS 

For  the  few  seconds  it  takes  to  drive  them, 

nails  do  a  remarkable  holding  job.  But  at 
critical  junctures,  you'll  want  the  strength  and 
neatness  of screws and  bolts. 

The  illustration  above  shows,  among  other 
things,  the two  broad  types of screws available: 
wood screws and metal screws. Metal screws have 
a  flat,  broad  head  and  a  shank  that's  threaded 
from  head  to  tip,  making  them  ideal  for  secur(cid:173)
ing thin materials such as sheet metal and plastic. 
For wood-to-wood joints, use flatheaded, ovalhead-
ed,  or roundheaded wood screws. You can drive 
flatheaded  screws  flush  with  the  surface.  Oval-
headed  screws  add  a decorative accent.  Round-
headed ones do more utilitarian tasks.  Use aflat 
washer with a roundheaded screw, trim washers 
with flat-  and  ovalheaded  screws. 

•  Sizing  up  screws 
As  with  nails,  the  right  size  screw  for  the  job 
goes  about  two-thirds  of  its  length  into  the 
member  you're  fastening  to.  When  ordering 
wood  screws,  specify  the  length  (from 1/4 to  5 
inches), gauge or shank diameter (No.  0, which 

274 

is  about 1/16 inch,  to  No.  24,  about 3/8 inch), 
head  type,  and  material  (brass  or  galvanized 
steel for outdoor projects).  The larger a screw's 
gauge,  the greater its  holding power. 

Turn to lag screws,  often called  lag bolts, for 

heavy  framing  jobs.  To  order  these,  specify di(cid:173)
ameter (from 1/4to 1  inch) and length (from  1  to 
16 inches). 

Machine and carriage bolts handle all kinds of 
heavy fastening jobs. You need two wrenches to 
tighten a machine  bolt,  one for a carriage  bolt. 
When  ordering  bolts,  specify  the  diameter, 
length,  and  the  type  (machine  or  carriage).  To 
determine the correct length, add about 3/4 inch 
to  the  combined  thicknesses  of the  materials  to 
be  joined.  Carriage  bolts  have  diameters  rang(cid:173)
ing from 1/4 to 3/4 inch and lengths from 3/4 to 20 
inches; machine bolts have diameters of 1/4 to 1 
inch and lengths of 1/2 to 30 inches. 

Concrete anchors enable you to drive a screw 
into masonry or mortar joints.  You drill a hole, 
insert  the  anchor,  then  turn  a  screw into  it.  As 
the  screw  cuts  its  threads,  it  expands  the  soft 
lead anchor snugly against the sides of the hole. 

•  Plates  and hangers 
Want to beef up an otherwise weak wood joint? 
Reach  for  one  of  the  devices  shown  at  upper 
right.  Mending plates  reinforce  end-to-end  butt 
joints. Corner braces strengthen right-angle joints 
by attaching to edge surfaces. Flat corner irons do 
the  same  thing,  but  attach  to  the  faces  of  the 
materials. T plates handle end-to-edge joints. 

Framing  fasteners,  such  as  the  joist  hanger 
shown  in  our  illustration,  solve  tricky  framing 
problems. Other fasteners include saddle brackets 
for  beam-on-beam  or  joist-on-beam  applica(cid:173)
tions, post caps for securing beams to the tops of 
posts, rafter brackets, and stair cleats. As with nails, 
screws, and bolts,  all plates and hangers intend(cid:173)
ed  for  outdoor  use  should  be  made  of galva(cid:173)
nized  steel  or  other  rustproof material. 

•  Gate  hardware 
If your construction  project  will  include  a gate, 
you have some more choices to make. The illus(cid:173)
tration  at  lower  right  shows  just  a  few  of  the 
hinges, latches, handles, and springs available at 
home  centers. 

Brick  hinges  install  in  the  mortar  between 
bricks.  You  chip  out  the  old  mortar,  fit  the 
hinge  support into  the recess,  then force a light 
concrete  or  mortar  mix  around  it. 

Screw hinges thread into holes in a post. Decora(cid:173)
tive  hinges  typically  attach  to  the  post  and  gate 
with  lag  screws.  T hinges  reinforce  the  gate  by 
covering its corner joints, always the weak spots 
in  any  gate.  Use  these  for  large  garden  gates, 
garage  and  barn  doors,  and  any  other  applica(cid:173)
tion that calls  for a sturdy,  functional  hinge. 

Besides  hinges,  a  gate  requires  a  latch  and 
some sort of handle. A self-closing latch automati(cid:173)
cally  engages  hardware  on  the  post  when  the 
gate swings shut, protecting the gate and hinges 
from  damage  caused  by  strong gusts  of wind. 

You  can  make  a  wood  handle  like  the  one 
shown  with  scraps  left  over  from  building  the 
gate.  Or  fit  the  gate  with  a  store-bought  metal 
handle.  Regardless  of whether  your  gate  has  a 
latch, a spring can keep it closed. Simply mount it 
as  shown  and  adjust for fast or slow closure. 

275 

CONSTRUCTION  AND  PLANTING  BASICS 

WOOD 

Because all successful outdoor woodworking 

projects start with the right tools and  mate(cid:173)
rials,  we  look first at these prerequisites.  Then, 
on  pages  279-281,  we  show  you  some  basic 
techniques  for working  with  wood. 

•  Choosing  tools 
Though  not exhaustive,  the  illustrations  on  the 
opposite  page  do  depict  many  of  the  tools  re(cid:173)
quired  for  landscape  construction  with  wood. 

When selecting tools, keep in mind that good 
craftsmanship  begins  with  quality  tools.  If,  like 
most homeowners, you already have a few tools 
lying around, take a critical look at them  before 
beginning a project.  Toss  out any  that are  bent 
or broken—and  stay away from the bargain bins 
when  you  shop  for  replacements. 

Instead,  if at all possible,  spend  more  money 
and  invest in  top-of-the-line professional-quality 
tools.  Sturdily built to exacting standards,  these 
tools  will endure years of hard  use.  Some com(cid:173)
panies  even  offer  lifetime  guarantees. 

•  Choosing  lumber 
Any  lumber  you  select  for  outdoor  projects 
must  be  naturally  or  chemically  rot-resistant. 
Page  184  presents  the  pros,  cons,  and  relative 
costs  of your four choices:  redwood,  cedar,  cy(cid:173)
press,  and  pressured-treated  lumber. 

Once  you've  decided  what  species  you  want 
for your project,  consider which grade of wood 
will  work  best for  the  project's  various  compo(cid:173)
nents.  Softwood  grading  is  tricky  to  learn,  in 
part  because  there  are  several  grading  systems. 
But  in general,  you'll  be  on  safe  footing  if you 
think in terms of two overall classifications: select 
and common. Use select lumber (B and Better, C, 
and D) for elements such as decking and fencing 
where good  looks  are important.  For other ele(cid:173)
ments, common lumber (nos.  1, 2, 3,  and 4) will 
do  nicely.  Not  surprisingly,  the  better  the 
grade, the more you will pay. 

Also  bear  in  mind  that  all  pieces  of  lumber 
have a set of nominal dimensions  (what you  or(cid:173)
der) and a set of actual dimensions (what you get 

276 

after the  lumber is  milled  and  dried).  To  learn 
about nominal and actual dimensions of various-
size members,  consult the chart on page 278. 

•  Ordering  lumber 
Before  you  set  out  for  the  home  center  or 
lumberyard,  draw  up  a  list  detailing  exactly 
what  wood  you  will  need.  To  order,  state  the 
quantity,  thickness,  width,  length,  grade,  and 
species—in  that  order.  Example:  40  pieces 
2"x6"xl0'  construction-heart  redwood. 

Do everything you can to get a firsthand  look 
at what you're buying. Some dealers will let you 
go out in the yard and hand-select your choices. 
Reject any boards that have serious defects.  Re(cid:173)
alize,  though,  that  few  boards  are  absolutely 
that  minor  problems  can  be 
perfect  and 
trimmed  off  when  you  cut  the 
lumber  or 
straightened  out when  you  nail  it in place. 

•  Choosing  plywood 
Use  only  exterior-grade  or  marine-grade  ply(cid:173)
wood  for  outdoor  projects;  moisture  quickly 
wrecks  the  glues  in  interior  plywood.  If  both 
sides  of  a  panel  will  show,  select  grade  A-A, 
which  has  two  good  faces.  For  applications  in 
which  only  one  side  will  show,  you  can  save 
money with A-B or A-C plywood.  Grade B-B is 
a  thrifty  choice  for  concrete  forms,  rough 
screening,  and  temporary walks. 

One  other  exterior  plywood  worth  knowing 

about is medium density overlay (MDO), which has 
a smooth, resin-impregnated fiber face designed 
especially  for  flawless  painted  finishes. 

•  Storing  lumber 
Before your order is  delivered, give thought to 
where  you  want  to  put  the  lumber.  You  may 
choose  to  stack  it  in  the  garage  or  near  the 
project site.  Use blocks to keep the stack up off 
the  floor  or  ground,  and  cover  it  to  protect 
against  moisture.  If  you  won't  be  using  the 
wood  for  a  while,  separate  layers  with  cross-
pieces so that air can circulate. Store sheet goods 
flat,  if possible.  Lumber  isn't  dimensionally  sta(cid:173)
ble  until  it's  nailed  or bolted  together. 

277 

CONSTRUCTION  AND  PLANTING  BASICS 

WOOD (continued) 

278 

All  carpentry  projects  follow  essentially  the 

same steps.  You begin with good measure(cid:173)

ments.  After  that,  you  cut  pieces  to  size,  then 
nail, screw, or bolt them together. Finally, when 
working outdoors,  you often protect everything 
with  a preservative.  Here,  and  on  pages  280-
281, we take you through these processes. 

•  Measuring  basics 
Whether you're building a  50-room mansion or 
a  doghouse,  there's  no  such  measurement  as 
about.  Measurements must be exact. 

Equally  important  to  making  correct  mea(cid:173)
surements is to start square.  Many boards aren't 
entirely  square,  especially  at  their  ends.  Fortu(cid:173)
nately,-most building materials have a factory edge 
milled  along  at  least  one  dimension.  Refer  to 
this edge when squaring the rest of the material. 
Be  sure,  too,  that  your  measurements  take 
into  account  the  narrow  opening  the  saw  will 
leave in its wake—called the kerf. If you're mak(cid:173)
ing just one cut, allow for the kerf by identifying 
the  scrap  side of the  cutoff line with  an  X.  This 
tells  you  which  side  to  cut  from.  For  multiple 
cuts  along a board  or on  sheet goods,  allow for 
the  kerf between  the  cutoff lines. 

•  Cutting  basics 
The  vast  majority  of the  cuts  you'll  be  making 
fall into two categories: crosscuts across the grain 
and rip cuts parallel with the grain. 

Crosscut boards with  either a hand- or power 
saw.  Start cuts by carefully positioning the blade 
so  its  kerf  will  be  on  the  scrap  side.  With  a 
handsaw, place the blade at a 45-degree angle to 
the work and,  using the  knuckle of your thumb 
as a guide, pull the saw back toward you; with a 
power saw, squeeze the trigger and let the blade 
get up  to  speed  before  easing  it into  the  wood. 
As  the  cut  progresses,  let  the  weight  of  the 
saw—hand-  or power—do  the  work. 

For  rip  cuts,  a power  saw  works  best.  To  as(cid:173)
sure  that  you'll  get  a  straight  edge  along  the 
entire  length  of the  cut,  clamp  a  straight  board 
or straightedge parallel to the cut line and guide 
the saw along it. 

27S 

CONSTRUCTION  AND  PLANTING  BASICS 

WOOD (continued) 

Fell  a  tree  and  its  wood  stops  growing.  But 

this  organic  building  material  has  an  after(cid:173)
life of sorts, because humidity changes cause the 
grain  to  expand  and  shrink with  the  seasons—a 
process  that can play  havoc with  weak  joints  in 
outdoor  projects.  To  minimize  twisting,  rack(cid:173)
ing, warping, and splitting, use nails, screws, or 
bolts at all critical structural points. 

•  Nailing  basics 
Bend  a few  nails  or  split a perfectly good  piece 
of wood and you'll  soon discover that no one is 
born  with  an  innate  knack  for  pounding  nails. 
Actually, you don't pound a nail at all; you drive it 
with a few well-directed  blows.  As with golf or 
tennis, learning to direct those blows means you 
must perfect  your  swing. 

Grasp  the  hammer  at  the  end  of its  handle, 
not  up  around  the  neck.  Start  the  nail  with  a 
gentle tap,  then lift the hammer in a gentle arc. 
Now, keeping your wrist stiff, drop the hammer 
squarely onto the nail. With practice, you'll find 
yourself driving  nails  smoothly,  without  strain(cid:173)
ing (or maiming)  your arm,  wrist,  or hand. 

Your  last  blow  should  push  the  head  of  a 
common nail flush with the surface of the wood; 
drive  the  heads  of finishing  or  casing  nails  be(cid:173)
low the surface with a nail set. 

For maximum  holding  power  in  rough  proj(cid:173)

ects,  use  nails  about  an  inch  longer  than  the 
combined  thicknesses  of  the  pieces  you're  fas(cid:173)
tening.  Drive  the nails,  then  turn  the  members 
over and clinch  (bend)  the exposed portions of 
the  nails  in  the direction  of the grain  so  they're 
nearly  flush  with  the  surface.  For  showier proj(cid:173)
ects,  or  when  you  can't  get  at  the  back  of  the 
materials, drive pairs of nails at opposing angles. 
For help selecting nails,  see page 273. 

•  Drilling  basics 
The  electric  drill  has  made  all  hand-powered 
boring tools  obsolete.  With  the complement of 
bits shown on page 277,  you can make holes in 
just  about  anything,  and  use  the  drill  to  drive 
screws as well.  Here are some tips for using this 
jack-of-all-trades  machine. 

•  To  prevent  the  drill  bit  from  skating  away 
from  the point  where  you  want  a hole,  make  a 
shallow pilot hole first with an awl or the tip of a 
nail.  Grip  the  drill  with  both  hands  and  center 
the bit in the hole, then apply firm pressure and 
begin drilling. If you have a variable-speed drill, 
bring it up  to full power gradually. 
•  To  assure  that  a  hole  will  be  perpendicular, 
hold a combination square against the wood and 
align the drill  with  the  square's  blade. 
•  When you want to drill one or more holes to a 
certain  depth,  wrap  masking  or  electrical  tape 
around  the  drill  bit  so  that  the  tape  will  touch 
the  surface  of the  wood  at  the  depth  you  want. 
Drill  with  gentle  pressure,  then  carefully  back 
the bit out as  soon as the tape hits the surface. 
•  To keep wood chips from clogging the bit and 
causing  it  to  bind  when  you're  drilling  deep 
holes,  feed  the  bit  into  the  wood  slowly,  and 
back  the  bit out  of the  hole  frequently  with  the 
drill's  motor still  running. 

•  Screw  basics 
The threads along the shank of a screw grip the 
fibers  of the  wood  being  joined  and  pull  them 
together with tremendous pressure.  Here's how 
to get good  results with  these super fasteners. 
•  First, drill pilot holes.  Screws driven in direct(cid:173)
ly can split all but the softest of woods. Make the 
holes slightly smaller than the screw's diameter. 
•  Select  the  correct  screwdriver  for  the  screw 
you're driving.  It should  fill the slot completely 
for  maximum  torque. 
just  a 
•  Turning 
few—by  hand  can  tire  you.  To  reduce  fatigue 
and  speed  up  the  operation,  drive  the  screws 
with your drill and a screwdriver bit. Make sure 
the  bit  is  firmly  seated  in  the  screw  slot  before 
beginning, and  don't drive the screw too quick(cid:173)
ly  or  you'll  strip  the  head.  If you  do  damage  a 
screwhead,  you  may  be  able  to  salvage  it  by 
deepening its slot with a hacksaw.-
•  Faced with a hole that's a little too big for the 
screw  you're  driving?  Insert  a  toothpick  or 

lots  of  screws—or  even 

sliver  of  wood  into  the  hole.  Tightening  the 
screw  forces  the  filler  material  against  the  wall 
of the hole,  holding the  screw tight. 

•  Bolting  basics 
Nails  and  screws  depend  on  friction  between 
the fastener and  the wood  to do their jobs.  Not 
so with bolts. When you tighten a nut on a bolt, 
you're  mechanically  clamping  adjoining  mem(cid:173)
bers together, creating the strongest joint of all. 
Here are ways  to get the  best out of bolts. 
•  Tighten  an  adjustable-end  wrench  snugly 
onto the work. Otherwise, it could slip and strip 
a nut or  bolt head. 
•  Adjustable-end  wrenches  can  handle  most 
bolting  jobs,  but  a  set  of  automotive  socket 
wrenches speeds  the work and  helps  you out in 
tight  corners.  Socket-wrench  sets  typically  in(cid:173)
clude  a  crank-style  handle  for  speedy  tighten(cid:173)
ing,  and  a reversible ratchet that lets you  move 
the handle back and forth without removing the 
socket from  the  work. 
•  With  any  wrench,  pull  it  toward  you;  if  the 
wrench  slips,  you  run  less  risk of skinning  your 
knuckles. 
•  Never  force  a  wrench  by  tapping  its  handle 
with  a  hammer.  And  don't  slip  a  pipe  over  a 
wrench handle to gain leverage; you could snap 
the wrench or the  material  it's  tightening. 

•  Finishing  basics 
Redwood,  cedar,  cypress,  and  pressure-treated 
lumber can last for years outdoors with no finish 
at  all,  but  periodic  applications  of preservative 
prolong the  lives  of all  of these woods. 

immediately 

Apply  clear  preservative 

to 
maintain  the  original  appearance  of  redwood, 
cedar,  and  cypress.  Or,  wait  a few  months  and 
let the wood  weather before  sealing it.  Staining 
preservatives  can  give  pressure-treated  lumber 
the  color  of redwood  or  cedar. 

Apply preservatives with a brush, roller, or an 
inexpensive pressure sprayer.  If you spray, wear 
a mask, gloves,  and eye protection. 

281 

CONSTRUCTION  AND  PLANTING  BASICS 

CONCRETE AND MASONRY 

Everybody  calls  it cement,  but  you  can't  build 

much  of  anything  with  plain  portland  ce(cid:173)
ment.  Mix  it  with  other  materials,  though,  and 
cement becomes  the  key  ingredient in  the  magic 
muds known as concrete and mortar. 

On  these  two  pages,  we  review  some  of  the 
tools  you'll  need  when  you  do  concrete  and 
masonry  work.  For details on  the  steps  involved 
in  working  with  concrete,  see  pages  2 8 4 - 2 8 5. 
Following  that,  on  pages  286-287,  is  a  discus(cid:173)
sion  of mortar  and  masonry  materials. 

•  Concrete  tools 
As  you  decide  which  of the  tools  shown  on  the 
opposite  page  you  will  need  for  your  project, 
bear  in  mind  that  you  can  either  buy  or  rent 
most  of them.  If you  buy,  purchase  only  good-
quality  tools. 

To  aid  in  mixing  and  transporting  masonry 
materials  and  concrete,  lay your  hands  on  a stur(cid:173)
dy contractor-quality wheelbarrow—the  kind  with  a 

3-cubic-foot  or  larger  tray  and  a  pneumatic  rub(cid:173)
ber  tire.  Also  handy,  but  not  essential,  are  a 
mortar box and mortar hoe for mixing ingredients. 

To prepare  sites  and  move  concrete  and  mor(cid:173)
tar  ingredients,  you  must  have  either  a  round-
bladed  shovel  or  a  couple  of specialists:  a spade 
for  squaring  up  excavation  edges  and  a  square-
bladed shovel for  moving  sand  and  wet concrete. 
For  placing  concrete,  you'll  need  a  tamper,  a 
wooden float, a. screed (not shown),  and  a darby or 
bull float. Screeds,  used  to  level  just-poured  con(cid:173)
crete,  often  are  nothing  more 
than  straight 
lengths  of  2x4.  Use  the  darby,  bull  float,  or  a 
small  hand  float  to  smooth  screeded  concrete 
and  push  larger  stones  below  the  surface.  You 
can  make  these  from  scrap  lumber,  if you  like. 
To  finish,  use  a  magnesium  or  steel  trowel  to 
further  smooth  and  compact  the  concrete,  an 
inexpensive  edger  to  round  off  and  strengthen 
the  edges  of  concrete  slabs,  and  a  jointer  to  put 
grooves  in  slabs  to  control  cracking.  If you  plan 
to  cut  control  joints  after  the  concrete  hardens, 
fit  a  circular  saw  with  a  masonry  blade  for  the 
jointing  work. 

•  Masonry  tools 
If you're  working with  mortar,  you  can  dispense 
with  the  tools  needed  for finishing  concrete,  but 
you'll  need  several others.  To cut  bricks,  blocks, 
and  stones,  buy or rent a brick hammer,  a brick set 
or masonry chisel,  and a 2-pound sledgehammer (of(cid:173)
ten  called  a  baby  sledge  or  mash  hammer). 

And,  when  building  concrete  or  masonry 
walls,  lay  your  hands  on  line  blocks,  a  modular 
spacing rule, and a plumb bob. 

For  placing  mortar,  use  a  well-balanced, 
pointed  brick  trowel.  Use  a  pointing  trowel  or  a 
caulking  trowel  to  force  mortar  into  joints  being 
repaired. A joint strike or a joint raker (not shown) 
helps  you  finish  mortar  joints. 

Because dried  concrete  and  mortar are  almost 

impossible  to  remove,  wash  and  dry  tools  thor(cid:173)
oughly  after  use.  Follow  the  drying  with  a  light 
coat  of oil  on  all  metal  parts. 

283 

CONSTRUCTION  AND  PLANTING  BASICS 

CONCRETE AND MASONRY 

Working  with  concrete  is  a  six-step process: 

You  prepare  the  site,  build  forms,  pour 
the  mix,  level  it,  trowel  the  surface,  then  help  it 
cure.  Here's  what  each  of these  steps  entails. 

•  Preparing  the  site 
If at  all  possible,  place  your  slab  on  undisturbed 
soil.  If  you  must  pour  on  top  of  recently  filled 
soil,  as  would  be  the  case  around  a new  founda(cid:173)
tion,  pack  the  soil  by watering  it for several  days 
and  allowing  it  time  to  settle. 

Lay  out  the  site  with  strings  and  stakes  or 
batter  boards,  as  explained  on  pages  58-59. 

284 

Then  excavate  to  a  depth  equal  to  the  thickness 
of the  slab you've  decided  on, plus  2  to  3  inches 
for  a  sand  or gravel  drainage  bed,  minus  1  inch 
so  the  slab's  surface  will  be  above  ground  level. 
Make  the  excavation  about  3  inches  larger  all 
around  to  provide  room  for  forms. 

•  Building  f o r ms 
inches 
Because  slabs  generally  run  about  4 
thick,  2x4s  that  are  smooth  and  straight  make 
ideal  forming  material.  Securely  anchor  the 
form  boards  with  foot-long  stakes  (1x4  lumber 
works  well)  every  3  to  4  feet.  Attach  the  stakes 
to  the  form  boards  with  doubleheaded  nails, 
which  are  easy  to  pull  later.  Or  nail  through  the 
form  boards  and  into  the  stakes  using  regular-
headed  nails.  Hammer  the  stakes'  tops  level 
with  the  top  of  the  form,  or  cut  them  at  that 
level,  so  you  can  drag  a  screed  across  the  form. 
For  proper  drainage,  forms  should  slope  at 
least 1/4 inch  per  foot.  To  establish  the  proper 
slope,  measure  down  from  both  ends  of a  level 
string  stretched  from  the  top  end  of  the  slab 
(perhaps  at  the  house  or  garage)  to  the  point 
where  the  slab  will  end.  For  a  20-foot  slab,  for 
example,  the  downhill  edge  should  be  5  inches 
lower  than  the  uphill  edge. 

Shape  curves  with 3 1/2-inch-wide strips  of 1/4-
inch-thick  hardboard  or  plywood.  With  ply(cid:173)
wood,  cut  the  strips  perpendicular  to  the  grain 
so they will be easier to bend.  For a snug fit,  tack 
one  end  in  place,  driving  two  4-penny  nails 
through  the  thin  form  member  into  a  stake. 
Then  spring  the  board  into  the  desired  shape, 
cut  it  to  length,  and  nail  it  to  a  second  stake. 

To  control  cracking,  prop  up 1/2-inch-thick ex(cid:173)
pansion  strips  wherever  the  new  concrete  will 
abut  old  concrete.  (See  opposite  for  details  on 
tooling  control  joints  into  the  poured  concrete.) 

•  M i x i ng  or  o r d e r i ng  concrete 
Compute  how  much  concrete  you'll  need  by 
multiplying  the  form's  width  and  length;  for 
circles  or  cylindrical  forms,  multiply  the  square 
of  the  radius  by  3.14.  After  you  know  how 
many  square  feet  you'll  have,  consult  the  Con-

crete  Estimator  at  right.  To  assure  you  won't 
run  short,  increase  your  estimate  by  10  percent. 

When  buying  concrete,  you  have  three  op(cid:173)

tions.  For  small  jobs,  such  as  setting  a few  fence 
posts,  buy  premixed  concrete.  Premix  bags  in(cid:173)
clude  cement,  sand,  and  aggregate.  You  simply 
add  water.  Each  sack  yields  from 1/3to 2/3 cubic 
foot  of concrete,  depending  on  its  size. 

For  jobs  that  require  a  half cubic  yard  of con(cid:173)
crete  or more,  buy  the  cement,  sand,  and  aggre(cid:173)
gate  separately  and  mix  them  yourself,  or  order 
ready-mix  concrete.  Mixing  it  yourself—using 
10  shovelfuls  of portland  cement,  22  shovelfuls 
of sand,  and  30  shovelfuls  of aggregate  for  each 
cubic  foot—lets  you  make  a  small  batch  at  a 
time.  This  allows  you  to  place  and  finish  one 
section  before  repeating  the  process. 

If  time  and  energy  mean  more  to  you  than 
cost,  order  ready-mix  concrete.  You'll  get  a 
more  reliable  mix  and  also  avoid  hauling  and 
mixing  messes. 

•  P o u r i ng  a nd  f i n i s h i ng  concrete 
Spread  sand  or gravel  in  the  form,  then  lay rein(cid:173)
forcing  mesh  of a  gauge  appropriate  to  the  job. 
Next,  pour  wet  concrete  into  the  form,  spread(cid:173)
ing it with  a garden  rake.  Use  the  rake's  tines  to 
pull  the  mesh  midway  into  the  slab's  thickness. 
Level  the  surface  by  screeding  it  with  a  2x4 
laid  across  the  slab,  from  one  side  of the  form  to 
the  other.  Move  the  screed  back  and  forth  in  a 
sawing  motion  and  draw  it  horizontally  across 
the  unleveled  concrete,  as  shown  on  page  161. 
Smooth  the  concrete  with  a darby or bull  float 
(see  page  161).  Then,  when  water  no  longer 
rises  to  the  surface,  run  an  edger  between  the 
slab  and  the  form.  After  that,  use  a jointer and  a 
straight  board 
to  hand-tool  shallow  control 
joints  (every  8  feet  or  so  in  a patio;  every  4  feet 
or  so  in  a  walk).  Finish  with  a  wood  or  steel 
trowel,  or give  the  surface  a  special  texture  (see 
pages  162-163). 

Keep  concrete  wet  during  the  first  week  after 
you  pour.  One  way  to  do  this  is  with  a  hose  or 
lawn  sprinkler.  You  also  can  retard  evaporation 
by  covering  the  slab  with  plastic  sheets. 

285 

CONSTRUCTION  AND  PLANTING  BASICS 

CONCRETE AND MASONRY 

Easy  to  work with  and  nearly  indestructible, 

stones,  bricks,  and  blocks  make sense  for a 
wide  range  of outdoor  building  projects.  First, 
we  look at your choices  in  masonry  units;  then 
we tell  you how to put them  together. 

•  Options 
Masonry  work  can  be  accomplished  with  any 
number  of different  building  materials. 
•  Stones fall into the three broad categories illus(cid:173)
trated  at  far  left.  Rubble  stones  interlock  like 
three-dimensional 
jigsaw  puzzles.  Because 
they're  irregular,  rubble  stones  work  well  for 
walls  but  not  horizontal  surfaces  such  as  patios 
and walks. 

in 

With flagstones,  it's  the  other  way  around. 
irregular  shapes  or  precut 
These  come 
squares and rectangles that are more or less uni(cid:173)
form  in  thickness.  Use  flagstones  for  walks, 
steps, and patios, and anywhere else you want a 
durable,  dressy  surface. 

Ashlar  or  dimensioned  stone  is  cut  on  all 
sides,  making it easy  to  stack.  You  still  have  to 
do  some  final  cutting and  fitting,  though. 
•  Bricks  vary  widely  in  color,  texture,  and  di(cid:173)
mensions.  Modular  bricks  are  sized  to  conform 
to  modules  of 4  inches,  which  makes  it easy to 
estimate how many you will need. Non-modular 
bricks  do  not  conform  to  the  4-inch  module  in 
one or  more  dimensions. 

When  a  dealer  tells  you  the  dimensions  of a 
brick, he is talking about its nominal size, which is 
the brick's actual size, plus a normal mortar joint 
of 3/8 to 1/2 inch on the bottom and at one end. 

For  outdoor  projects  that  must  withstand 
moisture and freeze-thaw cycles, ask for SW (se(cid:173)
vere weathering) bricks. If temperatures in your 
area  are  moderate  year-round,  you  can  get  by 
with  MW  (moderate  weathering)  bricks.  Use 
NW  (no  weathering)  bricks  only  for  interior 
projects  such as fireplaces. 
•  Concrete blocks are cast from a stiff concrete mix 
into  hundreds  of different  sizes  and  shapes.  A 
typical block has a nominal size of 8x8x16 inch(cid:173)
es and weighs 40  to  50 pounds. 

286 

Concrete  blocks  come  in  two  grades—N,  de(cid:173)

signed  for  outdoor  freezing,  and  S, 
for  use 
above  grade  and  where  the  blocks  won't  be 
directly  exposed  to  weather. 
•  Masonry veneers of brick, terra-cotta, slate, and 
stone  offer  a  way  to  put  an  attractive  face  on 
otherwise plain  materials,  such  as concrete.  Ter(cid:173)
ra-cotta  quarry  tiles  are  made  in  many  colors 
and  shapes.  They  measure 3/8 inch  or 1/2 inch 
thick.  Slate  tiles  also  come  in  several  colors,  in 
uniform  thicknesses  ranging  from 1/4 inch  to  1 
inch.  Flagstones  aren't  uniformly  thick,  which 
means  you  must  lay  them  on  sand  or  in  a  thick 
mortar  bed.  See  pages  164-165  for  details. 

•  D ry  v s.  w et  setting 
Once you've  settled  on  the  sort of masonry  units 
you'd  like  for  your  project,  you  need  to  decide 
what  to  put  between  them.  H e re  your  choices 
are two: dry-set the units without mortar or wet-set 
the  units  using  mortar  to  bond  them. 

To  dry-set a patio  or other surface,  you  simply 

excavate,  lay  down  a  bed  of sand,  set the  mason(cid:173)
ry  on  this  bed,  then  sweep  more  sand  into  the 
joints.  More  about  this  on  pages  154-157.  You 
also  can  lay  up  a  stone  retaining  wall  without 
mortar,  as  shown  on  page  72. 

Dry  setting  is  far  and  away  the  easier  way  to 
go,  but  mortaring  isn't  as  difficult  as  you  might 
imagine,  once  you  get  the  hang  of it. 

•  M i x i ng  mortar 
H ow  you  go  about  preparing  the  mortar  for  a 
job  depends  on  the  project's  size.  For  small  jobs 
and  repairs,  buy  premixed  mortar  that  already 
contains  sand.  For  larger  ventures,  you'll  save 
money  by  purchasing  the  sand  and  masonry  ce(cid:173)
ment  separately  and  mixing  them  yourself. 

To  mix  mortar,  carefully  measure  three  parts 
sand  and  one part cement into  a wheelbarrow or 
mortar  box.  Spread  half  of  the  sand  first,  then 
the  cement,  then  the  rest  of the  sand.  Use  a  hoe 
to  thoroughly  mix  the  dry  materials. 

After  you've  completely  blended  the  sand 
and  cement,  make  a  depression  in  the  center  of 
the  dry  mix,  pour  a  small  amount  of water  into 

it,  then  fold  the  mix  into  the  water with  a hoe  or 
trowel.  Add  more  water until  your  mix  behaves 
as shown opposite,  bottom.  Be  sure to take your 
time.  Generally,  you'll  need  about  2  1/2  gallons 
of  water  for  each  bag  of  cement,  but  this  can 
vary,  depending  on  the  moisture  content  of the 
sand.  Don't  run  water from  a  hose  into  the  mix; 
you  might  drown  the  mortar. 

•  Working  w i th  mortar 
Lay  mortared  masonry  paving  units  only  on  top 
of sound,  clean  concrete.  If you  have  to  pour  a 
concrete  slab  first,  follow  the  steps  explained  on 
pages  2 8 4 - 2 8 5,  skipping any steps after the con(cid:173)
crete  is  screeded. 

Wet  the  surface  just  before  troweling  on  an 
even 1/4- to 1-inch layer of mortar. Use a thinner 
layer for even-surface paving units  such  as brick, 
a  thicker  one  for  irregular  stones.  Screed  this  to 
a  uniform  depth  with  a  piece  of 2x4,  then  place 
the  paving  units  on  the  mortar,  leveling  each 
one  as  you  position  it.  Let  the  mortar  holding 
the  masonry  set and  cure for a day or two  before 
you fill  the  joints  between  them  with  more  mor(cid:173)
tar.  For  more  about  working  with  mortar,  see 
pages  124-125  and  164-165 

287 

CONSTRUCTION  AND  PLANTING  BASICS 

WIRING 

If  you've  successfully  pulled  off  a  few  indoor 

wiring  projects,  the  principles  you  learned 
there can help you do the same outside.  Exterior 
electrical  equipment  differs  slightly,  however, 
and  you  must  take  a  few  more  precautions  to 
protect  wiring  against  moisture. 

Read  these  two  pages  for  details  on  the  tools 
and  components  you'll  need.  Pages  290-291 
discuss  the  techniques  you'll  need  to  master. 

{Caution:  If  you've  never  worked  with  elec(cid:173)
tricity  before,  outdoors  is  not  the  place  to  start. 
For this  reason,  we've  omitted  any  discussion  of 
basic  procedures  such  as  making  connections 
and  hooking  up  receptacles  and  switches.) 

•  Cable 
In  planning  an  underground  installation,  first 
find  out  whether  local  codes  permit  plastic-clad 
UF  cable,  or  whether  they  require  that  you  run 
standard  TW  wire  through  rigid  conduit.  If 
you're permitted  to use  cable,  you'll  still have to 
protect  it  with  conduit  in  aboveground  situa(cid:173)
tions.  Keep  in  mind,  too,  that  cable  should  be 
buried  at least  12  inches  below the  surface.  Rig(cid:173)
id  conduit  need  go  only  six 
inches  under(cid:173)
ground;  thinner  EMT  conduit  (the  kind  used 
indoors)  requires  12  inches  of earth  protection. 
When  you  buy  fittings,  make  sure  they're  the 
weathertight type  designed  for outdoor use.  Ex(cid:173)
terior components  look  much  like  the  ones  used 
inside,  but  they're  heftier  and  have  gaskets,  wa(cid:173)
terproof covers,  and  rubber-sealed  connections. 
Also,  because  the  potential  for  serious  shock 
is  much  greater  outdoors,  you  must  protect  all 
exterior receptacles with ground fault circuit inter(cid:173)
rupters  (GFCIs).  These  devices,  which  can  be 
installed  in  your  home's  service  panel  or  in  lieu 
of a  standard  receptacle,  instantly  shut  off power 
should  a  malfunction  occur. 

•  Tools 
You  may  not  need  all  the  items  pictured  on  the 
opposite page,  and  you may already have quite a 
few  of them,  but  let's  explain  what  each  does. 

Long-nose and linemen's pliers are musts. The first 
help  you  curl  wires  into  the  loops  needed  for 

many  electrical  connections.  Linemen's  pliers 
handle  heavier  cutting  and  twisting  jobs.  Side-
cutting  pliers  are  handy  when  you  have  to  snip 
wires  in  tight places. 

A utility knife  slices  through  anything  that calls 

for a cutting edge. A combination tool does a varie(cid:173)
ty  of tasks—cuts  and  strips  wires,  si2es  and  cuts 
off screws,  crimps  connectors,  and  more.  If your 
wiring  is  protected  by  cartridge-type  fuses,  a 
plastic fuse puller  lets  you  remove  them  without 
danger  of  electrical  shock. 

Several  types of testers are available.  The con(cid:173)
tinuity  type  has  a  small  battery  and  bulb  for  test(cid:173)
ing  switches,  sockets,  and  fuses  with  the  power 
off.  A  neon  tester,  on  the  other  hand,  lights  up 
only when current is flowing.  It tells  you wheth(cid:173)
er  an  outlet  is  live  and  hooked  up  properly. 

You'll  need  one  of each  of these,  or  you  can 
invest  in  an  inexpensive  voltmeter  instead.  If 
you'll  be  installing  a  number  of new  receptacles, 
you also might want a receptacle analyzer. 

With an electric drill,  a spade bit,  and a bit exten(cid:173)
sion,  you  can  bore  holes  for  wiring  in  just  about 
anything,  even  through  the  side  of your  house. 
If codes  permit  UF  cable  in  your  area,  use  a 
cable ripper to cut open the plastic sheathing. The 
one  shown  also  strips  insulation  from  conduc(cid:173)
tors.  For  conduit,  you'll  need  a  tubing  cutter,  a 
bender,  and  a fish tape to pull wires through. 

Low-voltage  jobs  are  often  soldered.  Use  a 

soldering gun  and  a spool  of rosin-core solder. 

Most  of the  gear  shown  here  packs  easily  into 
a  tool pouch.  Electrical  work  keeps  you  on  the 
move,  and  you'll  appreciate  the  convenience  of 
having  everything  you  might  need  at  your  hip. 

•  Low-voltage  w i r i ng 
If  you  don't  relish  the  arduous  job  of  burying 
120-volt  wiring  underground,  consider  choos(cid:173)
ing  a  low-voltage  lighting  system  instead.  These 
step  down  house  current  to  a  six-  or  12-volt 
tickle,  which  means  you  can  safely  string  fix(cid:173)
tures  like  so  many  Christmas  tree  lights.  Simply 
plug  a  transformer  into  a  standard  120-volt  re(cid:173)
ceptacle  and  run  lightweight  cable  to  the  fix(cid:173)
tures.  See  pages  214-215  for  more  details. 

288 

289 

CONSTRUCTION  AND  PLANTING  BASICS 

WIRING (continued) 

To  complete  an  outdoor  electrical  installa(cid:173)

tion,  you  first  have  to  decide  where  the 
power  is going  to  come  from.  Next,  you  dig  a 
trench from  that point to  the site or sites where 
you  would  like  lights  or  receptacles.  Then  you 
lay  conduit,  cable,  or a combination  of the  two 
and  make the final  connections. 

•  Tapping  power 
If there's  an  exterior  receptacle  nearby,  you're 
in  luck.  Simply  dig  a  trench  to  the  receptacle 
and hook up to it as shown at upper right. 

If there's no convenient source of power out(cid:173)

side,  look around  your  basement for a junction 
box, or run a new circuit from the service panel. 
This requires boring a hole through the wall, as 
shown  at lower  right. 

In some localities, you can run sheathed cable 
through the wall to a new box outside; in others, 
you're  required  to  use  conduit  or  armored  ca(cid:173)
ble.  Find  out what codes permit.  In  most cases, 
it's  best  to  install  a  junction  box  back  to  back 
with the exterior box, then connect the two with 
conduit or  cable. 

A third option is to take power from an exte(cid:173)
rior light fixture, as shown on the opposite page. 
This  is  probably  the  least  desirable  way  to  go, 
because you have to run conduit up to the eaves, 
and  your new outlet will  be live  only when the 
light switch is turned  on. 

•  In  the  trenches 
Once you know where power is going to come 
from, it's time to plan an itinerary for the trench 
or  trenches  you  will  need.  Route  these  well 
away from  water,  gas,  electric,  telephone,  sew(cid:173)
er,  and  sprinkler  lines.  For  conduit,  keep  the 
trenches  as  straight  as  possible;  sheathed  cable 
can easily snake around  obstructions. 

After you've laid out a trench,  strip away  sod 
and set it aside on plastic sheeting. Keep the sod 
slightly  damp.  For  EMT  tubing  and  UF  cable, 
you'll need  a trench that is about 8  inches wide 
by 1 foot deep; rigid conduit requires one that is 
4 inches wide by 6 inches deep. 

290 

To  avoid  tearing  up  a  sidewalk,  dig  to  one 
side  of  it,  then  resume  on  the  other.  After 
you've  finished  digging,  flatten  one  end  of  a 
piece of conduit, lay it in the trench, and drive it 
through  the  ground  under  the  walk.  After  it 
emerges  on  the  other  side,  cut  off the  flat  end. 
You also can  rent an  auger. 

•  Bending  conduit 
Conduit  comes  in  10-foot sections:1/2, 3/4, or  1 
inch  in  diameter.  To  work  with  conduit,  first 
shape  it  with  a  bender  like  the  one  shown  on 
page 289, then cut it to length. Always bend the 
conduit  before  cutting  it  because  each  bend 
shortens the total run by a few inches. 

If you've  never  worked  with  conduit  before, 
buy an extra length or two and experiment until 
you get the knack of bending the tubing in gen(cid:173)
tle  arcs,  with  no  crimps  that  might  impede  the 
pulling  of wires. 

To bend conduit, slip the conduit into a bend(cid:173)

er,  with  its  handle  pointing  up  and  away  from 
you.  Then,  with  one  foot  on  the  conduit,  pull 
the  handle  slowly  and  steadily  toward  you. 
Make  a  bend  gradually,  with  a  series  of  tugs 
along  its  radius.  Pull  too  sharply  at  any  point 
and  you'll  crimp  the  tubing.  When  the  handle 
reaches  a  45-degree  angle  with  the  ground, 
you've completed  a 90-degree  bend. 

EMT  conduit  bends  easily.  Bending  rigid 
tubing  requires  more  muscle;  for  simple  runs, 
consider  substituting  elbow  connectors  for 
bends.  Codes  forbid  a  total  of more  than  360 
degrees in bends along any run. This limits you 
to  four  90-degree  quarter  bends,  three  if you'll 
have offsets at the ends (which you'll need for a 
box that's  mounted  on a wall). 

•  Cutting  and  connecting 
Cut  conduit  with  a  hacksaw  or,  better  yet,  an 
inexpensive  turning  cutter  like  the  one  shown 
on page 289. Clamp the cutter onto the conduit, 
rotate a few  times,  tighten  the  handle,  then ro(cid:173)
tate  some  more.  A  wheellike  blade  slices 
through  the  metal. 

A second pointed  blade on the cutter lets you 
remove  sharp  burrs  that  could  chew  up  wiring 
insulation.  Stick  the  point  into  the  cut  tubing 
end  and  rotate the cutter. 

Join  conduit  sections  end  to  end  with  water(cid:173)
proof couplings.  At  boxes,  use  special  connec(cid:173)
tors.  Some  of these  connectors  include  offsets, 
which can  save a lot of bending. 

Connect  conduit  carefully.  Pulling  wires 
through  conduit  can  subject  components  to 
stress,  and  good  grounding  depends  on  secure 
metal-to-metal  connections. 

•  Pulling  wires 
Now comes the time when you learn why codes 
are so specific about bends, crimps, and burrs in 
tubing. As you pull wires through your conduit, 
you'll quickly notice that any hang-ups can lacer(cid:173)
ate insulation or even make the task impossible. 
For a relatively straight run, you can probably 
push  the wires from  one  box to another.  If you 
can't push the wires, you'll need a fish tape and a 
helper.  Snake  the  tape  through  the  conduit, 
then hook  the  tape and  wires together. 

Next,  begin pulling with gentle pressure.  As 
the wires work past bends, expect to exert more 
muscle.  Have your helper gently feed wires into 
the  conduit.  With  lots  of wires  or  a  long  pull, 
lubricate the wires  with  talcum powder or pull(cid:173)
ing grease,  available from  electrical  suppliers. 

Leave 6 to 8 inches of extra wire at each box. 
And  never  splice  wires  inside  conduit.  They 
must run  continuously from  box to box. 

•  Aboveground  receptacle 
When  installing a freestanding exterior  recepta(cid:173)
cle  that  rises  out  of  the  ground  on  a  conduit 
stalk, be sure to firmly root the stalk in concrete 
below. First, cut the bottom out of a large coffee 
can and slip it over the conduit. Then plumb the 
stalk and  brace  it  with guy  wires.  Next,  fill  the 
can  with  concrete.  Bevel  the  top  so  water  will 
run  off.  Extend  the  stalk  20  to  24  inches  above 
ground so no one will trip over it. 

291 

CONSTRUCTION  AND  PLANTING  BASICS 

PLANTS 

Essential  to  all  landscapes,  of  course,  are 

plants.  On  these  two  pages,  we  outline 
some  of  the  tools  you'll  need  when  working 
with  plants,  and  offer  a  brief  discussion  about 
improving  your  soil.  On  pages  2 9 4 - 2 9 5,  you'll 
find  details  on  choosing  and  starting  plants. 
Pages  296-297  discuss  starting  a  lawn,  and 
pages  298-299  give  information  on  the  climate 
zones  that  should  guide  you  in  selecting  plants. 
For 
information  on  maintaining  plants  and 
lawns,  see pages  254-267.  And  for plant recom(cid:173)
mendations,  see pages  3 0 0 - 3 2 3,  plus  the  charts 
sprinkled  throughout  the  book. 

•  Tools 
Having  the  right  yard  tool  at  hand  can  make  all 
the  difference  in  how,  when,  or  if  a  job  gets 
done,  and  in  how  much  you  enjoy  or  resent  it. 
Your  tool  choices  depend  largely  on  the  size 

and  makeup  of your  yard,  as  well  as  your  tem(cid:173)
perament  and  the  time  you  have  for  yard  work. 
Most  garden  work  can  be  done  with  a  hoe 
and  a  trowel.  But  a  power  shredder,  edger, 
composter,  and  bicycle-tired  cart  add  greatly  to 
the  ease  and  satisfaction  for  some  people. 

Examine  tools  before  you  buy.  If a  handle  is 
too  long,  short,  or  heavy  for  you,  try  another. 
Check  connections.  The  best  spades,  forks,  and 
long-handled  shovels  have  a  metal  shank  ex(cid:173)
tending  part  way  up  the  handle  for  additional 
strength.  Trowels  are  more  durable  when  they 
have wooden  handles  driven  into  a metal  shank. 
Wheelbarrows  and  carts  come  in  many  mate(cid:173)
rials  and  sizes:  small  enough  to  go  down  the 
cellar  steps  or  big  enough  for  six  bags  of leaves. 
Choose  hoses  for  weight,  length,  durability, 
and  ease  of repair.  Consider  soaker  hoses,  mist 
nozzles,  and  sprinklers  according  to  your  yard's 
needs.  Hose  attachments  for  fertilizers  and 
sprays  have  finally  reached  the  no-plug  stage 
and  work  well. 

•  Tool  care 
With  care,  well-made  tools  will  last  for  years. 
H e re  are  some  maintenance  hints. 

•  Clean  tools  after  each  use  with  a paint  stick  or 
steel  brush  to  keep  soil  from  encrusting. 
•  Wipe  wooden  handles  with  linseed  oil.  Paint 
them  a  bright  color  if you  tend  to  lose  tools. 
•  Sharpen  tools  for  efficiency  and  safety.  Follow 
manual  instructions.  Use  a  file  on  the  inside 
edge  of your  hoe. 
•  Check  and  tighten  bolts  and  screws  regularly. 
•  Wind  up  hoses  between  use.  Excessive  sun 
shortens  their  life.  Drain  well  before  winter. 
•  Remove grass  clippings,  dirt,  and  grease  from 
your  mower  and  sharpen  as  needed.  Before 
winter,  run  until  gasoline  is  used.  Drain  the 
crankcase.  Clean  the  oil  filter.  Add  clean  oil. 
•  Sharpen  the  blades  of shears,  mowers,  spades, 
and  hoes  before  storing  for  winter.  Apply  oil, 
floor  wax,  petroleum  jelly,  or  lard. 
•  Wash  and  dry  sprayers  thoroughly  after  each 
use.  Oil  plunger  rod  and  leather  plunger  often. 
•  Have  a  storage  area  handy  to  the  garden. 
•  Store  all  sprays,  dusts,  and  poisons  out  of the 
reach  of children  and  pets. 

•  Soil  i m p r o v e m e n ts 
There  are  three  main  types  of soil,  one  of which 
is  best  for  growing  plants.  Loam—the  ideal 
soil—molds  into  a  loose  mound  when  squeezed 
lightly.  Squeezed  harder,  however,  it crumbles. 
Soil  high  in  clay  forms  a  tight,  sticky  mass  if 
squeezed  when  wet.  Sandy  soil  feels  grainy  and 
crumbles  when  wet. 

If your  yard's  soil  is  clayey  or  sandy,  turn  it to 
a  depth  of at  least  1  foot  wherever  you  want  to 
garden  and  add  humus  in  the  form  of compost, 
peat,  grass  clippings,  shredded  leaves,  or  any 
other  organic  matter.  If  you  religiously  use  all 
organic  material  produced  in  the  garden  and 
house  as  mulch  or  compost,  you'll  soon  have  a 
wonderfully  friable,  workable  soil  that  smells  of 
life.  For  more  about  composting,  see  page  235. 
Also  important  are  a  soil's  acidity  and  its  lev(cid:173)
els  of certain  nutrients.  To  judge  your  soil,  buy 
and  use  a  soil  test  kit  or  have  your  soil  tested. 
The  test  will  tell  you  exactly  what  your  soil 
needs.  Check  with  your  county  extension  office 
for  more  details. 

292 

293 

CONSTRUCTION  AND  PLANTING  BASICS 

PLANTS (continued) 

To  begin  creating  the  green  part  of  your 

landscape, buy plants from a reputable local 
or  mail-order  nursery  or  start  them  yourself. 
The  decision  depends  mainly  on  the  size  of 
plants you  want to start with. 

•  Nursery  plants 
Bare-root  stock,  the  most  economical  nursery 
plants,  must  be  purchased  and  planted  while 
dormant,  usually  late  winter  or  early  spring. 
Some  nurseries  can  extend  that  dormancy  for 
several weeks into the spring with cold storage. 
Bare-root plants come as rather dead-looking 
twigs,  so  the  reputation  of the  nursery  and  its 
guarantee  are  important.  Swelling  of buds  and 
suppleness  of branches indicate life.  Place roots 
and as much of the rest of the plant as possible in 
water for several hours to overnight, then plant. 
Mail-order stock may arrive  at the  beginning 
of a week of rain. If you can't plant soon, heel in 

294 

the plants by placing them slantwise in a shallow 
trench  and  covering  the  roots  with  soil  (see 
page 61).  As soon as possible,  move the plants 
to  their permanent homes. 

When  selecting  container  plants,  pick  ones 
with good foliage color. If the choice is between 
present  blooms  and  basic shape,  make  yourself 
choose  the  best  branch  structure  and  you'll get 
more blooms in the long run. 

Balled-and-burlapped  or  potted  trees  and 
shrubs  can  be planted  any  time  of the year,  but 
spring and early fall are the best times. Worst is 
late fall before a hard winter or in a hot summer 
without  proper  aftercare. 

•  Planting 
For years, the rule was that it was better to dig a 
$5  hole for a $1  plant than vice versa.  It still is 
necessary  to  dig  a  generous  hole  so  the  roots 
will  not  be  crowded,  but  it  is  no  longer  advis(cid:173)
able  to  fill  it  with  such  good  soil  amendments 
that the roots will  never push outward. 

Dig your hole 2 feet wider than the root ball. 
It  need  be  no  deeper.  If  roots  have  become 
tangled  within  a pot,  pull  some  of them  apart. 
Fill  the  hole  with  good  soil;  replace  subsoil  or 
clay with topsoil. 

Remove any labels, instruction tags, or strings 
that encircle  branches  so  they won't restrain  or 
become imbedded  in the growth. 

Whenever you plant anything,  water well,  as 
much  to  settle  as  to  moisten  the  soil.  Then 
mulch  the  soil  surface  and  leave  a  surrounding 
doughnutlike  ridge—a  foot  or  so  from  a  tree 
trunk, several inches from the crown of a peren(cid:173)
nial flower—to hold  in  waterings  or rain. 

Most trees are already pruned  at the nursery. 
Remove  any  broken  or  crowding  branches, 
then prune only as needed to start the shape you 
want.  See  pages  266-267  for  more  about  care 
after  planting. 

Very  large  trees  should  be planted  by an  ex(cid:173)
pert  who  has  the  special  equipment  needed. 
This  equipment  also  will  require  a  certain 
amount of space,  so plant your  big  trees  before 
you put in  surrounding plantings. 

•  Starting plants 
For  starts  of shrubs,  perennials,  or ground  cov(cid:173)
ers,  consider  seeking  divisions  from  friends' 
plants.  Or, try planting one section of your yard 
this  year—say  with  a  ground  cover—then  let(cid:173)
ting  the  plants  multiply  there  until  you  have 
enough  to  start  another section. 

Shrubs are best divided  in early spring, when 
they're  still  dormant.  For  late-blooming  peren(cid:173)
nials  like phlox and  mum,  divide just as  shoots 
are  coming  up.  Divide  after  flowers  fade  for 
early bloomers  like  iris  or peonies. 

For some plants—like Japanese  iris,  rhubarb, 
and  the  offshoots  of a  lilac  bush—simply  cut  a 
chunk  of branch  and  root  from  the  edge  of the 
clump with a spade.  You won't disturb the  rest 
of the plant at all. 

Many  clumps,  such  as  those  of ajuga,  can  be 
carefully dug with a spading fork and divided by 
pulling the crowns apart. Others, like ferns, may 
have such entangled roots that you'll have to pry 
the clumps  into sections with  two spading forks 
or  cut  them  apart  with  a  sharp  knife.  Replant 
each  section  in  good  soil  with  ample  room  for 
the plant's  natural  spread. 

•  Seeds 
Seeds  are  the  most  inexpensive  way  to  start 
many plants,  but they take longest and  may  not 
always  be  true  to  color.  Annuals  and  herbs  are 
often  started  from  seed  planted  indoors  in  late 
winter  or  outdoors  as  soon  as  cold  weather  is 
past.  Most  packets  give  the  best  time  to  plant 
and  instructions as  to depth  and  distance apart. 
Indoors,  plant  in  a  sterile  medium  like  pur(cid:173)

chased  potting  soil  or  perlite  in  any  container 
that  has  bottom  holes  for  drainage.  Pack  and 
moisten the medium. Scatter the seeds and press 
them. Tiny seeds need no covering; larger ones 
can be planted as deep as their greatest width. 
Cover the container with a loose piece of plas(cid:173)

tic.  Bread  wrappers work fine  and  usually keep 
the  medium  moist  enough  for  several  days. 
Heat from  the  bottom  speeds  sprouting,  so put 
containers  on  the  refrigerator,  dryer,  or  TV. 
Most seeds do  not need  light at this point. 

Packets or catalogs  also may tell you when  to 
expect  germination,  which  can  vary  from  two 
days  to a few weeks,  depending on  the  kind  of 
seed.  (Some tree seeds take several seasons.) 

As  soon as the first sprouts begin  to emerge, 
move  the  container  to  a  bright,  cool place  and 
take off the plastic.  Keep the medium moist but 
don't  overwater.  Feed  and  transplant  when  the 
second  set of leaves  appears. 

Harden-off the  seedlings  before  transplanting 
them  outdoors.  To  do  this,  carry  them  slightly 
on  the  dry  side,  but  don't  let  them  wilt.  Place 
the  containers  outdoors  for  a  few  more  hours 
each day until they are used to the sun and wind. 
If the  weather  is  harsh  the  first  few  days  after 
transplanting,  put  milk  jugs  or  other protection 
around  the  seedlings. 

If you plant your seeds outdoors,  you'll  have 
less  control  over  seedling  growth,  but  more 
space.  Prepare  the  soil.  Water  it  well.  Plant 
seeds,  cover  a  tad  more  deeply  than  indoors, 
and  keep  the  soil moist until  seedlings  appear. 
The  main  drawback  to  seeding  outdoors  is 
that you must be familiar enough with the seed(cid:173)
ling  to  know  if it  is  that  or  a weed  coming  up. 
Seed  packets,  rows,  and  time  will  help  you  tell 
for  sure. 

Thin and  transplant seedlings as  needed,  and 

pinch  most annuals  to encourage  bushiness. 

CONSTRUCTION  AND  PLANTING  BASICS 

PLANTS (continued) 

Since a good  lawn will last for generations, it 

is  vital  to  plant  it  carefully.  (For  details  on 
maintaining  established  lawns,  see  Chapter  12, 
pages  254-265.) 

•  Grading 
Before  starting,  make  sure  the  lawn  area  is  as 
level  as possible  and  drains properly.  For good 
drainage, slope the lawn gently away from your 
house.  Consider  ground  covers  or  a  retaining 
wall for severe grades (see Chapter 3). Mowing 
steep slopes  is difficult and  can  be dangerous. 

Whenever  building  or  drastically  changing 
grades, remove the topsoil first, then respread it 
over the leveled  surface.  You can do small jobs 
yourself  with  a  spade  and  rake  or  an  old  tire 
pulled  by a rope.  Hire a tractor for big jobs. 

For  more  information  on  grading  and  drain(cid:173)

age, see pages  52-57. 

•  Improving  the  soil 
Also before starting, test your soil with a simple 
test  kit  or  contact  your  county  extension  agent 
and follow instructions.  Most grasses thrive at a 
neutral or slightly acid pH of 6 to 7. Add lime as 
needed  to  improve  the  structure  and  provide 
the best environment (less acid,  better chemical 
balance) for beneficial bacteria and  earthworms. 
Adding organic matter,  such as moist peat or 
weed-free  compost,  and  additional  topsoil,  if 
needed,  will  increase  growth  and  decrease 
maintenance. Also broadcast a complete fertiliz(cid:173)
er  (10-10-10,  for  example)  using  10  to  20 
pounds per  1,000 square feet, depending on the 
fertility of the  soil.  Till  or  spade  6  inches  deep, 
making  the  soil  pebbly,  but  not  powdery.  Re(cid:173)
move any rocks or debris and rake smooth, leav(cid:173)
ing shallow crevices  to catch grass seeds. 

•  Choosing  the  kind 
Choose  from  new,  improved  grasses  according 
to  how  much  sun  your  lawn  will  get,  and  how 
you  will  use  the  yard.  In  the  southern  states, 
warm-season  grasses  grow  most  from  March 

296 

included,  and  percent of inert  ingredients.  Bet(cid:173)
ter seed is worth the price; cheap is no bargain if 
you  have  to  redo  all  the  work  or  settle  for  an 
inferior  lawn. 

•  When  to  start 
The ideal time for planting seed is early Septem(cid:173)
ber, with very early spring second best.  Sow the 
amount  listed  in  the  package  directions  (too 
much  seed  can  cause  the  tiny  grass  plants  to 
choke each other out). Then walk backward and 
rake  lightly  so  that the  seed  is covered  with no 
more than 1/8 inch of soil. 

Sod,  sprigs,  and  plugs  can  go  in  almost  any(cid:173)
time,  though  spring  or  fall  is  preferred.  When 
you choose sod, look for well-rooted, moist rolls 
that are  uniformly green  and  not yellowing. 

Roll  the area after planting seed  or sod,  then, 
if seeding,  cover with  mulch  to  conserve  mois(cid:173)
ture.  If you rent a drum  roller with a surface  of 
mesh fabric, you can roll the ground and apply a 
thin  mulch  of peat  moss  at  the  same  time.  Or 
spread straw about 1/8 inch thick—so you can see 
soil  through  it—after  you've  rolled  the  area.  If 
you use burlap to  retain moisture,  remove  it as 
soon  as  germination  begins.  A  mesh  material 
that  the  grass  can  grow  through  is  available, 
though  more  expensive.  Use  it  only  on  steep 
slopes  or difficult  spots  (see  pages  66-67). 

•  Watering  and  mowing 
The  main  cause  of lawn  failures  is  lack of mois(cid:173)
ture. Water new lawns with a fine mist from two 
to several times a day for the first week; the next 
week,  water at least once a day.  Water less  fre(cid:173)
quently but more deeply as grass grows. 

Weeds  also  may  germinate,  but  your  new 
grass soon will crowd  them out.  Keep traffic off 
until the lawn is well established. 

Mow the grass with sharp blades  set at about 
1 1/2  inches when the new growth is 2 inches tall. 
Fertilize  it  lightly  after  mowing,  then  monthly 
for three or four months,  giving thinner spots a 
bit more  food  to  equalize growth. 

297 

through  August.  They  turn  brown  after  frost. 
Over-seed with a winter grass in the fall to keep 
weeds  out  and  extend  and  intensify  the  lawn's 
green  color. 

Bahia is  the only  southern grass  often  started 
from  seed  and  thus  is  less  expensive.  It  also  is 
less  elegant  but  takes  less  care.  St.  Augustine 
makes a thick turf and is beautiful as long as it is 
protected  from  its  several  and  serious  enemies. 
Bermuda  is  used  on  southern  golf  courses 
and  athletic  fields.  'Meyer'  zoysia  will  thrive 
farther  north  than  any  other  southern  grass. 
'Cashmere'  zoysia  has  finer  texture,  grows  fast(cid:173)
er,  and  tolerates  shade  better. 

In the northern two-thirds of the country, use 
mixtures  of  cool-season  grasses.  These  grasses 
flourish in spring and fall, and turn brown in the 
dead  of winter and  during  summer drought. 

Most  sunny  cool-season  lawns  use  largely 
bluegrasses.  New  varieties  like  'Bonnieblue', 
'Eclipse',  and  'Sydsport'  have  superior  color, 
density,  and  heat and  drought tolerance. 

Fescues  are  the  best  for  shade  and  for  play 
areas  that get rough treatment.  New ryegrasses 
are  especially  good  for  getting  a  lawn  estab(cid:173)
lished  fast. 

When  buying  grass  seed,  always  check  the 
label  for  percentage  of  germination,  varieties 

CONSTRUCTION  AND  PLANTING  BASICS 

PLANTS (continued) 

One key to successful landscaping is planting 

the right plant in the right place.  The har(cid:173)
diness  2one  map  on  these  two  pages  was  pre(cid:173)
pared  by  the  U.S.  Department  of Agriculture, 
and  is  based  on  a  study  of the  average  annual 
minimum  temperatures  recorded  by  14,500 
weather  stations  throughout North  America. 

Find  and  keep  in  mind  your  zone  number 
when choosing any plant for your landscape.  In 
this and other garden books and catalogs, zones 
of hardiness  are given  for  many plants. 

As  the  environment  is  increasingly  threat(cid:173)
ened,  it  becomes  more  and  more  important  to 
use  our  bit  of  land  wisely  and  carefully.  The 
right plants  will  need  less  coddling,  less  water, 
and  fewer pesticides,  and  reward  us  with  more 
success  and  enjoyment. 

•  Microclimates 
This  zone  map  and  others,  though,  are  only 
general guides.  Most yards have several micro(cid:173)
climates  determined  by  exposure,  wind,  eleva(cid:173)
tion,  and 
the  warmer 
microclimates of your yard,  you  may be able  to 
grow  a  few  plants  from  the  next  zone  to  your 
south.  Or  you  may  find  that  most  of your  yard 
requires  extra hardiness,  and  you'd  be  wiser  to 
choose from  the  zone  to  your north. 

surroundings. 

In 

In yards near the water or in cities  surround(cid:173)

ed  by much concrete,  tender plants may escape 
damage while the same plants a few miles away 
suffer mild  to  severe  winterkill. 

Here are some other factors to consider when 
choosing plants and  deciding where they might 
grow  best. 
•  Southern and western sides of houses and oth(cid:173)
er  structures  are  sunnier  and  warmer  than 
northern  or eastern  exposures. 
•  Southern  and  eastern  exposures  usually  are 
protected  from  chilling  winter  winds. 
•  Strong  winds  can  damage  plants,  by  either 
drying the soil or knocking over fragile growth. 
•  Cold  air  sweeps  down  hills  and  rests  in  low 
areas  of neighborhoods. 
•  Your microclimates  will change as  your trees 
grow larger or when  you  add  a fence or deck. 

298 

RECOMMENDED 

PLANTS 

fter  completing  your 

general  plans,  you  are  ready  for  the  fun  of 

picking  particular  plants.  To  help  you  begin,  this 

chapter  describes  many  popular  trees,  shrubs, 

vines,  ground  covers,  and  flowers.  While  making 

your decisions,  keep  in  mind  that  your selections  will 

satisfy  you  more  if they  serve  several  purposes 

and  offer  interest  for  several  seasons.  Remember,  too, 

that  the  botanical  world  is  vast,  and  that 

there  are  many  fine  plants  beyond  those  listed  in 

this  review. 

301 

RECOMMENDED  PLANTS 

DECIDUOUS TREES (continued) 

302 

303 

RECOMMENDED  PLANTS 

DECIDUOUS TREES 

304 

305 

RECOMMENDED  PLANTS 

EVERGREEN TREES 

306 

DECIDUOUS  SHRUBS 

307 

RECOMMENDED  PLANTS 

DECIDUOUS SHRUBS  (continued) 

308 

309 

RECOMMENDED  PLANTS 

D E C I D U O US  S H R U BS  (continued) 

310 

BROAD-LEAVED EVERGREEN SHRUBS 

311 

RECOMMENDED  PLANTS 

BROAD-LEAVED EVERGREEN SHRUBS 

312 

NEEDLED EVERGREEN SHRUBS 

313 

RECOMMENDED  PLANTS 

VINES 

314 

315 

RECOMMENDED  PLANTS 

VINES (continued) 

316 

GROUND COVERS 

317 

RECOMMENDED  PLANTS 

GROUND COVERS (continued) 

318 

319 

RECOMMENDED  PLANTS 

FLOWERS 

320 

321 

RECOMMENDED  PLANTS 

F L O W E RS (continued) 

322 

323 

