Leafy Medicinal Herbs

Botany, Chemistry, Postharvest Technology and Uses

Leafy Medicinal Herbs

Botany, Chemistry, Postharvest  

Technology and Uses

Edited by

Dawn C.P. Ambrose

ICAR Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering,  

Regional Centre, Coimbatore, India

Annamalai Manickavasagan

College of Agricultural and Marine Sciences,  

Sultan Qaboos University, Oman

Ravindra Naik

ICAR Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering,  

Regional Centre, Coimbatore, India

CABI is a trading name of CAB International 

CABI
Nosworthy Way
Wallingford
Oxfordshire OX10 8DE
UK

Tel: +44 (0)1491 832111
Fax: +44 (0)1491 833508
E-mail: info@cabi.org
Website: www.cabi.org

CABI
745 Atlantic Avenue
8th Floor
Boston, MA 02111
USA

Tel: +1 (617)682-9015
E-mail: cabi-nao@cabi.org

© CAB International 2016. All rights reserved. No part of this  publication 
may be reproduced in any form or by any means, electronically, 
 mechanically, by photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the 
prior permission of the copyright owners.

A  catalogue  record  for  this  book  is  available  from  the  British  Library, 
 London, UK.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Names: Ambrose, Dawn C. P., editor.
Title: Leafy medicinal herbs : botany, chemistry, postharvest technology  
  and uses / editors: Dawn C.P. Ambrose, A. Manickavasagan, Ravindra  
  Naik.
Description: Boston, MA : CABI, [2016] | Includes bibliographical   
  references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016002562 (print) | LCCN 2016004050 (ebook) | ISBN 
  9781780645599 (hbk : alk. paper) | ISBN 9781780645605 (ePDF) | ISBN
  9781780647555 (ePub)
Subjects: LCSH: Herbs--Therapeutic use. | Medicinal plants.
Classification: LCC RM666.H33 L43 2016 (print) | LCC RM666.H33  
 
  615.8/8--dc23
LC record available at http://lccn.loc.gov/2016002562

(ebook) | DDC 

ISBN-13: 978 1 78064 559 9

Commissioning editor: Nicki Dennis/Rachael Russell
Editorial assistant: Emma McCann
Production editor: Lauren Povey

Typeset by SPi, Pondicherry, India.
Printed and bound in the UK by CPI Group (UK) Ltd, Croydon, CR0 4YY.

Contents

About the Editors 
Contributors 
Preface 
Introduction 

  1  Aloe Vera 

Ravindra Naik, J.S. Rutra Priya and R. Arul Mari

  2  Ashwagandha 

Paramadhas Sudha and Alagirisamy Reni

  3  Basil 

Darach Lupton, Muhammad Mumtaz Khan, Rashid Abdullah Al-Yahyai  
and Muhammad Asif Hanif

  4  Bay 

Hülya Çakmak, Seher Kumcuog˘lu and S¸ebnem Tavman

  5  Betel Vine 

S. Jacob K. Annamalai, S. Reetha Subashini, J.S. Rutra Priya and Ravindra Naik

  6  Celery 

Svein Øivind Solberg

  7  Centella 

Terrence Madhujith and Subajiny Sivakanthan

  8  Chester 

A.F. Alonge

  9  Coriander 

Maripillai Munusamy Pragalyaashree and Venkatachalam Thirupathi

10  Curry Leaf Plant 

Dawn C.P. Ambrose

 

vii

ix

xii

xiii

1

19

27

42

63

74

85

107

116

125

v

vi 

Contents 

11  Fenugreek 

Gopal Amuthaselvi and Dawn C.P. Ambrose

12  Lemongrass 

Salome Amarachi Chime and Ikechukwu V. Onyishi

13  Mint 

Maria do Carmo Ferreira and Aline de Holanda Rosanova

14  Moringa 

Anthonia O. Oluduro, Dawn C.P. Ambrose, Aregbesola Oladipupo  
Abiodun and Alice L. Daunty

15  Oregano 

K. Hüsnü Can Bas¸er and Nes¸et Arslan

16  Parsley 

Ghazi Daradkeh and Musthafa Mohamed Essa

17  Patchouli 

H.G. Ramya

18  Rosemary 

Milda E. Embuscado

19  Sage 

Ahmad Ghorbani

20  Senna 

Kuntal Das

21  Spinach 

Periyasamy Suganya and A. Sangamithra

22  Stevia 

Ramanathan Parimalavalli and S. Radhai Sri

23  Thyme 

Rashid Abdullah Al-Yahyai and Darach Lupton

Index 

133

139

149

163

170

189

198

209

224

237

246

260

268

277

About the Editors

Dawn C.P. Ambrose PhD is Principal Scientist at the Central Institute 
of  Agricultural   Engineering  (Indian  Council  of  Agricultural  Re-
search,  ICAR),  Regional  Centre,  Coimbatore,  India.  She  has  spe-
cialized in agricultural process engineering and obtained her PhD 
in that field at Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, India. Before 
joining ICAR in 1997, she had experience as an academician and 
also as a researcher in various other organizations. She has published 
four books, 13 book chapters, 30 research papers and 47 papers pre-
sented at conferences. She is a life member of many professional 
societies.

Annamalai Manickavasagan PhD, PEng (Canada) obtained a PhD 
(Biosystems Engineering) from the University of Manitoba, Canada. 
He is a licensed professional engineer (PEng) in the province of 
New Brunswick, Canada. After obtaining his PhD, he worked with 
McCain Foods Limited (Canada) as a Scientist. At present, he is 
working  as  an  Assistant  Professor  at  the  College  of  Agricultural 
and  Marine  Sciences,  Sultan  Qaboos  University,  Oman.  He  has 
published three books, eight book chapters and more than 60 sci-
entific papers in peer-reviewed journals and presented at international conferences. He has 
diverse research and management experience with academic institutions and industries in 
Canada, Malaysia, India and Oman.

 

vii

viii 

About the Editors 

Ravindra Naik PhD works as a Principal Scientist at the Central 
 Institute of Agricultural Engineering, (Indian Council of Agricul-
tural  Research,  ICAR),  Regional  Centre,  Coimbatore,  India,  and 
specializes in agricultural structure and process engineering. He 
obtained his PhD in 1998 from Tamil Nadu Agricultural Univer-
sity,  Coimbatore,  India  and  joined  the  ICAR  Directorate  of  Rice 
Research,  Hyderabad,  India,  in  1998.  His  major  areas  of  profes-
sional interest are in the postharvest technology of paddy, modi-
fied  atmosphere  storage  of  fruits  and  vegetables,  nutraceuticals, 
postharvest machinery for sugarcane and banana, and value add-
ition of horticultural crops, particularly fruits and vegetables. He 
has been involved in the patenting of six technologies, which are 
now at various stages of the patenting process. He has operated 
many externally funded projects and underwent training in the field of nutraceuticals at 
Virginia Tech, USA. He has also won many awards at national level. He is a member of many 
national  and  international  scientific  associations.  He  has  published  many  books,  book 
chapters,  extension bulletins, and articles in reputed national and international journals.

Contributors

Aregbesola Oladipupo Abiodun, Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Obafemi 

Awolowo University, Ile-Ife, 22005, Nigeria.

Rashid  Abdullah  Al-Yahyai,  Department  of  Crop  Sciences,  Sultan  Qaboos  University, 

PO Box 34, Al Khod 123, Muscat, Oman. E-mail: alyahyai@squ.edu.om

Akindele Folarin Alonge, Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering, University of Uyo, 

PMB 1017, Uyo, Akwa Ibom State, 52003, Nigeria. E-mail: akindelealonge@uniuyo.edu.ng

Dawn C.P. Ambrose, ICAR – Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering, Regional Centre, 

Coimbatore 641 007, Tamil Nadu, India. E-mail: dawncp@yahoo.com

Gopal  Amuthaselvi,  Krishi  Vigyan  Kendra,  Sirugamani,  Tiruchirappalli  639  115,  Tamil 

Nadu, India. E-mail: g.amuthaselvi@gmail.com

S.  Jacob  K.  Annamalai,  ICAR  –  Central  Institute  of  Agricultural  Engineering,  Regional 

Centre, Coimbatore 641 007, Tamil Nadu, India.

Nes¸et Arslan, Ankara University, Faculty of Agriculture, Department of Field Crops, 06110 

Ankara, Turkey.

R.  Arul  Mari,  Department  of  Food  and  Agricultural  Process  Engineering,  Agricultural 
 Engineering College and Research Institute, Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore 
641003, Tamil Nadu, India.

K. Hüsnü Can Bas¸er, Faculty of Pharmacy, Anadolu University, Eskisehir 26470, Turkey, 

Near East University, Nicosia, N. Cyprus. E-mail: khcbaser@gmail.com

Hülya Çakmak, Department of Food Engineering, Ege University, Bornova 35100, Izmir, 

Turkey. E-mail: hulya.cakmak@ege.edu.tr

Salome Amarachi Chime, Department of Pharmaceutical and Industrial Pharmacy, University 
of Nigeria, Nsukka 410001, Nigeria. E-mail: emmymarachi@yahoo.com; salome.chime@
unn.edu.ng

Ghazi Daradkeh, Department of Food Science and Nutrition, College of Agricultural and 
Marine Sciences (CAMS), Sultan Qaboos University, Muscat, Oman; Hamad Medical 
Corporation, Doha, Qatar.

Kuntal Das, Department of Pharmacognosy and Regulatory Affairs, Krupanidhi College of 
Pharmacy # 12/1, ChikkaBellandur, Carmelaram Post., VarthurHobli, Bangalore 560035, 
India. E-mail: drkkdsd@gmail.com

Alice L. Daunty, Mcrennet Foods, Anna Nagar East, Chennai 102, Tamil Nadu, India.

E-mail addresses are included only for corresponding authors.

 

ix

x 

Contributors 

Milda E. Embuscado, Senior Principal Scientist, Materials and Process Technology, McCormick 
& Company, Inc., 204 Wight Avenue, Hunt Valley, MD 21031-1501, USA. E-mail: milda_
embuscado@mccormick.com

Musthafa Mohamed Essa, Department of Food Science and Nutrition, College of Agricul-
tural and Marine Sciences (CAMS), Sultan Qaboos University, PO Box 34, Muscat, PIN 123, 
Oman. E-mail: drmdessa@squ.edu.om

Maria do Carmo Ferreira, Chemical Engineering Department, Federal University of São 
Carlos, Rodovia Washington Luís, Km 235, Zip Code 13565-905, São Carlos, SP, Brazil. 
E-mail: mariaf@ufscar.br

Ahmad Ghorbani, Pharmacological Research Center of Medicinal Plants, Medical School, 
Pardis  Campus,  Mashhad  University  of  Medical  Sciences,  Mashad  9177948564,  Iran. 
E-mail: ghorbania@mums.ac.ir

Muhammad Asif Hanif, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Agricul-

ture, Faisalabad 38040, Pakistan.

Seher Kumcuog˘ lu, Department of Food Engineering, Ege University, Bornova 35100, Izmir, 

Turkey.

Darach Lupton, Oman Botanic Garden, PO Box 808, Al-Khod 122, Muscat, Oman.
Terrence Madhujith, Department of Food Science and Technology, University of Peradeniya, 

Peradeniya 20400, Sri Lanka. E-mail: madujith@yahoo.com

Muhammad Mumtaz Khan, Department of Crop Sciences, College of Agricultural and Marine 

Sciences (CAMS), Sultan Qaboos University, PO Box 34, Al Khod 123, Muscat, Oman.

Ravindra  Naik,  ICAR  –  Central  Institute  of  Agricultural  Engineering,  Regional  Centre, 

 Coimbatore 641 007, Tamil Nadu, India. E-mail: naikravindra@gmail.com

Anthonia O. Oluduro, Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Obafemi Awolowo 

University, Ile-Ife 22005, Nigeria. E-mail: aoluduro2003@yahoo.co.uk

Ikechukwu V. Onyishi, Department of Pharmaceutical and Industrial Pharmacy, University 

of Nigeria, Nsukka 410001, Nigeria.

Ramanathan Parimalavalli, Department of Food Science and Nutrition, Periyar University, 

Salem 636 011, Tamil Nadu. E-mail: parimala1996@gmail.com

Maripillai  Munusamy  Pragalyaashree,  Department  of  Food  and  Agricultural  Process 
 Engineering, Agricultural Engineering College and Research Institute (AEC & RI), Tamil 
Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore 641003, India. E-mail: shreepragalyaa@gmail.
com

S. Radhai Sri, Department of Nutrition and Dietetics, PSG College of Arts and Science, 

 Coimbatore 641 014, Tamil Nadu, India.

H.G. Ramya, Processing and Food Engineering, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana, 

Punjab 141004, India. E-mail: ramyarinda@gmail.com

Alagirisamy Reni, Department of Food Processing and Preservation Technology, Faculty of 

Engineering, Avinashilingam University, Coimbatore 641 043, Tamil Nadu, India.

Aline de Holanda Rosanova, Chemical Engineering Program, Federal University of São Car-

los, Rodovia Washington Luís, Km 235, Zip Code 13565-905, São Carlos, SP, Brazil.

J.S.  Rutra  Priya,  ICAR  –  Central  Institute  of  Agricultural  Engineering,  Regional  Centre, 

 Coimbatore-641 007, Tamil Nadu, India.

A. Sangamithra, Department of Food Technology, Kongu Engineering College, Perundurai, 

638052 Erode, Tamil Nadu, India.

Subajiny Sivakanthan, Department of Agricultural Chemistry, Faculty of Agriculture, Uni-

versity of Jaffna, Sri Lanka.

Svein  Øivind  Solberg,  Nordic  Genetic  Resource  Center,  Smedjevägen  3,  230  53  Alnarp, 

Sweden. E-mail: svein.solberg63@gmail.com

S. Reetha Subashini, ICAR – Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering, Regional Centre, 

Coimbatore 641 007, Tamil Nadu, India.

 

Contributors 

xi

Paramadhas Sudha, Food Processing Research and Training Centre, Dryland Agricultural 
Research  Station,  Tamil  Nadu  Agricultural  University,  Chettinad  630  102,  Sivagangai 
District, Tamil Nadu, India. E-mail: sudha.raj2000@gmail.com

Periyasamy Suganya, Department of Food Processing and Preservation Technology, Fac-
ulty of Engineering, Avinashilingam Institute for Home Science and Higher Education for 
Women University, Coimbatore 641 108, Tamil Nadu, India. E-mail: suganya.abe@gmail.
com

S¸ebnem Tavman, Department of Food Engineering, Ege University, Bornova 35100, Izmir, 

Turkey.

Venkatachalam  Thirupathi,  Department  of  Food  and  Agricultural  Process  Engineering, 
Agricultural Engineering College and Research Institute (AEC & RI), Tamil Nadu Agricul-
tural University, Coimbatore 641 003, India.

Preface

Herbs are plants used since time immemorial for flavouring, food, medicine and perfumes. 
Leafy medicinal herbs are a good source of minerals, vitamins and antioxidants. They are 
presently considered to be safe alternatives to modern medicines owing to their healing 
properties and hence are gaining potential in domestic and international markets across the 
globe. Although medicinal and aromatic crops cover a broad spectrum of types, little atten-
tion has been focused on leafy medicinal herbs as such. This book is written in an attempt 
to unveil and compile information from various sources on leafy medicinal plants. The 
book discusses 23 different leafy medicinal plants with the purpose of highlighting their 
importance, and covers aspects ranging from the botany of these plants to their end uses. 
Each chapter focuses on the botany, chemistry and postharvest technology of an individual 
leafy medicinal herb, as well as on its general and pharmacological uses. The book will 
serve as a platform for researchers, students, farmers and industrialists in the area of leafy 
medicinal herbs.

Dawn C.P. Ambrose
Annamalai Manickavasagan
Ravindra Naik

xii 

Introduction

Herbs are any plant with leaves, seeds or flowers used for flavouring, food, medicine or 
perfume. The term ‘medicinal plants’ is used to describe plants (or plants from which prod-
ucts are obtained) that are used by human beings in protection against or treatment of ill-
nesses. The attraction of medicinal herbs has grown as a result of the demand created by 
consumer interest in these plants for culinary, medicinal and other anthropogenic applica-
tions. Herbal remedies are considered the oldest forms of healthcare known to humankind 
on this earth. Several hundred genera of plants are used in herbal remedies and in trad-
itional  or  folkloric  medicines  throughout  the  world.  It  has  been  reported  that  between 
40,000 and 50,000 species are known to be used in traditional and modern medicine sys-
tems  throughout  the  world.  The  medicinal  properties  of  many  plants  are  found  in  the 
leaves, which are used as alteratives, tonic diuretics and blood purifiers. Hence, leafy me-
dicinal herbs have found an important place in the medicinal and aromatic plant kingdom.
In recent years, there has been a growing focus on the importance of medicinal plants 
and traditional health systems in solving the healthcare problems of the world. Medicinal 
herbs are packed with nutrients such as vitamins, minerals, antioxidants, etc., that are es-
sential to humankind for healthy living. Besides their content of important nutrients, plants 
also  synthesize  secondary  metabolites,  for  example  alkaloids  and  volatiles,  that  have 
disease-preventive properties. Drug discovery from medicinal plants involves botanical, 
phytochemical, biological and molecular techniques in a multidimensional approach. Fur-
thermore, medicinal plants and their various products can be viewed as important com-
modity items for the sustainable economic development of a country. There is a need to 
produce quality raw materials for the promotion of these leafy medicinal herbs – raw ma-
terials that have a demand in terms of domestic and international markets worldwide. This 
could be achieved by various processing techniques, viz. drying, granulating, extraction, 
etc. Beside their traditional use as medicine, these plants are now industrially processed 
for various products used for pharmaceutical, food and perfumery and cosmetics applica-
tions. In this book, information has been compiled on the botany, chemistry, postharvest 
technology and uses of 23 leafy medicinal herbs.

 

xiii

1  Aloe Vera

Ravindra Naik1*, J.S. Rutra Priya1 and R. Arul Mari2

1ICAR – Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering, Regional Centre,  
Coimbatore, India; 2Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore, India

1.1  Botany

1.1.1 

Introduction

Aloe vera (Aloe vera (L.) Burm.f., syn. A. bar-
badensis Mill.), a traditional medicinal plant, 
is used in the food, pharmaceutical and cos-
metic industries. The word ‘aloe’ has its roots 
in  the  Arabic  word  ‘alloeh’,  which  means  
‘radiance’. The innermost part of the leaf is a 
clear, soft, moist and slippery tissue that con-
sists of large thin-walled parenchyma cells in 
which  water  is  held  in  the  form  of  viscous 
mucilage (Newton, 2004; Naik and Annama-
lai, 2013). Therefore, the thick fleshy leaves 
of  aloe  plants  contain  not  only  cell  wall 
carbohydrates such as cellulose and hemicel-
lulose, but also storage carbohydrates such as 
acetylated mannans (Ni et al., 2004).

Aloe  vera  is  an  industrial  crop  and  in 
the food industry it has been utilized for the 
preparation of health food drinks, beverages 
such  as  tea  and  milk,  and  ice  cream  and 
confectionery.  The  gel  from  aloe  vera  also 
finds application in the cosmetic and toilet-
ries industry for the preparation of creams, lo-
tions,  soaps,  shampoos  and  facial  cleansers. 
Aloe has antitumour and anti-tyrosine proper-
ties in addition to efficacy in healing wounds 

and  burns  and  in  the  treatment  of  gastric 
 ulcers.  The potential use of aloe vera prod-
ucts often involves some type of processing, 
such  as  heating,  dehydration  and  grinding 
(Chang et al., 2006).

Unfortunately, because of improper pro-
cessing  procedures,  aloe  products  can  con-
tain very little or virtually no active ingredi-
ents (Ramachandra and Rao, 2006; Naik and 
Annamalai,  2013).  So,  it  has  become  very 
important to evolve a better method of pres-
ervation  for  increasing  the  shelf  life  and 
maintaining the quality of aloe vera gel. This 
involves  proper  handling  and  treatment  of 
the aloe vera leaves before processing, proper 
processing to produce the gel and proper gel 
treatment and storage.

1.1.2  History/origin

Aloe  belongs  to  the  Liliaceae,  a  family  of 
perennial tropical plants of African origin. 
Species of aloe that have been used as folk 
medicine  include  Curaçao  aloe  (A.  vera), 
Cape aloe (A. ferox Mill.) and Socotra aloe 
(A.  perryi  Baker).  The  use  of  aloe  vera  as 
folk medicine dates to antiquity, and there 
is an early account from around 1500 bc.

*Corresponding author, e-mail: naikravindra@gmail.com

© CAB International 2016. Leafy Medicinal Herbs: Botany, Chemistry,  
Postharvest Technology and Uses (eds D.C.P. Ambrose et al.) 

1

2 

R. Naik et al. 

The name aloe is from the Greek word 
and refers to the bitter juice from the leaves 
of these plants. It is probably derived from 
the earlier Arabic word alloeh or the Hebrew 
word allal, both meaning shining bitter sub-
stance  (Sung,  2006).  In  biblical  times,  the 
Egyptians hailed aloe vera as the plant of im-
mortality. The Chinese called it their elixir 
of youth. Aloe vera has many common names 
and  is  often  referred  to  as  the  burn  plant, 
first aid plant or medicine plant, as well as 
being called true aloe or plain aloe vera. It is 
considered  to  be  a  native  plant  of  Somalia 
with a history dating back to the 4th century 
bc (Sung, 2006).

1.1.3  Location

Although aloe is reported to have originated 
in tropical Africa, it is now cultivated in the 
warm  climatic  areas  of  Asia,  Europe  and 
America (Coats, 1979). The majority of species 
occur  in  southern  Africa  and  on  the  eastern 
side of that continent. Many other species are 
found on the Arabian Peninsula and in Mada-
gascar. The Arabian species have strong rela-
tionships with the species of north-east Africa. 
Madagascan species appear not to be closely 
related to those of mainland Africa and so ac-
tive speciation seems to have occurred since 
the separation of these two land masses.

There are over 350 species of aloe grown 
the world over. However, only two species are 
grown  commercially:  A.  vera  (Fig.  1.1)  and  
A.  arborescens  Mill.  There  are  at  least  two 
other species that have medicinal properties, 
namely A. perryi and A. ferox. Most aloe vera 
plants are non-toxic, but a few are extremely 
poisonous  and  contain  a  hemlock-like  sub-
stance  (Atherton,  1998).  A.  variegata  L.  is  a 
dwarf species that is only a few centimetres in 
diameter and is a popular houseplant.

1.1.4  Morphology

Fig. 1.1.  An aloe vera plantation.

mature.  The  plant  matures  when  it  is  about 
4 years old and has a lifespan of about 12 years. 
The leaves are up to 0.5 m long and 8–10 cm 
across  at  the  base,  tapering  to  a  point,  with 
saw-like  teeth  along  their  margins.  In  trans-
verse section, the plant shows a slightly con-
cave appearance on the adaxial surface and 
a distinctly convex appearance on the lower 
abaxial surface (Grindlay and Reynolds, 1986; 
Naik  and  Annamalai,  2013).  The  leaves  are 
usually  covered  with  thick  cuticle  which  is 
differentiated  into  an  upper  chlorenchyma 
and a lower parenchyma. As the rosette ma-
tures,  successive  leaves  have  fewer  whitish 
spots and become grey to greenish in colour 
(Eshun and He, 2004).

The  plant  can  be  harvested  every  6–8 
weeks  by  removing  3–4  leaves  per  plant. 
Red, yellow, purple or pale striped flowers are 
 present for most of the year growing in a long 
raceme  at  the  top  of  the  flower  stalk  which 
 originates from the centre of the basal leaves. 
The flower stalk grows up to 1.5 m in height. 
The fruit is a triangular capsule containing nu-
merous seeds (Grindlay and Reynolds, 1986).

Aloe vera is a spiky cactus-like xerophyte. It is 
a clump-forming perennial plant with a thick 
fibrous  root  and  large  basal  leaves,  usually 
12–16 per plant. It weighs up to 1.5 kg when 

Aloe vera leaf structural composition

The aloe vera leaf can be divided into two major 
parts, namely the outer green rind, including 

 

Aloe Vera 

3

the vascular bundles, and the inner colour-
less  parenchyma  containing  the  aloe  gel. 
Different  terms  that  are  used  interchange-
ably  include  inner  pulp,  mucilage  tissue, 
mucilaginous gel, mucilaginous jelly, inner 
gel and leaf parenchyma tissue. Technically, 
the term ‘pulp’ or ‘parenchyma tissue’ refers 
to the intact fleshy inner part of the leaf in-
cluding the cell walls and organelles, while 
‘gel’ or ‘mucilage’ refers to the viscous clear 
liquid within the parenchyma cells (Ni et al., 
2004).  The  three  structural  components  of 
the aloe vera pulp are the cell walls, the degen-
erated organelles and viscous liquid contained 
within the cells.

The  raw  pulp  of  aloe  vera  is  approxi-
mately 98.5% water, while the mucilage or 
gel  is  about  99.5%  water  (Eshun  and  He, 
2004).  The  whole  plant  contains  99–99.5% 
water,  and  the  remaining  0.5–1.5%  solid 
 material  consists  of  a  range  of  compounds, 
including  water-soluble  and  fat-soluble 
vitamins,  minerals,  enzymes,  polysacchar-
ides, phenolic compounds and organic acids 
(Boudreau and Beland, 2006). It has been hy-
pothesized that this heterogeneous compos-
ition of the aloe vera pulp may contribute to 
the diverse pharmacological and therapeutic 

activities that have been observed for aloe gel 
products (Talmadge et al., 2004).

1.2  Chemistry

1.2.1  Chemical composition

Aloe vera’s parenchyma tissue or pulp is re-
ported to contain proteins, lipids, amino acids, 
vitamins, enzymes, inorganic compounds and 
small organic compounds in addition to the 
different carbohydrates. Table 1.1 summarizes 
the various chemical and enzymatic compos-
ition of aloe vera leaf pulps and exudates.

1.2.2  Phytochemistry

There are as many as 200 different types of 
molecules  in  aloe  vera  (Davis,  1997).  The 
leaf  gel  has  been  reported  as  containing  
98–99.5% water (Eshun and He, 2004; Bozzi 
et al., 2007). The total solid content of aloe 
vera gel is 0.66% and soluble solids are 0.56%, 
with some seasonal fluctuation. Carbohydrates 
are derived from the mucilage layer of the 

Table 1.1.  Chemical and enzymatic composition of Aloe vera leaf pulp and exudates. From Raksha et al. 
(2014).

Anthraquinone

Aloe emodin, aloectic acid, anthranol, aloin A and B (or collectively known as 

Carbohydrate

Pure mannan, acetylated mannan, acetylated glucomannan, glucogalacto-

barbaloin), isobarbaloin, emodin and ester of cinnamic acid

Enzymes

mannan, galatan, galactogalacturan, arabinogalactan, galactoglucoarabino-
mannan, pectic substance, xylan, cellulose, chromones, isoaloeresin- D, 
isoarabaichromone and neoaloesin A

Phosphatase, amylase, carboxypeptidase, catalase, cyclooxidase, cyclooxy-

genase, lipase, oxidase, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase and superoxide 
dismutase

Inorganic compounds

Calcium, chlorine, chromium, copper, iron, magnesium, manganese, 

Non-essential and 

essential amino acids
Organic compounds and 

potassium, phosphorous, sodium and zinc

Hydroxyproline, isoleucine, leucine, lysine, methionine, phenylalanine, proline, 

threonine, tyrosine and valine

Arachidonic acid, linolenic acid, triglycerides, triterpenoids, gibberellins, lignin, 

lipids
Proteins
Saccharides
Sterols
Vitamins

potassium sorbate, salicylic acid and uric acid

Lectins and lectin-like substances
Mannose, glucose, rhamnose and aldopentose
Campesterol, cholesterol and b-sitosterol
B1, B2, B6 ,C, b-carotene, choline, folic acid, a-tocopherol

4 

R. Naik et al. 

plant under the rind surrounding the inner 
parenchyma  or  gel.  They  comprise  both 
monosaccharides and polysaccharides. Bit-
ter aloe (the dried yellow exudates), which 
consists  of  free  anthraquinones  and  their 
derivatives,  exerts  powerful  purgative  ef-
fects when ingested in large amounts, while 
at low concentrations, it appears to aid ab-
sorption from the gut and is a potent anti-
microbial  and  powerful  analgesic  agent 
(Saccu et al., 2001).

About  20  out  of  22  amino  acids  and 
seven of the eight essential amino acids re-
quired by the human body are also present 
in  aloe  vera  gel.  Aloe  vera  juice  has  been 
evaluated  for  its  antioxidant  potential  and 
the  study  showed  significant  presence  of 
antioxidant in aloe extracts. It is suggested 
that the growth stage of the aloe plant plays 
a vital role in the composition and antioxi-
dant activity of its extracts (Hu et al., 2003). 
Aloe vera juice also has antibacterial prop-
erties against Gram-positive bacteria (Alemdar 
and Agaoglu, 2009). Antiviral and antifun-
gal properties of aloe vera, as well as many 
other medicinal properties, have also been 
described (Anonymous, 2008).

The leaves of A. ferox contain various 
phenolic  secondary  metabolites,  including 
the anthrone-C-glycoside homonataloin and 
three  isomers  of  aloeresin  –  A,  B  and  C 
(Speranza et al., 2005). The amounts of ho-
monataloin  in  exudates  from  cut  leaves  of 
various  Aloe  spp.  were  reported  by  Beau-
mont et al. (1984).

1.3  Postharvest Technology

1.3.1  Commercial processing of aloe gel

The commercial processing of aloe vera gel 
can be broken down into three basic steps, 
viz. preliminary processing, intermediate pro-
cessing and final processing (see Fig. 1.2). In 
preliminary processing, the leaves are har-
vested and scrubbed, the rind is removed to 
yield  the  gel  fillet,  the  fillets  are  lightly 
ground and the cellulosic pulp is removed. 
Next,  the  crude  gel  is  subjected  to  inter-
mediate  processing  to  kill  bacteria  and,  if 

desired,  to  remove  anthraquinones.  Inter-
mediate  processing  yields  the  materials 
that,  with  the  addition  of  preservatives, 
comprise the basic gel products. Final pro-
cessing  yields  preserved  liquid  products, 
concentrates  and  powders.  We  acknow-
ledge  the  paper  by  Ramachandra  and  Rao 
(2008) as a major source of the information 
on these steps that is presented below.

Preliminary processing

Preliminary  processing  begins  with  wash-
ing the freshly harvested leaves and sanitiz-
ing the outer surface and proceeds through 
removal of the outer rind and expression of 
the gel fillet, either manually or by machine 
to produce the gel. Ideally, leaves should be 
harvested and washed within 2–4 h. In con-
trolled studies it was found that if 24 h elapse 
between harvesting and washing, some bio-
logical  activity  of  the  gel  is  lost.  Delaying 
washing  after  harvesting  while  preserving 
freshness requires meticulous planning and 
attention.  Leaves  must  not  be  bruised  and 
refrigeration should be immediate.

filleting  and  depulping.  The  next  step  in 
processing is production of the gel fillet. Fil-
leting  is  accomplished  by  one  of  two 
methods: manual removal of the rind with a 
knife or filleting by machine. In either case, 
the tip of the leaf is first removed, the butt is 
trimmed  off  and  the  sides  of  the  leaf  are 
trimmed.  Tip  removal  is  usually  accom-
plished  using  a  knife  at  the  culling  table. 
The butt can either be trimmed with a knife 
at the culling table or by wire at the filleting 
table. Manual filleting generally takes place 
on a stainless steel table approximately 1 m 
wide with raised edges approximately 10 cm 
high. The flow of cleaned leaves is generally 
at  the  head  of  the  table  where  the  rind  is 
 removed  and  discarded  to  the  side.  Fillets 
with exuded pseudoplastic gel are removed 
from the foot of the table. Trimming and fil-
leting tables are often equipped with stain-
less  steel  wire,  set  up  on  pegs  about  1  cm 
above the surface. These provide a cutting 
edge for removal of the butt and trimming of 
the sides. After trimming of the tip, butt and 
sides,  the  upper  and  lower  surfaces  of  the 

 

Aloe Vera 

5

Aloe vera leaves

Washing

↓

↓

(200 ppm hypochlorite wash and 20 ppm hypochlorite rinse)

Culling and trimming

(Hand filleting or machine filleting)

↓

Gel fillets

↓

Grinding and pulp extraction

↓

Pulp and crude aloe gel

↓

Pasteurization

(Batch pasteurization or HTST/UHT or membrane filtration)

↓

Pasteurized aloe gel

Batch-activated carbon absorption and filtration or activated carbon column

↓

Thin film vacuum evaporation or membrane filtration

↓

↓

Concentrated aloe

↓

Freeze-drying

↓

Freeze-dried aloe powder 

Addition of 50% maltodextrin

↓

Spray-drying

Spray-dried aloe powder with maltodextrin

↓

Fig. 1.2.  Steps in the commercial processing of aloe gel. Key: HTST, high-temperature/short-time; UHT, 
ultra-high-temperature.

leaf are removed. The rind on the flat side of 
the leaf is then often removed with a knife, 
discarding the rind. The gel is then scraped 
or  scooped  with  the  knife  away  from  the 
rind  on  the  rounder  side  of  the  leaf.  The 
rinds are discarded to the side and the gel 
fillet passed down the table.

The  removing  of  aloe  vera  gel  is  done 
manually  by  using  a  sharp  knife  as  in  the 
hand-filleting method. Mechanical methods 
such as whole leaf processing method (see 
Section 1.3.2) or passing through the crush-
ing  roller  method  are  also  adopted  for  the 
extraction  of  aloe  vera  gel.  In  the  hand- 
filleting  method  the  worker  has  to  operate 
in  an  uncomfortable  posture  and  the  time 
taken for the process is quite long. Also, be-
cause  aloe  vera  gel  is  slippery  in  nature, 
there are chances of damage to the operator’s 
hand by the sharp knife that is used. In the 

mechanical  methods,  the  unwanted  con-
stituents also get mixed with the extracted 
gel,  thus  making  it  unsuitable  for  human 
consumption.  The  extracted  gel  has  to  be 
treated  with  neutralizing  chemicals  and 
passed  through  a  series  of  filters  before  it 
becomes fit for human consumption.

A continuous feed aloe vera whole gel 
extraction unit has been developed (Fig. 1.3), 
that peels off both top and bottom rinds in a 
single  pass  using  stainless  steel  blades. 
There is a set of stainless steel rods which 
are provided at the gel outlet which allows 
the top rind layer of the leaves and the gel to 
be separated. The whole gel is directly col-
lected in a food grade tray which is partially 
filled with clean water. The top and the bot-
tom layers of the leaves are collected separ-
ately. The equipment consists of a set of two 
pressure rollers on the top and a set of two 

6 

R. Naik et al. 

5

4

11

3

6

7

1

2

9

10

8

1.   Outer frame
2.   Castor wheel
3.   Continuous feed conveyor
4.   Pressure spring
5.   Sliding bearing
6.   Cutting blade
7.    Whole gel diversion rod
8.   Starter
9.   Motor (1hp, 3 phase)
10.   Drive mechanism
11.   Top roller assembly

Fig. 1.3.  An isometric view of aloe vera gel extraction equipment.

rollers  at  the  bottom.  When  the  aloe  vera 
leaf is fed between rollers, they flatten it and 
make it devoid of curvature. The bottom set 
of pressure rollers can be rotated manually 
by means of a handle or by means of a motor 
through gear transmission mechanism. Slid-
ing  bearing  arrangements  are  provided  to 
adjust  the  gap  between  the  two  sets  of 
rollers based on the average thickness of the 
aloe vera leaf. Pressure springs are provided 
between the top and bottom set of rollers for 
fine  adjustment  of  the  gap  between  the 

rollers  to  match  the  curvature  of  the  leaf. 
Two blades made of high carbon steel, one 
each,  just  above  the  bottom  set  of  rollers 
and just below the top set of rollers, are pro-
vided.  The  outer  rind  at  the  bottom  of  the 
aloe vera leaf is peeled as the leaf moves for-
ward between the rollers. The upper blade 
is  fixed  on  the  spring-loaded  top  roller,  so 
that the blade is positioned just below the 
top  layer  of  the  leaf.  Peeling  of  the  upper 
rind of the aloe vera leaf takes place simul-
taneously with that of the bottom rind as the 

 

Aloe Vera 

7

leaf  is  moved  forward  by  means  of  a  con-
veyer belt (Anonymous, 2011).

The  next  and  last  step  in  preliminary 
processing involves removing the cellulosic 
fibres  from  the  gel  fillet.  This  is  accom-
plished by very coarsely chopping the fillet 
with  an  industrial-grade  pulverizing  unit. 
The  coarsely  chopped  fillet  is  then  passed 
through a depulper. Particles that are small-
er than 200 μm in diameter will readily pass 
through  the  final  screen  of  the  depulper. 
The removal of the fibre yields the crude gel 
product.

Intermediate processing

destruction of bacteria and fungi.  Batch pas-
teurization  in  unsealed  kettles  is  the  trad-
itional method for reducing bacterial num-
bers. Usually, a solution of aloe vera gel is 
fed into a steam-jacketed, electrically heated 
or  gas-fired  kettle  and  the  temperature 
raised  to  65°C.  Attaining  this  temperature 
can  take  from  15  to  60  min  depending  on 
the equipment used in the processing facil-
ity. In standard pasteurization, the material 
is  then  held  at  65°C  for  15  min.  Owing  to 
the limitations of the above methods, larger 
and more modern processing plants are em-
ploying high-temperature/short-time (HTST) 
pasteurization.  This  is  done  in  sealed  but 
non-pressurized systems that employ a ser-
ies of heat exchangers to rapidly (within se-
conds) raise and then lower the temperature 
of  the  liquids.  In  the  regeneration  cycle, 
product entering the HTST unit is initially 
heated in the first stage of the exchanger by 
product  leaving  the  HTST.  It  then  passes 
through a heater section where its tempera-
ture  is  raised  to  90–95°C,  and  afterwards 
proceeds  into  a  set  of  holding  coils  where 
pasteurization  occurs.  The  pasteurized 
product then re-enters the regenerating heat 
exchanger where it is used to raise the tem-
perature  of  the  incoming  raw  gel  to  about 
50–60°C  while  its  own  temperature  de-
creases  to  about  35–45°C.  A  final  heat  ex-
changer cools the leaving gel to the desired 
temperature with chilled glycol or water.

The processes described above yield a very 
slightly  yellow  to  almost  water–white  (ap-
proaching colourless) liquid. This material, 

usually  with  added  preservatives,  is  mar-
keted  as  ‘1:1  Aloe  Vera  Gel’  (IASC,  2004). 
Ideally,  when  mesophyll  contamination  is 
low, pasteurization does not affect the col-
our of aloe gel and pasteurized aloe vera gel 
is commonly marketed without adsorption 
on  to  activated  charcoal.  This  material  is 
called ‘non-decolorized’ because it has not 
been  treated  (decolorized)  with  activated 
carbon. The most commonly employed pre-
servatives  to  prevent  bacterial  growth  are 
benzoate  (up  to  0.1%),  and  sulfite  (up  to 
0.1%  for  cosmetics).  Sorbate  in  concentra-
tions up to 0.1% is used to retard the growth 
of fungi. Antioxidants are also added in an 
attempt  to  prevent  colour  change.  Chief 
among  these  are  ascorbate  (up  to  0.1%).  It 
should be noted that sulfite also has antioxi-
dant  properties.  Citrate  (up  to  0.2%),  or 
other  food-approved  acids,  are  usually 
added  as  a  buffer  to  keep  the  pH  in  the 
proper  range  of  less  than  4.5;  citrate  itself 
has a mild bacteriostatic effect.

decolorization  with  activated  charcoal.  Most 
activated  charcoal  adsorption  is  done  in  a 
batch process fashion. Pasteurized aloe vera 
gel is run into a mixing tank while activated 
charcoal (0.05–2% w/v) is added with mix-
ing. After 15–60 min, the activated charcoal 
is  removed  by  filtration.  Theoretically,  the 
temperature  at  which  adsorption  occurs  is 
critical. However, in most aloe vera industry 
applications, the temperature of adsorption 
is determined by convenience. If adsorption 
is conducted as part of batch pasteurization, 
then  activated  charcoal  is  added  immedi-
ately after the pasteurization holding period 
is  finished  and  temperature  reduction  be-
gins.  Filtration  is  performed  when  the  de-
sired final temperature is attained. Thus, ad-
sorption may begin at a temperature of 65°C 
and continue for 1 h until a temperature of 
45°C is reached. At this point, the product is 
filtered and finished.

There are four sets of parameters to be 
optimized  for  successful  adsorption:  (i) 
time,  in  the  range  of  15–60  min;  (ii)  tem-
perature:  in  the  range  of  40–60°C;  (iii) 
amount of colour change potential; and (iv) 
amount  (0.05–2%  w/v)  and  type  of  acti-
vated carbon employed. Once adsorption is 

8 

R. Naik et al. 

finished, the activated charcoal must be re-
moved. This is generally done with a filter 
press using paper with a nominal pore size 
of  20  μm,  rather  than  by  sedimentation  or 
centrifugation. The most active carbon sys-
tems generally have a small particle size in 
order  to  maximize  surface  area.  When  the 
particle size is significantly below 50 μm, it 
is advisable to employ 0.05–0.5% of a clari-
fying agent such as Celite Filteraide (diato-
mateous earth) to minimize filter clogging.

Final processing – concentration 

and drying

concentration of aloe vera gel.  Pasteurized 
aloe vera gel (Product M) and pasteurized, 
decolorized aloe ‘gel’ are 99% water. An in-
dustrial thin film vacuum evaporation sys-
tem  with 
temperatures  maintained  at 
35–45°C  and  a  throughput  usually  in  the 
range of several hundred litres per hour re-
sults in ‘concentrated aloe’. Pressure filtra-
tion across membranes can also be used.

freeze-dried or lyophilized aloe vera.  Freeze- 
drying is certainly the most elegant method 
for stabilizing aloe vera materials. Material 
with a solids content of 5–20 g/dl is poured 
into  stainless  steel  trays  and  frozen  to  low 
temperature (below −40°C). The frozen ma-
terial is then put under a high vacuum (50 
mTorr = 6.67 Pa). Water gradually sublimes 
from  the  frozen  material  as  it  is  gradually 
heated. The rate at which the trays are heated 
controls  the  rate  at  which  water  sublimes 
from the frozen blocks and thus the degree of 
vacuum is controlled. After a cycle time of 
36–72 h, most of the water has been removed, 
a  high  vacuum  is  sustained  (<25  mTorr  = 
<3.34 Pa), and the temperature of product re-
mains  at  ambient  (30°C).  Freeze-drying  is 
 potentially the method of choice for the pro-
duction of the finest quality finished product 
to be used in the manufacture of cosmetics.

spray-dried aloe vera gel.  Spray-drying is poten-
tially an excellent method of concentrating 
and  preserving  aloe  vera  extracts.  Spray- 
drying can be a two-step process. First, the aloe 
concentrate is mixed with a matrix and then 
sprayed into a stream of hot air, which dries 

the mix of matrix and aloe. The process be-
gins when matrix is added to the aloe liquid 
concentrate. Matrix, either the disaccharide, 
lactose,  or  maltodextrin,  a  higher  molecular 
weight saccharide, is used to provide a rapidly 
forming, readily dried nucleus around which 
the aloe can accrete and dry. The matrix-like 
maltodextrin is added at a ratio of about 1 g 
matrix/1  g  aloe  solids.  The  fluid  is  then 
sprayed in a downward direction out of a ser-
ies of nozzles as a fine mist. The spray tower, 
which  is  an  enclosed  space,  has  a  positive 
flow  of  air  heated  to  50–90°C.  The  dried 
product, which consists of tiny granules, falls 
into a conical collector from which it is con-
tinuously removed.

1.3.2  Processing of aloe vera leaves

The three basic methods of processing aloe 
vera leaves are the traditional hand-filleted 
processing, whole leaf processing and total 
processing.

Traditional hand-filleted aloe vera

In  order  to  avoid  contamination  of  the  in-
ternal  fillet  with  the  yellow  sap,  the  trad-
itional hand-filleting method of processing 
aloe vera leaves is adopted. In this method, 
the lower 25 mm of the leaf base (the white 
part attached to the large rosette stem of the 
plant), the tapering point (25–50 mm) of the 
leaf top and the short, sharp spines located 
along the leaf margins are removed with a 
sharp  knife.  The  knife  is  then  introduced 
into  the  mucilage  layer  below  the  green 
rind, avoiding the vascular bundles, and the 
top  rind  is  removed.  The  bottom  rind  is 
similarly  removed,  and  the  rind  parts,  to 
which a significant amount of mucilage re-
mains attached, are discarded.

The mucilage (gel) layer is accumulated 
on the top of the filleting table, and can later 
be  used  in  total  aloe  vera  processing  (see 
last part of this section). This layer is of crit-
ical concern because the highest concentra-
tion of potentially beneficial aloe constitu-
ents  are  found  in  the  mucilage,  which 
represents  the  constituents  synthesized  by 
the  vascular  bundle  cells  empowered  by 

 

Aloe Vera 

9

energy developed in the green (chlorophyll- 
containing) rind cells through sun-induced 
photosynthesis.

Subsequent to their synthesis, the ma-
terials of the mucilage layer are distributed 
to  the  storage  cells  (cellulose-reinforced 
hexagons) of the fillet, a process that is ac-
companied  by  dilution  owing  to  the  large 
amount  of  water  (the  major  fillet  constitu-
ent), which is stored in the fillet cells (the 
fillet consists of more than 99% water). The 
fillet itself is now further washed to ensure 
that there is no possibility of bacterial con-
tamination,  after  which  it  is  put  into  the 
pulper. The pulper refrigerates the juice for 
optimum conversion when the holding tank 
is full; it is then left for 24 h to decant.

The way that the inner gel is extracted 
from  the  leaf  is  very  important.  The  latex 
portion  of  the  leaf  is  located  between  the 
rind and the inner gel. The gel should be re-
moved from the leaf without disrupting this 
area so that little or no latex (aloin) gets into 
the gel. If latex does get into the gel, it makes 
the gel very bitter. This taste can be distin-
guished from the vegetable taste of the inner 
gel with very little experience. If the gel is 
extracted  by  mechanical  methods,  then 
there is the possibility that the latex can mix 
with the inner gel, resulting in a loss of pur-
ity. By hand-filleting the leaf, it is possible to 
cleanly separate the gel from the rind. The 
gel is then ground to a liquid and the pulp is 
removed. The hand-filleting method is very 
labour  intensive,  and  because  of  this,  ma-
chines have been designed and used that at-
tempt  to  simulate  the  hand-filleted  tech-
nique; however, in general, the product then 
contains  higher  amounts  of  anthraquinone 
laxatives  than  are  obtained  using  the  trad-
itional hand-filleting approach.

Whole leaf aloe vera processing

This  whole  leaf  process  employed  in  the 
making of aloe vera juice allows the cellulose 
(skin) to be dissolved, as well as measurable 
amounts of aloin to be removed. This total 
procedure is done entirely by a cold process 
treatment.  Maximum  efficiency  is  thus  as-
sured, resulting in a product that is rich in 
polysaccharides.

In this process, the base and tip of the 
leaf are removed and then the leaf is cut into 
sections and ground into a particulate slurry. 
The  method  for  producing  whole  leaf  aloe 
vera  begins  by  placing  the  whole  leaf  in  a 
grinding unit that pulverizes the entire leaf 
into a soup-like structure (see Fig. 1.4). The 
material is then treated with special chem-
ical products that break down the hexagonal 
structure of the fillet, releasing the constitu-
ents. The rind particles are removed using a 
series of coarse and screening filters, or pas-
sage through a juice press, and the expressed 
juice is then passed through various filtering 
columns  which  remove  the  undesirable 
laxative agents. This liquid is then pumped 
into large, stainless steel holding tanks that 
have been thoroughly cleaned and sanitized.
Once a holding tank is filled, it is sent to 
a depulping extractor. This machine removes 
the large pieces of pulp and leaves that were 
generated  by  the  initial  grinding  process. 
The second phase of processing consists of 
passing the aloe liquid through a series of fil-
ters that remove the aloin and aloe emodin 
(bitter-tasting,  harsh  laxatives),  as  well  as 
any microscopic traces of leaves and/or other 
particles. The filter press is used during this 
phase.  The  press  is  attached  to  the  storage 
tank  containing  the  pre-filtered  aloe  liquid, 
and its carbon-coated plates absorb the aloin 
and  aloe  emodin  that  are  by-products  of 
grinding  the  whole  leaf.  The  aloe  liquid  is 
continually  passed  through  the  filter  press 
until 99% of the aloin and aloe emodin are 
removed,  and  the  filtered  product  is  then 
placed in a second holding tank.

Total aloe vera processing

In  total  aloe  vera  processing,  the  aloe  vera 
leaves are hand-filleted by the traditional, old 
fashioned, labour-intensive method described 
above. Then the green rinds and the mucilage 
layer  from  the  table  top  are  processed  by  a 
newly  developed  proprietary  methodology. 
A combination of the products produced by 
these two procedures produces an aloe vera 
product  called  ‘Total  Process  Aloe’,  which 
contains  a  high  concentration  of  desirable 
constituents, and is virtually free from undesir-
able laxative anthraquinones.

10 

R. Naik et al. 

Cleaning

(High-pressure sprayers and scrub brushing)

↓

↓

Base and tip removed

↓

Leaf cut into sections

↓

Ground into slurry

↓

Chemical treatment

Juice press (rind particles removed)

↓

Filter press (5 m filter paper)

↓

(Carbon-coated plates absorb aloin and aloe emodin)

↓

Series of filters

Removal of aloin and aloe emodin, sand and other particles 

↓

↓

Final purification

↓

Aloe vera juice

↓

Pasteurization

↓

Flash cooling

Flavours and sugar added 

↓

↓

Preservatives added

↓

Packing

Fig. 1.4.  Process flow diagram for whole leaf aloe vera processing.

The traditional hand-fillet methodology, 
coupled  with  the  newly  developed  propri-
etary handling of the waste (green rinds and 
table  top  mucilage)  from  the  traditional 
method, and a geographical area where aloe 
plants thrive, have been combined to achieve 
the  superior  quality  of  Total  Process  Aloe. 
Total  Process  Aloe  contains  considerably 
higher  concentrations  of  total  solids,  cal-
cium, magnesium and malic acid, the major 
parameters of quality that are utilized and re-
commended  by  the  International  Aloe  Sci-
ence Council (IASE) for certification.

1.3.3  Gel stabilization technique

Aloe  vera  gel  is  the  mucilaginous  jelly  ob-
tained from the parenchyma cells of the aloe 

vera plant. When exposed to air, the gel rap-
idly oxidizes, decomposes and loses much of 
its biological activity. Gel stabilization can be 
carried out either by cold processing or heat 
treatment.  Regardless  of  the  relative  quality 
of  the  plant,  the  best  results  are  obtained 
when leaves are processed immediately after 
harvesting. This is because derivative decom-
position of the gel matrix begins as a result of 
natural  enzymatic  reactions,  as  well  as  the 
growth of bacteria, in the presence of oxygen.
In  the  cold  processing  technique,  the 
entire  processing  steps  are  accomplished 
without the application of heat. Coats (1979) 
described  the  use  of  enzymes  such  as  glu-
cose oxidases and catalase. Other steriliza-
tion  steps  reported  in  cold  processing  in-
clude  exposing  the  gel  to  ultraviolet  light, 
followed by microfiltration.

 

Aloe Vera 

11

In heat treatment processing, steriliza-
tion is achieved by subjecting the aloe vera 
liquid  obtained  from  the  activated  carbon 
treatment to pasteurization at high tempera-
ture.  Aloecorp  (http://www.aloecorp.com) 
has  reported  that  the  biological  activity  of 
aloe  vera  gel  remains  essentially  intact 
when the gel is heated at 65°C for periods 
less  than  15  min.  Extended  periods  or 
higher temperatures have resulted in greatly 
reduced biological activity. However, it has 
been suggested that the best method of pas-
teurization is HTST, followed by flash cool-
ing to 5°C or below.

In both of these processing techniques, 
stabilization  can  be  achieved  by  the  add-
ition  of  preservatives  and  other  additives. 
The  use  and  efficacy  of  sodium  benzoate, 
potassium sorbate, citric acid and vitamin E 
have been reported (Chang et al., 2006).

Reception of raw material (aloe vera leaves)

↓

Washing operation

↓

Filleting operation

↓

Grinding/homogenization

↓

Enzyme addition

↓

Filtration

↓

Unpasteurized juice

Addition of vitamin C and citric acid

↓

↓

Deaeration

↓

Pasteurization

↓

Flash cooling

↓

Packaging

↓

Storage

1.3.4  Major unit operations in processing 

aloe vera leaf gel

Reception of raw materials

After harvesting, aloe vera leaves are prefer-
ably  transported  at  reduced  temperature 
from the field to the processing place. The 
leaves should be sound, undamaged, mould/ 
rot free and mature (3–4 years old) in order 
to keep all the active ingredients at full con-
centration  (Lawless  and  Allan,  2000).  One 
important factor that must be considered is 
the  handling/treatment  of  the  leaves  after 
harvesting  because  the  decomposition  of 
the matrix occurs on cutting as a result of 
natural enzymatic reactions and the activ-
ity of bacteria that are normally present on 
the leaves. This derivative process can ad-
versely  affect  the  quality  of  the  end  prod-
uct. Therefore, there is a need to carefully 
work  towards  refrigerating  the  freshly  re-
moved  leaves  within  4–6  h  or  getting  the 
raw  material  directly  into  the  production 
line (Fig. 1.5).

Filleting operation

The  loss  of  biological  activity  appears  to 
be the result of enzymatic activity after the 

Fig. 1.5.  Processing flow diagram for the production 
of single-strength aloe vera gel juice.

aloe  vera  leaf  has  been  removed  from  the 
plant,  and  it  has  been  demonstrated  that 
once  extracted  from  the  leaf,  aloe  gel  has 
greater stability than the gel left in the leaf. 
In order to avoid the decomposition of the 
biological  activity  in  the  leaf,  the  filleting 
operation must be completed within 36 h of 
harvesting (Robert, 1997). Another import-
ant  factor,  which  leads  to  non-enzymatic 
browning of the aloe gel product is the pres-
ence of anthraquinone (Zhang et al., 2002).

Grinding/homogenization

The major steps in the production process 
of aloe vera gel include crushing or grind-
ing.  The  aloe  gel  fillets  should  be  crushed 
and  homogenized  using  a  commercial 
high-speed tissue crusher at room tempera-
ture (25°C).

Due  to  the  enzymatic  browning  reac-
tion, the longer the crushing/grinding time, 
the greater the browning index of aloe vera 
gel juice (Liu et al., 2001). Therefore, the gel 
crushing or grinding should be shortened to 
within  10–20  min  in  order  to  avoid  the 
browning reaction.

12 

R. Naik et al. 

Addition of pectolytic enzyme

Treatment  of  aloe  vera  gel  with  pectolytic 
enzymes for a long time before processing is 
detrimental  to  biologically  active  com-
pounds such as polysaccharides, which are 
the  single  most  important  constituent  in 
aloe (Waller et al., 1978; Gowda et al., 1980; 
Yagi et al., 1982). It has been reported that 
enzymatic  treatment  at  50°C  and  within 
20 min does not induce loss of the biological 
activity of polysaccharides in aloe vera gel 
(Maughan, 1984).

crucial step to preserve the biological activ-
ity of aloe vera gel (Eshun, 2003).

Storage

Relative humidity and temperature are two 
of the most important environmental factors 
that affect product quality. They can also af-
fect the amount of the volatile substances of 
the juice that are absorbed by the packaging 
material  (Hernandez  and  Giacin,  1998)  
and, consequently, affect the shelf life of the 
product  (Hirose  et  al.,  1988;  Sadler  and 
Braddock, 1990).

Filtration

This is an important process and the oper-
ation influences the stability of aloe vera gel 
juice.

1.3.5  Time, temperature and sanitation 

(TTS) process

Addition of vitamin C and citric acid

The unpasteurized aloe gel juice is fortified 
with vitamin C and citric acid to avoid the 
browning  reaction,  to  improve  the  flavour 
of the aloe vera gel juice and to stabilize the 
juice (Eison-Perchonok and Downes, 1982; 
Tramell et al., 1986; Kennedy et al., 1992).
The pH of aloe gel juice is adjusted to be-
tween  3.0  and  3.5  by  adding  citric  acid  to 
improve its flavour.

Deaeration

The  aim  of  the  deaeration  step  is  to  avoid 
the  oxidation  of  ascorbic  acid  (Chan  and 
Cavaletto,  1986),  and  this  eventually  im-
proves the shelf life of aloe vera gel juice.

Pasteurization

Like the processing steps for other vegetable 
juices, the pasteurization step may affect the 
taste,  appearance  and  content  of  biological 
activity of the aloe gel product. HTST treat-
ment (at 85–95°C for 1–2 min) is an effective 
method to avoid poor flavour and the loss of 
biological activity (Eshun, 2003).

Flash cooling

After pasteurization, the juice is flash cooled 
to  5°C  or  below  within  10–15  s.  This  is  a 

An innovative process based on time, tem-
perature and sanitation has been developed 
to eliminate sources of degradation of aloe 
vera gel during processing. This method is 
described below.

Timing of the TTS leaf process

Leaves show losses of biological activity be-
ginning at 4–6 h following harvest when the 
leaves  are  stored  at  ambient  temperatures.  
A decrease in activity is also evident when 
the leaves are stored under refrigerated con-
ditions, even though the rate of activity loss 
is greatly reduced. The losses of activity ap-
pear  to  be  the  result  of  enzymatic  activity 
after the leaf is removed from the plant. In 
fact, as noted earlier, it has been shown that 
the  gel,  once  extracted  from  the  leaf,  has 
greater stability than gel which is left in the 
leaf. The overall timing of TTS production 
phase  is  extremely  critical:  the  processing 
must be completed within 36 h of harvest-
ing the leaves.

Leaf harvesting and handling

Loss of biological activity is also due to the 
microbial decay of the gel. The first expos-
ure of the inner gel to microbes is when the 
leaves are harvested from the plant. To pre-
vent contamination of the gel, the leaves are 
handled carefully and soaked in a food-grade 

 

Aloe Vera 

13

sanitizer which effectively reduces the mi-
crobial count on the leaf exterior to accept-
able levels.

Flash cooling

As a crucial step in preserving the biological 
activity  of  the  product,  the  gel  should  be 
cooled to below 50°C in 10–15 s following 
gel  extraction.  Rapid  cooling  leads  to  en-
zymatic and microbial deterioration in the 
gel, and also aids in reducing the microbial 
counts in the product.

Pasteurization

Biological  activity  of  the  product  remains 
active  when  the  gel  is  heated  at  65°C  for 
periods  of  less  than  15  min,  but  extended 
periods  of  heating  or  higher  temperatures 
will result in greatly reduced activity levels. 
The best method of pasteurization is HTST, 
which exposes the gel to elevated tempera-
ture  for  periods  of  1–3  min.  Once  heated, 
the gel is flash cooled to 5°C or below.

Concentration

The gel obtained after using the pasteuriza-
tion and flash cooling methods can be con-
centrated under vacuum without the loss of 
its biological activity. The concentration op-
eration  must  be  conducted  under  125  mm 
mercury  vacuum  at  a  temperature  below 
50°C and must not exceed 2 min. A higher 
vacuum and temperature will cause activity 
loss, as will extended concentration times.

Freeze- or spray-drying

The  concentrated  product  can  then  be 
freeze-dried  at  temperatures  between  −45 
and −30°C, or can be spray-dried at a prod-
uct temperature below 60°C without loss of 
its biological activity.

1.3.6  The desiccant dehydration process

This system has been used for many years to 
dehydrate foods. The pure intact aloe fillets 
are first washed so that the remaining aloin 

is removed. Then they are placed in a desic-
cant  dehydration  chamber  where  the  de-
sired  level  of  relative  humidity  and  tem-
perature  are  maintained.  The  material  is 
then ground to a powder of the desired fine-
ness and packed.

1.3.7  The Qmatrix process (Aloecorp)

Qmatrix drying is a 4th generation dehydra-
tion  technology  that  also  includes  micro-
wave and radio frequency drying. The Qma-
trix  process  is  a  novel  proprietary  method 
of dehydration of aloe gel in that it enables 
dehydration  while  maintaining  integrity 
with  respect  to  flavour,  colour  and  nutri-
ents.  It  is  comparable  to  freeze-drying  in 
quality  aspects  but  without  the  high  oper-
ation costs (http:www.aloecorp.com).

Advantages of this process

The advantages include:
 ● 

low 

time 

temperature/short 

gentle 
 drying;
superior sensory attributes retained;
superior retention of nutrients and bio-
activity;
atmospheric pressure (no vacuum);
energy  and  environmental  efficiency 
(‘greenness’); and
superior solubility characteristics.

 ● 
 ● 

 ● 
 ● 

 ● 

1.4  Uses

1.4.1  General uses

General uses include the following:

 •  Traditionally, aloe vera was used topic-
ally to heal wounds and for various skin 
conditions, and orally as a laxative.

 •  Today, in addition to its traditional uses, 
aloe vera is also taken orally to treat dia-
betes,  asthma,  epilepsy  and  osteoarth-
ritis.  It  is  also  still  used  topically  to 
treat osteoarthritis, burns, sunburn and 
psoriasis.

14 

R. Naik et al. 

 •  Aloe vera gel can be found in hundreds 
of skin products, including lotions and 
sunblocks.

 •  The US Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) has approved aloe vera as a nat-
ural food flavouring.

 •  The clear gel from aloe leaves is often 

used as an ointment.

 •  The green part of the leaf that surrounds 
the gel can be used to produce a juice or 
a dried substance (called latex) that is 
taken orally.

1.4.2  Pharmacological uses

The health benefits of some of the compo-
nents  of  aloe  vera  gel  are  summarized  in 
Table 1.2. Some of these, and other benefits 
of aloe vera, are further described below.

Skin penetration enhancement

Aloe  vera  gel  has  been  shown  to  increase  
in vitro skin penetration of compounds de-
pending on their molecular weight, with an 
apparent  inverse  correlation  between  en-
hancement  ratio  and  molecular  weight  of 
the compound (Moser et al., 2001; Cole and 
Heard, 2007).

Aloe vera leaf gel as an excipient in  

modified-release dosage forms

Gums  and  mucilages  of  natural  origin  that 
contain complex polysaccharides have found  
a wide range of pharmaceutical applications, 

Table 1.2.  Novel components of aloe vera along 
with their health benefits.

Chemical component Health benefits

Acemannan

Accelerates wound healing, 

modulates immune 
system, has antineoplastic 
and antiviral effects

Anti-allergic

Alprogen
C-glycosyl chromone Anti-inflammatory
Anti-inflammatory
Bradykinase
Anti-allergic
Magnesium lactate
Salicylic acid
Analgesic, anti-inflammatory

such as functional excipients in various dos-
age  forms,  which  include  binders,  disinte-
grants, emulsifiers, suspending agents, gelling 
agents  and  sustaining  agents  in  modified- 
release  tablets  (Kulkarni  et  al.,  2005;  Jani 
et al., 2007).

Antidiabetic effects

Several  trials  have  shown  a  blood  glucose 
lowering effect following the consumption 
of aloe vera gel. It significantly reduced fast-
ing  blood  glucose,  hepatic  transaminases, 
plasma and tissue cholesterol, triglycerides, 
free  fatty  acids  and  phospholipids,  and  in 
addition also significantly increased plasma 
insulin levels. It was reported by Rajasekaran 
et al. (2006) that the mechanism of action of 
aloe vera extracts in reducing blood glucose 
levels is by enhancing glucose metabolism 
due to its antioxidant mechanism.

Immunomodulatory effects

Immunomodulation  activities  of  the  poly-
saccharides in aloe vera gel may be via acti-
vation of macrophage cells to generate nitric 
oxide, secrete cytokines (e.g. tumour necro-
sis factor-alpha or TNF-α, interleukin-1 or IL-1, 
interleukin-6 or IL-6, and interferon-g or INF-g) 
and  present  cell  surface  markers.  It  is  re-
ported that relatively high concentrations of 
acemannan  are  required  to  achieve  modest 
activation of macrophages by aloe vera.

Anti-inflammatory effects

The anti-inflammatory activity of mannose- 
6-phosphate  is  believed  to  resemble  the 
 effects  observed  for  acetylated  mannan  in 
aloe  gel.  Aloe  gel  is  reported  to  reduce 
agent-induced inflammation via the promo-
tion  of  prostaglandin  synthesis  as  well  as 
via  increased  infiltration  of  leucocytes.  It 
has also been shown to significantly reduce 
leucocyte  adhesion  and  levels  of  TNF-α 
(Prabjone et al., 2006).

Antioxidant effects

It has been reported that different fractions  
of aloe vera, as well as unfractionated whole 

 

Aloe Vera 

15

gel,  have  antioxidant  effects.  Glutathione 
peroxidase  activity,  superoxide  dismutase 
enzymes  and  a  phenolic  antioxidant  have 
been  found  to  be  present  in  aloe  vera  gel, 
and  may  be  responsible  for  these  antioxi-
dant effects.

Wound-healing effects

Wound healing is a response to injured tis-
sue that results in the restoration of tissue 
integrity. Healing by application of aloe vera 
gel  is  thought  to  be  promoted  by  keeping 
the wound moist, increasing epithelial cell 
migration, more rapid maturation of collagen 
and reducing inflammation (Reynolds and 
Dweck, 1999).

Anticancer effects

The  two  fractions  from  aloes  that  are 
claimed to have anticancer effects include 
glycoproteins  (lectins)  and  polysacchar-
ides. Various studies have indicated antitu-
mour activity for aloe vera gel in terms of 
reduced tumour burden, tumour shrinkage, 
tumour  necrosis  and  prolonged  survival 
rates. In addition to these effects, aloe vera 
gel  has  also  shown  chemopreventive  and 
anti-genotoxic  effects  on  benzo[α]pyrene- 
DNA  adducts  (Steenkamp  and  Stewart, 
2007).

Effect on gastric acid secretion  

and ulcers

Aloe vera gel has the ability to cure gastric 
ulcers  or  protect  against  their  formation. 
The  anti-ulcer  activity  of  the  gel  has  been 
attributed  to  several  possible  mechanisms, 
including  its  anti-inflammatory  properties, 
healing  effects,  mucus  stimulatory  effects 
and regulatory effects on gastric secretions 
(Suvitayavat et al., 2004).

Skin hydration effects

It has been found that aloe vera gel-containing 
products improve skin hydration possibly by 
means  of  a  humectant  mechanism  and  in-
creasing  the  water  content  of  the  stratum 
corneum (Dal’Belo et al., 2006).

Hepatoprotective activities

An  aqueous  extract  of  dried  aerial  parts  of 
aloe vera significantly reduced hepatic dam-
age  induced  by  carbon  tetrachloride  and  
reversed  certain  biochemical  parameters. 
Histopathological  studies  confirmed  the 
curative efficacy of the water extract of aloe 
vera  against  carbon  tetrachloride-induced 
liver damage as indicated by the reversal of 
centrilobular necrosis, macro-vascular fatty 
changes and scattered lymphomononuclear 
cell infiltration into the hepatic parenchyma 
(Chandan et al., 2007).

Antimicrobial activities

Aloe vera inner gel is effective against both 
Gram-positive  and  Gram-negative  bacteria. 
Anthraquinones  isolated  from  the  exudate 
of aloe vera have shown a wide spectrum of 
antimicrobial  activity.  The  antibacterial 
activity of emodin against Escherichia coli 
is reported to be through the inhibition of 
 solute transport in membranes. Many anth-
raquinones  have  shown  antiviral  and/or 
virucidal effects on enveloped viruses (Alves 
et al., 2004).

1.5  Summary

Aloe  vera  is  becoming  popular  in  devel-
oping  and  developed  countries  owing  to 
its natural origin and low side effects. It is 
an industrial crop, and in the food indus-
try it has been utilized for the preparation 
of  health  food  drinks.  Aloe  vera  gel  also 
finds application in the cosmetic and toi-
letries  industry  for  the  preparation  of 
creams,  lotions,  soaps,  shampoos  and  fa-
cial  cleansers.  It  has  been  used  exten-
sively  by  many  people  because  of  its 
 effectiveness  in  treating  burns,  healing 
wounds, relieving aches and pains, and in 
a whole range of internal and external dis-
orders.  It  contains  a  plethora  of  antioxi-
dant  components,  including  flavonoids, 
vitamin  C,  β-carotene  and  vitamin  E.  It 
also  acts  as  a  beauty  enhancer  and  helps 
in treating skin allergies. Aloe vera has a 
long  history  as  a  medicinal  plant  with 

16 

R. Naik et al. 

 diverse therapeutic applications. It has anti- 
inflammatory,  antioxidant  and  antibacterial 
properties. The presence of all of the essen-
tial  elements  in  aloe  vera  may  account  for 
most of its therapeutic efficiencies, includ-
ing gastrointestinal problems, arthritis, stress, 
diabetes,  cancer,  ulcers,  piles,  liver  dis-
orders, asthma, etc. The medicinal value of 
aloe vera is found in the gel obtained by peel-
ing its leaves and is a storehouse of nutrients 
and phytochemicals. The presence of phyto-
chemicals such as tannins, saponins, flavon-
oids,  alkaloids  and  anthraquinones  in  high 
concentrations  is  a  strong  indication  of  the 
medicinal value of this plant. The processing 
of  aloe  vera  includes  harvesting,  scrubbing 

and  removal  of  the  rind  to  yield  the  gel 
fillet. The fillets are lightly ground and the 
cellulosic pulp is removed. The crude gel is 
then subjected to intermediate processing to 
kill bacteria and, if desired, to remove anth-
raquinones.  Intermediate  processing  yields 
materials which, with the addition of preser-
vatives, comprise the basic gel products. Final 
processing yields preserved liquid products, 
concentrates and powders. Today, aloe vera 
is  available  in  many  forms,  such  as  juices, 
candies, jellies, powder, gel, pills and sprays. 
There are also many equipment and process-
ing  protocols  available  for  the  primary,  sec-
ondary and tertiary processing of aloe vera at 
small scales.

References

Alemdar, S. and Agaoglu, S. (2009) Investigations of in-vitro antimicrobial activity of aloe vera juice. 

Journal of Animal and Veterinary Advances 8, 99–102.

Alves, D.S., Perez Fons, L., Estepa, A. and Micol, V. (2004) Membrane related effects underlying the 
biological activity of the anthrax quinines emodin and barbaloin. Biochemical Pharmacology 68, 
549–561.

Anonymous (2008) Aloe Vera: History, Science and Medicinal Uses. Available at: http://www.healingaloe.

com (accessed 9 July 2015).

Anonymous (2011) Continuous-feed aloe vera gel extraction machine. CIAE News 20(1), 2.
Atherton,  P.  (1998)  Aloe  vera  revisited:  review  of  aloe  gel.  The  British  Journal  of  Phytotherapy  4, 

176–183.

Beaumont, J., Reynolds, T. and Vaughan, J.G. (1984) Homonataloin in Aloe species. Planta Medica 50, 

505–508.

Boudreau, M.D. and Beland, F.A. (2006) An evaluation of the biological and toxicological properties of 
Aloe barbadensis (Miller), aloe vera. Journal of Environmental Science and Health, Part C: Envir-
onmental Carcinogenesis and Ecotoxicology 24, 103–154.

Bozzi, A., Perrin, C., Austin, S. and Arce Vera, F. (2007) Quality and authenticity of commercial aloe 

vera gel powders. Food Chemistry 103, 22–30.

Chan, H.T. Jr and Cavaletto, C.G. (1986) Effects of deaeration and storage temperature on quality of 

aseptically packaged guava puree. Journal of Food Science 51, 165–168.

Chandan, B.K., Saxena, A.K., Shukla, S., Sharma, N., Gupta, D.K., Suri, K.A., Suri, J., Bhadauria, M. 
and Singh, B. (2007) Hepatoprotective potential of Aloe barbadensis Mill. against carbon tetra-
chloride induced hepatotoxicity. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 111, 560–566.

Chang, X.L., Wang, C., Feng, Y. and Liu, Z. (2006) Effects of heat treatments on the stabilities of poly-
saccharides substances and barbaloin in gel juice from Aloe vera Miller. Journal of Food Engin-
eering 75, 245–251.

Coats, B.C. (1979) The Silent Healer. A Modern Study of Aloe Vera. Bill C. Coats, Garland, Texas.
Cole, L. and Heard, C. (2007) Skin permeation enhancement potential of aloe vera and a proposed 
mechanism of action based upon size exclusion and pull effect. International Journal of Pharma-
ceutics 333, 10–16.

Dal’Belo, S.E., Gaspar, L.R. and Maia Campos, P.M. (2006) Moisturising effect of cosmetic formulations 
containing  aloe  vera  extract  in  different  concentrations  assessed  by  skin  bioengineering  tech-
niques. Skin Research and Technology 12, 241–246.

Davis, R.H. (1997) Aloe Vera: A Scientific Approach. Vantage Press, New York.

 

Aloe Vera 

17

Eison-Perchonok, M.H. and Downes, T.W. (1982) Kinetics of ascorbic acid oxidation as a function of 

dissolved oxygen concentration and temperature. Journal of Food Science 47, 765–767, 773.

Eshun, K. (2003) Studies on aloe vera gel: its application in beverage preparation and quality assessment. The-
sis submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the Degree of Master of Science to Food Science 
and Technology School of Southern Yangtze University (Jiangnan University), Wuxi, Jiangsu, China.

Eshun, K. and He, Q. (2004) Aloe vera: a valuable ingredient for the food, pharmaceutical and cosmetic 

industries: a review. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition 44, 91–96.

Gowda,  D.,  Neelisiddaiah,  B.  and  Anjaneyalo,  Y.  (1980)  Structural  studies  of  polysaccharides  from 

Aloe saponaria and Aloe vanbalenii. Carbohydrate Research 83, 402–405.

Grindlay, D. and Reynolds, T. (1986) The Aloe vera phenomenon: a review of the properties and 
modern  uses  of  the  leaf  parenchyma  gel  (review  article).  Journal  of  Ethnopharmacology  16, 
117–151.

Hernandez, R.J. and Giacin, J.R. (1998) Factors affecting permeation, sorption and migration processes 
in package-product systems. In: Taub, I.A. and Singh, R.P. (eds) Food Storage Stability. CRC Press, 
Boca Raton, Florida, pp. 269–329.

Hirose, K., Harte, B.R., Giacin, J.R., Miltz, J. and Stine, C. (1988) Sorption of  d-limonene by sealant 
films and effects on mechanical properties. In: Hotchkiss, J.H. (ed.) Food and Packaging Inter-
actions. ACS Symposium Series Volume 365, ACS Publications, Washington, DC, pp. 28–41.

Hu, Y., Xu, J. and Hu, Q. (2003) Evaluation of antioxidant potential of aloe vera (Aloe barbadensis 

 Miller) extracts. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 51, 7788–7791.

IASC (2004) How Large is the Aloe Market? International Aloe Science Council News, October 2004, 
Silverspring, Maryland. Available at: http://www.iasc.org/aloemarket.html (accessed 18 August 
2009).

Jani, G.K., Shah, D.P., Jain, V.C., Patel, M.J. and Vithalan, D.A. (2007) Evaluating mucilage from Aloe 
barbadensis  Miller  as  a  pharmaceutical  excipient  for  sustained-release  matrix  tablets.  Pharma 
Technology 31, 90–98.

Kennedy, F.C., Rivera, Z.S., Lloyd, L.L., Warner, F.P. and Jumel, K. (1992) l-ascorbic acid stability in 
aseptically processed orange juice in tetra brick cartons and the effect of oxygen. Journal of Food 
Chemistry 45, 327–331.

Kulkarni, G.T., Gowthamarajan, K., Dhobe, R.R., Yohanan, F. and Suresh, B. (2005) Development of con-
trolled release spheroids using natural polysaccharide as release modifier. Drug Delivery 12, 201–206.

Lawless, J. and Allan, J. (2000) Aloe Vera – Natural Wonder Cure. HarperCollins, London, pp. 5–12.
Liu, C., Qian, H. and Liu, J. (2001) Study on preservatives in the aloe gel juice system. Journal of Wuxi 

University Light Industry [now Journal of Food Science and Biotechnology] 2001(5), 480–484.

Maughan, R.G. (1984) Method to increase color fastness of stabilized aloe vera. US Patent 4,465,629 A. 
Available  at:  http://www.google.com/patents/US4465629?printsec=description#v=onepage\&q\&f= 
false (accessed 10 July 2015).

Moser, K., Kriwet, K., Naik, A., Kalia, Y.N. and Guy, R.H. (2001) Passive skin penetration enhancement 
and its quantification in vitro. European Journal of Pharmaceutics Biopharmaceutics 52, 103–112.
Naik, R. and Annamalai, S.J.K. (2013) Gel textural properties of aloe vera. The Madras Agricultural 

Journal 100, 232–235.

Newton, L.E. (2004) Aloes in habitat. In: Reynolds, T. (ed.) Aloes: The Genus Aloe. Medicinal and Aro-

matic Plants – Industrial Profiles, Volume 38. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida, pp. 3–15.

Ni, Y., Turner, D., Yates, K.M. and Tizard, I. (2004) Isolation and characterization of structural compo-

nents of Aloe vera L. leaf pulp. International Immunopharmacology 4, 1745–1755.

Prabjone,  R.,  Thong-Ngam,  D.  and  Wisedopas,  N.  (2006)  Antiinflammatory  effects  of  Aloe  vera  on 
 leukocyte-endothelium  interaction  in  the  gastric  microcirculation  of  Helicobacter  pyroli-infected 
rats. Clinical Hemorheology and Microcirculation 35, 359–366.

Rajasekaran, S., Ravi, K., Sivagnanam, K. and Subramanian, S. (2006) Beneficial effects of Aloe vera 
leaf gel extract on lipid profile status in rats with streptozotocin diabetes. Clinical and Experi-
mental Pharmacology and Physiology 33, 232–237.

Raksha, B., Pooja, S. and Babu, S. (2014) Bioactive compounds and medicinal properties of Aloe vera L.: 

an update. Journal of Plant Sciences (Science Publishing Group, New York) 2, 102–107.

Ramachandra, C.T. and Rao, P.S. (2006) Processing of aloe vera leaf gel: a focus on the present and innova-
tive process technologies. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Innovations in Food 
and Bioprocess Technologies, 12–14 December 2006. Asian Institute of Technology, Pathumthani, 
Thailand, pp. 358–377.

18 

R. Naik et al. 

Ramachandra, C.T. and Rao, P.S. (2008) Processing of aloe vera leaf gel: a review. American Journal of 

Agricultural and Biological Sciences 3, 502–510.

Reynolds, T. and Dweck, A.C. (1999) Aloe vera leaf gel: a review update. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 

68, 3–37.

Robert, H.D. (1997) Aloe Vera: A Scientific Approach. Vantage Press, New York.
Saccu, D., Bogoni, P. and Procida, G. (2001) Aloe exudate: characterization by reversed phase HPLC 

and head-space GC-MS. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 49, 4526–4530.

Sadler, G.D. and Braddock, R.J. (1990) Oxygen permeability of low density polyethylene as a function of lim-

onene absorption. An approach to modeling flavour (scalping). Journal of Food Science 55, 587–590.

Speranza,  G.,  Morelli,  C.F.,  Tubaro,  A.,  Altinier,  G.,  Duri,  L.  and  Manitto,  P.  (2005)  Aloeresin  I,  an 

anti-inflammatory 5-methylchromone from Cape aloe. Planta Medica 71, 79–81.

Steenkamp,  V.  and  Stewart,  M.J.  (2007)  Medicinal  applications  and  toxicological  activities  of  aloe 

products. Pharmaceutical Biology 45, 411–420.

Sung,  C.K.  (2006)  The  history  of  Aloe.  In:  Park,  Y.I.  and  Lee,  S.K.  (eds)  New  Perspectives  of  Aloe. 

Springer, New York, pp. 7–18.

Suvitayavat, W., Sumrongkit, C., Thirawarapan, S.S. and Bunyapraphatsara, N. (2004) Effects of aloe 
preparation on the histamine-induced gastric secretion in rats. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 90, 
239–247.

Talmadge, J., Chavez, J., Jacobs, L., Munger, C., Chinnah, T., Chow, J.T., Williamson, D. and Yates, K. 
(2004) Fractionation of Aloe vera L. inner gel, purification and molecular profiling of activity. 
International Immunopharmacology 4, 1757–1773.

Tramell, D.J., Dalsis, D.E. and Malone, C.T. (1986) Effect of oxygen on taste, ascorbic acid loss and brown-

ing for HTST-pasteurized, single-strength orange juice. Journal of Food Science 51, 1021–1023.

Waller, G.R., Mangiafico, S. and Ritchey, C.R. (1978) A chemical investigation of Aloe barbadensis Miller. 

Proceedings of the Oklahoma Academy of Science 58, 69–76.

Yagi, A., Shibata, S., Nishioka, I., Iwadre, S. and Ishida, Y. (1982) Cardiac stimulant action of constitu-

ents of Aloe saponaria. Journal of Pharmaceutical Science 71, 739–741.

Zhang, T., Qian, H. and Liu, C. (2002) Study on non-enzymatic browning of aloe products and its in-
hibition methods. Journal of Wuxi University of Light Industry [now Journal of Food Science and 
Biotechnology] 2002(5), 496–498, 502. [Often incorrectly cited as He, Q.C., Liu, C. and Zhang, T. (2002) 
Study  on  non-enzymatic  browning  of  aloe  products  and  its  inhibition  methods.  Food  Science 
(Chenses) 23(10), 53–56.]

2  Ashwagandha

Paramadhas Sudha1* and Alagirisamy Reni2

1Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Chettinad, India; 

2Avinashilingam University, Coimbatore, India

2.1  Botany

2.1.1 

Introduction

Withania  somnifera  (L.)  Dunal,  or  ashwa-
gandha,  is  an  erect,  evergreen,  perennial 
shrub and member of the Solanaceae family. 
In  Ayurvedic  and  indigenous  medicine,  it 
has been considered to be a medicinal plant 
for  over  3000  years.  The  genera  Withania 
and Physalis have played an important role 
in the traditional Unani medicine system of 
South- east  Asia.  Ashwagandha  is  believed 
to be an aphrodisiac and to have rejuvenat-
ing  properties  that  are  useful  for  the  treat-
ment of inflammatory conditions and as an 
antitumour agent.

Apart 

from  ashwagandha,  common 
names of the plant include withania, winter 
cherry, Indian winter cherry and Indian gin-
seng. It also has many vernacular names in 
different languages (see Table 2.1). The roots 
and leaves are the parts of ashwagandha that 
are used for medicinal purposes. The plant is 
cultivated mainly in the drier parts of India.
Ashwagandha, or winter cherry, is con-
sidered by herbalists as the Ayurvedic an-
swer to ginseng because of its rejuvenating 

properties,  and  it  is  often  referred  to  as 
 Indian ginseng by herbalists from Western 
countries. In Ayurvedic medicine, the herb 
is used in a way that is similar to how Asian 
ginseng  is  used  in  traditional  Chinese 
medicine. In Sanskrit, ashwagandha means 
‘the smell of a horse’, which is taken to mean 
that  the  herb  may  impart  the  vigour  and 
strength of a stallion. Some (men and women) 
even  use  it  to  support  sexual  function. 
 Behind  its  clumsy  and  hard-to- pronounce 
name,  ashwagandha  holds  a  few  secrets 
that need to be uncovered. It is known as an 
adaptogen, a class of medicinal herbs that 
work  to  normalize  physiological  function 
in various, sometimes unknown, ways.

In India, the estimated annual production 
of  ashwagandha  roots  is  more  than  1500  t, 
while the annual requirement is about 7000 t, 
so that increased cultivation and higher pro-
duction have become a necessity (Umadevi 
et al., 2012). In the Ayurvedic system of medi-
cine  there  are  several  products  in  which 
 ashwagandha is used as a single plant-based 
formulation, but there is also a huge demand 
for root raw material for industrial use, thus 
necessitating  the  large-scale  cultivation  of 
the plant (Fig. 2.1).

*Corresponding author, e-mail: sudha.raj2000@gmail.com

© CAB International 2016. Leafy Medicinal Herbs: Botany, Chemistry,  
Postharvest Technology and Uses (eds D.C.P. Ambrose et al.) 

19

20 

P. Sudha and A. Reni 

Table 2.1.  Vernacular names of ashwagandha in 
different languages.

Bahman
Blærebæger
Winter cherry, Indian ginseng
Asgandh

Aasoganda
Ashvagandha (‘horse smelling’)

Arabian
Danish
English
Hindi
Japanese Ashwangandha
Nepalese
Sanskrit
Sinhalese Amukkara
Tibetan
Unani

Ba-dzi-gandha
Asgandh volaite

Fig. 2.1.  A Withania somnifera plant showing the 
leaves and fruits.

2.1.2  History/origin

Ashwagandha is native to the dry regions 
of India, and the species is also a native of 
Australia, East Asia and Africa. This herb has 
been used for over 4000 years in India, and 
is very important in Ayurveda, a traditional 
Indian system of medicine. In Sanskrit, ash-
wagandha means ‘horse’s smell’, and the name 
probably  originates  from  the  odour  of  its 
root which resembles that of a sweaty horse. 
The  species  epithet  of  somnifera  means 
‘sleep-bearing’ in Latin. Traditional uses of 
ashwagandha among tribal peoples in Africa 
include the treatment of fevers and inflam-
matory conditions. The use of ashwagandha 
in  Ayurvedic  medicine  extends  back  over 
3000–4000 years to the teachings of an es-
teemed rishi (sage), Punarvasu Atriya. It has 
been described in the sacred texts of Ayurveda, 
including the Charaka and Sushruta Samhitas. 

Robin Lane Fox, in his biography of Alexander 
the Great, claims that the herb was used in 
wine in ancient times (http://www.neurosoup.
com/ashwagandha-withania-somnifera). 
According to Anne Van Arsdall, W. somnifera 
was called apollinaris and also glofwyrt in 
The Old English Herbarium, and had a legend 
that  Apollo  found  it  first  and  gave  it  to  the 
healer  Aesculapiu  (http://www.neurosoup.
com/ashwagandha-withania-somnifera).

2.1.3  Location

Ashwagandha is a xerophytic plant that is 
found  mostly  in  the  drier  parts  of  India,  
Sri Lanka, Afghanistan, Baluchistan and Sind, 
but it is also distributed in the Mediterranean 
regions,  the  Canary  Islands  of  Spain  and 
the Cape of Good Hope in South Africa (Ud-
din et al., 2012). The plant itself is beautiful 
in  appearance,  with  deep  green  leaves  and 
branched  limbs  topped  by  seeded  yellow- 
coloured flowers; its berries are red. The 23 
known Withania species are broadly distrib-
uted  in  the  drier  parts  of  tropical  and  sub-
tropical  zones,  ranging  from  the  Canary 
Islands, the Mediterranean region and northern 
Africa to south-west Asia (Bhattacharya et al., 
1997a;  Dhuley,  1997;  Christina  et  al.,  2004; 
Girdhari and Rana, 2007). Ashwagandha has 
been  in  use  for  thousands  of  years  in  Ayur-
vedic medicine as a stress  reliever and also for 
strengthening the immune system. It is grown 
as a late rainy-season crop in all the parts of 
India, but the major ashwagandha- producing 
states  are  Rajasthan,  Punjab,   Haryana,  Uttar 
Pradesh,  Gujarat,  Maharashtra  and  Madhya 
Pradesh (Bhattacharya, 1998).

2.1.4  Morphology

The plant is an erect branching shrub reach-
ing a height of about 30–150 cm. The leaves 
grow up to 10 cm long and are simple, ovate 
and glabrous (Fig. 2.1). The flowers are green-
ish or a lurid yellow, about 1 cm long), few 
in number (usually about five) and are borne 
together  in  axillary,  umbellate  cymes.  The 
fruits are globose berries, 6 mm in diameter, 

 

Ashwagandha 

21

turn orange red when mature (see Fig. 2.1) and 
are enclosed in an inflated and membranous 
calyx. The seeds are yellow, reniform and 2.5 mm 
in diameter. The crop is harvested 180–210 days 
after planting (Bhatia et al., 1987; Andallu and 
Radhika, 2000).

2.2  Chemistry

2.2.1  Chemistry and biochemical 
composition of active constituents

The  major  constituents  of  ashwagandha 
are alkaloids, such as withanine alkaloids, 
and steroidal lactones (withanolides). Other 
constituents  include  amino  acids,  choline, 
β-sitosterol, chlorogenic acid and scopoletin. 
The leaves of Indian species of the plant are 
reported to contain withanolides, alkaloids, 
chlorogenic  acid,  glycosides,  tannins,  fla-
vonoids and other compounds (Khare, 2007).
Leaves  of  the  plant  from  different  re-
gions differ in their withanolide content. The 
leaf extract and dried roots of ashwagandha 
contain  withaferin  A,  which  is  resistant  to 
heat but is insoluble in water. The compound 
is extracted from the leaves with cold alco-
hol;  the  extract  is  purified  and  dried,  and 
 finally  crystallized  from  aqueous  alcohol 
(yield  0.18%  on  an  air-dry  basis).  Ashwa-
gandha from South Africa is reported to give 
a high yield of withaferin A, and it is to this 
compound that the curative properties of the 
herb are attributed (Chadha, 1976).

The  major  biochemical  constituents  of 
ashwagandha root are the steroidal alkaloids, 
but much of the plant’s pharmacological activ-
ity is ascribed to its two main withanolides, 
withaferin A and withanolide D. Withaferin A 
is the therapeutically active withanolide pre-
sent in the leaves. The pharma cological activ-
ity of the root is attributed to both its alkaloids 
and its steroidal lactones (withanolides). The 
total  alkaloid  content  of  the  roots  of  Indian 
types has been reported to vary between 0.13 
and 0.3%. Other biochemically heterogeneous 
alkaloids  found  include  choline,  tropane, 
pseudotropane  alkaloids  and  cuscohygrene, 
along with several steroidal lactones. In add-
ition  to  alkaloids  and  steroidal  lactones,  the 

roots are reported to contain starch,  reducing 
sugars,  glycosides  and  various  other  com-
pounds (Kulkarni et al., 1991).

2.3  Postharvest Technology

2.3.1  Processing and value addition

For the preparation of leaf extract, the leaves 
are  pulverized  into  a  coarse  powder,  and 
the ground powder is soaked in 60 ml 95% 
ethanol for a day, with occasional shaking, 
after which the mixture is filtered. The fil-
trate is evaporated using a rotary evaporator 
to yield dried extract, which is stored under 
refrigerated conditions in an airtight screw-
capped  tube.  The  yield  of  withaferin  A  is 
0.2–0.3%  of  the  dry  weight  of  the  leaves 
 extracted.  Gupta  et  al.  (1996)  performed  a 
quantitative  analysis  of  an  Indian  chemo-
type of W. somnifera from Uttar Pradesh by 
thin-layer chromatography (TLC) densitom-
etry and (in contrast to the results reported 
above in Section 2.2.1) observed that with-
aferin A was totally absent from the roots, 
stems,  seeds  and  persistent  calyx  of  the 
fruits of intact plants, but was present in the 
leaves. The leaf extracts exhibited high in-
hibitory effects on the lipid peroxidation of 
linoleic acid due to the abundant presence 
of  active  antioxidant  compounds,  and  are, 
therefore, effective agents in retarding Fe2+ 
catalysed lipid oxidation. In contrast to the 
distribution  of  withaferin  A,  the  same  au-
thors  found  alkaloids  and  other  withano-
lides in the roots, fruits and leaves of With-
ania spp. Leaf extraction with 45% alcohol 
yielded the highest percentage of alkaloids.
Ashwagandha leaf extract has also been 
found to kill cancer cells owing to its selective 
inhibitory effect on lipid peroxidation. Other 
components of the leaf extract, withaferin A 
and withanone, have different gene targets and 
mechanisms of action. Whereas withaferin A 
was toxic to normal cells, withanone was safe 
and hence can be recruited for safe cancer thera-
peutics. Furthermore, a combinational approach 
using withaferin A and withanone against the 
anticancer  and  anti-ageing  effects  of  cancer 
and normal cells, respectively, is warranted.

22 

P. Sudha and A. Reni 

After washing and peeling, ground roots 
of ashwagandha were dried under different 
conditions (in sun, shade or a cabinet drier) 
to  determine  the  effect  of  temperature  on 
the withanolide content. Maximum withan-
olide content was observed after shade dry-
ing and the minimum after cabinet drying at 
an air velocity of 1.8–2.0 m/s (Agrawal et al., 
2014).

According to Asthana and Raina (1989), 
it is important to investigate the side effects 
of the bioactive compounds of ashwagandha 
and  their  possible  interactions  before  ex-
perimental  clinical  research  is  conducted. 
Also,  although  withanolide  production  by 
in  vitro  cultures  is  still  far  from  the  levels 
required for economic exploitation, the study 
of such cultures is a useful tool for obtaining 
greater  understanding  of  the  withanolide 
metabolic pathway and allowing the appli-
cation of plant metabolic engineering tech-
niques  to  improve  the  biotechnological 
production  of  bioactive  compound(s)  of 
Withania.

Isolation of flavonoids from leaves

According to Bashir et al. (2013), air-dried 
leaves of W. somnifera are ground to a fine 
powder  and  extracted  with  chloroform  to 
remove chlorophyll and resinous and waxy 
material.  The  ground  material  is  then  ex-
tracted with 85% aqueous methanol and the 
slurry  stood  at  room  temperature  for  24  h 
with  occasional  stirring.  The  solvent  con-
taining the extract is then decanted and fil-
tered  by  vacuum  filtration.  The  extraction 
is repeated twice with the same solvent and 
twice  with  50%  aqueous  methanol.  The 
four filtrates from each extraction are com-
bined and excess solvent evaporated under 
reduced  pressure  at  40°C  to  give  crude 
 extracts as a solid mass, which is kept in a 
glass container. The dry extract is loaded on 
to an 80 × 3 cm column of polyamide 6S for 
the chromatographic isolation of flavonoids.

Extraction of bioactive components

Ashwagandha has been used as an antioxi-
dant,  adaptogen,  antitumour  agent,  aphro-
disiac, liver tonic, anti-inflammatory agent 

and astringent, and for its immunomodula-
tory  activity  (Tripathi,  2003).  The  major 
constituents  of  the  plant  are  withanolides 
and alkaloids. These bioactive components 
of  are  prepared  by  extraction.  During  this 
process,  the  desirable  soluble  constituents 
are  separated  from  those  that  are  not  re-
quired by using different solvents. The various 
methods  of  extraction  include  maceration, 
hot continuous extraction, percolation, de-
coction, ultrasound extraction, supercritical 
fluid extraction, microwave-assisted extrac-
tion, etc. Two of these are outlined below.

extraction  of  bioactive  components  using  the 
soxhlet  extraction  method.  The  Soxhlet 
method  is  one  of  the  most  used  conven-
tional methods for the extraction of withan-
olides from ashwagandha. Cell permeation 
followed by solubilization of the active con-
stituents  by  the  extracting  solvent  is  the 
underlying  principle.  The  powdered  plant 
material  can  be  effectively  extracted  in  a 
Soxhlet  extractor  at  elevated  temperature 
(40–60ºC)  using  200  ml  of  distilled  petrol-
eum  ether  followed  by  n-hexane,  ethanol, 
chloroform and methanol. The crude extracts 
are  individually  filtered,  evaporated  in  a 
rotor  evaporator,  dried  and  stored  in  stock 
vials  that  are  kept  refrigerated.  However, 
this type of conventional method is time- and 
solvent-consuming, thermally unsafe and not 
economically viable (Jyothi et al., 2010).

extraction  of  bioactive  components  using  a 
 microwave-assisted  extraction  method.  With 
increasing demand for more environmental 
friendly  methods,  microwave-assisted  ex-
traction (MAE) has been developed and op-
timized  for  the  fast  extraction  of  withano-
lides, and seems to be a good option. Solvent 
consumption is less and there is also time 
saving compared with traditional methods. 
In this method, the solvent, while in contact 
with sample, is heated using microwave en-
ergy. During this process, the disruption of 
hydrogen  bonds  results  from  microwave- 
induced  dipole  rotation  of  molecules  and 
the migration of ions that enhance the pene-
tration of the solvent into the matrix, and al-
lows  the  dissolution  of  the  components  to 
be extracted. The extraction process involves 

 

Ashwagandha 

23

extracting finely powdered samples in metha-
nol  in  an  extraction  vessel  at  the  requisite 
irradiation  power  level  and  temperature 
and for the requisite time (Jyothi et al., 2010). 
After  extraction,  the  extracts  are  filtered 
and  evaporated  under  vacuum  in  a  rotary 
evaporator.

2.3.2  Value-added products

In  addition  to  the  traditional  drugs  made 
from  ashwagandha,  value-added  products 
from  the  plant  include  root  powder,  cap-
sules,  root  extract,  herbal  beer,  etc.  Health 
drinks,  herbal  tea,  functional  foods,  nutra-
ceuticals and cosmeceuticals are some of the 
other value-added products based on which 
enterprises  can  be  set  up.  Ashwagandha 
sweet  and  salty  biscuits,  ashwagandha 
churan  balls  and  ashwagandha  beverages 
are prepared by incorporating ashwagandha 
root powder, ashwagandha leaf powder and 
ashwagandha root and leaf powder, respect-
ively, into the products.

Powder preparation

The  leaves  are  cleaned  and  dried  under 
shade or using a tray dryer, The dried leaves 
are then ground to a coarse powder using a 
high-capacity grinding machine. The resulting 
powder  is  stored  in  an  air-tight  container 
and kept in a cool, dark and dry place.

Ashwagandha tea

Ashwaganda  tea  is  very  beneficial  for  pro-
moting a relaxed state of mind. The herb is 
sometimes  referred  to  as  ‘India’s  ginseng’, 
because it is used by practitioners of Ayur-
veda  for  medicinal  reasons.  It  is  an  excel-
lent  remedy  for  low  levels  of  energy  and 
does  not  have  the  adverse  side  effects  of 
 caffeine. Ashwagandha tea may be drunk as 
a  beverage  every  day  by  most  people,  al-
though practitioners of alternative medicine 
caution  their  patients  against  drinking  the 
tea if they have a history of high blood pres-
sure, because it could elevate this even more. 
Long-term use of the tea is quite beneficial 
for  keeping  people  who  are  stressed  in  a 

more  calm  and  relaxed  state.  The  tea  also 
helps to rejuvenate the system after exertion 
but is still calming.

Bakery products

Bakery products are widely consumed pro-
cessed food products, with 80% of products 
(such as bread and biscuits) consumed on a 
regular  basis.  The  common  ingredients  in 
biscuits  are  refined  wheat  flour,  vegetable 
shortening, butter, sugar, baking powder and 
flavouring agents. Biscuits are consumed by 
all age groups of consumers because they re-
lease instant energy and offer various other 
nutritive benefits, particularly to people with 
a health disorder. Making biscuits with ash-
wagandha  herbs  is  an  innovative  steps  in 
upgrading  the  nutritive  value  of  the  bis-
cuits, along with their medicinal value. The 
herb is considered to be of GRAS (generally 
recognized as safe) status and is used as an 
ingredient of cereals, candies, chewing gum 
and cookies.

Preparation of ashwagandha-based 

extruded products

Extrusion cooking is a method used for con-
verting starchy and proteinaceous material 
into  fabricated  products  during  which  the 
material is forced through a die at high tem-
perature in a short time to generate friction 
by the rotation of a single or twin screw(s) to 
produce extruded snacks (Alavi et al., 1999; 
Singh et al., 2007; Gamlath, 2008). Snacks 
can be produced from ashwagandha powder 
in combination with other ingredients as an 
extruded  product.  The  acceptability  of  ex-
trudate snack is greater than that of the usual 
snack products available on the market (Moraru 
and Kokini, 2003).

2.4  Uses

2.4.1  General uses

The  leaves  of  ashwagandha  are  bitter  and 
are recommended to treat fever and painful 
swellings.  The  crude  preparation  of  the 
plant has also been found to be very active 

24 

P. Sudha and A. Reni 

against  a  number  of  pathogenic  bacteria. 
Sore eyes, ulcers and swellings can be cured 
using a fomentation of the leaves. The leaves 
are  also  used  as  a  hypnotic  and  an  anthel-
mintic,  can  be  crushed  and  applied  to  tu-
mours  and  ulcers,  and  are  consumed  as  a 
vegetable  and  used  as  livestock  fodder 
( Kirtikar  and  Basu,  1991).  Other  uses  of  
the leaves are to heal open as well as septic 
and  inflamed  wounds  and  abscesses,  and 
to treat inflammation, haemorrhoids, rheuma-
tism and syphilis.

Ashwagandha as a medicinal herb

Ashwagandha is considered to be one of the 
greatest  rejuvenating  agents  in  Ayurvedic 
medicine. The leaves are applied externally 
as a paste or after crushing for carbuncles on 
to inflamed areas and swellings. Herbal tea, 
powders, tablets and syrups can be prepared 
from the leaf extract. The root is claimed to 
have  sex-enhancing  properties,  and  the 
herb is used to promote a peaceful state of 
mind. The plant is also used as a liver tonic 
and anti-inflammatory agent and, more re-
cently,  to  treat  asthma,  ulcers  and  insom-
nia.  The  incorporation  of  ashwagandha 
into  the  diet  can  prevent  or  decrease  the 
growth of tumours in humans. It is an ex-
cellent nerve tonic and is used to nourish 
the  nerves  and  improve  nerve  function  in 
order  to  maintain  calm  during  stressful 
conditions.

2.4.2  Pharmacological uses

The pharmacological activity of ashwagand-
ha is attributed to the presence of several al-
kaloids and steroid lactones (Chadha, 1976).

Anti-inflammatory activity

The  anti-inflammatory  activity  of  ashwa-
gandha is attributed to the biologically active 
steroid withaferin A (Khare, 2007), which is 
used to suppress arthritic syndrome effect-
ively and without any toxic effects. Studies 
of  ashwagandha  in  animal  models  have 
proven that it has anti-inflammatory proper-
ties (Kulkarni et al., 1993).

Antibiotic activity

Withaferin A in leaf extracts of ashwagandha 
inhibits the growth of various Gram- positive 
bacteria, acid-fast and aerobic bacilli and patho-
genic fungi, and also inhibited Ranikhet virus. 
The antibiotic activity of withaferin A is due 
to the presence of the unsaturated lactone ring. 
The  extract  of  the  shrub  is  active  against 
Vaccinia  virus  and  Entamoeba  histolytica 
(Chadha, 1976; Rastogi and Mehrotra, 1998; 
Khare,  2007),  and  Dhuley  (1997)  reported 
that  ashwagandha  showed  a  protective  ac-
tion against systemic Aspergillus infection.

Immunomodulatory activity

The  consumption  of  ashwagandha  signifi-
cantly  increased  haemoglobin  concentra-
tion, red blood cell count, platelet count and 
body weight in mice (Ziauddin et al., 1996). 
Withaferin  A  exhibited  specific  immuno-
suppressive effects on both human B and T 
lymphocytes, while withanolide E had a spe-
cific  effect  on  T  lymphocytes  (Rastogi  and 
Mehrotra, 1998; Aggarwal et al., 1999; Davis 
and Kuttan, 2000; Gautam et al., 2004; Rasool 
and Varalakshmi, 2006).

Antioxidant activity

In an investigation of the antioxidant activ-
ity of the active principles of ashwagandha 
in rats, Bhattacharya et al. (1997a) found the 
antioxidant effects were mainly due to the 
presence of glycowithanolides.

Anti-hyperglycaemic effect

Bhattacharya  et  al.  (1997b)  reported  that 
a  preparation  containing  ashwagandha  de-
creased  streptozocin  (STZ)-induced  hyper-
glycaemia  and  pancreatic  islet  superoxide 
dismutase (SOD) activity in type 1 diabetic 
rats.

Hepatoprotective activity

Withaferin A has also been shown by various 
researchers  to  have  significant  hepatopro-
tective  activity  against  carbon  tetrachloride 
(CCl4)-induced hepatotoxicity (Aphale et al., 
1998; Rastogi and Mehrotra, 1998; Khare, 2007).

 

Ashwagandha 

25

2.5  Summary

Withania somnifera, known as ashwagandha 
or winter cherry, is a solanaceous herb that 
is  known  to  soothe  and  calm  the  nervous 
system. The multiple health benefits of this 
herb make it a perfect rejuvenator of phys-
ical and psychological health. Its powerful 

antioxidant  compounds  scavenge  free  rad-
icals reducing the impact of ageing. Ashwa-
gandha  is  a  medicinal  plant  that  can 
potentially  generate  global  business  for 
India,  and  scientific  studies  on  the  crop 
need  to  be  increased  manyfold  in  order  to 
put  its  many  medicinal  qualities  to  max-
imum use.

References

Aggarwal, R., Diwanay, S., Patki, P. and Patwardhan, B. (1999) Studies on immunomodulatory activity 
of Withania somnifera (ashwagandha) extracts in experimental immune inflammation. Journal of 
Ethnopharmacology 97, 27–35.

Agrawal, R., Upadhyay, A. and Nayak, P.S. (2014) Influence of drying on the quality of ashwagandha 

(Withania somnifera). Journal of Food and Pharmaceutical Sciences 2, 63–67.

Alavi, S.H, Gogoi, B.K, Khan, M, Bowman, B.J. and Rizvi, S.S.H. (1999) Structural properties of protein- 

stabilized starch-based supercritical fluid extrudates. Food Research International 32, 107–118.

Andallu, B. and Radhika, B (2000) Hypoglycemic, diuretic and hypocholesterolemic effect of winter 

cherry (Withania somnifera Dunal) root. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology 38, 607–609.

Aphale, A.A., Chhibba, A.D., Kumbhakarna, N.R., Mateenuddin, M. and Dahat, S.H. (1998) Subacute 
toxicity study of the combination of ginseng (Panax ginseng) and ashwagandha (Withania somnif-
era) in rats: a safety assessment. Indian Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology 42, 299–302.

Asthana, R. and Raina, M.K. (1989) Pharmacology of Withania somnifera (L.) Dunal – a review. Indian 

Drugs 26, 199–205.

Bashir, H.S., Mohammed, A.M., Magsoud, A.S. and Shaoub, A.M. (2013) Isolation of three flavonoids 
from Withania somnifera leaves (Solanaceae) and their antimicrobial activities. Journal of Forest 
Products and Industries 2(5), 39–45.

Bhatia, P., Rattan, S.I.S., Cavallius, J. and Clark, B.F.C (1987) Withania somnifera (ashwagandha) a 
so-called rejuvenator inhibits growth and macromolecular synthesis of human cells. Medical 
Science Research 15, 515–516.

Bhattacharya, S.K. (1998) Adaptogenic activity of siotone, a herbal formulation against an unpredictable 
chronic stress induced physiological and behavioral perturbation in rats. In: National Conference 
on Recent Trends in Spice and Medicinal Plant Research, Calcutta, 2–4 April 1998.

Bhattacharya, S.K., Satyan, K.S. and Ghosal, S. (1997a) Antioxidant activity of glycowithanolides from 

Withania somnifera. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology 35, 236–239.

Bhattacharya, S.K., Satyan, K.S. and Chakarbarti, A. (1997b) Effect of Tarsina, an Ayurvedic herbal 
formulation, on pancreatic islet superoxide dismutase activity in hyperglycemic rats. Indian Journal 
of Experimental Biology 35, 297–299.

Chadha, Y.R. (ed.) (1976) The Wealth of India, Vol. X: Sp–W. Raw Materials: Original Series, Publications 
and Information Directorate, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), New Delhi, India, 
pp. 580–585.

Christina, A.J.M., Joseph, D.G., Packialakshmi, M., Kothai, R., Robert, S.J.H. and Chidambaranathan, N. 
(2004) Anticarcinogenic activity of Withania somnifera Dunal against Dalton’s ascitic lymphoma. 
Journal of Ethnopharmacology 93, 359–361.

Davis, L. and Kuttan, G. (2000) Immunomodulatory activity of Withania somnifera. Journal of Ethno-

pharmacology 71, 193–200.

Dhuley, J.N. (1997) Effect of some Indian herbs on macrophage functions in ochratoxin A treated mice. 

Journal of Ethnopharmacology 58, 15–20.

Gamlath, S. (2008) Impact of ripening stages of banana flour on the quality of extruded products. Inter-

national Journal of Food Science and Technology 43, 1541–1548.

Gautam, M., Diwanay, S.S., Gairola, S., Shinde, Y.S., Jadhav, S.S. and Patwardhan B.K. (2004) Immune 
response modulation to DPT vaccine by aqueous extract of Withania somnifera in experimental 
system. International Immunopharmacology 4, 841–849.

26 

P. Sudha and A. Reni 

Girdhari, L.G. and Rana, C.A. (2007) Plant review on Withania somnifera (ashwagandha). Pharmacog-

nosy Magazine 1, 129–136.

Gupta, A.P., Verma, R.K., Misra, H.O. and Gupta, M.M. (1996) Quantitative determination of withafer-
in A in different plant parts of Withania somnifera by TLC densitometry. Journal of Medicinal 
and Aromatic Plants 18, 788–790.

Jyothi, D., Khanam, S. and Sultana, R. (2010) Optimization of microwave assisted extraction of witha-
nolides  from  roots  of  ashwagandha  and  its  comparison  with  conventional  extraction  method. 
International Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences 2(4), 46–50.

Khare,  C.P.  (2007)  Withania  ashwagandha  Kaul  (cultivated  var.).  In:  Khare,  C.P.  Indian  Medicinal 

Plants: An Illustrated Dictionary. Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, pp. 717–718.

Kirtikar,  K.R.  and  Basu,  B.D.  (1991)  Indian  Medicinal  Plants,  Vol.  3.  Shiva  Publishers,  Dehradun, 

India, p. 1783.

Kulkarni, R.R., Patki, P.S., Jog, V.P., Gandage, S.G. and Patwardhan, B. (1991) Treatment of osteoarth-
ritis with a herbomineral formulation: a double-blind, placebo-controlled, cross-over study. Jour-
nal of Ethnopharmacology 33, 91–95.

Kulkarni, S.K., Sharma, A., Verma, A. and Ticku, M.K. (1993) GABA receptor mediated anticonvulsant 

action of Withania somnifera root extract. Indian Drugs 30, 305–312.

Moraru, C.I. and Kokini, J.L. (2003) Nucleation and expansion during extrusion and microwave heat-

ing of cereal foods. Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety 2, 120–138.

Rasool, M. and Varalakshmi, P. (2006) Immunomodulatory role of Withania somnifera root powder on 
experimental induced inflammation: an in vivo and in vitro study. Vascular Pharmacology 44, 
406–410.

Rastogi, R.P. and Mehrotra, B.N. (eds) (1998) Compendium of Indian Medicinal Plants, 2nd reprint. 
Central  Drug  Research  Institute,  Lucknow  and  National  Institute  of  Science  Communication, 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, New Delhi, India. (see Vol. 1, pp. 434–436; Vol. 2, 
pp. 708–710; Vol. 3, pp. 682–684; Vol. 4, pp. 765–766; Vol. 5, pp. 889–891; Vol. 6. p. 148).

Singh, S., Gamlath, S. and Wakeling, L. (2007) Nutritional aspects of food extrusion: a review. Inter-

national Journal of Food Science and Technology 42, 916–929.

Tripathi, K.D. (2003) Essentials of Medicinal Pharmacology, 5th edn. Jaypee Brothers Medical Pub-

lishers, New Delhi, p. 405.

Uddin, Q., Samiulla, L., Singh, V.K. and Jamil, S.S. (2012) Phytochemical and pharmacological profile 
of Withania somnifera Dunal: a review. Journal of Applied Pharmaceutical Science 2(1), 170–175.
Umadevi, M., Rajeswari, R., Sharmila Rahale, C., Selvavenkadesh, S., Pushpa, R., Sampath Kumar, K.P. 
and  Bhowmik,  D.  (2012)  Traditional  and  medicinal  uses  of  Withania  somnifera.  The  Pharma 
 Innovation 1(9), 102–110.

Ziauddin, M., Phansalkar, N., Patki, P., Diwanay, S. and Patwardhan, B. (1996) Studies on the immu-

nomodulatory effect of ashwagandha. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 50, 69–76.

3  Basil

Darach Lupton,1 Muhammad Mumtaz Khan,2 Rashid Abdullah  

Al-Yahyai2* and Muhammad Asif Hanif3

1Oman Botanic Garden, Muscat, Oman; 2Sultan Qaboos University,  

Muscat, Oman; 3University of Agriculture, Faisalabad, Pakistan

3.1  Botany

3.1.1 

Introduction

Basil  (Ocimum  basilicum  L.)  is  an  annual 
herb belonging to the mint family (Lamiaceae). 
It has been utilized for millennia and is an 
essential ingredient in many cooking tradi-
tions  and  practices  (Agarwal  et  al.,  2013). 
The genus Ocimum contains a range of some 
50 to 150 species and varieties that are native 
to  the  tropical  regions  of  Asia  and  Central 
and South Africa (Ghosh, 1995). The uncer-
tainty in the exact number of species within 
the  genus  is  largely  attributed  to  the  enor-
mous variation that is found among the con-
stituent species. The variability is prevalent 
in the morphology, growth habit, flower col-
our, leaves, stems and chemical composition 
(Svecova  and  Neugebauerova,  2010).  Basil 
cross- pollinates  readily,  and  the  resulting 
diversity and variation has led some authors 
to reclassify sections of the genus (Paton, 1992). 
There are a number of plants outside the genus 
Ocimum  with  the  common  name  basil,  in-
cluding ‘basil thyme’ (Acinos arvensis (Lam.) 
Dandy) and ‘wild basil’ (Clinopodium vulgare L.), 
which can sometimes lead to confusion and 
misunderstanding.

*Corresponding author, e-mail: alyahyai@squ.edu.om

O. basilicum is known by different names 
depending  on  the  location.  In  the  English 
language, it is typically called basil, common 
basil or sweet basil. In India, specifically in 
Hindi and Bengali, it called babui tulsi. Other 
common names of basil are basilica (in French), 
basilikum or basilienkraut (in German), ba-
silico (in Italian), rehan (in Arabic) and alba-
haca (in Spanish). In Arabic, it is known as 
hebak  as  well  as  rihan  (Kirtikar  and  Basu, 
2003, cited by Bilal et al., 2012). Probably the 
most familiar basil is sweet basil (O. basilicum); 
however, this has a large number of cultivars, 
varying in flavour, scent and uses. There are 
more than 160 named cultivars in existence 
today.  Popular  examples  include,  O.  basili-
cum  ‘Cinnamon’,  O.  basilicum  ‘Dark  Opal’ 
and holy basil (the species O. tenuiflorum L., 
previously known as O. sanctum L.) (Fig. 3.1). 
Scents and flavours can range from cinnamon, 
liquorice and lemon to anise. The plants can 
be shrubby or herbaceous, and vary in size 
from 20 cm to 3 m tall, depending on the spe-
cies  (and  the  literature  source  used).  The 
leaves can be smooth, shiny, hairy or curly, 
and  they  can  be  green  to  blue/purple.  The 
flower colour ranges from white to purple to 
lavender (Meyers, 2003). Most of the regular 
varieties  of  basil  are  considered  annuals; 

© CAB International 2016. Leafy Medicinal Herbs: Botany, Chemistry,  
Postharvest Technology and Uses (eds D.C.P. Ambrose et al.) 

27

28 

D. Lupton et al. 

2010). Basil is highly variable both morpho-
logically and chemically, and the variations 
appear  to  be  strongly  influenced  by  eco-
logical factors. The origin, source and grow-
ing  conditions  of  basil  therefore  have  an 
impact on plant uses, and in particular upon 
its flavours, aromas and medical uses. This 
variability  of  basil  is  reflected  in  its  broad 
array  of  uses,  which  will  be  discussed  in 
more detail later in the chapter.

3.1.2  History/origin

O. basilicum is indigenous to India and other 
areas  in  tropical  Asia,  where  it  has  been 
grown  for  5000  years.  The  generic  name, 
Ocimum, originates from the ancient Greek 
word  okimon,  which  means  smell  (Tucker 
and  DeBaggio,  2000).  There  are  numerous 
suggestions for the origins of the word basil. 
One  is  that  it  stems  from  the  Greek  word 
basileus,  meaning  king,  as  it  is  believed  to 
have grown close to the area where St Con-
stantine and his mother St Helen discovered 
the Holy Cross (Jacqueline, 2001). According 
to Parkinson, basil’s scent was ‘fit for a king’s 
house’ (Grieve, 1931). Other less fanciful specu-
lation  suggests  that  the  origin  of  the  name 
basil stems from the similarity of the species 
name, basilicum, to the name of the basilisk, 
the  fabled  serpent  with  the  deadly  gaze 
(Meyers, 2003).

The history of basil is steeped in legend 
and mystery. Many believe it was Alexander 
the  Great  (356–323  bce)  who  brought  it  to 
Greece. Basil is thought to have been brought 
to England from India in the 1500s, eventu-
ally arriving in the USA in the early 1600s 
(Darrah, 1980). Culpeper, Gerard and Dios-
cordes  mention  basil  in  their  respective 
herbals (Meyers, 2003).

Gerard praised basil as a remedy for mel-
ancholy but also repeated Dioscorides’ warn-
ing  that  too  much  basil  ‘dulleth  the  sight  … 
and is of a hard digestion’ (Gerard, 1975, cited 
by  Meyers,  2003).  Basil  was  also  alleged  to 
cause the spontaneous generation of scorpions 
and to cause scorpions to develop in the brain. 
The  link  with  scorpions  is  evident  today  in 
basil’s depiction with the astrological sign of 
Scorpio (Reppert, 1984, cited by Meyers, 2003).

Fig. 3.1.  A basil plant in flower. Basil is usually 
cultivated as an ornamental in Middle Eastern 
countries due to its attractive flowers and aroma.

however,  in  warm  tropical  regions  many 
 perennial varieties exist, e.g. O. tenuiflorum 
(Simon et al. 1999; Tilebeni, 2011) (Fig. 3.1). 
Their wide range of forms, colours and sizes 
has  elevated  the  ornamental  importance  of 
basil in recent years (Svecova and Neugebau-
erova,  2010)  and  has  increased  the  plants’ 
economic value globally. It is not uncommon 
to see basil grown as an ornamental plant in 
public parks and home gardens (Fig. 3.1).

The essential oil content of basil shows 
a  variability  between  species  and   cultivars 
and is thought to be the result of varying eco-
logical  factors,  geographic  origins,  genetic 
patterns,  different  chemotypes  and  differ-
ences  in  the  nutritional   status  of  plants. 
In  Finland,  17  different  collections,  all 
called  sweet  basil,  were  analysed  for  their 
morphological traits and chemical make-up. 
A  large  amount  of  variation  was  recorded 
for both characteristics. A similar variability 
was  found  when  ten  Italian  commercially 
available  basil  cultivars  were  studied.  The 
chemical  analyses  of  the  varieties  showed 
correlations with their morphological char-
acters. Two varieties with violet leaves were 
linalool  chemotypes  and  three  of  the  large-
leaved  varieties  were  linalool  and  methyl 
chavicol (estragole or p-methoxyallyl benzene) 
chemotypes  (Galambosi,  1995,  cited  by 
 Putievsky and Galambosi, 1999). The bulk of 
the essential oil of basil plants is concentrated 
in the leaves and flowers; there are trace quan-
tities  of  essential  oils  in  the  branches  and 
stems, but the amounts are not commercially 
important  (Svecova  and  Neugebauerova, 

 

Basil 

29

3.1.3  Location

Although basil is grown in a variety of cli-
matic  and  environmental  conditions,  the 
optimum conditions are found in countries 
with  a  warm  climate.  Warmth,  light  and 
moisture are the key ecological requirements 
for basil cultivation. The herb is susceptible 
to frost so outdoor cultivation is restricted to 
frost-free regions of the world. Basil is grown 
widely  in  the  following  countries:  India, 
Pakistan, Comores Islands, Madagascar, Haiti, 
Guatemala,  Réunion,  Thailand,  Indonesia, 
Russia (Georgia, East Caucasus) and South 
Africa, Egypt, Morocco, France, Israel, Bulgaria, 
the USA (Arizona, California, New Mexico), 
Italy,  Hungary,  Poland,  Germany,  Greece, 
Turkey, other Balkan countries and Slovakia 
(Putievsky and Galambosi, 1999).

Absolute figures for basil oil production 
are difficult to acquire. There are numerous 
small-scale  growers  working  in  local  oper-
ations whose production figures are not in-
tegrated  into  national  statistics.  However, 
there are some gross figures available from 
the  1990s,  when  gross  world  production  of 
basil oils was approximately 93–95 tons/year 
of which 55 tons was from O. gratissimum L. 
and 43 tons from O. basilicum. About 100 kg 
of  oils  were  produced  from  O.  canum 
(Simms) (preferred name O. americanum L.). 
Basil oils were then produced in the follow-
ing  countries  (the  quantities  that  follow  in 
parentheses are tons): India (15), Bulgaria (7), 
Egypt (5), Pakistan (4.5), the Comoros (4.5), 
Israel (2), the former Yugoslavia (1), the USA 
(1),  Madagascar  (1),  Réunion  and  Albania 
(each 0.5), Hungary (0.3) and Argentina (0.2) 
(Lawrence,  1993,  cited  by  Hiltunen  and 
Holm, 1999). The USA is probably the lar-
gest  market  for  basil  oil,  followed  by  the 
European countries of Germany, France, the 
UK and the Netherlands (Robbins and Green-
halg,  1979,  cited  by  Hiltunen  and  Holm, 
1999).

Global  statistics  for  the  production  of 
dried  basil  are  also  hard  to  obtain.  A  large 
portion  of  the  world  production,  chiefly  in 
the  Mediterranean  region,  and  in  India  and 
California, is not sold internationally; most of 
the basil in these areas is consumed locally. 
Import  statistics  also  show  that  the  USA  is 

one of the world’s biggest users of dried basil 
(Putievsky and Galambosi, 1999).

Other important areas for basil import-
ation are the European countries. In the 1990s, 
the  total  amount  of  basil  herb  imported  to 
Europe was about 830–880 t/year. France is the 
largest  importer  at  300–350  t/year,  followed 
by the UK (250 t/year), Germany (200 t/year) 
and the Netherlands (80 t/year). The largest 
supplier of the Western European countries 
was Egypt (Putievsky and Galambosi, 1999).

3.1.4  Morphology

O. basilicum is an upright, branching herb, 
0.6–0.9 m high with square, glabrous stems 
and branches, usually green but sometimes 
purple in colour. The leaves are simple and 
oppositely  arranged  on  the  stem.  They  are 
2.5–5 cm or more long and are ovate with an 
acute  tip;  the  margins  are  entire,  more  or 
less toothed or lobed (Jayaweera, 1981, cit-
ed by Bilal et al., 2012). The petiole is 1.3–
2.5 cm long. The leaves have numerous oil 
glands which exude strongly scented vola-
tile oil. The inflorescence is usually racem-
ose,  and  the  terminal  raceme  is  usually 
much  longer  than  the  lateral  ones.  The 
bracts  are  stalked,  shorter  than  the  calyx, 
ovate  and  acute.  The  calyx  is  5  mm  long, 
enlarging on the fruit. The fruit has a short 
pedicel. The calyx lower lip has two central 
teeth and is longer than the rounded upper 
lip.  The  corolla  is  8–13  mm  long,  white, 
pink or purplish in colour, and glabrous or 
slightly  pubescent.  The  nutlets  (seeds)  are 
about 2 mm long, ellipsoid, black and pit-
ted. There are five flower sepals that remain 
fused into a two-lipped calyx. The ovary is 
superior and the fruit consists of four achenes 
(Jayaweera, 1981, cited by Bilal et al., 2012).
Basil requires warm temperate or Medi-
terranean  conditions.  The  optimum  tem-
perature  for  germination  is  20°C,  with 
growing temperatures of 7 to 27°C (Simon, 
1995). The plant develops best in long-day, 
full-sun  conditions. 
tolerate 
drought  as  the  plant  tissue  is  very  tender. 
Basil  requires  well-drained,  fertile  soils 
with a high organic matter content. It grows 
well in soils with a pH ranging from 4.3 to 

It  cannot 

30 

D. Lupton et al. 

8.2 and has an optimum pH of 6.4. Basil has 
medium,  deep  roots  and  a  high  water  re-
quirement (Simon, 1995).

3.2  Chemistry

including 

Basil is an impressively aromatic plant and 
is used as a sweet-smelling herb. Different 
phenotypic  characters, 
taste, 
aroma  and  many  others,  are  used  to  de-
scribe a variety of basil ecotypes. The height 
of plants varies from 30 to 300 cm and leaf 
colour  from  green  to  blue/purple;  this  de-
pends on the type of species (Hiltunen and 
Holm,  1999).  The  name  of  each  basil  type 
often represents its particular flavour, with 
the exception of the sweet basil, whose taste 
is  bright  and  pungent;  anise  basil,  lemon 
basil  and  cinnamon  basil  offer  unique  fla-
vours as indicated by their names. The es-
sential  oil  present  in  the  leaves  and  other 
parts of a number of basil species/cultivars 
is  responsible  for  its  distinctive  fragrance 
and aroma. In most species of basil, methyl 
chavicol,  eugenol  and  linalool  are  major 
components.  Different  species  or  cultivars 
have  different  amounts  of  each  of  these 
chemical constituents, which hence are re-
sponsible for the different taste and aroma 
of  each  basil  cultivar.  As  an  example,  the 
sweet  aroma  of  methyl  chavicol  has  been 
compared with that of French tarragon and 
anise,  while  a  floral  scent  is  produced  by 
linalool and eugenol is reminiscent of cloves. 
The  major  component  present  in  sweet 
basils  is  methyl  chavicol  while  eugenol  is 
present  in  large  amounts  in  spicy  basils. 
Other chemical components responsible for 
flavour  include  geranial  (a  rose  flavour), 
thymol  (a  thyme  flavour),  camphor,  trans- 
methyl cinnamate (a cinnamon flavour) and 
citral (lemon) (DeBaggio and Belsinger, 1996; 
Al-Maskri et al., 2011).

3.2.1  Chemical composition

In sweet basil, the fat content and calorific 
value is low while high amount of minerals 
and vitamin A are present. In 2.5 g of basil 

leaves (five fresh leaves), there are 96.6 IU 
vitamin A, 3.85 mg calcium, less than 1 cal-
orie, 11.55 mg potassium, and smaller pro-
portions  of  vitamin  C  and  other  vitamins, 
protein,  fibre  and  minerals.  The  GRAS 
(Generally Recognized As Safe) list of the US 
Department  of  Agriculture  includes  sweet 
basil leaf to be used in the range of 2–680 ppm 
and 0.01–50 ppm for the essential oil. The 
use of exceedingly large quantities of oil is 
suggested  to  have  a  health  risk  due  to  the 
occurrence  of  carcinogenic  compounds. 
The GRAS-suggested amount of basil essen-
tial oil is very minute, and internal use of a 
large amount of this oil should be avoided 
(Hanif  et  al.,  2011;  Hosseini-Parvar  et  al., 
2015).

3.2.2  Phytochemistry

O. tenuiflorum has essential oils mostly con-
fined to the green leaves and thus has a par-
ticular  aroma.  This  leaf  scented  volatile  oil 
chiefly comprises phenols, terpenes and al-
dehydes. Besides its essential  or  fixed  oils, 
the  plant  also  includes  alkaloids,  glyco-
sides,  saponins  and  tannins.  The  leaves 
also contain particular amounts of carotene 
and  ascorbic  acid.  The  reported  chemical 
properties of basil leaves are based on nu-
merous  worldwide  studies,  and  hence  ed-
aphic  and  geographic  factors  are  expected 
to influence different chemical ingredients. 
The difference in aroma between different 
varieties of O. basilicum is due to the vari-
ous  compositions  of  their  essential  oils.  
In various parts of the world, basil cultivars 
are present in large diversity, indicating a 
diverse  range  of  chemical  composition. 
The  essential  oil  of  basil  usually  contains 
α-terpineol,  eucalyptol,  eugenol,  methyl  eu-
genol, linalool, β-elemene, germacrene D, α- 
bergamotene, α-guaiene, cubenol, τ-cadinol, 
camphor,  bornylacetate,  α-caryophyllene,  β- 
caryophyllene, elixen, β-cadinene, α-copaene, 
α-bisabolol,  β-farnesene,  epibiciclosesqui-
phelandrene,  τ-muralol,  δ-gurjunene  and 
δ-cadinene  (Hanif  et  al.,  2011).  The  various 
types of fatty acids present in three Ocimum 
species are presented in Table 3.1. The presence 
of cardiac glycosides, saponins and tannins in 

 

Basil 

31

Table 3.1.  Fatty acid composition in basil species (O. album, O. basilicum and 
O. tenuiflorum). From Malik et al., 1987, 1979.

Fatty acid

O. albuma

O. basilicuma

O. tenuiflorumb

Arachidonic acid (C20:4)
Capric acid (C10:0)
Lauric acid (C12:0)
Linoleic acid (C18:2)
α-Linolenic acid (C18:3)
Myristic acid (C14:0)
Oleic acid (C18:1)
Palmitic acid (C16:0)
Stearic acid (C18:0)

2.73
1.30
0.78
36.36

–
0.68
44.16
11.68
2.33

aMalik et al., 1987; bMalik et al., 1989.

–
–
0.85
21.18
48.50
0.36
13.33
9.70
5.45

–
–
2.84
59.10
21.27
1.90
6.00
5.54
3.12

the  aqueous  extract  of  O.  basilicum  plants 
has been shown by phytochemical analysis.

3.3  Postharvest Technology

Conventionally,  the  best  harvesting  time 
for basil is early in the morning just after 
the evaporation of the dew and before the 
day  temperature  starts  increasing.  The 
strongest activity of basil essential oil has 
been  observed  in  the  morning.  No  diffe-
rence in flavour contents has been reported 
in some findings between fresh and dried 
basil, but the flavour complexity and inten-
sity that has been observed in fresh leaves 
is lost to a large extent in the dried leaves. 
Fresh basil, when placed in an airtight bag 
after  it  is  wrapped  in  numerous  paper 
towels, can be stored for up to a week in a 
refrigerator.

This herb cannot be stored easily for a 
longer time unless it is dried, so appropriate 
drying of leaves is recommended for long- term 
storage. The leaves should not be shredded or 
broken  during  drying  because  the  essential 
oil content will be lost and the aroma will be 
reduced  in  such  leaves.  For  basil  leaves, 
shade drying is more appropriate than sun 
drying in order to avoid the loss of fragrance 
due to volatility of the essential oils. If dried 
basil  is  kept  in  closed  jars  and  away  from 
heat  and  light,  it  can  be  stored  for  a  year. 
The leaves of basil can also be maintained 
for some time by salt layering. Another type 
of preferred long-term handling is the freeze 

storage. If the leaves are chopped and tightly 
wrapped in plastic sheets for freezing, then 
they  will  remain  green  and  blackening  of 
the  leaves  during  freezing  can  be  avoided. 
The  leaves  can  also  be  frozen  in  ice  cube 
trays  after  mixing  with  olive  oil  in  a  food 
processor.  For  domestic  use,  basil  leaves 
can  also  be  preserved  by  adding  olive  oil 
and salt to the storage jar and keeping in a 
refrigerator.  Bacterial  growth  during  such 
storage may be a possible problem, and even 
under  refrigerated  storage,  infection  with 
Clostridium botulinum may cause botulism. 
To avoid food-borne botulism, it is import-
ant to strictly follow food safety/sanitation 
instructions  for  product  receipt,  handling, 
processing  and  storage.  For  culinary  pur-
poses,  single  or  multiple  fresh  leaves  can 
be  removed  and  used  (Pushpangadan  and 
George, 2012).

3.3.1  Processing

Basil, like other herbal plants, is consumed 
in a variety of ways and for various purposes. 
In addition to the use of fresh leaves, other 
common  processed  forms  of  basil  include 
whole dry leaves, frozen or powdered leaves, 
and extracted essential oils. Whole plants or 
chopped  leaves  can  be  stored  frozen,  with 
and  without  oils,  to  be  used  for  extended 
periods  of  time  beyond  the  fresh  shelf  life. 
Alternative traditional methods for preserv-
ing basil leaves include storage in salt and in 
the form of oil concentrates (Meyers, 2003).

32 

D. Lupton et al. 

The herb is traditionally dried by hang-
ing  washed  bundles  inverted  in  a  dry  and 
shaded place or placing whole spread leaves 
between two sheets of paper to prevent oxi-
dation  and  discoloration.  Forced  warm  air 
drying  is  used  for  industrial  production. 
Basil  leaves  should  be  dried  immediately 
after harvest because they darken if exposed 
to  the  open  air  for  an  extended  period  of 
time. Drying should be done at a temperature 
not exceeding 40°C to minimize the evapor-
ation of volatile compounds (Putievsky and 
Galambosi,  1999).  Dried  basil  can  be  pre-
served for a year when it is protected from 
heat, light and moisture (Meyers, 2003).

Essential oil can be extracted from basil 
in  two  forms,  as  herbal  oil  that  originates 
from the leaves (0.1–0.25%) or as a superior- 
quality  floral  oil  that  is  collected  from  the 
flowers (0.4%) (Srivastava, 1980; Putievsky 
and Galambosi, 1999). In India, flowers are 
harvested four times during the season and 
produce 12–13 kg/ha oil yield compared to 
18–22  kg/ha  from  one  harvest  from  the 
much  higher  fresh  yield  of  whole  plants 
(Srivastava, 1980). In Israel, plants are har-
vested when half of them have flowers and 
the fresh annual yield is 75 tons/ha, which 
produces an essential oil yield 120–140 kg/ha 
(Putievsky and Galambosi, 1999). A similar 
distillation  process is used for basil oil ex-
traction to the one that is commercially used 
for other herbs; this takes about an hour us-
ing freshly harvested leaves (Wijesekera, 1986; 
Denny, 1995).

3.3.2  Value addition

Basil  leaves  can  be  mixed  with  a  variety  of 
other  herbs,  including  juniper,  garlic,  mar-
joram,  oregano,  paprika,  mustard,  parsley, 
pepper, sage, rosemary and thyme, and can be 
used in stuffings, soups, stews and rice, and 
also with fish, vegetables, chicken and meats. 
They  can  be  a  key  ingredient  in  vinegars, 
jams, teas, cheeses, drinks, oils and liqueurs 
too.  Purple  basil  vinegars  can  be  produced 
with a good colour, and according to personal 
taste, cinnamon and lemon basils are used to 
make  delicious  desserts  and  may  increase 
their taste. Larger leaves can be minced, torn 

or chopped and consumed. Small leaves are 
good to add to vegetarian dishes, salads, rice 
and  pasta.  For  maximum  flavour,  basil  is 
added at the end of cooking. It is used fresh as 
well as dried, but the drying reduces the pre-
dominant flavours. The uses of basil are diverse 
and plenteous; it is used with meat, vegetables, 
fish, dressings, sauces, stews, herbal teas, li-
queurs  and  mixed  drinks.  It  is  universally 
used by both the domestic and the industrial-
ized producer in the preparation of pesto, 
a varying combination of basil, cheese, garlic, 
oil  and  nuts.  Basil  is  often  used  as  an  add-
itional  flavour  with  tomatoes.  Garden- fresh 
basil is preserved in vinegar or oil, or frozen. 
Chilling of basil preserves the flavour of the 
herb more effectively than does drying. The 
length of storage of dried basil is far more than 
that of fresh basil, which lasts for only a short 
time in the refrigerator.

3.4  Uses

Despite  being  consumed  at  relatively  low 
amounts, the high levels of antioxidants and 
minerals in herbs means that many of them 
have significant health benefits. It is not fully 
understood  what  quantities  of  basil  should 
be ingested to achieve its health benefits and 
there are no standards or recommendations 
as to the precise amounts to use. Neverthe-
less,  basil  is  almost  completely  calorie  free 
and contains high quantities of dietary fibre 
and minerals. Even though there appears to 
be  no  logical  evidence  for  its  usefulness  to 
human  health,  basil  tea  and  oil  are  readily 
available in many health food stores. Having 
said that, basil is a popular food additive and 
provides  a  distinctive  flavour  and  aroma. 
Basil is a great addition to any kitchen, it adds 
both flavour and personality to many dishes 
(Hosseini-Parvar et al., 2015).

3.4.1  General uses

Ritualistic uses

Basil has many uses ranging from culinary 
to religious, and these are often steeped in 

 

Basil 

33

ritual.  There  are  a  number  of  interesting 
 beliefs linked with the historical use of basil. 
In Europe, it was associated with death and it 
was considered to be unlucky to dream of it. 
In contrast, in Italy, women wore it in their 
hair  and  young  men  wore  it  behind  their 
ears when they went courting (Dymock et al., 
2005).  Hindus  in  India  believe  that  if  you 
are  buried  with  basil,  it  is  a  guaranteed 
ticket to heaven. The English used it in food 
and to repel pests, e.g. flies, and evil spirits. 
Basil is often called l’herbe royale (the royal 
herb) by the French. Jewish folklore implies 
that while fasting, basil gives you strength 
(Miele et al., 2001). In Portugal, potted basil 
is presented to a loved one on the religious 
holidays of St John and St Antony. Holy basil 
has religious worth across a range of belief 
systems; the Greek, Bulgarian, Romanian and 
Serbian Orthodox churches utilize basil in the 
preparation of holy water, in some instances 
a  pot  of  basil  is  placed  under  the  church 
altar (Tilebeni, 2011).

Culinary uses

Basil  has  been  incorporated  into  culinary 
preparations for thousands of years. It is a 
very  useful  gastronomic  herb  found  in  a 
wealth  of  dishes,  sauces  and  condiments, 
soups, stews and stuffing, and also in fish, 
meats  and  vegetables.  It  is  easily  blended 
with other herbs, including, garlic, oregano, 
mustard, parsley, pepper, rosemary and thyme 
(Hemphill, 2000, cited by Meyers, 2003). It 
is also an important constituent in teas, oils, 
cheeses and liqueurs (Darrah, 1980; Simon, 
1995).  Basil  is  an  important  component  of 
many alcoholic beverages, including bitters, 
liquors  and  spirits.  By  adding  a  blend  of 
mixed essential oils of fennel, basil and cori-
ander to a salt solution of whey, Russian re-
searchers  found  a  method  to  enhance  the 
storage of a carbonated fermented milk bever-
age (Askerova et al., 1993). Fresh, frozen or 
dried basil (1–40 g/1) is also used in spirits, 
garlic or lemon alcoholic beverages, which 
may be sweet or dry, according to a German 
patent (Meier, 1990, cited by Hiltunen and 
Holm, 1999). Basil essential oil has significant 
commercial value. It is utilized in a range of 
industrial  products,  including  beverages, 

prepared foods, dental products, fragrances 
and soaps (Darrah, 1980). O. gratissimum and 
O. basilicum essential oils are considered eco-
nomic materials in their own right (Lawless, 
1992).

Insecticidal properties

Many  synthetic  insecticides  have  signifi-
cant negative side effects and are expensive 
to  produce.  Efforts  to  develop  alternative 
more environmentally friendly insect repel-
lents are high on the environmental agenda. 
Some  evidence  suggests  that  basil  has 
powerful insecticidal properties. A number 
of studies have been carried out in this re-
spect  on   Ocimum  spp.  One  hundred  per 
cent repellence of O. gratissimum essential 
oil  (2%  in  acetone)  has  been  observed 
against  Musca  domestica  (the  housefly) 
(Singh  et  al.,  1985).  Another study demon-
strated  that  O.  basilicum  essential  oil  re-
pelled  the  red  flour  beetle,  Tribolium 
castaneum ( Mohiuddin et al., 1987, cited by 
Nahak et al., 2011).

Traditional medical uses

O.  basilicum  has  more  than  50  medicinal 
uses, from analgesic to anthelmintic, and is 
supposed  to  treat  fungal  infections,  acne, 
headaches  and  over  100  such  conditions 
(Duke, 2002, cited by Meyers, 2003). The fol-
lowing  are  just  a  small  sample  of  the  trad-
itional medicinal uses. The traditional Chinese 
medicine system involves the use of O. basili-
cum for treatment of gum ulcers, kidney prob-
lems  and  as  a  haemostyptic  in  childbirth. 
In India, it is used for problems as  diverse as 
earache,  menstrual  irregularities,  arthritis, 
anorexia  and  malaria  (Medical  Economics 
Company,  2000,  cited  by  Meyers,  2003). 
 Rihan  (O.  basilicum  in  Arabic)  is  used  in 
treatment of colds, cataract and diarrhoea in 
northern  and  central  Oman  (Ghazanfar  and 
Al Sabahi, 1993). Reyhan (the Persian name) 
is used to treat urinary tract infection, chest 
and lung problems, ulcers and influenza, and 
in Iran, basil is employed as a tonic, appetizer 
and expectorant (Naghibi et al., 2005, cited in 
Rivera Núñez et al., 2012). In Jordan, an infu-
sion of basil is considered to be anthelmintic, 

34 

D. Lupton et al. 

anti-emetic  and  antidiarrhoeal  (Kirtikar  and 
Basu, 2003, cited by Bilal et al., 2012). In Guinea, 
the leaves and stems are used to treat fever, 
neuralgia, catarrh and renal troubles (Kirtikar 
and Basu, 2003, cited in Bilal et al., 2012). In 
Ethiopia, the leaves are used against malaria, 
headache and diarrhoea. In homeopathy, the 
fresh mature leaves are used to treat blood dys-
entery,  inflammation  and  congestion  of  the 
kidney. The roots and the leaves are used to 
treat bowel complaints in children (Jayaweera, 
1981, cited by Bilal et al., 2012; Kirtikar and 
Basu, 2003, cited by Bilal et al., 2012). There 
is a long list of traditional basil remedies in 
the literature and according to folklore. As is 
seen from this account, the uses of basil are 
medically and geographically diverse.

There is considerable interest in study-
ing  the  properties  and  benefits  of  basil. 
The following paragraphs and Section 3.4.2 
(Pharmacological uses) examine a number of 
the  pharmacological  characteristics  of  basil 
and explore some of the current research.

Basil has been found to show effective-
ness against many fungal, viral, bacterial and 
protozoal infections. Current studies suggest 
that basil is helpful in inhibiting the growth of 
carcinogenic  cells  and  in  HIV.  Basil  leaves 
are used specifically to treat many fevers and 
coughs,  flu,  asthma,  influenza,  bronchitis, 
colds,  chicken  pox  and  diarrhoea,  and  they 
can lower the cholesterol level in blood and 
act as anti-stress agents. Basil juice is an ef-
fective medicine for inflamed eyes and night-
blindness, which is often caused by vitamin 
A  deficiency  (Grieve  and  Marshall,  1982; 
 Boggia et al., 2015; Hosseini-Parvaret al., 2015).
There are frequent studies on the anti-
fungal activity of Ocimum leaves, essential 
oils  and  their  components  and  extracts. 
Fresh ripe tomato fruits were treated before 
and after inoculation with Aspergillus niger 
in the presence of Drosophila busckii by an 
ethanolic  extract  of  O.  tenuiflorum.  The 
fruits did not show signs of rotting for 5 to 
7 days after this treatment (Sinha and Saxena, 
1989, cited by Nahak et al., 2011). The es-
sential oil of O. canum was successful against 
the fungi causing damping-off disease, Pyth-
ium  aphanidermatum,  P.  debaryanum  and 
Rhizoctonia  solani.  O.  canum  gave  a  50% 
reduction in damping-off disease of tomato 

plants  in  P.  aphanidermatum-infected  soil 
and up to 43% reduction in P. debaryanum- 
infected  soil.  Phytotoxicity  of  this  essential  
oil was not observed and it was superior to 
 common synthetic fungicides such as captan  
(Pandey and Dubey, 1992, 1994). O. basilicum 
essential  oil  displayed  antifungal  properties 
against an Aspergillus flavus strain producing 
aflatoxin and against A. parasiticus. The fun-
gistatic properties of the oil were observed at a 
dose of 1.5 ml/1 and the fungicidal properties 
at 6.0 ml/1. These doses are much lower than 
those  of  industrial  synthetic  fungicides  and 
fumigants, and effect of the oil treatment is not 
altered  by  storage,  temperature  or  increased 
inocula (Nahak et al., 2011). Antimicrobial ac-
tivity  of  sweet  basil  has  been  found  against 
such organisms as Lactobacillus acidophilus, 
Saccharomyces  cerevisiae,  Mycoderma  sp., 
A. niger and Bacillus cereus (Meena and Vijay, 
1994, cited by Hiltunen and Holm, 1999).

3.4.2  Pharmacological uses

Basil oil is known to have strong antioxidant 
properties. Research has shown the oil contains 
potent anticancer, antiviral and antimicrobial 
properties  (Tilebeni,  2011).  Antioxidants  are 
an  important  part  of  maintaining  a  healthy 
and balanced lifestyle, and basil may be a very 
important source of these essential compounds 
(Baritaux et al., 1992, cited by Tilebeni, 2011). 
However, despite these reputed properties, it 
is  important  to  be  aware  that  basil  contains 
estragole, which may be carcinogenic. In Ger-
many, for example, basil is not considered safe 
for pregnant women or children (Aruna and 
Sivaramakrishnan, 1992, cited by Meyers, 2003).
There  is  extensive  diversity  in  the 
phytochemical  constituents  of  basil;  these 
constituents  vary  significantly  with  time, 
cultivation processes and storage. The nutri-
tional  and  pharmacological  properties  of 
the whole herb in natural form, as it has been 
traditionally  used,  results  from  the  inter-
action of many different active phytochemi-
cals,  and  consequently,  the  overall  benefits 
of basil cannot be completely duplicated us-
ing single isolated constituents (Tewari et al., 
2012). There is very little data relating to a 
standardized dosage available from traditional 

 

Basil 

35

practitioners, which is problematic for chem-
ists  and  pharmacists.  This  raises  the  issue 
that there needs to be a greater communica-
tion between traditional and orthodox medi-
cine in order to improve our understanding 
of  the  interactions  and  properties  of  basil 
(Tewari et al., 2012).

Research into the medicinal properties 
and  effects  of  basil  has  been  conducted 
at  various  levels.  A  methanolic  extract  of 
O. basilicum was assessed for its analgesic 
activity in mice. Choudary et al. (2010, cited 
by Bilal et al., 2012) demonstrated that anal-
gesic activity at a concentration 200 mg/kg 
was similar to that of the drug aspirin. Bene-
dec et al. (2007) examined the effects of an 
O. basilicum tincture in acute inflammation 
in male rats and showed a small but consid-
erably important inflammatory effect. O. ba-
silicum oil was shown to contain significant 
anti-ulcer  activity  against  aspirin,  alcohol, 
histamine, serotonin and stress-induced gas-
tric ulceration (Singh et al., 1999, cited by 
Nahak et al., 2011). Zeggwagh et al. (2007, 
cited by Bilal et al., 2012) studied the hypo-
glycaemic effect of aqueous extract of O. ba-
silicum  in  normal  and  diabetic  rats.  Their 
results  showed  the  extracts  had  high  anti- 
hypoglycaemic effects in diabetic rats.

In  the  last  decade  or  two,  an  increased 
methodical interest in the health benefits of 
plant  phytochemicals  (in  herbs  and  spices, 
vegetables and fruits) has gained prominence 
in the wider study of plant-based nutritional 
research.  Although  the  study  of  plant  com-
pounds is by no means a new area of research, 
scientists have only recently started to char-
acterize  bioactive  compounds  in  order  to 
 explore  their  effects  on  human  health  and 
disease.  In  animal  and  cell  culture  studies, 
basil has displayed anti-inflammatory, antidi-
abetic,  antimicrobial,  antioxidant  and  anti-
cancer activity (Arfat et al., 2014).

Use as a prophylactic agent

A  decoction  of  basil  leaves  is  used  against 
hepatic  and  gastritis  disorders.  Basil  leaf 
juice is used to treat dysentery, night blind-
ness and conjunctivitis. The essential oils of 
basil have 100% larvicidal properties. Basil 
has  excellent  antimalarial  properties  and 

 eugenol is the main constituent responsible 
for  its  mosquito-repellent  properties.  Basil 
leaf  paste  is  effective  against  ringworm  in-
fection and to clear marks on the face. The 
occurrence  of  urosolic  acid  in  the  leaves 
helps  to  remove  wrinkles  and  returns  skin 
elasticity. Basil is highly beneficial in healing 
wounds,  cuts  and  ulcers,  and  in  removing 
parasites and worms (Bansod and Rai, 2008). 
It supplies numerous antioxidants and offers 
generous reinforcement against free radical- 
induced  damage.  Oxygen  free  radicals  are 
naturally  occurring  physiological  products 
containing one or more unpaired electrons, 
and along with reactive oxygen species (ROS), 
are  considered  to  be  harmful  to  important 
membrane  lipids,  proteins,  carbohydrates 
and DNA. This damage has been related to 
several  diseases,  for  example  atheroscler-
osis, liver cirrhosis, cancer and diabetes, etc. 
(Chiang et al., 2005; Bansod and Rai, 2008). 
It has been well accepted that dietary antioxi-
dants  have  great  prospects  for  curing  these 
disease processes. Antioxidants also enhance 
the activity of superoxide dismutase (SOD) and 
reduce  lipid  peroxidation  (Rai  et  al.,  1997; 
Hannan et al., 2006). Basil antioxidants help 
in maintaining good health and in prevent-
ing the chance occurrence of heart diseases, 
as well as most of the other degenerative dis-
eases,  because  oxidative  stress  is  the  hall-
mark of such diseases (Hannan et al., 2006).

Anticancer activity

The anticancer activity of basil has been long 
established  and  is  mentioned  by  several 
investigators  (e.g.  Karthikeyan  et  al.,  1999; 
Somkuwar,  2003).  Protection  against  cancer 
at  the  cellular  level  is  provided  by  the 
unique array of flavonoids that are found in 
basil.  Water-soluble  flavonoids  of  basil,  in-
cluding  vicenin  and  orientin,  have  been 
shown to defend cell structures and chromo-
somes  against  radiation  and  oxygen-based 
damage  in  human  white  blood  cell  studies 
(Madhuri, 2001). Basil leaf alcoholic extracts 
have  a  modulatory  impact  on  carcinogen- 
metabolizing enzymes such as aryl hydrocarbon 
hydroxylase  and  glutathione-S-transferase, 
(GST)  and  the  cytochromes  P450  and  b5. 
They are important detoxicants of mutagens 

36 

D. Lupton et al. 

and carcinogens. Basil anticancer activity has 
also been established against human fibrosar-
coma cell cultures, in which alcohol extracts 
induced cytotoxicity at 50 mg/ml and above. 
Morphologically,  the  cancer  cells  showed 
condensed  nuclei  and  shrunken  cytoplasm 
and the DNA was found to be fragmented on 
agarose gel electrophoresis. Basil considerably 
decreased  the  occurrence  of  3′-methyl-4- 
dimethylaminoazobenzene-induced  hepato-
mas in rats and benzo(α)pyrene-induced neo-
plasia of the forestomach of mice. An alcohol 
extract of basil leaves was shown to have an 
inhibitory effect on chemically induced skin 
papillomas  in  mice  (Devi,  2001).  A  leaf  ex-
tract of basil applied to 7,12-dimethylbenz(a)
anthracene (DMBA)-induced papillomas in 
mice considerably reduced tumour incidence, 
the average number of papillomas per mouse 
and  the  cumulative  number  of  papillomas. 
Eugenol, a flavonoid present in basil and other 
plants  showed  similar  activity.  Oral  treat-
ment with basil fresh leaf paste inhibits the 
early events of DMBA-induced buccal pouch 
carcinogenesis. Basil leaf extract suppresses 
or  blocks  the  events  related  to  chemical 
 carcinogenesis  by  hindering  the  metabolic 
activation of the carcinogen (Aggarwal and 
Shishodia, 2006).

Radioprotective activity

The  flavonoids  vicenin  and  orientin  from 
basil  leaves  exhibited  a  greater  radioprotec-
tive effect than synthetic radioprotectors by 
protecting human lymphocytes from the clas-
togenic effects of radiation at low, non-toxic 
dilutions (Devi et al., 2000). Among three plant 
extracts, viz. Withania somnifera (L.) Dunal, 
O. tenuiflorum and Plumbago rosea (preferred 
name  P.  indica  L.),  tested  on  experimental 
mice  for  bone  marrow  survival  following  2 
Gy γ-radiation, O. tenuiflorum water extract 
exhibited maximum radioprotection as meas-
ured by an exogenous spleen colony forming 
unit (CFU-S) assay (Devi et al., 1998).

Antimicrobial activity

It  is  the  volatile/essential  oils  of  a  hydro-
phobic nature that account for the biochem-
ical actions of spices and herbs (Pandey and 

Madhuri,  2010).  Basil  contains  many  aro-
matic essential oil compounds that fluctuate 
in proportion and quality depending on the 
cultivar. The important aromatic compounds 
present include linalool, eugenol, citral, me-
thyl  chavicol/estragole,  limonene  and  me-
thyl cinnamate. These aromatic compounds 
defend  the  herb  from  insects,  bacteria  and 
fungi.  In  similar  fashion,  they  can  help  in 
protecting against diseases caused by fungi, 
bacteria and insects.

In studies involving cell culture, the es-
sential oils of basil have demonstrated anti-
microbial activity by damaging bacterial cell 
walls and triggering cell lysis. Linalool, me-
thyl chavicol and methyl cinnamate are also 
very efficient in hindering the development 
of  pathogenic  bacteria  such  as  Escherichia 
coli,  Staphylococcus  aureus,  Streptococcus 
faecalis, Shigella spp., Mycobacterium spp., 
Salmonella  spp.  and  Pseudomonas  aerugi-
nosa. Pathogenic bacteria can cause illnesses 
such as pneumonia, food poisoning, urinary 
tract infections and dysentery.

Basil  is  also  a  well-recognized  insecti-
cidal, antiviral and antifungal agent. Although 
it has long been used to treat microbial infec-
tions, there is not sufficient data to fully sup-
port its efficacy and safety in humans. Basil has 
potent antimicrobial activity against P. aerug-
inosa, Bacillus pumilus and B. megaterium, 
S. aureus and S. albus, M. tuberculosis, Micro-
coccus pyogenes var. aureus, Helminthosporium 
spp., H. oryzae, Alternaria tenuis, A. solani, 
Curvularia  spp.  and  C.  penniseli,  Candida 
guillermondii, Pseudomonas spp., S. aureus, 
Fusarium  solani,  Colletotricum  capsici,  Ar-
throbacter globiformis, E. coli and Vibrio chol-
erae.  The  high  concentrations  of  linolenic 
acid in basil oil are considered to be largely 
responsible  for  its  antimicrobial  activity 
(Phadke  and  Kulkarni,  1989;  Mondal  et  al., 
2009).

Anti-inflammatory effects

The  active  role  of  acute  inflammation  is  a 
normal  and  protective  process  in  helping 
the body to deal with infections, tissue injury 
and immune reactions. It is not un expected 
that  basil  has  been  used  for  centuries  as  a 
traditional  method  of  curing  inflammatory 

 

Basil 

37

disorders. The anti-inflammatory activity of 
basil  is  largely  credited  to  the  presence  of 
eugenol, which can block the activity of the 
enzyme  cyclooxygenase  (COX).  Basil  ex-
tracts  diminish  inflammation  by  stopping 
the  release  of  pro-inflammatory  cytokines 
and  mediators  (most  notably  nitric  oxide). 
Cytokines are proteins that are passed from 
one cell to another that sanction direct cell-to- 
cell communication (Singh and Majumdar, 
1997; Singh, 1998).

Immunomodulatory activity

Steam-distilled  basil  essential  oil  altered 
the  humoral  immune  response  in  albino 
rats.  This  response  could  be  attributed  to 
the  discharge  of  mediators  of  hypersensi-
tivity  reactions,  antibody  production  and 
tissue responses to these mediators in the 
target organs. Basil bolsters the immune re-
action by improving both cellular and hu-
moral immunity (Mukherjee et al., 2005).

Adaptogenic/anti-stress  

activity

The immunostimulant capacity of basil ac-
counts for its adaptogenic action. Basil ale 
enhanced  the  survival  time  of  swimming 
mice and prevented milk-induced leucocyt-
osis  in  mice  and  stress-induced  ulcers  in 
rats. Stress is ‘non-specific result of any de-
mand upon the body’ and is experienced by 
every  individual.  It  can  be  either  psycho-
logical or physical. Extreme stress is harm-
ful for the body and its immediate treatment 
is  required.  Stress  is  also  involved  in  the 
pathogenesis  of  a  variety  of  diseases,  in-
cluding  psychiatric  disorders  such  as  im-
munosuppression,  depression  and  anxiety, 
endocrine disorders such as diabetes melli-
tus, cognitive dysfunction, male impotence, 
hypertension,  peptic  ulcers  and  ulcerative 
colitis. Basil has good rejuvenating activity 
and helps to reduce stress, assist the body 
by improving memory and relax the mind. 
The  anti-hypoxic  effect  of  basil  increases 
the survival time in anoxic stress. Basil re-
duced oxidative stress in a study conducted 
with rabbits (Chattopadhyay et al., 1992).

Antidiabetic activity

One  of  the  most  important  capabilities  of 
basil  found  in  recent  times  is  its  antidia-
betic  activity.  The  anti-glycaemic  proper-
ties of basil have been reported by various 
researchers but the mechanism of this ac-
tion  has  not  yet  been  explained.  A  study 
with neem (Azadirachta indica) and basil 
leaves  blended  together  showed  that  this 
blend significantly lowered the sugar level 
in  diabetic  patients.  Basil  extract  also 
caused a noticeable drop of blood sugar in 
normal, streptozotocin (STZ)-induced and 
glucose- fed  hyperglycaemic  and  diabetic 
rats.  A  completely  randomized,  placebo- 
controlled,  cross-over  single  blind  trial  of 
holy basil leaves in humans showed a no-
ticeable  drop  in  postprandial  and  fasting 
blood glucose levels of 7.3 and 17.6%, re-
spectively.  A  similar  trend  was  noted  in 
urine glucose levels. The aldose reductase 
activity  of  basil  assists  in  reducing  the 
complications of diabetes, such as retinop-
athy,  cataract,  etc.  (Mandal  et  al.,  1993; 
Halder  et  al.,  2003;  Kochhar  et  al.,  2009; 
Nair et al., 2009).

Antipyretic activity

The antipyretic action of basil fixed oil ex-
tracted from the seeds was examined in rats 
against  typhoid-paratyphoid  A/B  vaccine- 
induced  pyrexia.  The  intraperitoneal  (ip) 
administration of basil fixed oil significantly 
decreased the febrile response, thereby dem-
onstrating  its  antipyretic  activity.  The  oil 
showed  comparable  antipyretic  activity  to 
aspirin at a dose of 3 ml/kg. Additionally, it 
has prostaglandin inhibitory activity which 
can be explained by its antipyretic activity 
(Singh et al., 2007).

Anti-arthritic activity

Formaldehyde-induced arthritis in rats was 
studied to evaluate the anti-arthritic activity 
of basil fixed oil. The fixed oil significantly 
reduced inflamed paw diameter. There was 
conspicuous  progress  in  the  improvement 
in the arthritic conditions of rats on ip dos-
age of the oil for 10 days. The anti-arthritic 
effect of the basil fixed oil at 3 ml/kg dose 

38 

D. Lupton et al. 

was analogous to that of aspirin at 100 mg/kg. 
The  oil  inhibited  inflammatory  mediators 
(e.g.  histamine,  serotonin,  prostaglandin-2 
(PGE-2)  and  bradykinin)  and  carrageenan- 
induced inflammation. The end result sug-
gests possibly useful anti-arthritic properties 
of  basil  oil  in  these  inflammation  models 
(Singh  and  Majumdar,  1996;  Singh  et  al., 
2007).

Use in cardiovascular disease

The  cholesterol  and  triglyceride-lowering 
properties of basil offer potential for inhibit-
ing cardiovascular disease. The combination 
of  LDL  (low-density  lipoprotein)  choles-
terol  (which  clogs  blood  vessels)  and  high 
levels of circulating triglycerides (a fat form 
in the blood) are risk factors for heart attack, 
stroke  and  atherosclerosis.  Basil  extracts 
slowed down platelet aggregation and throm-
bosis,  suggesting  their  potential  for  stroke 
prevention and heart attack (Sharma et al., 
2001).

Antioxidant activity

The  unique  health  benefits  of  basil  are  pri-
marily due to its very high antioxidant con-
tent, and the antioxidants (e.g. phytochemicals 
such as phenolics and vitamins) that it con-
tains  contribute  to  disease  prevention.  The 
principal subtype of basil phenolics is its fla-
vonoids, which include orientin and vicenin; 
and the plant also contains eugenol and an-
thocyanins. The presence of anthocyanins in 
purple  basils  is  responsible  for  their  deep 
red–violet pigmentation. All of the cultivars 
of purple basils contain very high antioxidant 
activity  due  to  their  anthocyanin  content 
(Khan et al., 2008).

3.5  Summary

Basil (Ocimum basilicum L.) is an annual to 
perennial herb that is grown around the world 
for use as a food flavouring, in essential oil ap-
plications  and  in  traditional  medicinal  prac-
tices.  Basil  contains  mostly  methyl  chavicol 
(estragole), eugenol and linalool. The amount 
of each of these chemical constituents differs 
depending on the type of species or cultivar 
and the cultivation, such as soil type, weather, 
irrigation,  pruning  and  other  horticultural 
practices. Basil is a vital component of several 
industrial  applications,  ranging  from  food  to 
cosmetics to pharmaceuticals. More uses and 
applications of basil by-products are continu-
ously being added.

Basil  is  a  key  ingredient  in  vinegars, 
oils,  cheeses,  jams,  teas,  drinks  and  li-
queurs. It has an extensive list of traditional 
medicinal uses. The unique health benefits 
of  basil  are  primarily  due  to  its  very  high 
antioxidant content. O. basilicum has been 
utilized  to  treat  kidney  problems,  gum  ul-
cers, as a haemostyptic in childbirth and for 
problems as diverse as malaria, arthritis, an-
orexia, menstrual irregularities and earache.
Further  research  on  maximizing  the 
yield per hectare and on the optimum preser-
vation and oil extraction methods are needed, 
particularly in the developing world, where 
basil leaf and flower harvesting and posthar-
vest processing methods are very traditional.

Acknowledgements

The  authors  acknowledge  Sultan  Qaboos 
University  and  The  Research  Council  of 
Oman for partially funding this work.

References

Agarwal, C., Sharma, N.L. and Gaurav, S.S. (2013) An analysis of basil (Ocimum sp.) to study the mor-

phological variability. Indian Journal of Fundamental and Applied Life Sciences 3, 521–525.

Aggarwal, B.B. and Shishodia, S. (2006) Molecular targets of dietary agents for prevention and therapy 

of cancer. Biochemical Pharmacology 71, 1397–1421.

Al-Maskri, A.Y., Hanif, M.A., Al-Maskari, M.Y., Abraham, A.S., Al-Sabahi, J.N. and Al-Mantheri, O. 
(2011) Essential oil from Ocimum basilicum (Omani Basil): a desert crop. Natural Product Com-
munications 6, 1487–1490.

 

Basil 

39

Arfat, Y.A., Benjakul, S., Prodpran, T., Sumpavapol, P. and Songtipya, P. (2014) Properties and anti-
microbial activity of fish protein isolate/fish skin gelatin film containing basil leaf essential oil 
and zinc oxide nanoparticles. Food Hydrocolloids 41, 265–273.

Askerova, A., Guseinov, I., Azimov, A., Dmitrieva, N. and Shamsizade, R. (1993) Manufacture of the 

carbonated fermented milk beverage, Airan. USSR Patent, SU 1796122.

Bansod, S. and Rai, M. (2008) Antifungal activity of essential oils from Indian medicinal plants against 
human pathogenic Aspergillus fumigatus and A. niger. World Journal of Medical Sciences 3, 
81–88.

Benedec, D., Pârvu, A.E., Oniga, I., Toiu, A. and Tiperciuc, B. (2007) Effects of Ocimum basilicum L. 
extract on experimental acute inflammation. Revista Medico-chirurgicala a Societatii de Medici si 
Naturalisti din Iasi 111, 1065–1069.

Bilal, A., Jahan, N., Ahmed, A., Bilal, S.N., Habib, S. and Hajra, S. (2012) Phytochemical and pharma-
cological studies on Ocimum basilicum L. – a review. International Journal of Current Research 
and Review 4(23), 73–83.

Boggia, R., Zunin, P., Hysenaj, V., Bottino, A. and Comite, A. (2015) Dehydration of basil leaves and 
impact of processing composition. In: Preedy, V. (ed.) Processing and Impact on Active Compo-
nents in Food. Academic Press, San Diego, California, pp. 645–653.

Chattopadhyay, R.R., Sarkar, S.K., Ganguly, S., Medda, C. and Basu, T.K. (1992) Hepatoprotective 
activity of O. sanctum leaf extract against paracetamol induced hepatic damage in rats. Indian 
Journal of Pharmacology 24, 163.

Chiang, L.C., Ng, L.T., Cheng, P.W., Chiang, W. and Lin, C.C. (2005) Antiviral activities of extracts and 
selected pure constituents of Ocimum basilicum. Clinical and Experimental Pharmacology and 
Physiology 32, 811–816.

Darrah, H.H. (1980) The Cultivated Basils. T.E. Thomas, Independence, Missouri.
DeBaggio, T. and Belsinger, S. (1996) Basil: An Herb Lover’s Guide. Interweave Press, Loveland, Colorado.
Denny, E.F.K. (1995) Field Distillation for Herbaceous Oils. Denny Mckenzie Associates, Lilydale, Tas-

mania, Australia.

Devi, P.U. (2001) Radioprotective, anticarcinogenic and antioxidant properties of the Indian holy basil, 

Ocimum sanctum (tulasi). Indian Journal of Experimental Biology 39, 185–190.

Devi, P.U., Bisht, K. and Vinitha, M. (1998) A comparative study of radioprotection by Ocimum flavonoids 

and synthetic aminothiol protectors in the mouse. The British Journal of Radiology 71, 782–784.

Devi, P.U., Ganasoundari, A., Vrinda, B., Srinivasan, K. and Unnikrishnan, M. (2000) Radiation protec-
tion by the Ocimum flavonoids orientin and vicenin: mechanisms of action. Radiation Research 
154, 455–460.

Dymock, W., Warden, C.J.H. and Hooper, D. (2005) A History of the Principal Drugs of Vegetable Ori-

gin. Pharmacographica Indica, Vol. III. Shrishti Book Distributors, New Delhi, pp. 82–85.

Ghazanfar, S.A. and Al Sabahi, A.M.A. (1993) Medicinal plants of northern and central Oman. Eco-

nomic Botany 47, 89–98.

Ghosh, G.R. (1995) Tulasi (genus Ocimum). New Approaches to Medicine and Health (NAMAH) 3, 23–29.
Grieve, M.A. (1931) A Modern Herbal, Vol. 2. Dover, New York.
Grieve, M. and Marshall, M. (1982) A Modern Herbal: The Medicinal, Culinary, Cosmetic and Eco-
nomic Properties, Cultivation and Folk-lore of Herbs, Grasses, Fungi, Shrubs, and Trees with All 
Their Modern Scientific Uses. Dover, New York.

Halder, N., Joshi, N. and Gupta, S.K. (2003) Lens aldose reductase inhibiting potential of some indigen-

ous plants. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 86, 113–116.

Hanif, M.A., Al-Maskari, M.Y., Al-Maskari, A., Al-Shukaili, A., Al-Maskari, A.Y. and Al-Sabahi, J.N. 
(2011) Essential oil composition, antimicrobial and antioxidant activities of unexplored Omani 
basil. Journal of Medicinal Plants Research 5, 751–757.

Hannan, J., Marenah, L., Ali, L., Rokeya, B., Flatt, P. and Abdel-Wahab, Y. (2006) Ocimum sanctum leaf 
extracts stimulate insulin secretion from perfused pancreas, isolated islets and clonal pancreatic 
β-cells. Journal of Endocrinology 189, 127–136.

Hiltunen, R. and Holm, Y. (eds) (1999) Basil: The Genus Ocimum. Medical and Aromatic Plants – In-
dustrial Profiles Volume 10. Harwood Academic Publishers, Amsterdam.152. Also reprinted in 
2003 by Taylor & Francis Group, CRC Press, Abingdon, UK.

Hosseini-Parvar, S.H., Matia-Merino, L. and Golding, M. (2015) Effect of basil seed gum (BSG) on tex-
tural, rheological and microstructural properties of model processed cheese. Food Hydrocol-
loids 44, 557–567.

40 

D. Lupton et al. 

Jacqueline, A.S. (2001) Father Kino’s herbs: growing and using them today. Tierra Del Sol Institute 

Press, Tucson, Arizona.

Karthikeyan,  K.,  Ravichandran,  P.  and  Govindasamy,  S.  (1999)  Chemopreventive  effect  of  Ocimum 

sanctum on DMBA-induced hamster buccal pouch carcinogenesis. Oral Oncology 35, 112–119.

Khan, N., Afaq, F. and Mukhtar, H. (2008) Cancer chemoprevention through dietary antioxidants: pro-

gress and promise. Antioxidants and Redox Signaling 10, 475–510.

Kochhar, A., Sharma, N. and Sachdeva, R. (2009) Effect of supplementation of tulsi (Ocimum sanctum) 
and neem (Azadirachta indica) leaf powder on diabetic symptoms, anthropometric parameters 
and blood pressure of non-insulin dependent male diabetics. Studies on Ethno-Medicine 3, 5–9.

Lawless, J. (1992) The Encyclopedia of Essential Oils. Element Books, Rockport, Massachusetts.
Madhuri,  S.  (2001)  Studies  on  oestrogen  induced  uterine  and  ovarian  carcinogenesis  and  effect  of 

ProImmu in rats. PhD thesis, Rani Durgavati Vishwa Vidyalaya, Jabalpur, India.

Malik, M.S., Rafique, M., Sattar, A. and Khan, S.A. (1987) The fatty acids of indigenous resources for 
possible industrial applications. Part XII: the fatty acid composition of the fixed oils of Ocimum 
sanctum and Salvia aegyptica seeds. Pakistan Journal of Scientific and Industrial Research 30, 
369–371.

Malik, M.S., Sattar, A. and Khan, S.A. (1989) The fatty acids of indigenous resources from possible in-
dustrial applications. Part XVII: the fatty acid composition of the fixed oils of Ocimum basilicum 
and Ocimum album seeds. Pakistan Journal of Scientific and Industrial Research 32, 207–208.

Mandal, S., Das, D.N., Kamala, D., Ray, K., Roy, G., Chaudhari, S.B. and Sahana, C.C. (1993) Ocimum 
sanctum  Linn.  –  a  study  on  gastric  ulceration  and  gastric  secretion  in  rats.  Indian  Journal  of 
Physiology and Pharmacology 37, 91–92.

Meyers,  M.  (ed.)  (2003)  Basil:  An  Herb  Society  of  America  Guide.  The  Herb  Society  of  America, 
Kirtland,  Ohio.  Available  at:  http://www.herbsociety.org/factsheets/Basil%20Guide.pdf  (accessed 
14 July 2015).

Miele, M., Dondero, R., Ciarallo, G. and Mazzei, M. (2001) Methyleugenol in Ocimum basilicum L. Cv. 

‘Genovese Gigante’. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 49, 517–521.

Mondal, S., Mirdha, B.R. and Mahapatra, S.C. (2009) The science behind sacredness of tulsi (Ocimum 

sanctum Linn.). Indian Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology 53, 291–306.

Mukherjee, R., Das, P.K. and Ram, G.C. (2005) Immunotherapeutic potential of Ocimum sanctum Linn. 

bovine subclinical mastitis. Research in Veterinary Science 79, 37–43.

Nahak, G., Mishra, R.C. and Sahu, R.K. (2011) Taxonomic distribution, medicinal properties and drug 

development potentiality of Ocimum (tulsi). Drug Invention Today 3(6), 95–113.

Nair,  V.D.,  Jaleel,  C.A.,  Gopi,  R.,  Gomathinayagam,  M.  and  Panneerselvam,  R.  (2009)  Antioxidant 
 potential of Ocimum sanctum under growth regulator treatments. EurAsian Journal of BioSciences 
3, 1–9.

Pandey, V.N. and Dubey, N.K. (1992) Effect of essential oils from some higher plants against fungi caus-

ing damping-off disease. Biologia Plantarum 34, 143–147.

Pandey,  V.N.  and  Dubey,  N.K.  (1994)  Antifungal  potential  of  leaves  and  essential  oils  from  higher 

plants against soil phytopathogens. Soil Biology and Biochemistry 26, 1417–1421.

Pandey, G. and Madhuri, S. (2010) Pharmacological activities of Ocimum sanctum (tulsi): a review. 

International Journal of Pharmaceutical Science: Reviews and Research 5, 61–66.

Paton, A. (1992) A synopsis of Ocimum L. (Labiatae) in Africa. Kew Bulletin 47, 403–435.
Phadke, S. and Kulkarni, S. (1989) Screening of in vitro antibacterial activity of Terminalia chebula, 

Eclapta alba and Ocimum sanctum. Indian Journal of Medical Sciences 43, 113–117.

Pushpangadan, P. and George, V. (2012) Basil. In: Peter, K.V. (ed.) Handbook of Herbs and Spices, 2nd 

edn. Woodhead Publishing, Cambridge, UK, pp. 55–72.

Putievsky, E. and Galambosi, B. (1999) Production systems of sweet basil. In: Hiltunen, R. and Holm, Y. 
(eds) Basil: The Genus Ocimum, Medical and Aromatic Plants – Industrial Profiles, Volume 10. 
Harwood Academic Publishers, Amsterdam, pp. 39–65.

Rai, V., Iyer, U. and Mani, U. (1997) Effect of tulasi (Ocimum sanctum) leaf powder supplementation 
on blood sugar levels, serum lipids and tissues lipids in diabetic rats. Plant Foods for Human 
Nutrition 50, 9–16.

Rivera Núñez, D., Matilla Séiquer, G., Obón, C. and Alcaraz Arixa, F. (2012) Plants and Humans in the 
Near East and the Caucasus. Ancient and Traditional Uses of Plants as Foods and Medicine. An 
Ethnobotanical Diachronic Review. Vol. 1: The Landscapes, The Plants: Ferns and Gymnosperms. 
Ediciones de la Universidad de Murcia, Murcia, Spain.

 

Basil 

41

Sharma, M., Kishore, K., Gupta, S.K., Joshi, S. and Arya, D.S. (2001) Cardioprotective potential of Ocimum 
sanctum in isoproterenol induced myocardial infarction in rats. Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry 
225, 75–83.

Simon, J.E. (1995) Basil. Newcrop factsheet. Purdue University, Centre for New Crops and Plant Products, 
West  Lafayette,  Indiana.  Available  at:  http://www.hort.purdue.edu/newcrop/CropFactSheets/
basil.html (accessed 29 May 2003).

Simon, J.E., Morales, M.R., Phippen, W.B., Vieira, R.F. and Hao, Z. (1999) Basil: a source of aroma com-
pounds  and  a  popular  culinary  and  ornamental  herb.  In:  Janick,  J.  (ed.)  Perspectives  on  New 
Crops and New Uses. ASHS Press, Alexandria, Virginia, pp. 499–505. Available at: https://hort.
purdue.edu/newcrop/proceedings1999/v4-499.html (accessed 5 February 2016).

Singh, S. (1998) Comparative evaluation of antiinflammatory potential of fixed oil of different species 
of  Ocimum  and  its  possible  mechanism  of  action.  Indian  Journal  of  Experimental  Biology  36, 
1028–1031.

Singh, S. (1999) Evaluation of gastric anti-ulcer activity of fixed oil of Ocimum basilicum Linn. and its 

possible mechanism of action. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology 37, 253–257.

Singh, S. and Majumdar, D.K. (1996) Effect of fixed oil of Ocimum sanctum against experimentally 
induced arthritis and joint edema in laboratory animals. International Journal of Pharmaceutics 
34, 218–222.

Singh, S. and Majumdar, D.K. (1997) Evaluation of antiinflammatory activity of fatty acids of Ocimum 

sanctum fixed oil. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology 35, 380–383.

Singh, S., Taneja, M. and Majumdar, D.K. (2007) Biological activities of Ocimum sanctum L. fixed oil – an 

overview. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology 45, 403–412.

Somkuwar, A.P. (2003) Studies on anticancer effects of Ocimum sanctum and Withania somnifera on 
experimentally  induced  cancer  in  mice.  PhD  thesis,  Jawaharlal  Nehru  Krishi  Viswavidyalaya, 
Jabalpur, India.

Srivastava, A.K. (1980) French Basil and Its Cultivation in India. Farm Bulletin No. 16. Central Institute 

Medicinal and Aromatic Plants, Lucknow, India.

Svecova, E. and Neugebauerova, J. (2010) A study of 34 cultivars of basil (Ocimum L.) and their morpho-
logical, economic and biochemical characteristics, using standardized descriptors. Acta Universitatis 
Sapientiae, Alimentaria 3, 118–135.

Tewari, D., Pandey, H.K., Sah, A.N., Meena, H.S., Manchanda, A. and Patni, P. (2012) Pharmacognos-
tical, biochemical and elemental investigation of Ocimum basilicum plants available in western 
Himalayas.  International  Journal  of  Research  in  Pharmaceutical  and  Biomedical  Sciences  3, 
840–845.

Tilebeni, H.G. (2011) Review to basil medicinal plant. International Journal of Agronomy and Plant 

Production 2, 5–9.

Tucker, A.O. and DeBaggio, T. (2000) The Big Book of Herbs: A Comprehensive Illustrated Reference to 

Herbs of Flavor and Fragrance. Interweave Press, Loveland, Colorado.

Wijesekera, R.O.B. (1986) Practical Manual on the Essential Oils Industry. United Nations Industrial 

Development Organization, Vienna.

4  Bay

Hülya Çakmak,* Seher Kumcuoglu and S¸ebnem Tavman

Ege University, Bornova, Izmir, Turkey

4.1  Botany

4.1.1 

Introduction

The bay, Laurus nobilis L., is indigenous to 
Asia  Minor  and  the  Mediterranean  basin, 
and  its  dried  aromatic  leaves  are  used  as  a 
culinary herb. The plant is also used medicin-
ally, especially in traditional folk medicine. 
Cultivated bay plants are pruned to different 
topiary shapes and used as ornamental plants 
in temperate zones. The species is categorized 
as a non-timber (secondary) forest product.

L. nobilis is a perennial, evergreen tree or 
shrub and is known as sweet bay, true bay, 
bay laurel, Turkish laurel, Roman laurel, sweet 
laurel  or  true  laurel  (Kumar  et  al.,  2001; 
Charles, 2013; FAO, 2014). Common names 
of bay in other languages are: ghar (Arabic), 
yueh kuei (Chinese), feuille de laurier (French), 
Lorbeerblatt (German), daphni (Greek), foglia 
di alloro (Italian), gekkeiju (Japanese), louro 
(Portuguese), lawr (Russian), hojas de laurel 
(Spanish) and defne yaprag˘ı (Turkish) (Sei-
demann, 2005; Raghavan, 2007). Indian bay 
(Cinnamomum  tamala  (Buch.-Ham.)  Th. 
G.G.  Nees),  Californian  bay  (Umbellularia 
californica (Hook. & Arn.) Nutt.), West Indian 
bay (Pimenta racemosa (Mill.) J.W. Moore), 

Indonesian bay (Eugenia polyantha, preferred 
name Syzygium polyanthum (Wight) Walp.) 
and cherry laurel (Prunus laurocerasus L.) 
are other commercially available herbal ‘bay’ 
plants and can be confused with true L. no-
bilis (Buttery et al., 1974; Kumar et al., 2001; 
Weiss, 2002; Raghavan, 2007).

Dried bay leaves are a popular herb that 
is widely used in pickles, soup, meat and fish 
dishes, casseroles and sauces; it is also used 
in spice mixes such as bouquet garni (Akgul, 
1993; Raghavan, 2007; Charles, 2013). Apart 
from  the  food  industry,  the  essential  and 
fixed oils of the leaves and fruits are utilized 
in soap, perfumery, cream, cosmetics, pharma-
ceutical  formulations  and  candle  making 
(Acar, 1988; Akgul, 1993; Elzebroek and Wind, 
2008).

Turkey is the third largest herb and spice 
producer after India and Bangladesh (FAO 
STAT,  2014),  and  bay  leaf  provides  one  of 
highest sources of total export revenues from 
herbs and spices after thyme, cumin, sage and 
nigella (black cumin, Nigella sativa L.) (BAKA, 
2012). Some 90% of high-quality dried bay 
leaf sales throughout the world are supplied 
by Turkey (BAKA, 2012), although the domes-
tic consumption is quite high as well. Accord-
ing  to  the  export  statistics  of  the  Aegean 

*Corresponding author, e-mail: hulya.cakmak@ege.edu.tr

42 

© CAB International 2016. Leafy Medicinal Herbs: Botany, Chemistry,  
Postharvest Technology and Uses (eds D.C.P. Ambrose et al.)

 

Bay 

43

Exporters Association (AEA), the total dried 
bay leaf export of Turkey is gradually increas-
ing by year, as shown in Fig. 4.1 (AEA, 2014). 
The biggest importers of bay leaf are Vietnam, 
the  USA,  Russia,  Poland  and  Germany. 
Besides export of the bay leaf as a culinary 
herb, the essential oil of the leaves and fruits 
is also exported, although the statistics for 
this are not included in Fig. 4.1.

4.1.2  History/origin

In  the  plant  kingdom,  Mediterranean  bay 
(L. nobilis) is in the division Magnoliophyta, 
class Magnoliopsida, order Laurales, family 
Lauraceae, subfamily Lauroideae, tribe Lit-
seae, subtribe Laurineae and genus Laurus 
(Acar, 1987; Ceylan, 1997; Weiss, 2002; Sei-
demann, 2005; FAO, 2014). The Lauraceae 
family includes 50 genera and 2000 species 
of trees and shrubs (Wiart, 2006). The genus 
Laurus includes two varieties of L. nobilis, 
L. nobilis itself and Laurus nobilis var. angus-
tifolia (Acar, 1987). Bay belongs to the same 
family as avocado, sassafras and cinnamon.
In Greek mythology, Daphne, who is es-
caping from the love of the Greek God Apollo, 
prayed to the river God that she should dis-

appear and she was turned into a sacred laurel 
tree. Bay leaves are therefore symbols of im-
mortality,  grace,  victory,  peace,  prosperity, 
merit, nobility and glory in Ancient Greek and 
Roman mythology, and even today. Because 
of this, heroes and wise men were rewarded 
with wreaths made from bay leaves and branches 
in ancient times (Elzebroek and Wind, 2008; 
Charles,  2013).  The  winners  of  the  Pythian 
Games (the forerunner of the Olympic Games) 
were  honoured  with  a  laurel  wreath  in  the 
memory  of  Apollo  (Raghavan,  2007).  The 
meaning of ‘Laurus’ is ‘crown of laurel’ and 
‘triumph’. Bay leaves are also believed to pro-
tect from lightning strikes (Weiss, 2002). Gov-
ernment bodies in Turkey, such as the Turkish 
Armed  Forces,  the  Gendarmerie  General 
Command,  Ministry  of  Education,  Turkish 
Police  Department,  High  Council  of  Judges 
and Prosecutors, Ministry of Youth and Sports 
and some of the municipalities use a bay leaf 
or laurel wreath as an emblem to represent the 
superior attributes of those bodies.

4.1.3  Location

The motherland of bay is Asia Minor and the 
Balkan  Peninsula  (Acar,  1987).  In  ancient 

)
n
o
t
(
 
t
r
o
p
x
e

 
l

a
t
o
T

12,000

10,000

8,000

6,000

4,000

2,000

0

2007

2008

2009

Total (ton)
Total (million US$)

2010

2011

Year

30

20

10

T
o
t
a

l
 

e
x
p
o
r
t
 
(

m

i
l
l
i

 

o
n
U
S
$
)

2012

2013

2014a

Fig. 4.1.  Turkey’s total dried bay leaf export; a2014 figures for January–July only. From AEA, 2014.

44 

H. Çakmak et al. 

times, the plant spread to the whole of the 
Mediterranean  coast.  Today,  wild  plants 
grow in the Mediterranean basin, Asia Minor 
(Anatolia), the Balkan Peninsula and western, 
middle  and  southern  parts  of  Europe,  and 
the coast of the Black Sea in Russia where 
the  climate  is  quite  favourable  for  maquis 
vegetation  (Acar,  1987).  Wild  plants  have 
adapted  to  the  climate  of  the  whole  coast-
line  of  Turkey,  namely  the  Black  Sea,  Ae-
gean Sea and the Mediterranean Sea. Plants 
are also cultivated in Turkey, Greece, France, 
Spain,  Italy,  Portugal,  China,  Israel,  Asia 
Minor,  Central  America  and  Arabic  coun-
tries  from  Libya  to  Morocco  (Kumar  et  al., 
2001; Board, 2010; Charles, 2013). Accord-
ing  to  the  classification  of  European  Spice 
Association (ESA), the bay tree grows in tem-
perate  climate  zones.  The  climate  biome 
classification  for  bay  is  tropical  wet,  trop-
ical  wet  and  dry,  steppe  or  semiarid,  sub-
tropical  dry  summer,  temperate  oceanic, 
temperate  continental  and  temperate  with 
dry  winters  (UNIDO  and  FAO,  2005).  A 
short  summer  drought  period  with  suffi-
cient  temperature  and  rainfall  promotes 
vegetative  production  and  the  leaves  be-
come  bigger,  thinner  and  tender,  while  in 
regions that have a longer summer drought, 
plant  growth  reaches  a  standstill  and  the 
leaves become smaller, thicker and tougher 
(Acar, 1988).

The optimum growing conditions for the 
west Anatolian bay plant are given as: from 
sea level to 600 m altitude, sometimes up to 
1000 m in the south; located on a plain, at 
the bottom of a hill, by the mouth of a stream 
or by a hill stream; shade exposure to the east, 
north, north-west or north-east; 600 mm to 
2000  mm  annual  rainfall;  warm  temperat-
ures (~15°C), but able to withstand several 
degrees of frost; sites where the soils were 
formed in alluvium and colluvium derived 
from  limestone  and  mica  schist;  and  soil 
texture moderate (loam) with the pH neutral 
or slightly alkaline (Erden, 2005; Elzebroek 
and Wind, 2008; EFRI, 2014). Bay plants can 
be propagated from seed, by cuttings or by 
layering (Elzebroek and Wind, 2008). How-
ever, propagation from seed is utilized as it 
provides  greater  harvest  efficiency  (Acar, 
1987). The plant shows periodicity in seed-

ing, and the seeds exhibit double dormancy 
because  of  the  characteristics  of  both  the 
seed coat and embryo (EFRI, 2014). The peri-
carp is scarified and removed from the seed 
to aid further germination.

Wild  or  cultivated  bay  can  sometimes 
be affected by damage caused by the follow-
ing  insects:  Trioza  alacris,  Aonidia  lauri, 
Dynaspidiotus britannicus, Ceroplastes japon-
icus, C. rubens, Pulvinaria regali, Cacoecimor-
pha pronubana, Archips rosanus and Otio-
rhynchus  ovalipennis  (Weiss,  2002;  EFRI, 
2014). Chemical pesticides may reduce the 
harm  of  these  insects,  although  pesticide 
residues can remain and result in a decrease 
in the yield of essential oil.

4.1.4  Morphology

The bay is a dioecious leafy evergreen tree 
or  shrub  up  to  10  m  high  for  wild  plants 
and up to 3 m for cultivated plants (Spratt, 
1830;  Acar,  1987;  Akgul,  1993;  Weiss, 
2002; Elzebroek and Wind, 2008). Cultivated 
plants, owing to their shorter height, can 
be ranked as shrubs, but wild plants can be 
ranked as trees (Spratt, 1830). The stem is 
branched, covered with shiny, smooth, olive 
green  or  dark  brown  bark  (Spratt,  1830; 
Elzebroek  and  Wind,  2008;  Parthasarathy 
et al., 2008). The plant has a great ability to 
generate  shoots  from  the  roots  and  stools 
(Acar,  1987).  The  flowers  are  yellow  and 
white and appear in clusters; most of the male 
flowers have 10–12 stamens, while the female 
flowers have four non-functional staminoids 
(Acar, 1987). The small, oval- shaped greenish 
fruits turn deep purple or black after ripening 
(Spratt, 1830; Acar, 1987; Akgul, 1993; Kumar 
et  al.,  2001).  The  fruits  are  1–1.5  cm  in 
diameter; 28% of the fruit weight is flesh and 
72% seed (Baytop, 1984; Acar, 1987; Erden, 
2005).The leaves are thick, firm and leathery 
with  short  stalks,  lanceolate  or  lanceolate 
 oblong in shape with an acuminate leaf tip, 
rounded  leaf  base;  they  are  about  5–12  cm 
long  and  2–5  cm  wide,  with  entire  wavy 
margins.  The  upper  surface  of  the  leaf  is 
glossy,  yellowish/olive  green  to  brown  and 
the  lower  surface  is  pale  olive  to  brown 

 

Bay 

45

with  pinnate  venation,  as  can  be  seen  in 
Fig. 4.2 (Baytop, 1984; Akgul, 1993; Kumar 
et al., 2001; Raghavan, 2007; Elzebroek and 
Wind, 2008).

4.2  Chemistry

4.2.1  Chemical composition

The major and minor nutrients of dried bay 
leaf  are  listed  in  Table  4.1.  Apart  from  the 
listed  nutrients,  dried  leaves  also  include 
essential  oils,  tannins,  resin  and  mucilage 
(Baytop, 1984; Akgul, 1993). The fresh leaves 
have about 50% moisture content (Çakmak 
et al., 2013) and the dried leaves have a mois-
ture content of 5–10% (Elzebroek and Wind, 
2008). Wild and cultivated bay leaves show 
a different nutrient composition. For example, 
the total sugar content of wild samples was 
significantly  higher  (p  <  0.05)  than  that  of 
cultivated samples (Dias et al., 2014). How-
ever, as far as the total carbohydrate level is 
concerned, the wild and cultivated samples 
were statistically in the same group. The lipid 

Fig. 4.2.  A cultivated bay leaf plant in the yard of 
Ege University campus in Turkey.

Table 4.1.  Nutrient contents of bay leaf. From USDA, 2014.

Nutrients

Proximate analysis

Energy
Fibre, total dietary
Protein
Total lipid (fat)
Water
Carbohydrate (by difference)

Lipids

Cholesterol
Fatty acids, total saturated
Fatty acids, total monounsaturated
Fatty acids, total polyunsaturated

Minerals

Calcium
Iron
Magnesium
Phosphorus
Potassium
Sodium
Zinc

Vitamins
Folate
Niacin
Riboflavin
Thiamine
Vitamin A, IU
Vitamin A, RAE
Vitamin B6
Vitamin C (total ascorbic acid)

Unit

kcal
g
g
g
g
g

mg
g
g
g

mg
mg
mg
mg
mg
mg
mg

μg
mg
mg
mg
IU
μg
mg
mg

Value/100 g portion

313
26.30
7.61
8.36
5.44
74.97

0
2.28
1.64
2.29

834
43
120
113
529
23
3.70

180

2.005
0.421
0.009

6185
309

1.740

46.5

46 

H. Çakmak et al. 

(also known as fixed oil) content and compos-
ition of bay leaves and fruits are important, 
and the fruit oil has an important economic 
value, especially in soap making. The fruits 
of  the  bay  plant  contain  25–30%  fixed  oil 
(Acar, 1987; Akgul, 1993; Çelik and Yılmaz, 
1996; Erden, 2005). The main fatty acids of 
the fixed oil of commercial fruits (from Turkey) 
are oleic, linoleic, palmitic and lauric acids 
(Çelik and Yılmaz, 1996). From a similar place 
of harvest, Ozcan et al. (2010) determined that 
linoleic, lauric and palmitic acids are the main 
components  of  the  fruit  oil.  For  plants  of 
 Tunisian  origin,  lauric,  oleic,  linoleic  and 
palmitic acid had the highest contents in the 
fruit oil (Marzouki et al., 2008). Hafizogˇlu and 
Reunanen (1993) determined similar domin-
ant components in fruit oil of Turkish origin; 
analysis  by  GC-MS  (gas  chromatography– 
mass  spectrometry)  demonstrated  54.2% 
lauric acid, 17.2% linoleic acid and 15.1% 
oleic acid. The fixed oil content of leaves is 
somewhat lower than the fruits (EFRI, 2014). 
The fixed oil extracted from the leaves from 
Turkish  origin  includes  linolenic,  palmitic, 
linoleic  and  oleic  acids  (Çelik  and  Yılmaz, 
1996). Dias et al. (2014) determined 24 dif-
ferent fatty acids in both wild and cultivated 
plants. Linolenic acid was the major compo-
nent of wild samples, whereas the palmitic 
acid content was higher in cultivated plants.
The major active compounds of the plant 
are  present  in  the  essential  (volatile)  oil, 
which is extracted from the leaves, and the 
essential  oil  content  of  leaves  is  0.8–4.0% 
(Baytop, 1984; Ceylan, 1997; Raghavan, 2007). 
The  extraction  yield  and  the  composition 
of essential oil can be affected by several fac-
tors, such as: the place of harvest (edaphic, 
climatic and genetic differences), plant type 
(wild or cultivated), time/season of harvest, 
the age of shoots, the extraction and drying 
method and temperature (Acar, 1988; Diaz- 
Maroto et al., 2002; Kilic et al., 2004; Erden, 
2005; Zekovic et al., 2009; Kandi and Sefid-
kon, 2011; Sellami et al., 2011; Özek, 2012). 
Acar (1988) determined that the lowest essen-
tial oil content was obtained from leaves har-
vested in June, and the highest in August, for 
all of the plants located in the different geo-
graphical regions of Turkey. Lira et al. (2009) 
did not find any significant difference in the 

composition  of  essential  oil  in  leaves  from 
Argentina, although the total amount was the 
lowest in the December harvest. Drying tem-
perature and type of drier can influence the 
composition and amount of essential oil and 
other bioactive compounds in the leaves (Diaz- 
Maroto et al., 2002; Erden, 2005; Kandi and 
Sefidkon, 2011; Sellami et al., 2011). Depend-
ing on the drying time, significant changes 
were  obtained  in  the  overall  essential  oils 
(Diaz-Maroto et al., 2002); the composition 
of the essential oil extracted from leaf sam-
ples dried in ambient air or shade (at 22–25°C) 
gave the closest results to the fresh samples; 
the losses from this drying method were min-
imal compared those from oven, infrared (IR) 
and microwave drying (Diaz-Maroto et al., 
2002;  Kandi  and  Sefidkon,  2011;  Sellami 
et al., 2011). Sellami et al. (2011) concluded 
from  their  study  that  drying  of  bay  leaves 
resulted in the losses of some essential oils 
together  with  the  appearance  of  new  sub-
stances that were not found in fresh samples.
Hydrocarbons, alcohols, esters, phenol 
and  phenol  ethers,  and  terpene  oxides  are 
the main chemical constituents identified in 
bay leaf oil (Acar, 1987). The monoterpenoid 
1,8-cineole (25–63%), which is also known 
as eucalyptol, comprises the major compo-
nent of the essential oil; however, α-terpinyl 
acetate, sabinene, α-pinene, linalool, β-pinene, 
α-terpineol,  4-terpineol,  methyl  eugenol, 
eugenol and limonene can also be found at 
various  concentrations  depending  on  the 
aforementioned factors (Acar, 1987; Kumar 
et al., 2001; Raghavan, 2007; Board, 2010). 
The six major essential oil components found 
in bay leaves according to their geographic 
origin are listed in Table 4.2, and the chem-
ical structure of the five major essential oil 
components is shown in Fig. 4.3.

Fruits, flowers, buds and even stems of 
the bay plant, along with the leaves, have been 
investigated  for  their  volatile  compounds 
and essential oil composition. Viridiflorene 
(Fiorini et al., 1997), α-eudesmol (Kilic et al., 
2004) and 1,8-cineole (Moghtader and Salari, 
2012)  are  the  major  volatiles  in  flowers  of 
bay that have been described in the recent 
literature. For the fruits, (E)-β-ocimene is the 
major compound (Kilic et al., 2004; Marzouki 
et  al.,  2008).  For  the  buds  and  stem  bark, 

Table 4.2.  Major compounds in essential oil of bay leaves from different plant origins, in decreasing order of content.

Compound in decreasing order of content from columns 1 to 6

Origin

1

2

3

4

5

6

Reference

Algeria
Argentina
Croatia
Croatia
Northern Cyprus
France
Iran
Iran

Italy
Morocco
Morocco

Portugal
Spain
Tunisia
Tunisia
Tunisia

Turkey
Turkey
Turkey
Turkey

camphene
sabinene
α-terpinyl acetate

linalool
linalool

1,8-cineole
1,8-cineole
1,8-cineole methyl eugenol
1,8-cineole
1,8-cineole
1,8-cineole
1,8-cineole
1,8-cineole

α-terpinyl acetate methyl eugenol
α-terpinyl acetate
α-terpinyl acetate methyl eugenol
α-terpinyl acetate
sabinene

sabinene
α-pinene

4-terpineol

isovaleraldehyde
α-terpinyl acetate
linalool
sabinene
α-pinene
linalool
β-pinene
β-pinene

β-phellandrene
α-pinene
sabinene
α-terpineol
sabinene
sabinene
α-pinene
camphene

1,8-cineole
1,8-cineole
1,8-cineole

α-terpinyl acetate
isovaleraldehyde
2-carene

linalool
linalool
trans-ocimene

methyl eugenol
α-terpineol
sabinene

sabinene
2-carene
cis-ocimene

α-terpinyl acetate
linalool
α-terpinyl acetate

1,8-cineole
1,8-cineole
1,8-cineole
1,8-cineole methyl eugenol
1,8-cineole

linalool

1,8-cineole
1,8-cineole
1,8-cineole
1,8-cineole

sabinene
α-terpinyl acetate
α-terpinyl acetate
α-terpinyl acetate

linalool
α-terpinyl acetate
α-pinene
eugenol
eugenyl methyl 

ether

α-terpinyl acetate
sabinene
sabinene
sabinene

methyl eugenol
sabinene
β-pinene
4-terpineol
isovaleraldehyde

sabinene
methyl eugenol
sabinene
sabinene
camphene

caryophyllene

carvacrol
α-pinene
methyl eugenol
linalool
β-phellandrene

α-pinene
4-terpineol
α-pinene
α-pinene

β-pinene
β-pinene
β-pinene
4-terpineol

α-terpineol
α-pinene
4-terpineol
β-pinene

α-pinene
β-pinene
eugenol
α-pinene
β-pinene
limonene
α-terpineol
α-terpineol

α-terpineol
α-pinene
trans- 

Jemaa et al., 2012
Lira et al., 2009
Politeo et al., 2007
Zekovic et al., 2009
Yalçın et al., 2007
Fiorini et al., 1998
Kandi and Sefidkon, 2011
Moghtader and  

Salari, 2012

Caredda et al., 2002
Jemaa et al., 2012
Cherrat et al., 2014

Ramos et al., 2012
Diaz-Maroto et al., 2002
Bouzouita et al., 2001
Sellami et al., 2011
Jemaa et al., 2012

Kilic et al., 2004
Bayramoglu et al., 2009
Özek, 2012
El et al., 2014

 

B
a
y
 

4
7

48 

H. Çakmak et al. 

OH

O

OOC-CH3

1,8-cineole

`-terpinyl acetate

sabinene

`-pinene

linalool

Fig. 4.3.  Major components of bay leaf essential oil. Chemical formulae from Akgul, 1993.

1,8-cineole is again the major component of 
the volatiles (Fiorini et al., 1997; Kilic et al., 
2004). The main components in the wood of 
the stems are α-terpinyl acetate, methyl eu-
genol and α-copaene (Fiorini et al., 1997).

4.2.2  Phytochemistry

Antioxidant activity

Several studies have been conducted on the 
bioactive  compounds  of  bay  leaves,  fruits, 
roots, branches, bark, leaf extracts and leaf/
fruit  essential  oils.  These  physiologically 
active chemicals have antioxidant and anti-
microbial activity. Phenolic compounds, es-
pecially  flavonoids  and  tocopherols,  are 
natural  antioxidants  that  are  found  in  bay 
tissue.  These  antioxidant  compounds  are 
extracted  by  various  methods,  such  as  ex-
traction  with  chemicals  (chloroform,  etha-
nol, ether, ethyl acetate, hexane, methanol, 
n-butanol),  hydrodistillation  (steam  distil-
lation), infusion and decoction (Demo et al., 
1998; Kang et al., 2002; Conforti et al., 2006; 
Elmastas¸  et  al.,  2006;  Politeo  et  al.,  2007; 
Kaurinovic  et  al.,  2010;  Ouchikh  et  al., 
2011;  Albayrak  et  al.,  2012;  Ramos  et  al., 
2012;  Muñiz-Márquez  et  al.,  2013;  Cherrat 
et al., 2014; Dias et al., 2014; El et al., 2014).
Antioxidant  activities  of  the  extracts 
are determined according to the scavenging 
of  DPPH  (2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl), 
ABTS  (2,2′-azino-bis(3-ethylbenzothiazoline- 
6-sulfonic  acid)  and  superoxide  anion 

 radicals,  and  by  ferric  reducing  ability 
(FRAP).  Other  methods  include  the  β-caro-
tene bleaching assay, phosphomolybdenum 
assay and linoleic acid peroxidation (lipid 
oxidation). The DPPH scavenging activity of 
leaf  extracts  can  be  expressed  as  the  IC50 
(half maximal inhibitory concentration), EC50 
(half  maximal  effective  concentration)  or 
inhibition percentage values. Albayrak et al. 
(2012) reported in their study that decoction 
extracts had the highest scavenging activity 
(IC50 = 25.05 μg/ml), while methanol extracts 
had  moderate  activity  (IC50  =  30.05  μg/ml) 
and infusion extracts had the lowest activ-
ity (IC50 = 47.62 μg/ml). Conforti et al. (2006) 
found a little higher radical scavenging ac-
tivity  for  ethanolic  extracts  of  wild  bay 
leaves (IC50 = 22 ± 0.531 μg/ml), while eth-
anolic extracts of cultivated samples had an 
IC50 of 29 ± 0.634 μg/ml. Higher contents of 
eugenol, methyl eugenol and vitamin E con-
tents were associated with the higher anti-
oxidant capacity of wild plants by the authors. 
In  a  recent  study,  methanolic  extracts  of 
the  cultivated  sample  (EC50  =  150  μg/ml) 
had  higher  DPPH  scavenging  activity  than 
that of the wild sample (EC50 = 200 μg/ml) 
(Dias et al., 2014).

A clear picture of the effect of different 
solvents used on the DPPH radical scaven-
ging  activity  of  the  extracts  was  presented 
by  Kaurinovic  et  al.  (2010).  When  ether, 
chloroform, ethyl acetate, n-butanol and water 
were used as solvents, the highest DPPH rad-
ical scavenging activities were obtained for 
the ethyl acetate extracts (IC50 = 83.24 μg/ml). 

 

Bay 

49

The ethyl acetate extracts had also showed 
the highest scavenging activity of the super-
oxide anion and nitric oxide. Depending  on 
the  extraction  method  and  time,  DPPH  in-
hibition by the essential oil of bay leaf was 
found to be 83–91.1% (Cherrat et al., 2014; 
El  et  al.,  2014).  Comparably  higher  DPPH 
inhibition  was  obtained  from  ultrasound- 
assisted extracts of leaves (94.73 ± 0.49%), 
while the inhibition of lipid oxidation was 
73.55 ± 1.91% (Muñiz-Márquez et al., 2013). 
A  98.6%  inhibition  of  the  lipid  peroxida-
tion of linoleic acid emulsion was detected 
for the maximum concentration (60 μg/ml) 
of the ethanolic extract of leaves (Elmastas¸ 
et al., 2006).

The antioxidant activity of free volatile 
aglycones derived from bay leaf was evalu-
ated by the FRAP and DPPH assays, but these 
substances showed lower antioxidant activity 
than bay essential oil and synthetic antioxi-
dants (Politeo et al., 2007). In the β-carotene 
bleaching  assay,  both  the  methanolic  and 
ethanolic extracts of wild bay leaf samples 
showed higher antioxidant activity than that 
of cultivated samples (Conforti et al., 2006; 
Dias et al., 2014).

The total amounts of phenolic compounds 
in bay leaves were found to be 12–84.5 mg 
GAE  (gallic  acid  equivalents)/g  (Elmastas¸ 
et al., 2006; Muchuweti et al., 2007; Ouchikh 
et al., 2011; Albayrak et al., 2012). The tannin 
composition of bay leaves was around 10 mg 
GAE/g  (Muchuweti  et  al.,  2007).  As  well  
as the total phenolics, flavonoids and proan-
thocyanidins are other bioactive compounds 
that directly affect the total antioxidant cap-
acity  of  bay  leaf  (Ouchikh  et  al.,  2011). 
Interestingly, these compounds were found 
in higher amounts in the roots than the leaves. 
In the same study, antioxidant activity was 
measured by the phosphomolybdenum assay, 
ferrous ion chelating activity and β-carotene 
bleaching assay, but the results of these assays 
did not give the same results; instead, they 
showed  that  the  extracts  of  the  roots  had 
lower antioxidant activity than the leaves.

Another group of chemicals with anti-
oxidant activity are phenolic acids; so far, van-
illic acid, caffeic acid, ferulic acid, p-coumaric 
and 2-hydroxycinnamic acid have been iden-
tified in bay leaves (Muchuweti et al., 2007; 

Muñiz-Márquez  et  al.,  2013).  Flavonol  de-
rivatives are also present as part of the bay 
leaf flavonoid compounds; those that have 
been detected are quercetin, isorhamnetin and 
kaempferol derivatives (Fiorini et al., 1998; 
Dias  et  al.,  2014).  The  total  flavonols  and 
total flavones of cultivated bay leaves were 
found to be significantly higher than those 
of wild samples in either methanolic extracts 
or infusions (Dias et al., 2014).

Tocopherols  are  terpenoids  and  four 
different tocopherol isomers (α, β, γ and δ) 
contribute to vitamin E activity beyond show-
ing antioxidant activity. The α-tocopherol 
content  of  bay  leaves  was  found  to  be 
49.69–139.34  mg/100  g  fresh  leaf  (Gómez- 
Coronado et al., 2004; Ouchikh et al., 2011). 
The γ-tocopherol content was 0–1.15 mg/100 g 
fresh  leaf  (Gómez-Coronado  et  al.,  2004; 
Ouchikh et al., 2011). When the tocopherol 
extraction methods used were compared, the 
amounts  of  both  α-  and  γ-tocopherol  were 
found to be significantly higher (p < 0.05) by 
the micro-scale saponification method (Ou-
chikh et al., 2011). Not only the leaves but 
also  the  branches  and  roots  of  bay  are  a 
source of α and γ-tocopherol (Ouchikh et al., 
2011). Branches had comparably higher values 
than roots, and once again the micro-scale 
saponification  method  gave  better  results 
(Ouchikh et al., 2011). The total tocopherol 
and α-tocopherol contents were significantly 
higher (p < 0.05) in wild than cultivated bay 
leaves  (Conforti  et  al.,  2006;  Dias  et  al., 
2014); the α-tocopherol content was deter-
mined to be 370.05 mg/100 g dry weight (dw) 
for the wild sample, 304.74 mg/100 g dw for 
the cultivated sample, while the total tocoph-
erol content was 780.12 mg/100 g dw for the 
wild  sample  and  655.70  mg/100  g  dw  for 
the cultivated sample (Dias et al., 2014). The 
tocopherol  extraction  method,  plant  type 
(wild  or  cultivated),  plant  part  and  even 
the  solvents  used  may  be  responsible  for 
the variation in the results obtained.

Four  anthocyanins  were  identified  in 
the fruits (berries) of the bay leaf plant in a 
study by Longo and Vasapollo (2005); these 
were  cyanidin-3-O-glucoside,  cyanidin-3-
O- rutinoside, peonidin-3-O-glucoside and 
peonidin-3-O-rutinoside.  Of  these  four  an-
thocyanins,  cyanidin-3-O-rutinoside  was 

50 

H. Çakmak et al. 

the major component, at 116 mg/g stoned 
fresh berry.

Overall,  the  antioxidant  activity  and 
the  amount  and  composition  of  bioactive 
substances in bay vary significantly and the 
factors affecting the composition are similar 
to those that affect the essential oil compos-
ition of the plant.

Antimicrobial activity

The  antimicrobial  activity  of  the  essential 
oils and extracts of herbs and spices is a popu-
lar subject, as some of them are quite prom-
ising. Intensive studies have been done on 
the  antimicrobial  activity  of  extracts  made 
using various solvents (ethanol, ethyl acetate, 
hexane), and also on hydrodistilled extracts, 
SFE/SPFE  (supercritical  fluid  extraction) 
extracts, essential oils and even ground bay 
leaf (Aktug˘ and Karapinar, 1986; Dadalıog˘lu 
and Evrendilek, 2004; Santoyo et al., 2006; 
Derwich et al., 2009; El Malti and Amarouch, 
2009; De Corato et al., 2010; Ceyhan et al., 
2012;  Ramos  et  al.,  2012;  Cherrat  et  al., 
2014; El et al., 2014; Mello da Silveira et al., 
2014).  In  these  studies,  the  effects  of  the 
extracts were tested against pathogenic Gram- 
positive and/or Gram-negative bacteria (Aktug˘ 
and  Karapinar,  1986;  Dadalıog˘lu  and 
Evrendilek,  2004;  Ertürk,  2006;  Santoyo 
et al., 2006; Derwich et al., 2009; El Malti and 
Amarouch, 2009; Ceyhan et al., 2012; Millezi 
et al., 2012; Cherrat et al., 2014; El et al., 
2014; Mello da Silveira et al., 2014), moulds 
(Simic´ et al., 2004; Ertürk, 2006; Santoyo 
et al., 2006; De Corato et al., 2010) and yeasts 
(Ertürk, 2006; Santoyo et al., 2006; Ozcan 
et al., 2010; Fukuyama et al., 2011; Ceyhan 
et al., 2012).

The activity of the essential oil of bay 
leaf against common food-borne pathogens 
such  as  Staphylococcus  aureus  6538P  and 
Listeria  monocytogenes  Scott-A 
(Gram- 
positive),  and  Escherichia  coli  O157:H7, 
Salmonella  typhimurium  NRRL  E  4463 
(Gram-negative) was evaluated, and only in 
the case of L. monocytogenes Scott-A no in-
hibition was observed (El et al., 2014). Mello 
da Silveira et al. (2014) determined the min-
imum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of bay 
leaf  essential  oil  in  fresh  Tuscan  sausages; 

the lowest MIC was observed against L. mono-
cytogenes serotype 2 ATCC 19112 (1.25 g/l) 
and  Yersinia  enterocolitica  ATCC  9610 
(1.25 g/l). In the same study, the lowest min-
imum  bactericidal  concentrations  (MBC) 
were observed for E. coli ATCC 25922 (2.5 g/l) 
and  Y.  enterocolitica  ATCC  9610  (2.5  g/l). 
The MIC of bay leaf essential oil was 0.5–14 
μl/ml for the Gram-positive bacteria tested 
and 4–14 μl/ml for the Gram-negative bac-
teria tested (Cherrat et al., 2014). The highest 
bactericidal  effect  was  determined  against 
L. monocytogenes CECT 4031 (8 μl/ml) among 
the Gram-positive bacteria, and among the 
Gram-negative  bacteria,  Y.  enterocolitica 
CECT 4315 (14 μl/ml) was the most resistant. 
There is some disagreement over the resist-
ance of the bacteria tested to the antibacterial 
activity of bay leaf, because in some of the stud-
ies it was claimed that Gram-negative bac-
teria are more resistant than Gram- positive 
bacteria (Aktug˘ and Karapinar, 1986; Derwich 
et al., 2009; Millezi et al., 2012; Cherrat et al., 
2014),  whereas  in  another  (El  et  al.,  2014) 
the opposite result was determined. The in-
hibitory potential of the bay leaf has been 
demonstrated  both  in  Gram- negative  and 
Gram-positive  bacteria 
(Dadalıog˘lu  and 
Evrendilek, 2004; Ertürk, 2006; Ozcan et al., 
2010; Ramos et al., 2012), and as the com-
position of the essential compounds or ac-
tive constituents might be different, there is 
no  need  to  separate  the  effectiveness  in 
terms  of  Gram-positive  or  Gram-negative 
bacteria.

The antifungal activity of bay leaf essen-
tial oil has been studied under both in vitro 
and  in  vivo  conditions  (Simic´  et  al.,  2004; 
De Corato et al., 2010; Rosello et al., 2015). 
Essential oil at a concentration of 1000 μg/ml 
completely  inhibited  both  Botrytis  cinerea 
and Monilinia laxa,  but  this  concentration 
partially inhibited Penicillium digitatum (De 
Corato et al., 2010). Simic´ et al. (2004) studied 
the antifungal activity of bay leaf essential 
oil on 17 different fungi; among these, Alter-
naria  alternata  gave  the  lowest  minimum 
fungicidal concentration (MFC) (10 μl/ml), 
and  Aspergillus  ochraceus  and  A.  terrus 
showed the highest MFC (50 μl/ml). The an-
tifungal activity of bay leaf oil was also tested 
on  peaches,  kiwifruit,  citrus  fruits  (orange 

 

Bay 

51

and  lemon)  and  rice  under  in  vivo  condi-
tions (De Corato et al., 2010; Rosello et al., 
2015). In the De Corato et al. (2010) study, 
B.  cinerea,  M.  laxa  and  P.  digitatum  were 
 artificially  inoculated  on  to  the  fruits  and 
the  oil  was  applied  at  a  concentration  of  
3 mg/ml. In peaches, decay was inhibited by 
91%  in  the  preventive  treatment  (applied 
before  fungal  inoculation)  and  76%  in  the 
curative treatment (applied after inoculation). 
In  various  studies,  Candida  albicans  was 
the yeast type that was generally tested for 
the determination of the antifungal activity 
of bay leaves (Ertürk, 2006; Santoyo et al., 
2006; Ozcan et al., 2010; Fukuyama et al., 
2011; Ceyhan et al., 2012). The MIC of leaf 
essential  oil  was  found  to  be  0.1  mg/ml 
(Ozcan et al., 2010), while that for aqueous 
extracts was 1.56 mg/ml (Ceyhan et al., 2012) 
and that for ethanolic extracts was 5 mg/ml 
(Ertürk, 2006).

4.3  Postharvest Technology

4.3.1  Processing

Different parts of plants can be consumed as 
spices or herbs, including the bark, flower, 
leaves, rhizomes, roots, stems, seeds, bulbs, 
tubers,  berries  or  arils  (Raghavan,  2007; 
Schweiggert et al., 2007). The spices can also 
be consumed in a fresh, dried, whole, ground, 
crumbled, paste, extract (oil, oleoresin and 
derivatives) or powder form (Raghavan, 2007; 
Board, 2010). Harvesting and processing steps 
are therefore unique for each herb type. Here, 
the  whole  dried  bay  leaf  processing  steps 
are summarized, starting from harvesting.

Bay leaves can be harvested all the year 
round by virtue of the plant being an ever-
green. However, for the herbal plants, leaves 
are generally collected when the plants bear 
flowers (Baytop, 1984).There are some small 
differences  in  the  harvesting  of  bay  leaves 
depending on the type of bay plant – whether 
they  are  wild  or  cultivated.  For  cultivated 
bay, one or two harvests a year are recom-
mended  for  the  highest  yield  and  highest 
quality  of  dry  leaf  (Weiss,  2002;  Elzebroek 
and Wind, 2008; Polat et al., 2009). In the 

Mediterranean region, the optimum harvest 
time is the autumn season. For example, in 
Turkey,  Greece  and  the  former  Yugoslavia, 
bay  leaves  are  harvested  from  August  to 
October; for Morocco and Portugal, the re-
commended harvest time is July and August 
(Weiss, 2002; Erden, 2005). The harvesting 
should  be  under  optimum  conditions  and 
avoid dew, high humidity and rain (UNIDO 
and  FAO,  2005),  as  these  can  accelerate 
deterioration  and  discoloration,  and  thus 
result in a low-quality product.

Collection of the leaves and flowers of 
bay is generally carried out by hand or using 
small  farming  tools  such  as  rakes  (Baytop, 
1984; Weiss, 2002). Sometimes, the stems of 
the  plants  are  cut,  and  the  leaves  or  fruits 
removed following the harvesting. Mechan-
ical  harvesting  is  not  favoured  because 
small farmers or wild plant collectors are in 
charge of most of the harvesting, especially 
in  developing  countries,  but  clear-cutting, 
pollarding  or  a  combination  of  these  two 
methods can be applied (Polat et al., 2009).

Drying

After  the  harvesting  of  herbs  and  spices, 
some pre-drying processes are applied, in-
cluding washing, peeling off the bark (ginger, 
cinnamon, etc.), puncturing (for red peppers 
before drying), bleaching (for delaying enzym-
atic  activity),  blanching,  curing  (turmeric, 
garlic,  etc.),  threshing,  sifting  or  chemical 
treatment  (Akgul,  1993;  UNIDO  and  FAO, 
2005). However, none of these pretreatments 
are applied to bay leaves. Wild bay leaf col-
lectors or small-scale farmers dry the leaves 
after harvesting, although large-scale produ-
cers who are supplied with dried leaves from 
the  smaller  producers  carry  out  cleaning 
and washing when the leaves are transported 
to the production facility.

Moisture  levels  of  spices  and  herbs  of 
up to 80% are decreased to below 10% by 
using drying to enhance their shelf-life sta-
bility (Diaz-Maroto et al., 2002; UNIDO and 
FAO,  2005).  The  drying  of  bay  leaves  and 
most of the other leafy herbs and spices is 
performed by several methods. These methods 
can be classified as sun drying, shade dry-
ing,  drying  in  greenhouse  type  dryers  and 

52 

H. Çakmak et al. 

drying  with  hot  air  (Baytop,  1984;  UNIDO 
and  FAO,  2005).  Shade  drying  or  artificial 
drying are especially recommended to meet 
the highest final quality (Acar, 1987; Grabowski 
et al., 2003). Sun drying is an easy and com-
parably  cheaper  method,  but  direct  sun 
light or the use of temperatures over 50°C in 
other  drying  methods  may  cause  discolor-
ation, loss of volatiles and excessive shrink-
age (Baytop, 1984; Acar, 1987; Grabowski 
et al., 2003; UNIDO and FAO, 2005; Sellami 
et al., 2011; Çakmak et al., 2013). A bright 
green  colour  is  appreciated  for  dried  bay 
leaves that are consumed as a culinary herb, 
as  shown  in  Fig.  4.4.  Hot-air  drying  is  an 
applicable  method  when  open-air  drying 
cannot be practised owing to the air condi-
tions, and this method also allows consider-
able reduction of the drying time. In addition 
to  these  traditional  methods,  new  drying 
methods  have  recently  been  introduced, 
such as heat pump drying, microwave oven 
drying, convection oven drying and freeze- 
drying; these can both meet food safety and 
quality regulations and decrease the energy 
costs  of  drying  (Diaz-Maroto  et  al.,  2002; 
Kuzgunkaya  and  Hepbasli,  2007;  Sellami 
et al., 2011; Çakmak et al., 2013). However, 
freeze-drying is only applied to spices and 
herbs that have relatively higher economic 
values (Grabowski et al., 2003).

Fumigation and/or irradiation

Dried herbs and spices are subjected to heat 
treatment, fumigation and/or irradiation for 
pest control and to lower the microbiological 

Fig. 4.4.  Sun-dried bay leaves.

risks. Heat treatment (pasteurization) by us-
ing steam, infrared radiation or a hot air oven 
can be applied, with different process tem-
peratures  and  exposure  times  for  different 
levels of lethality (Akgul, 1993). Fumigation 
and gamma irradiation and their combination 
are  other  alternative  processes  for  imple-
menting microbial safety. Fumigation is an 
efficient,  fast  and  economic  pest  control 
method, but the application should be han-
dled only by authorized personnel (Akgul, 
1993; WHO, 1998; UNIDO and FAO, 2005). 
Chemical pesticides (fumigants)  in  the  gas-
eous state, such as methyl bromide, ethylene 
dibromide, ethylene oxide, ethylene chloro-
hydrin, methyl formate, phosphine, alumin-
ium phosphide or their mixtures are applied 
to kill the target pests (Akgul, 1993; WHO, 
1998;  UNIDO  and  FAO,  2005).  The  use  of 
some of these fumigants is now limited or 
totally banned owing to their toxic residues 
and  potential  health  risks  (Akgul,  1993; 
Raghavan, 2007; US FDA, 2013).

Irradiation  with γ-rays  is  gaining  popu-
larity even though the set-up costs are high 
and  trained  personnel  are  needed  for  their 
use (Akgul, 1993). Cobalt 60 is the source for 
the  production  of  γ-rays,  and  the  radiation 
dose is expressed by the gray (Gy), where 1 
Gy is equal to 1 J of energy absorbed per kilo-
gram  of  irradiated  product  (Lacroix  et  al., 
2003).  This  method  is  stated  to  be  superior 
due  to  its  applicability  to  pre-packed  herbs 
and spices, but there is still some controversy 
in  the  literature  about  the  possible  health 
risks and product quality (Akgul, 1993; UNIDO 
and FAO, 2005). Although it is stated that the 
loss  of  volatile  or  flavour  components  is 
either  eliminated  or  minimal  in  irradiated 
herbs and spices (Lacroix et al., 2003; UNIDO 
and FAO, 2005), colour and aroma (volatile) 
losses are also reported in literature (Polovka 
and  Suhaj,  2010;  Kirkin  et  al.,  2014).  The 
maximum  average  absorbed  radiation  dose 
for herbs, spices and seasonings is 10 kGy 
for the reduction of target pathogenic micro-
organisms and 1 kGy for insect disinfestation. 
The  foodstuffs  that  have  been  treated  with 
ionizing radiation must be labelled as ‘irradi-
ated’ or ‘treated with ionising radiation’ (FAO 
and WHO, 2001; Lacroix et al., 2003; Polovka 
and Suhaj, 2010; EFSA, 2011; ESA, 2013).

 

Bay 

53

Packaging

Dried  herbs  or  spices  are  packaged  before 
transportation to the end user. The moisture 
content of herbs/spices should be decreased 
to below 10% (UNIDO and FAO, 2005), but 
the maximum moisture level is declared as 
8% (w/w) in the final product (ESA, 2013). 
Bay leaves are classified according to shape, 
size,  colour  and  aroma  before  packaging  
(Akgul,  1993).  The  packaging  requirements 
are according to the various quality standards, 
and  need  to  conform  to  the  international 
standards for imported goods, as well as con-
sumer  preferences.  The  packaging  material 
should  be  properly  selected  to  protect  the 
herb/spice from moisture, heat, light and po-
tential  pests,  and  to  decrease  the  gas  (oxy-
gen) permeability to preserve the aroma and 
essential compounds; it should also ensure 
microbial  safety  and  meet  the  appropriate 
quality  standards.  The  packaging  material 
should  be  food  grade  and  non-polluting 
(UNIDO and FAO, 2005; ESA, 2013). Paper 
bags,  plastic  bags,  polyethylene  bags,  card-
board boxes, tins and jute or sisal sacks are 
preferred  for  bay  leaf  packaging  (Baytop, 
1984;  UNIDO  and  FAO,  2005).  Sometimes, 
transparent glass  jars are preferred  to show 
the  premium  quality  of  whole  dried  bay 
leaves.  The  International  Trade  Centre  has 
produced  a  manual  that  covers  the  pack-
aging requirements; for jute and sisal pack-
aging in particular, these should conform to 
the standards of CAOBISCO Ref C502- 51-sj 
of  20-02-95  (Muggeridge  and  Clay,  2001; 
Weiss,  2002;  UNIDO  and  FAO,  2005;  ESA, 
2013).  The  packaged  bay  leaves  should  be 
kept in a cool and dry place, and contamin-
ation  and  infestation  should  be  prevented; 
the  suggested  storage  conditions  for  spices 
are 10–15°C and 55–65% relative humidity 
(RH) (Raghavan, 2007). A maximum of 1 year 
of  shelf  life  is  recommended  for  herbs  and 
spices owing to the loss of bioactive and es-
sential  compounds,  but  they  can  be  stored 
up to 3 years if the packaging is tightly closed 
(Baytop, 1984; Raghavan, 2007).

Quality standards

Physical and chemical quality requirements 
for dried whole bay leaf herb according to 

the Turkish food codex, notification for herbs 
and  spices  are:  ‘max.  0.1%  (w/w)  foreign 
matter, max. 8% (w/w) moisture, max. 7% 
(w/w) ash, max. 1.5% (w/w) acid-insoluble 
ash,  max.  30%  (w/w)  cellulose,  max.  15% 
broken and 10% blemished leaf; minimum 
essential oil should be 1 ml/100 g leaf’ (An-
onymous, 2013). Moisture, ash and essential 
oil  requirements  are  similar  for  the  ESA, 
except that the acid-insoluble ash content is 
little  higher  and  given  as  max.  2%  (w/w) 
(ESA, 2013). The cleanliness specifications of 
the American Spice Trade Association (ASTA) 
for bay leaves are: ‘2 (by count) whole dead 
insects, 1 mg/lb mammalian excreta, 10 mg/lb 
other excreta, 2% (w/w) mould, 2.5% (w/w) 
defiled/infested insect, 0.5% (w/w) extraneous/ 
foreign matter and stems are excluded from 
this  specifications’  (Muggeridge  and  Clay, 
2001). According to the Turkish food codex, 
microbiological  criteria,  spices,  herbs  and/
or their mixtures should meet the following 
requirements:  coagulase- positive  staphylo-
cocci  103–104  cfu/g,  Bacillus  cereus  103–104 
cfu/g  and  Salmonella  absent  in  25  g  (An-
onymous, 2011). The classification of herbs 
and  spices  by  microbiological  criteria  of 
within  Recommendation  2004/24/EC  and 
ESA samples that are listed as ‘Satisfactory’ 
should have: Salmonella spp. absent in 25 g, 
B.  cereus  <103  cfu/g,  Clostridium  perfrin-
gens <102 cfu/g and E. coli <101 cfu/g (Sagoo 
et al., 2009).

4.3.2  Value addition

Bay is used as a culinary herb in both the 
whole and powdered form (fresh or dried), 
and also as a medicinal herb. Dried leaves 
can  be  consumed  as  a  herbal  tea  prepared 
by either decoction or infusion.

The essential oil of bay leaves and fruits 
is produced in Russia, Georgia, Albania, the 
former Yugoslavia, Italy, Portugal, Morocco 
and  Turkey  (Ceylan,  1997;  Weiss,  2002; 
Charles, 2013).Various methods are applied 
to extract essential oil from leaves, such as 
steam distillation (hydrodistillation), super-
critical fluid extraction (SFE/SPFE), solvent 
extraction or solvent-free microwave assisted 
steam distillation (SFME) (Demo et al., 1998; 

54 

H. Çakmak et al. 

Fiorini  et  al.,  1998;  Caredda  et  al.,  2002; 
Dadalıog˘lu  and  Evrendilek,  2004;  Kosar 
et  al.,  2005;  Parthasarathy  et  al.,  2008; 
Lira et al., 2009; Zekovic et al., 2009; Sellami 
et  al., 2011; Jemaa et al., 2012; Moghtader 
and Salari, 2012; Özek, 2012; Cherrat et al., 
2014; El et al., 2014). The hydrodistillation 
method  can  be  applied  using  a  Clevenger- 
type  apparatus  (Dadalıog˘lu  and  Evrendilek, 
2004; Kosar et al., 2005; Sangun et al., 2007; 
Bayramoglu et al., 2009; Kandi and Sefidkon, 
2011; Özek, 2012; Cherrat et al., 2014), the 
Likens–Nickerson apparatus (Bouzouita et al., 
2001)  and  the  Soxhlet  extractor  apparatus 
using water (steam) as a solvent (Zekovic et al., 
2009). The Clevenger-type apparatus is also 
known  as  the  ‘European  Pharmacopoeian 
hydrodistillation apparatus’, and details are 
described by Hinneburg et al. (2006).

Bay leaf essential oil is sometimes ex-
tracted by the SFE/SPFE method with CO2 
as  a  carrier  solvent  (Caredda  et  al.,  2002;  
Zekovic et al., 2009; De Corato et al., 2010). 
SFME extraction is also a hydrodistillation 
method  in  which  a  Clevenger-type  appar-
atus  is  placed  inside  the  microwave  oven 
(Kosar et al., 2005; Bayramoglu et al., 2009; 
El  et  al.,  2014).  These  solvent-free  extrac-
tion  methods  are  viewed  as  green  (clean) 
technology, to which much attention is paid 
nowadays.

The  efficiency  of  extraction  methods 
is compared according to the quantity of es-
sential oil extracted. The average min./max. 
yields  of  the  various  extraction  methods 
are: 0.23–2.65% for hydrodistillation, 0.60–
2.54% for SPFE and 6.5% for the chemical 
solvent method (Demo et al., 1998; Fiorini 
et al., 1998; Bouzouita et al., 2001; Kosar 
et al., 2005; Hinneburg et al., 2006; Lira et al., 
2009; Zekovic et al., 2009; De Corato et al., 
2010;  Kandi  and  Sefidkon,  2011;  Sellami 
et  al., 2011; Jemaa et al., 2012; Moghtader 
and Salari, 2012; Özek, 2012; Cherrat et al., 
2014).  The  maximum  yield  of  the  SFME 
method at 622 W power was 0.024 ml/g dry 
leaf, while for the hydrodistillation method it 
was 0.022 ml/g dry leaf (Bayramoglu et al., 
2009; El et al., 2014). However, the difference 
in  essential  oil  yields  was  not  significant 
in these studies (P > 0.05). The hydrodistil-
lation and SFME extraction methods show 

remarkable  variation  in  the  volatile  com-
pounds of the essential oil. In particular, the 
content of major volatiles such as 1,8-cineole 
and α-terpinyl acetate was higher in SFME- 
extracted  oil  than  in  hydrodistilled  oil 
(Kosar et al., 2005; Bayramoglu et al., 2009; 
El et al., 2014).

Volatile compounds can also contribute 
to  the  odour  and  aroma  perception  of  bay 
leaves. Monoterpene and sesquiterpene hy-
drocarbons  and  their  derivatives  are  the 
main volatiles of Mediterranean bay leaf (Kilic 
et al., 2004). In a study by Buttery et al. (1974), 
1,8-cineole,  α-pinene,  linalool  and  limon-
ene were the major aroma compounds in the 
Mediterranean bay leaf oil tested; 1,8- cineole 
was  also  dominant  in  other  commercially 
available  so-called  bay  oils  extracted  from 
U. californica  and P. racemosa.  The  odour 
compounds are also affected from the age of 
the shoots that are harvested. Younger shoots 
can have weaker and non-odour-contributing 
monoterpene  hydrocarbons  (Kilic  et  al., 
2004).  The  odour  compounds  of  fresh  bay 
leaves  depend  on  the  age  of  shoot/part  of 
the plant and were described in a compre-
hensive study by Kilic et al. (2004). In this, 
odour  compounds  were  ranked  using  fla-
vour  dilution  (FD)  factors,  and  eucalyptus 
(1,8-cineole),  fresh  green  ((Z)-3-hexenal), 
flowery clove (eugenol) and pepper odours 
were  higher  in  old  shoots,  while  flowery 
((E)-isoeugenol), eucalyptus (1,8-cineole) and 
flowery clove (eugenol) odours were higher 
in the younger shoots. Apart from these major 
odour-active  substances,  there  are  still  un-
identified  compounds  in  trace  amounts  in 
Mediterranean  bay  leaf  and  these  may  act 
as a signature odour of this species (Buttery 
et al., 1974; Kilic et al., 2004). Bay leaf aroma 
is described as a pleasant sweetly aromatic, 
camphoraceous, cineolic and slightly bitter 
aftertaste (Charles, 2013).

The aromatic fruit oil is used in phar-
macy and veterinary practice (Board, 2010). 
Bay  leaf  oil,  either  alone  or  mixed  with 
other essential oils, is used as a massage oil 
in aromatherapy, and in hot baths for mind 
and body relaxing effects. Bay leaf essential 
oil has also showed strong pest repellent and 
fumigant  activity,  but  exposure  time,  dose 
tested and oil origin (chemical composition) 

 

Bay 

55

significantly affected these activities (Jemaa 
et al., 2012). Turkish producers benefit from 
the dried leaves as a pest control agent used 
in raisin and dried fig packages (Acar, 1987; 
Zeybek and Zeybek, 1994; Polat et al., 2009).
After the leaf harvest, small-scale wild 
bay  leaf  collectors  or  cultivated  bay  leaf 
farmers  utilize  the  bark,  wood,  stem  and 
rest of the plant as firewood, which is then 
used in the drying of the leaves. The wood 
of  the  bay  plant,  together  with  the  leaves, 
may  be  burned  for  the  smoking  of  meat 
and fish.

A most interesting study of bay leaves 
was done recently by Onay (2014). Seeds of 
the plant were used as a biomass feed stock 
in catalytic pyrolysis and the catalytic pyr-
olysis oil, with the addition of catalyst, had 
comparably lower oxygenated compounds, 
and  therefore  could  well  be  an  ingredient 
for transportation fuels (Onay, 2014).

4.4  Uses

4.4.1  General uses

Bay leaf is a popular culinary herb in French, 
Italian,  Greek  and  Turkish  cuisine  (Akgul, 
1993; Farrell, 1998). Dried leaves are used 
to  garnish  fish,  meat  and  chicken  dishes, 
casseroles, soups, sauces, puddings, pickles, 
canned  vegetables,  confectionery,  baked 
goods  and  pastries  and  impart  their  fresh, 
pungent,  spicy,  cineolic  and  piney  aroma 
(Ceylan,  1997;  Kumar  et  al.,  2001;  Ragha-
van, 2007; Charles, 2013). Dried bay leaves, 
together  with  parsley  and  thyme,  are  tied 
with a string to produce a bundle of herbs 
known as bouquet garni in French cuisine 
(Raghavan,  2007).  Leaves  are  placed  in 
canned salmon, tuna and sardine to remove 
or  mask  the  strong  fishy  odour.  Also,  in 
Mediterranean  countries,  dried  leaves  are 
put into olive oil to give it an aromatic flavour 
and  enhance  the  appetite.  Dried  bay  leaf 
powder  is  an  ingredient  of  chicken  gravy 
powder, a mix for beef, North Indian curry 
blends, fish marinade, and ras-el-hanouth 
(a  Moroccan  spice  mix)  (Raghavan,  2007). 
Some  artisan  bread  powder  mixes  include 

the aromatic powder of bay leaf to improve 
the flavour.

Oleoresin is a mixture of essential oils, 
and the resin extracted from herbal plants by 
solvents, as well as the semi-solid and dark 
green oleoresin of bay leaves can be used in-
stead of the herb or the essential oil (Akgul, 
1993;  Farrell,  1998;  Weiss,  2002;  Charles, 
2013). 2.27 kg of bay leaf oleoresin is equal to 
45.45  kg  fresh  ground  leaves  in  terms  of 
odour and flavour (Farrell, 1998).

The ripe fruits of the plant are used in 
non-alcoholic and alcoholic beverages such 
as home-made liquors (Akgul, 1993; Ceylan, 
1997). The essential and fixed oil of both the 
leaf and fruit are utilized in soap, candles, 
cream,  skin  and  haircare  products,  and  in 
shampoos  for  preventing  hair  loss  (Akgul, 
1993;  Charles,  2013).  In  the  Mediterranean 
Turkish  city  of  Antakya  (Hatay)  especially, 
bay  is  quite  popular  in  the  production  of 
soaps that are handmade from bay fruit oil 
mixed with olive oil; the soap is believed to 
treat  hair  loss  and  hair  dandruff.  Essential 
fruit and leaf oil has a soft, floral, spicy and 
aromatic  scent,  and  the  oil  is  used  in  per-
fumes and in cologne as an accent in many 
masculine  and  some  feminine  fragrances. 
Bay oil is classified as a middle perfumery 
note.  Cineolic  and  camphoraceous  accents 
are also used in detergents, soaps, home fra-
grances, and even in incense.

As it is an evergreen plant, bay leaf is 
grown  as  ornamental  plant  and  specimen 
tree  in  gardens,  indoor  facilities  and  land-
scape  designs  owing  to  its  bright  and  aes-
thetically pleasing appearance. The attract-
ive white or yellow flowers of the plant are 
in  blossom  between  March  and  May,  and 
the plant is grown in containers or pruned 
as hedges along with the wild types.

4.4.2  Pharmacological uses

The extracts or essential oils of bay leaves 
and  bay  fruits  have  an  important  place  in 
Turkish folk medicine, and they are used in 
both internal and external treatment of vari-
ous diseases. A decoction of fresh bay leaves 
has therapeutic effects on cardiac diseases, 
joint calcification and rheumatism (Tuzlacı 

56 

H. Çakmak et al. 

and  Sadıkog˘lu,  2007).  A  decoction  of  the 
branches  and  fruits  of  bay  leaves  is  also 
used for treating bee and snake bites as well 
as stomach ulcers (Tuzlacı and Tolon, 2000). 
The essential oil of bay fruits has gastropro-
tective and antineuralgic effects, and shows 
analgesic  and  wound-healing  properties 
when used as a cream (Zeybek and Zeybek, 
1994). In Turkish folk medicine, the fruit es-
sential  oil  and  extract  are  also  used  as  an 
antipyretic, digestive, appetite stimulant, as 
a  remedy  for  toothache,  chronic  headache 
and insect bites, as a regulator of the blood-
stream  and  as  a  diaphoretic.  The  essential 
oil of the leaves has emmenagogue, irritant, 
rubefacient and antirheumatic effects (Ceylan, 
1997).  Anti-emetic,  antiseptic,  antipyretic, 
diuretic,  expectorant,  appetite-stimulating, 
digestive,  carminative  and  sedative  effects 
of bay leaves are also reported in the litera-
ture  (Spratt,  1830;  Baytop,  1984;  Akgul, 
1993; Duke, 2002). In Iranian folk medicine, 
the leaf essential oils are also a remedy for 
rheumatism pain and epilepsy (Sayyah et al., 
2002,  2003).  The  highly  esteemed  Turkish 
professor  and  pharmacist  Turhan  Baytop 
suggested an infusion formula prepared as a 
drink  for  treating  acute  bronchitis,  indiges-
tion  and  inappetency;  this  was  made  by 
leaving 4 g of dried bay leaf and 8 g of dried 
orange  peel  in  200  ml  of  boiled  water  for  
15 min, filtering and sweetening with honey 
(if wanted) (Baytop, 1984).

The sesquiterpene lactones isolated from 
hexane  and  ethyl  acetate  extracts  of  bay 
leaves are 10-epigazaniolid, gazaniolide, spir-
afolide, costunolide, reynosin and santama-
rin,  and  those  substances  show  cytotoxic 
activity  (Fang  et  al.,  2005).  Julianti  et  al. 
(2012) isolated and determined 22 different 
sesquiterpenes  from  bay  leaves  and  deter-
mined by spectroscopic analysis that ten of 
these  (new)  compounds  were  eudesmane 
lactones and their methyl esters. The cyto-
toxicity of these fractions were tested against 
K562 leukaemia tumour cells, and most of 
them  showed  moderate  to  significant  tox-
icity; the most active fraction had an LC50 of 
4.57 ± 2.1 mM. Essential oil from the leaves 
and  seeds  also  inhibited  K562  leukaemia 
tumour cells with the IC50 values of 95 and 
75  μg/ml,  respectively  (Saab  et  al.,  2012). 

Gazaniolide,  costunolide,  santamarin,  rey-
nosin, 11,13-dehydrosantonin, spirafolide and 
lauroxepine are sesquiterpene lactones iso-
lated from methanol extracts of the fruits of 
the plant (Barla et al., 2007). The cytotoxic 
effect of these substances was tested against 
A2780 human ovarian cancer cells, and the 
IC50 values were in the range 4–13.5 μg/ml.
Another  active  fraction  of  bay  leaf  is 
lauroside  B,  and  this  metastigmane  glyco-
side  suppressed  the  proliferation  of  tested 
human melanoma cell lines (A375, WM115, 
and  SK-Mel-28)  and  has  the  potential  to 
reduce  apoptosis  in  aggressive  melanoma 
cancer cells (Panza et al., 2010). The antipro-
liferative activity of bay leaf and fruit essential 
oils was also evaluated using breast cancer 
cell lines (MCF7 and T47D) (Al-Kalaldeh 
et al., 2010; Abu-Dahab et al., 2014). Etha-
nolic extracts of bay leaf at a concentration 
50 μg/ml gave 52.53% inhibition of MCF7 
cell  lines;  however,  the  antiproliferative 
effect was somewhat lower for both the aque-
ous extract and the essential oil (Al-Kalaldeh 
et al., 2010). In another study, fruit and leaf 
extracts  obtained  using  different  solvents 
were  compared  against  MCF7  and  T47D 
breast cancer cell lines, and the lowest IC50 
value  was  obtained  from  ethyl  acetate  ex-
tract  of  bay  fruits  with  MCF7  cancer  cells 
(20.6  μg/ml),  while  for  the  T47D  cells  the 
lowest IC50 (12.3 μg/ml) was obtained from 
ethanolic  extracts  of  bay  fruits  (Abu-Dahab 
et al., 2014).

The  analgesic,  anti-inflammatory  and 
anticonvulsant  activities  of  bay  leaf  essen-
tial oil have also been tested in animal stud-
ies (Sayyah et al., 2002, 2003). In humans, 
clinical studies showed that bay leaves re-
duce  plasma  glucose  levels  (20–30%)  and 
total cholesterol levels (20–24%) in people 
with  type  2  diabetes  (Khan  et  al.,  2009;  
Aljamal,  2011).  Aqueous  extracts  of  bay 
seeds and aqueous or methanolic extracts of 
the fruits showed a nearly 100% gastropro-
tective effect and thus anti-ulcerogenic ac-
tivity (Afifi et al., 1997; Gürbüz et al., 2002). 
In addition to these health-promoting activ-
ities, antidiarrheal activity was observed in 
rats treated with different doses of bay leaf 
aqueous  extracts  (Qnais  et  al.,  2012).  The 
neuroprotective  effects  of  bay  leaves  were 

 

Bay 

57

studied  by  Cho  et  al.  (2010),  and  their  re-
sults (as stated by the authors) showed that 
the chloroform fraction of methanol extracts 
of  bay  leaves  had  the  potential  to  cure  is-
chaemic neuronal damage and significantly 
reduced  death-associated  protein  kinase 
(DAPK)  dephosphorylation  in  human  cell 
lines and organotypic tissues.

There is no specific information regard-
ing the toxicity of bay leaves or oil. Accord-
ing to the  Food Additives Status List of the 
US  Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA), 
bay leaf as a herb and essential oil/oleoresin 
has GRAS (generally recognized as safe) sta-
tus,  with  the  GRAS  numbers  182.10  and 
182.20 (Charles, 2013; US FDA, 2014). In the 
only  study  on  the  toxicity  of  bay  leaf,  the 
toxic dose was determined as 0.3 mg bay leaf 
extract/g mouse weight, and at this level, in-
flammation and cell necrosis in the liver and 
heart, and oxidative stress, were induced (El 
Malti and Amarouch, 2009). However, there 
is no predictable risk for public health as the 
real consumable portion is much lower than 
the given limits. The only dosage information 
on bay leaf is given by the American Pharma-
ceutical Association (APA): 1–2 tablespoons 
leaf/cup water and 3 times/day; 1–2 drops es-
sential oil added to brandy, honey, or tea (Duke, 
2002). Only a few cases have been reported of 
allergic reactions (contact dermatitis) to bay, 
and these occurred when the person was ex-
posed to laurel oil (Özden et al., 2001; Bleasel 
et al., 2002; Adis¸en and Önder, 2007).

4.5  Summary

The  bay  plant  is  an  evergreen  tree/shrub 
used  as  a  culinary  herb  in  Mediterranean 
cuisine. Apart from its aromatic properties, 
the  therapeutic  activity  of  the  plant  has 
been  extensively  studied  in  both  folk  and 
modern  medicine.  The  essential  oil  of  the 
leaves  and  the  fruits  is  extracted  and  the 
major  component  compounds  and  their 
amounts  have  been  found  to  change  with 
several  factors,  such  as  climate,  place  of 
harvest, season of harvest, the age of shoots 
and the parts of the plant used. Among the 
constituents  that  have  been  evaluated, 
1,8-cineole is the main bioactive compound 
of bay leaf essential oil and it also contrib-
utes  the  characteristic  bay  leaf  odour.  The 
traditional formulas for treating several dis-
eases with bay leaf have been passed through 
the  generations,  and  some  of  their  health- 
promoting effects have been proven by clin-
ical  studies.  The  cytotoxic  activity  of  the 
essential  oil  and  extracts  have  been  deter-
mined by several authors against leukaemia, 
human  ovarian  cancer,  human  melanoma 
cancer and breast cancer cell lines. Besides 
its health-improving status, the antioxidant 
and  antimicrobial  (antibacterial  and  anti-
fungal)  effects  of  bay  and  its  extracts  have 
been  examined.  When  all  these  positive 
effects  are  taken  into  account,  bay  will  be 
acknowledged more than it is today in the 
future.

References

Abu-Dahab, R., Kasabri, V. and Afifi, F.U. (2014) Evaluation of the volatile oil composition and antipro-
liferative activity of Laurus nobilis L. (Lauraceae) on breast cancer cell line models. Records of 
Natural Products 8, 136–147.

Acar, I. (1987) Production and Utilization of Bay Laurel (Laurus nobilis L.) Leaves and Essential Oil. 
Technical Bulletin No. 186, Forest Research Institute, Kamer Matbaacilik, Ankara. [In Turkish.]

Acar, I. (1988) Studies on Leaf Quality of Bay Laurel (Laurus nobilis L.) Distributed in Turkey. Technical 

Bulletin No: 202, Forest Research Institute, Kamer Matbaacilik, Ankara. [Iin Turkish.]

Adis¸en, E. and Önder, M. (2007) Allergic contact dermatitis from Laurus nobilis oil induced by massage. 

Contact Dermatitis 56, 360–361.

AEA (2014) Export data of herbs and spices. Aegean Exporters Association, Alsancak, Izmir, Turkey. 
Obtained  from:  http://www.egebirlik.org.tr/Asp/Content.asp?MS=1&Id=0  (accessed  21  August 
2014 but no longer available via this link).

Afifi, F.U., Khalil, E., Tamimi, S.O. and Disi, A. (1997) Evaluation of the gastroprotective effect of Laurus 

nobilis seeds on ethanol induced gastric ulcer in rats. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 58, 9–14.

58 

H. Çakmak et al. 

Akgul, A. (1993) Spice Science and Technology. Damla Matbaacilik ve Ticaret, Konya, Turkey. [In Turkish.]
Aktug˘, S¸.E. and Karapinar, M. (1986) Sensitivity of some common food-poisoning bacteria to thyme, 

mint and bay leaves. International Journal of Food Microbiology 3, 349–354.

Albayrak, S., Aksoy, A., Sagdic, O. and Albayrak, S. (2012) Antioxidant and antimicrobial activities of 
different extracts of some medicinal herbs consumed as tea and spices in Turkey. Journal of Food 
Biochemistry 36, 547–554.

Aljamal, A. (2011) Effects of bay leaves on the patients with diabetes mellitus. Research Journal of Medi-

cinal Plant 5, 471–476.

Al-Kalaldeh, J.Z., Abu-Dahab, R. and Afifi, F.U. (2010) Volatile oil composition and antiproliferative 
activity  of  Laurus  nobilis,  Origanum  syriacum,  Origanum  vulgare,  and  Salvia  triloba  against 
human breast adenocarcinoma cells. Nutrition Research 30, 271–278.

Anonymous (2011) Regulation on Turkish food codex microbiological criteria. Available at: http://www.

tarim.gov.tr/Sayfalar/EN/Mevzuat.aspx?OgeId=15 (accessed 7 August 2014).

Anonymous (2013) Turkish food codex notification no. 2013/12 on spices. Available at: http://mevzuat.
basbakanlik.gov.tr/Metin.Aspx?MevzuatKod=9.5.17268&sourceXmlSearch=baharat&MevzuatIliski=0 
(accessed 7 August 2014).

BAKA (2012) Medicinal and aromatic plants sectorial report. Batı Akdeniz Kalkınma Ajansı, Isparta, 
Turkey. Available at: http://www.baka.org.tr/dokuman-listesi-tumu.html (accessed 7 August 2014).
Barla, A., Topçu, G., Öksüz, S., Tümen, G. and Kingston, D.G. (2007) Identification of cytotoxic sesquiter-

penes from Laurus nobilis L. Food Chemistry 104, 1478–1484.

Bayramoglu, B., Sahin, S. and Sumnu, S. (2009) Extraction of essential oil from laurel leaves by using 

microwaves. Separation Science and Technology 44, 722–733.

Baytop, T. (1984) Therapy with Medicinal Plants in Turkey (Past and Present). Sanal Matbaacilik, Istanbul, 

Turkey. [In Turkish.]

Bleasel, N., Tate, B. and Rademaker, M. (2002) Allergic contact dermatitis following exposure to essen-

tial oils. Australasian Journal of Dermatology 43, 211–213.

Board, N. (2010) Bay or laurel leaves. In: Board, N. (ed.) Handbook on Spices. Asia Pacific Business 

Press, Delhi, pp. 278–280.

Bouzouita,  N.,  Nafti,  A.,  Chaabouni,  M.M.,  Lognay,  G.C.,  Marlier,  M.,  Zghoulli,  S.  and  Thonart,  P.H. 
(2001) Chemical composition of Laurus nobilis oil from Tunisia. Journal of Essential Oil Research 
13, 116–117.

Buttery, R.G., Black, D.R., Guadagni, D.G., Ling, L.C., Connolly, G. and Teranishi, R. (1974) California 
bay oil I: constituents, odor properties. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 22, 773–777.
Çakmak, H., Kumcuog˘lu, S. and Tavman, S¸. (2013) Thin layer drying of bay leaves (Laurus nobilis L.) 

in conventional and microwave oven. Academic Food Journal/Akademik Gida 11(1), 20–26.

Caredda, A., Marongiu, B., Porcedda, S. and Soro, C. (2002) Supercritical carbon dioxide extraction and char-
acterization of Laurus nobilis essential oil. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 50, 1492–1496.
Ceylan, A. (1997) Medicinal Plants-II: Essential Oil Plants. Yayinlari No. 481, Ziraat Fakultesi, Ege Univer-

sitesi Basımevi, Izmir, Turkey. [In Turkish.]

Ceyhan, N., Keskin, D. and Ug˘ur, A. (2012) Antimicrobial activities of different extracts of eight plant 
species  from  four  different  family  against  some  pathogenic  microorganisms.  Journal  of  Food, 
Agriculture and Environment 10, 193–197.

Charles, D.J. (2013) Antioxidant Properties of Spices, Herbs and Other Sources. Springer, New York.
Cherrat, L., Espina, L., Bakkali, M., García-Gonzalo, D., Pagán, R. and Laglaoui, A. (2014) Chemical 
composition and antioxidant properties of Laurus nobilis L. and Myrtus communis L. essential 
oils from Morocco and evaluation of their antimicrobial activity acting alone or in combined pro-
cesses for food preservation. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture 94, 1197–1204.

Cho, E.Y., Lee, S.J., Nam, K.W., Shin, J., Oh, K.B., Kim, K.H. and Mar, W. (2010) Amelioration of oxygen 
and  glucose  deprivation-induced  neuronal  death  by  chloroform  fraction  of  bay  leaves  (Laurus 
nobilis). Bioscience, Biotechnology, and Biochemistry 74, 2029–2035.

Çelik, S. and Yılmaz, Ö. (1996) The fatty acid composition of Laurus nobilis L. leaves and fruits. GIDA 

21(3), 165–167.

Conforti, F., Statti, G., Uzunov, D. and Menichini, F. (2006) Comparative chemical composition and 
antioxidant  activities  of  wild  and  cultivated  Laurus  nobilis  L.  leaves  and  Foeniculum  vulgare 
subsp. piperitum (Ucria) Coutinho seeds. Biological and Pharmaceutical Bulletin 29, 2056–2064.
Dadalıog˘lu, I. and Evrendilek, G.A. (2004) Chemical compositions and antibacterial effects of essential 
oils  of  Turkish  oregano  (Origanum  minutiflorum),  bay  laurel  (Laurus  nobilis),  Spanish  lavender 

 

Bay 

59

(Lavandula stoechas L.), and fennel (Foeniculum vulgare) on common foodborne pathogens. Journal 
of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 52, 8255–8260.

De Corato, U., Maccioni, O., Trupo, M. and Di Sanzo, G. (2010) Use of essential oil of Laurus nobilis 
obtained by means of a supercritical carbon dioxide technique against post harvest spoilage fungi. 
Crop Protection 29, 142–147.

Demo,  A.,  Petrakis,  C.,  Kefalas,  P.  and  Boskou,  D.  (1998)  Nutrient  antioxidants  in  some  herbs  and 

Mediterranean plant leaves. Food Research International 31, 351–354.

Derwich, E., Benziane, Z. and Boukir, A. (2009) Chemical composition and antibacterial activity of 
leaves essential oil of Laurus nobilis from Morocco. Australian Journal of Basic and Applied Sciences 
3, 3818–3824.

Dias,  M.I.,  Barros,  L.,  Duenas,  M.,  Alves,  R.C.,  Oliveira,  M.B.P.P.,  Santos-Buelga,  C.  and  Ferreira, 
I.C.F.R. (2014) Nutritional and antioxidant contributions of Laurus nobilis L. leaves: would be 
more suitable a wild or a cultivated sample? Food Chemistry 156, 339–346.

Diaz-Maroto, M.C., Perez-Coello, M.S. and Cabezudo, M.D. (2002) Effect of drying method on the vol-
atiles in bay leaf (Laurus nobilis L.). Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 50, 4520–4524.

Duke, J.A. (2002) Handbook of Medicinal Herbs, 2nd edn. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida.
EFRI (2014) Handbook of Bay Laurel (Laurus nobilis L.). Ege Forestry Research Institute, Izmir, Turkey. [In 
Turkish.] Available at: http://www.efri.gov.tr/yayinlar/Son_defne_elkitabi.pdf (accessed 1 August 2014).
El, S.N., Karagozlu, N., Karakaya, S. and Sahin, S. (2014) Antioxidant and antimicrobial activities of 
essential oils extracted from Laurus nobilis L. leaves by using solvent-free microwave and hydro-
distillation. Food and Nutrition Sciences 5, 97–106.

El Malti, J. and Amarouch, H. (2009) Antibacterial effect, histological impact and oxidative stress studies 

from Laurus nobilis extract. Journal of Food Quality 32, 190–208.

Elmastas¸, M., Gülçin, I., Is¸ildak, Ö., Küfreviog˘lu, Ö.I˙., I˙baog˘lu, K. and Aboul-Enein, H.Y. (2006) Radical 
scavenging activity and antioxidant capacity of bay leaf extracts. Journal of the Iranian Chemical 
Society 3, 258–266.

Elzebroek, A.T.G. and Wind, K. (2008) Spices and flavorings. In: Elzebroek, A.T.G. and Wind, K. (eds) 

Guide to Cultivated Plants. CAB International, Wallingford, UK, pp. 263–266.

Erden,  U.  (2005)  Investigation  of  seasonal  variability  and  optimum  drying  methods  of  bay  (Laurus 

nobilis L.). MSc. thesis, University of Cukurova, Adana, Turkey. [In Turkish.]

Ertürk, Ö. (2006) Antibacterial and antifungal activity of ethanolic extracts from eleven spice plants. 

Biologia 61, 275–278.

EFSA (2011) EFSA assesses the safety of food irradiation. European Food Safety Authority, Parma, 
Italy. Available at: http://www.efsa.europa.eu/en/press/news/cef110406 (accessed 10 September 
2015).

ESA (2013) European Spice Association quality minima document. Available at: http://www.esa-spices.

org/index-esa.html/publications-esa (accessed 28 October 2014).

Fang, F., Sang, S., Chen, K.Y., Gosslau, A., Ho, C.T. and Rosen, R.T. (2005) Isolation and identification 

of cytotoxic compounds from bay leaf (Laurus nobilis). Food Chemistry 93, 497–501.

FAO  (2014)  Laurus  nobilis  data  sheet.  Ecocrop,  Food  and  Agriculture  Organization  of  the  United 
 Nations, Rome. Available at: http://ecocrop.fao.org/ecocrop/srv/en/cropView?id=1333 (accessed 
4 August 2014).

FAO and WHO (2001) Proposed Draft Revision to the Recommended International Code of Practice for 
the Operation of Irradiation Facilities Used in the Treatment of Foods. Food and Agriculture Organ-
ization of the United Nations, Rome and World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland. Avail-
able at: ftp://ftp.fao.org/Codex/Meetings/CCFAC/ccfac33/fa01_12e.pdf (accessed 12 October 2014).
FAOSTAT (2014) Food and agricultural commodities production. Food and Agriculture Organization 
of  the  United  Nations,  Rome.  Available  at:  http://faostat.fao.org/site/339/default.aspx  (accessed  
4 August 2014).

Farrell,  K.T.  (1998)  Bay  (laurel)  leaves.  In:  Farrell,  K.T.  (ed.)  Spices,  Condiments  and  Seasonings. 

Springer, New York, pp. 38–41.

Fiorini, C., Fourasté, I., David, B. and Bessière, J.M. (1997) Composition of the flower, leaf and stem es-

sential oils from Laurus nobilis L. Flavour and Fragrance Journal 12, 91–93.

Fiorini,  C.,  David,  B.,  Fouraste,  I.  and  Vercauteren,  J.  (1998)  Acylated  kaempferol  glycosides  from 

Laurus nobilis leaves. Phytochemistry 47, 821–824.

Fukuyama, N., Ino, C., Suzuki, Y., Kobayashi, N., Hamamoto, H., Sekimizu, K. and Orihara, Y. (2011) 
Antimicrobial sesquiterpenoids from Laurus nobilis L. Natural Product Research 25, 1295–1303.

60 

H. Çakmak et al. 

Gómez-Coronado, D.J., Ibanez, E., Rupérez, F.J. and Barbas, C. (2004) Tocopherol measurement in 

edible products of vegetable origin. Journal of Chromatography A 1054, 227–233.

Grabowski, S., Marcotte, M. and Ramaswamy, H.S. (2003) Drying of fruits, vegetables, and spices. In: 
Chakraverty,  A.,  Mujumdar,  A.S.,  Raghavan,  G.S.V.  and  Ramaswamy,  H.S.  (eds)  Handbook  of 
Postharvest Technology: Cereals, Fruits, Vegetables, Tea, and Spices. Marcel Dekker, New York, 
pp. 653–695.

Gürbüz, I., Üstün, O., Yes¸ilada, E., Sezik, E. and Akyürek, N. (2002) In vivo gastroprotective effects of 
five Turkish folk remedies against ethanol-induced lesions. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 83, 
241–244.

Hafizogˇlu, H. and Reunanen, M. (1993) Studies on the components of Laurus nobilis from Turkey with 
special reference to laurel berry fat. Lipid/Fett [now European Journal of Lipid Science and Technology] 
95, 304–308.

Hinneburg, I., Dorman, H.J.D. and Hiltunen, R. (2006) Antioxidant activities of extracts from selected 

culinary herbs and spices. Food Chemistry 97, 122–129.

Jemaa, J.M.B., Tersim, N., Toudert, K.T. and Khouja, M.L. (2012) Insecticidal activities of essential oils 
from leaves of Laurus nobilis L. from Tunisia, Algeria and Morocco, and comparative chemical 
composition. Journal of Stored Products Research 48, 97–104.

Julianti, E., Jang, K.H., Lee, S., Lee, D., Mar, W., Oh, K.B. and Shin, J. (2012) Sesquiterpenes from the 

leaves of Laurus nobilis L. Phytochemistry 80, 70–76.

Kandi, M.N.H. and Sefidkon, F. (2011) The influense [sic] of drying methods on essential oil content 

and composition of Laurus nobilis L. Journal of Essential Oil Bearing Plants 14, 302–308.

Kang, H.W., Yu, K.W., Jun, W.J., Chang, I.S., Han, S.B., Kim, H.Y. and Cho, H.Y. (2002) Isolation and char-
acterization of alkyl peroxy radical scavenging compound from leaves of Laurus nobilis. Biological 
and Pharmaceutical Bulletin 25, 102–108.

Kaurinovic, B., Popovic, M. and Vlaisavljevic, S. (2010) In vitro and in vivo effects of Laurus nobilis L. 

leaf extracts. Molecules 15, 3378–3390.

Khan, A., Zaman, G. and Anderson, R.A. (2009) Bay leaves improve glucose and lipid profile of people 

with type 2 diabetes. Journal of Clinical Biochemistry and Nutrition 44, 52–56.

Kilic, A., Hafizoglu, H., Kollmannsberger, H. and Nitz, S. (2004) Volatile constituents and key odorants 
in leaves, buds, flowers, and fruits of Laurus nobilis L. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemis-
try 52, 1601–1606.

Kirkin, C., Mitrevski, B., Gunes, G. and Marriott, P.J. (2014) Combined effects of gamma-irradiation and 

modified atmosphere packaging on quality of some spices. Food Chemistry 154, 255–261.

Kosar, M., Tunalier, Z., Özek, T., Kürkcüoglu, M. and Baser, K.H.C. (2005) A simple method to obtain 
essential oils from Salvia triloba L. and Laurus nobilis L. by using microwave-assisted hydrodistil-
lation. Zeitschrift für Naturforschung C 60, 501–504.

Kumar, S., Singh, J. and Sharma, A. (2001) Bay leaves. In: Peter, K.V. (ed.) Handbook of Herbs and 

Spices, Vol. 1. Woodhead Publishing, Cambridge, UK, pp. 52–61.

Kuzgunkaya, E.H. and Hepbasli, A. (2007) Exergetic evaluation of drying of laurel leaves in a vertical 
ground-source heat pump drying cabinet. International Journal of Energy Research 31, 245–258.
Lacroix, M., Marcotte, M. and Ramaswamy, H.S. (2003) Irradiation of fruits, vegetables, nuts and spic-
es. In: Chakraverty, A., Mujumdar, A.S., Raghavan, G.S.V. and Ramaswamy, H.S. (eds) Handbook 
of Postharvest Technology: Cereals, Fruits, Vegetables, Tea, and Spices. Marcel Dekker, New York, 
pp. 623–653.

Lira, P.D.L., Retta, D., Tkacik, E., Ringuelet, J., Coussio, J.D., van Baren, C. and Bandoni, A.L. (2009) 
Essential oil and by-products of distillation of bay leaves (Laurus nobilis L.) from Argentina. Indus-
trial Crops and Products 30, 259–264.

Longo, L. and Vasapollo, G. (2005) Anthocyanins from bay (Laurus nobilis L.) berries. Journal of Agricul-

tural and Food Chemistry 53, 8063–8067.

Marzouki, H., Piras, A., Marongiu, B., Rosa, A. and Dessi, M.A. (2008) Extraction and separation of vola-
tile and fixed oils from berries of Laurus nobilis L. by supercritical CO2. Molecules 13, 1702–1711.
Mello  da  Silveira,  S.,  Luciano,  F.B.,  Fronza,  N.,  Cunha,  A.  Jr,  Scheuermann,  G.N.  and  Vieira,  C.R. 
(2014) Chemical composition and antibacterial activity of Laurus nobilis essential oil towards food-
borne pathogens and its application in fresh Tuscan sausage stored at 7°C. LWT – Food Science and 
Technology 59, 86–93.

Millezi, A.F., Caixeta, D.S., Rossoni, D.F., Cardoso, M.D.G. and Piccoli, R.H. (2012) In vitro antimicrobial 
properties of plant essential oils [of] Thymus vulgaris, Cymbopogon citratus and Laurus nobilis 

 

Bay 

61

against five important foodborne pathogens. Ciência e Tecnologia de Alimentos [Food Science 
and Technology (Campinas)] 32(1), 167–172.

Moghtader, M. and Salari, H. (2012) Comparative survey on the essential oil composition from the 
leaves and flowers of Laurus nobilis L. from Kerman Province. Journal of Ecology and the Natural 
Environment 4, 150–153.

Muchuweti, M., Kativu, E., Mupure, C.H., Chidewe, C., Ndhlala, A.R. and Benhura, M.A.N. (2007) 
Phenolic composition and antioxidant properties of some spices. American Journal of Food Tech-
nology 2, 414–420.

Muggeridge, M. and Clay, M. (2001) Quality specifications for herbs and spices. In: Peter, K.V. (ed.) 

Handbook of Herbs and Spices, Vol. 1. Woodhead Publishing, Cambridge, UK, pp. 13–21.

Muñiz-Márquez, D.B., Martínez-Ávila, G.C., Wong-Paz, J.E., Belmares-Cerda, R., Rodríguez-Herrera, R. 
and  Aguilar,  C.N.  (2013)  Ultrasound-assisted  extraction  of  phenolic  compounds  from  Laurus 
 nobilis L. and their antioxidant activity. Ultrasonics Sonochemistry 20, 1149–1154.

Onay, Ö. (2014) Effects of catalyst on pyrolysis of laurel (Laurus nobilis L.) seed in a fixed bed tubular 

reactor. Chemical Engineering Transactions 37, 127–132.

Ouchikh, O., Chahed, T., Ksouri, R., Taarit, M.B., Faleh, H., Abdelly, C., Kchouk, M.E. and Marzouk, B. 
(2011) The effects of extraction method on the measured tocopherol level and antioxidant activity 
of L. nobilis vegetative organs. Journal of Food Composition and Analysis 24, 103–110.

Ozcan, B., Esen, M., Sangun, M.K., Coleri, A. and Caliskan, M. (2010) Effective antibacterial and antioxi-
dant properties of methanolic extract of Laurus nobilis seed oil. Journal of Environmental Biology 31, 
637–641.

Özden, M.G., Öztas¸, P., Öztas¸, M.O. and Önder, M. (2001) Allergic contact dermatitis from Laurus no-

bilis (laurel) oil. Contact Dermatitis 45, 178–178.

Özek, T. (2012) Distillation parameters for pilot plant production of Laurus nobilis essential oil. Records 

of Natural Products 6, 135–143.

Panza,  E.,  Tersigni,  M.,  Iorizzi,  M.,  Zollo,  F.,  De  Marino,  S.,  Festa,  C.,  Napolitano,  M.,  Castello,  G., 
Ialenti, A. and Ianaro, A. (2010) Lauroside B, a megastigmane glycoside from Laurus nobilis (bay 
laurel) leaves, induces apoptosis in human melanoma cell lines by inhibiting NF-κB activation. 
Journal of Natural Products 74, 228–233.

Parthasarathy,  V.A.,  Zachariah,  T.J.  and  Chempakam,  B.  (2008)  Bay  leaf.  In:  Parthasarathy,  V.A., 
Chempakam, B. and Zachariah, T.J. (eds) Chemistry of Spices. CAB International, Wallingford, UK, 
pp. 426–434.

Polat, S., Gulbaba, A.G., Tufekci, S. and Ozkurt, A. (2009) Determination of the Most Suitable Leaf Har-
vesting Methods of Bay Laurel (Laurus nobilis L.) and its Economy (the Case of Tarsus). Technical 
Bulletin No: 34, Eastern Mediterranean Forestry Research Institute, Tarsus, Turkey. [In Turkish.]

Politeo, O., Jukic, M. and Milos, M. (2007) Chemical composition and antioxidant activity of free vola-
tile aglycones from laurel (Laurus nobilis L.) compared to its essential oil. Croatica Chemica Acta 
80, 121–126.

Polovka, M. and Suhaj, M. (2010) The effect of irradiation and heat treatment on composition and anti-
oxidant properties of culinary herbs and spices – a review. Food Reviews International 26, 138–161.
Qnais, E.Y., Abdulla, F.A., Kaddumi, E.G. and Abdalla, S.S. (2012) Antidiarrheal activity of Laurus 

nobilis L. leaf extract in rats. Journal of Medicinal Food 15, 51–57.

Raghavan,  S.  (2007)  Handbook  of  Spices,  Seasonings,  and  Flavorings,  2nd  edn.  CRC  Press,  Boca 

Raton, Florida.

Ramos, C., Teixeira, B., Batista, I., Matos, O., Serrano, C., Neng, N.R., Nogueira, J.M.F., Nunes, M.L. and 
Marques,  A.  (2012)  Antioxidant  and  antibacterial  activity  of  essential  oil  and  extracts  of  bay 
laurel Laurus nobilis Linnaeus (Lauraceae) from Portugal. Natural Product Research 26, 518–529.
Rosello, J., Sempere, F., Sanz-Berzosa, I., Chiralt, A. and Santamarina, M.P. (2015) Antifungal activity 
and potential use of essential oils against Fusarium culmorum and Fusarium verticillioides. Jour-
nal of Essential Oil Bearing Plants 18, 359–367.

Saab, A.M., Tundis, R., Loizzo, M.R., Lampronti, I., Borgatti, M., Gambari, R., Menichini, F., Esseily, F. 
and Menichini, F. (2012) Antioxidant and antiproliferative activity of Laurus nobilis L. (Lauraceae) 
leaves and seeds essential oils against K562 human chronic myelogenous leukaemia cells.  Natural 
Product Research 26, 1741–1745.

Sagoo, S.K., Little, C.L., Greenwood, M., Mithani, V., Grant, K.A., McLauchlin, J., de Pinna, E. and 
Threlfall, E.J. (2009) Assessment of the microbiological safety of dried spices and herbs from pro-
duction and retail premises in the United Kingdom. Food Microbiology 26, 39–43.

62 

H. Çakmak et al. 

Sangun, M.K., Aydin, E., Timur, M., Karadeniz, H., Caliskan, M. and Ozkan, A. (2007) Comparison of 
chemical composition of the essential oil of Laurus nobilis L. leaves and fruits from different re-
gions of Hatay, Turkey. Journal of Environmental Biology 28, 731–733.

Santoyo, S., Lloria, R., Jaime, L., Ibanez, E., Senorans, F.J. and Reglero, G. (2006) Supercritical fluid 
extraction  of  antioxidant  and  antimicrobial  compounds  from  Laurus  nobilis  L.  Chemical  and 
functional characterization. European Food Research and Technology 222, 565–571.

Sayyah, M., Valizadeh, J. and Kamalinejad, M. (2002) Anticonvulsant activity of the leaf essential oil 
of Laurus nobilis against pentylenetetrazole- and maximal electroshock-induced seizures. Phyto-
medicine 9, 212–216.

Sayyah, M., Saroukhani, G., Peirovi, A. and Kamalinejad, M. (2003) Analgesic and anti-inflammatory 

activity of the leaf essential oil of Laurus nobilis Linn. Phytotherapy Research 17, 733–736.

Schweiggert, U., Carle, R. and Schieber, A. (2007) Conventional and alternative processes for spice 

production – a review. Trends in Food Science and Technology 18, 260–268.

Seidemann, J. (2005) World Spice Plants: Economic Usage, Botany, Taxonomy. Springer, Heidelberg, 

Germany.

Sellami, I.H., Wannes, W.A., Bettaieb, I., Berrima, S., Chahed, T., Marzouk, B. and Limam, F. (2011) 
Qualitative and quantitative changes in the essential oil of Laurus nobilis L. leaves as affected by 
different drying methods. Food Chemistry 126, 691–697.

Simic´, A., Sokovic´, M.D., Ristic´, M., Grujic´-Jovanovic´, S., Vukojevic´, J. and Marin, P.D. (2004) The chem-
ical composition of some Lauraceae essential oils and their antifungal activities. Phytotherapy 
Research 18, 713–717.

Spratt,  G.  (1830)  Flora  Medica:  Containing  Coloured  Delineations  of  the  Various  Medicinal  Plants. 

Callow and Wilson, London.

Tuzlacı, E. and Sadıkog˘lu, E. (2007) Turkish folk medicinal plants, Part VI: Koçarlı (Aydın). Journal of 

Faculty Pharmacy of Istanbul University 39, 25–37.

Tuzlacı, E. and Tolon, E. (2000) Turkish folk medicinal plants, Part III: S¸ile (Istanbul). Fitoterapia 71, 

673–685.

UNIDO  and  FAO  (2005)  Herbs,  Spices  and  Essential  Oils:  Post-harvest  Operations  in  Developing 
Countries. United Nations Industrial Development Organization, Vienna, Austria and Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome.

US FDA (2013) FDA Draft Risk Profile: Pathogens and Filth in Spices. US Food and Drug Administration, 
Silver Spring, Maryland. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Food/FoodScienceResearch/
RiskSafetyAssessment/UCM367337.pdf (accessed 13 October 2014).

US  FDA  (2014)  Food  Additive  Status  List,  Bay,  Bay  leaves.  US  Food  and  Drug  Administration,  
Silver  Spring,  Maryland.  Available  at:  http://www.fda.gov/food/ingredientspackaginglabeling/
foodadditivesingredients/ucm091048.htm#ftnB (accessed 1 August 2014).

USDA  (2014)  National  Nutrient  Database  for  Standard  Reference.  US  Department  of  Agriculture, 
Washington, DC. Available at: http://ndb.nal.usda.gov/ndb/search/list (accessed 1 August 2014).

Weiss, E.A. (2002) Spice Crops. CAB International, Wallingford, UK.
WHO (1998) Quality Control Methods for Medicinal Plant Materials. World Health Organization, Geneva, 

Switzerland.

Wiart, C. (2006) Medicinal Plants of Asia and the Pacific. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida.
Yalçın, H., Akın, M., S¸anda, M.A. and Çakır, A. (2007) Gas chromatography/mass spectrometry analysis 
of Laurus nobilis essential oil composition of northern Cyprus. Journal of Medicinal Food 10, 715–719.
Zekovic, Z.P., Lepojevic, Z.D. and Mujic, I.O. (2009) Laurel extracts obtained by steam distillation, 

supercritical fluid and solvent extraction. Journal of Natural Products 2, 104–109.

Zeybek, N. and Zeybek, U. (1994) Pharmaceutical Botany: Angiospermae Systematics and Important 

Items, 2nd edn. Ege Universitesi Basımevi, Izmir, Turkey. [In Turkish.]

5  Betel Vine

 S. Jacob K. Annamalai, S. Reetha Subashini, J.S. Rutra Priya  

and Ravindra Naik*

ICAR – Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering,  

Regional Centre, Coimbatore, India

5.1  Botany

5.1.1 

Introduction

The betel vine plant is reported to have ori-
ginated  from  South  and  South-east  Asia.  Its 
scientific name is Piper betle L. It belongs to 
the  family  Piperaceae,  the  black  pepper 
family. The names of betel vine in local (Indian) 
languages  are  vetrilai  in  Tamil,  tambula  in 
Sanskrit, vettilakkotti in Malayalam, villaya 
in  Kannada,  tamalapaku  in  Telugu,  vedech- 
pan in Marathi, nagerbel in Gujrati and pan 
in Hindi and Bangala. In other (foreign) lan-
guages, it is called tanbol in Arabic and burg-e- 
tanbol  in  Persian.  [There  are  variations  on 
many  of  these  spellings.]  Betel  leaves  are  a 
special item that is offered to guests in order 
to  show  respect  and  they  are  traditionally 
used in Indian society. A well- prepared betel 
quid  (a  combination  of  betel  leaf,  areca  nut 
and slaked lime, which may also contain to-
bacco)  is  regarded  as  an  excellent  mouth 
freshener and mild vitalizer, and is regularly 
served  on  social,  cultural  and  religious  occa-
sions such as marriage, puja (a religious festi-
val)  and  the  religious  function  performed 
after cremation (Mehrotra, 1981; Guha, 1997). 
The leaves are traditionally used for chewing in 

their natural raw condition, along with many 
other ingredients, including sliced areca nut, 
slaked lime, coriander, aniseed, clove, carda-
mom, sweetener, coconut scrapings, ashes of 
diamond,  pearl,  gold  and  silver  (Ayurvedic 
preparations),  jelly,  peppermint,  flavouring 
agent, fruit pulp, etc. (Krishnamurthi, 1969).

The fresh leaves of betel vine (see Fig. 5.1) 
are popularly known as paan in India, and 
they are consumed by about 20 million people 
in that country. Betel is cultivated over about 
55,000 ha and has an annual production worth 
about Rs 9000 million (Kaleeswari and Sridhar, 
2013). The leaves are nutritive and also con-
tain anticarcinogenic agents, thereby show-
ing  much  promise  for  manufacturing  of  a 
blood  cancer  drug.  Some  disputed  reports 
also  claim  that  the  excessive  chewing  of 
betel  leaves  may  cause  oral  cancer.  It  has 
been reported that there is a great wastage of 
the  leaves  during  storage  and  transporta-
tion, and during the glut season. Moreover, 
the surplus leaves, if not disposed of prop-
erly,  may  cause  environmental  pollution 
and  health  hazards.  Such  wastage  may  be 
minimized  in  various  ways,  including  the 
use of surplus betel leaves for the extraction 
of essential oils. The oil can be used as an 
industrial  raw  material  for  manufacturing 

*Corresponding author, e-mail: naikravindra@gmail.com

© CAB International 2016. Leafy Medicinal Herbs: Botany, Chemistry, 
Postharvest Technology and Uses (eds D.C.P. Ambrose et al.) 

63

64 

S.J.K. Annamalai et al. 

evident  from  many  references  in  the  early 
Sanskrit literature (3000 bc), such as the Ve-
das, Ramayana, Mahabharata, Mahavansha, 
etc. Marco Polo (1295 ad) took notice of the 
pan-chewing  habit  of  the  people  in  south 
India. Over the centuries, pan chewing had 
become  so  prevalent  that  the  serving  and 
chewing of pan had been raised to various 
levels of fine art at the Mughal darbar (the 
Mughal court), particularly during the Akbar’s 
regime (Chopra et al., 1956).

5.1.3  Location

Betel  is  believed  to  have  originated  from 
 Malaysia or the surrounding East Asian region 
and  other  South  Asian  countries,  and  have 
been  traded  by  Chinese  and  Arab  merchants 
(Rathnasoma and Senavirathna, 2002). Today, 
betel is grown for local consumption and ex-
port, and the major betel-/growing countries 
are Sri Lanka, India, Thailand and Bangladesh.
Malay  culture  and  tradition  hold  betel 
(areca) nut and betel leaves in high esteem, 
as is evident from their use in many social 
and  religious  ceremonies.  The  exchange  of 
betel leaves and areca nuts, or the presenta-
tion of betel leaves or a bunch of areca nuts, 
bundles of betel leaves and a betel box have 
earned their own social meaning and import-
ance. Tambula is a token of honour, pledge 
and love, and exchange is a sign of marriage 
or betrothal. This single tradition is an inte-
gral  part  of  the  folklore,  art,  rituals,  cere-
monies and social intercourse of daily life in 
Cambodia, India, Malaysia, Myanmar, Thai-
land and Vietnam (Ahuja and Uma, 2011).

There  are  more  than  100  varieties  of 
betel vine in the world, of which about 40 
are  found  in  India  and  30  in  West  Bengal 
(Maity, 1989; Guha, 1997). In spite of being 
an alien species, the plant is, and has been 
since antiquity, much more popular in India 
than in any other country of the world.

5.1.4  Morphology

The betel leaf is heart shaped and the size of 
the  leaf  varies  between  different  cultivars. 

Fig. 5.1.  A betel vine plant. From The Hindu (http://
www.thehindu.com).

medicines,  perfumes,  mouth  fresheners, 
tonics,  food  additives,  etc.  (Guha,  2007) 
This  chapter  describes  the  importance  of 
betel vine leaves and their processing to de-
velop various value-added products.

5.1.2  History

Betel  leaves  have  been  used  by  humans 
since time immemorial. The use of tambula 
is been mentioned in the Vedas and Ayur-
veda Sastra. Betel leaf with a bit of betel nut 
has  been  used  in  Hindu  rituals  as  a  pious 
offering  to  God  on  many  auspicious  occa-
sions and for older people as a mark of re-
spect  during  ceremonies.  The  commercial 
product  is  the  betel  leaf,  which  is  mainly 
used  for  chewing  with  areca  nut,  slaked 
lime,  tobacco  and  some  other  ingredients 
(as the betel quid). The betel chewing habit 
in Sri Lanka dates back to 340 bc and during 
that time betel was a prestigious item used 
by the prestigious society of the country.

The chewing of ‘pan’ has also been said 
to  be  popular  among  ‘aryas’  (nobles)  and 
has  been  credited  with  many  medicinal 
properties, as indicated in the Susruta Sam-
hita, a classical Sanskrit text on medicine. 
Since  then,  betel  leaves  have  occupied  an 
important  place  in  daily  life  of  Indian 
people (Rayaguru et al., 2007). Historically, 
the  word  ‘pan’  in  Hindi  and  other  Indian 
languages  is  probably  a  derivative  of  the 
Sanskrit  word  ‘pan’,  meaning  leaf.  It  has 
been very intimately connected with ancient 
Indian  history,  religion  and  culture,  as  is 

 

Betel Vine 

65

The  leaves  are  simple  alternate  stipulate 
petiolate  with  0.75  to  3.8  cm  long,  ovate  
oblong  broadly  ovate  cordate  or  obliquely 
elliptic  entire  glabrous  coriaceous  10  to  
18 cm long and 5 to 10 cm broad acuminate 
oblique and rounded base. The general col-
our of the leaves is yellowish green to dark 
green in colour with a glossy upper surface 
and a characteristic and pleasant odour. The 
leaves are aromatic with a varied taste ran-
ging from sweet to pungent due to the pres-
ence of essential oils.

A transverse section of the leaf through 
the midrib shows a four-layered upper and 
a two-layered lower epidermis. The cuticle 
is  thick  on  the  upper  epidermis  and  thin 
on  the  lower  epidermis.  The  cells  of  the 
outer epidermal layers on both sides of the 
leaf are small and contain tannins and oils. 
The  sub-epidermal  cells  on  the  abaxial 
side  are  enlarged  and  store  water.  Crystal 
and  oil  reserves  are  found  in  the  sub- 
epidermal  cells  on  both  sides  of  the  leaf. 
The palisade layers are well distinguished, 
with  double-layered  short  wide  compact 
cells;  the  mesophyll  cells  are  three–four 
layered  and  small  lobed.  Thick  walled  ir-
regular secretory cells are seen with dense 
contents,  mostly  of  essential  oil  (Pradhan 
et al., 2013).

5.2  Chemistry

5.2.1  Chemical and nutritional  

composition

P. betle contains a wide variety of biologic-
ally  active  compounds  whose  concentra-
tion  depends  on  the  variety  of  the  plant, 
season and climate. The aroma of betel leaf 
is due to the presence of essential oils that 
consist of phenols and terpenes. The betel 
leaf  is  rich  in  many  components  that  are 
nutritious  and  essential  for  healthy  build-
ing  of  the  body.  The  juice  of  the  pan  has 
nutritional  elements  of  various  kinds,  in-
cluding vitamins A, B and C, essential oils, 
alkaloids and arecolin, etc. Tables 5.1 and 5.2 
present  data  on  the  composition  of  fresh 
betel leaves.

Table 5.1.  Nutritional composition of fresh betel 
leaves. From Guha, 2006.

Constituents

Approximate composition

Calcium
Carbohydrate
Chlorophyll
Energy
Essential oil
Fat
Fibre
Iodine
Iron
Minerals
Nicotinic acid
Nitrogen
Phosphorus
Potassium
Protein
Riboflavin
Tannin
Thiamine
Vitamin A
Vitamin C
Water

0.2–0.5%
0.5–6.10%
0.01–0.25%
44 kcal/100 g
0.08–0.2%
0.4–1.0%

2.3%

3.4 μg/100 g
0.005–0.007%

2.3–3.3%

0.63–0.89 mg/100 g

2.0–7.0%
0.05–0.6%
1.1–4.6%
3–3.5%

1.9–30 μg/100 g

0.1–1.3%

10–70 μg/100 g
1.9–2.9 mg/100 g

0.005–0.01%

85–90%

Table 5.2.  Percentage chemical composition of 
fresh betel leaves. From Rekha et al., 2014.

Constituents (in descending 
order of content)

Approximate  
composition (%)

Chavibetol
Chavibetol acetate
Caryophyllene
Allylpyrocatechol diacetate
Campene
Chavibetol methyl ether
Eugenol
Allylpyrocatechol monoacetate
a-Pinene
b-Pinene
d-Limonene
Safrole
1,8-Cineol

53.1
15.5
3.71
0.71
0.48
0.48
0.32
0.23
0.21
0.21
0.14
0.11
0.04

5.2.2  Phytochemistry

The  specific  strong  pungent  aromatic  fla-
vour in betel leaves is due to the presence of 
phenol  and  terpene-like  compounds.  The 
total phenol content varies with plant gen-
der.  The  male  plant  contains  threefold 
higher  total  phenolic  content  and  twofold 

66 

S.J.K. Annamalai et al. 

higher  thiocyanate  content  compared  with 
female plants. The quality of the leaf depends 
upon the phenolic content, i.e. the more the 
phenolic content, the better the leaf quality. 
Many earlier research works have shown that 
betel leaves contain starch, diastases, sugars 
and  an  essential  oil  composing  of  safrole, 
allyl  pyrocatechol  monoacetate,  eugenol, 
terpinen-4-ol,  eugenyl  acetate,  etc.  as  the 
major  components.  Phytochemical  investi-
gations of leaves also revealed the presence 
of  alkaloids,  carbohydrates,  amino  acids, 
tannins  and  steroidal  components.  The 
middle  part  of  the  main  vine  contains  the 
largest quantity of tannin. The major terpen-
oids and phenols found in betel leaf include 
1,8-cineole (or 1,8-cineol, also known as eu-
calyptol),  cadinene,  camphene,  caryophyl-
lene, limonene, pinene, chavicol, allylpyro-
catechol,  carvacrol,  safrole,  eugenol  and 
chavibetol.  Eugenol  has  been  identified  as 
the antifungal principle in the oil. The fresh 
new leaves contain a much greater amount 
of  essential  oil,  the  enzyme  diastase  and 
sugar  than  old  leaves.  Chavicol  is  four 
times more potent as  an  antiseptic agent 
than carbolic acid (Pradhan et al., 2013).

5.3  Postharvest Technology

5.3.1  Harvesting and processing

As the betel vines reach to a certain height, 
leaves are harvested from the lower portion 
of the stem. In India, harvesting is done dur-
ing March–April in Uttar Pradesh, Madhya 
Pradesh  and  Bihar,  during  May–June  in  
Andhra Pradesh and during January–February 
or April–May in Tamil Nadu. Mature leaves 
are plucked by hand along with a portion of 
petiole.  In  Karnataka  and  Tamil  Nadu, 
leaves  are  plucked  from  side  shoots.  In 
south  India,  comparatively  tender  leaves 
are preferred in the market. After plucking, 
they are washed thoroughly and made into 
bundles according to the prevailing custom 
of the area.

Betel leaves are usually used for chew-
ing fresh and unprocessed, but in certain areas, 
leaves are subjected to a process known as 

bleaching  or  curing.  There  is  good  demand 
for such leaves, which fetch higher prices in 
the markets. Bleaching is done by successive 
heat  treatments  at  60–70°C  for  6–8  h 
(Rayaguru et al., 1999).

Harvesting

Leaves  that  are  sufficiently  matured  are 
plucked along with a portion of the petiole 
by hand without any aid. The level of ma-
turity  is  decided  based  on  the  consumer 
preference  in  the  local  area.  The  leaves 
 mature in 15–30 days and one or two har-
vestings can be done every month. In India, 
the leaves are plucked at an interval of 7–15 
days  and  the  yield  is  about  50–70  leaves  
per  plant  each  year.  About  7–8  million 
leaves are harvested annually from 1 ha of 
betel vine garden. Thus, the betel vine pro-
vides a continuous source of income, even 
to  small  farmers.  On  average,  60–80  lakh 
leaves  are  harvested  annually  from  a  1  ha 
plantation.

Cleaning, sorting and packaging

The  harvested  leaves  are  washed,  cleaned 
and  graded  according  to  their  size,  colour, 
texture,  maturity  and  quality.  Damaged 
leaves are rejected. The good quality leaves 
are separated, a portion of the petiole cut off 
and bundled into groups of 50 or 100, and 
then packed in bamboo baskets. Packing is 
mostly  into  bamboo  baskets,  and  in  many 
places straw, fresh or dried banana leaves, 
wet cloth or gunny cloth, etc. are used for 
an inner lining. The packaging is done in a 
very specific manner. The betel leaf bundles 
are  arranged  towards  the  periphery  of  the 
basket in a circular pattern so that a cavity is 
created at the centre (Fig. 5.2). Then the bas-
ket, along with the leaves, is covered with a 
layer  of  gunny  cloth  on  top  and  stitched 
properly. Freshly plucked leaves are sold in 
the  local  pan  markets  either  to  local  pan 
vendors or to middlemen and processors.

Conditioning

Conditioning  is  a  process  in  which  the 
green colour of the leaves will be changed 

 

Betel Vine 

67

given  time,  about  10–40  baskets  each  con-
taining about 2000 leaves can be kept in the 
chamber.  The  number  varies  according  to 
the size of the chamber. In one corner of the 
chamber, a small chullah is kept, in which 
wood charcoal is burned during condition-
ing. About 2–3 kg of charcoal are required 
for  one  charging.  After  firing,  the  movable 
chullah  is  kept  in  a  corner  away  from  the 
racks to avoid direct heat. The door is also 
properly  covered  to  avoid  any  leakage  of 
heat from the chamber. After 10 to 12 h of 
charging the baskets are taken out for cool-
ing. The cooling period varies from 36 to 72 h 
depending  upon  the  weather  conditions. 
During the cooling period, the leaves are sorted 
and reshuffled. Before subjecting the baskets 
to a second phase of charging, the damaged 
or rotten leaves are discarded. The process 
is  then  repeated  until  all  of  the  leaves  are 
conditioned,  i.e.  the  green  colour  of  the 
leaves changes to a yellow colour. After the 
second  phase,  the  amount  of  fuel  used  is 
gradually reduced. The fuel requirement for 
obtaining the desired temperature range, as 
well  as  to  achieve  the  final  conditioned 
stage of the betel leaves, is mainly decided 
through  personal  experience  as  no  rule  or 
scientific formula to calculate it exists. The 
temperature  requirement  varies  with  the 
variety and quality of the leaves. During the 
summer season, the leaves are fully condi-
tioned  after  two  or  three  chargings,  but  in 
winter, sometimes as many as five chargings 
are required. The conditioned leaves are fi-
nally packed in bamboo baskets to be trans-
ported to other cities (Rayaguru et al., 2007).

5.3.2  Value addition

Several  value-added  products  have  been 
 developed  from  betel  leaves,  namely  betel 
toothpaste, mouthwash, shampoo, face cream 
and  ointment,  instant  betel  chew,  instant 
betel quid and pellets, etc. The commercial 
use  of  betel  vine  should  be  cost-effective 
and safe. The leaves of the plant have a high 
economic  and  medicinal  value,  but  since 
ancient  times  have  been  mostly  used  for 
chewing  purposes  and  ceremonial  events, 

Fig. 5.2.  Betel leaves in baskets for market sale. 
Photo courtesy of Liz Bordo, from Burma Link 
(available at: www.burmalink.org/background/
burma/ethnic-groups/overview/).

to yellow/white. This is in high demand by 
a group of consumers. The process not only 
fetches  a  high  price  but  also  increases  the 
storability of the leaves to a significant ex-
tent. In the traditional method of condition-
ing, a small chamber (called a Bhatti) made 
of  brick  and  mud  is  used.  The  chambers/
vats are of various sizes ranging from 1.2 × 
1.2 × 2.4 m to 2.7 × 2.7 × 2.4 m depending 
on  the  capacity  needed.  They  are  usually 
constructed inside houses. The walls of the 
vat  are  constructed  of  brickwork  of  mud 
plaster, sometimes accompanied by a layer 
of  cow  dung.  The  floor  is  also  either  ce-
mented or covered by an even layer of clay 
and dung to make it airtight. An insulated 
door of 0.75 × 1.8 m is provided at the front 
that  is  fabricated  of  a  bamboo  mat  frame 
covered  with  straw  and  gunny  cloth.  The 
door is about 15 cm larger on each side of 
the dimensions of the door opening. Care is 
taken to make the chamber airtight as well 
as  insulated  by  restricting  the  opening  of 
the door.

Inside the chamber, at a height of 30 cm 
from  ground  level,  bamboo  racks  are  pro-
vided  at  an  interval  of  45–60  cm  between 
racks on all sides of the chamber, excluding 
the entrance side. The bundles are placed in 
such a manner that the front and backside of 
the leaves are exposed alternately. Then the 
baskets are covered with moist gunny cloth 
and  arranged  in  the  racks  in  order.  At  a 

68 

S.J.K. Annamalai et al. 

along with other condiments (Arambewela 
et al., 2006). The composition of the chew-
ing combination in the form of a betel quid 
can be varied, and different ingredients are 
used from country to country.

The oil from betel leaves has multiple 
potential  uses  in  cottage  industry  for  the 
manufacturing  of  numerous  commercial 
products, such as medicine, gutkha (chew-
able  mouth  freshener),  incense  sticks,  fra-
grance and flavouring agents, etc. (Fig. 5.3). 
The establishment of a rural industry for the 
extraction of essential oil from betel leaves 
can be achieved at a very reasonable initial 
investment  along  with  suitable  ideas  for 
minimizing  the  wastage  of  surplus  leaves 
and  increasing  the  agricultural  and  indus-
trial employment opportunities in the betel 
leaf  growing  regions  of  India  and  other 
countries (Guha, 2007).

5.4  Uses

5.4.1  General uses

Betel leaves have a strong pungent aromatic 
flavour  and  are  widely  used  as  a  mastica-
tory agent. Generally mature or overmature 
leaves,  which  have  ceased  physiological 
growth but not yet become brittle, are used 
for  chewing.  The  basic  preparation  for 
chewing  purpose  consists  of  betel  leaf 
smeared with hydrated lime and acacia ex-
tract  to  which  a  scraping  of  areca  nut  is 
added; flavourings such as coconut shavings, 
clove, cardamom, fennel, powered liquorice, 
nutmeg and also tobacco  are  used  accord-
ing  to  taste.  In  some  places,  the  prepared 
pan is covered with silver or gold. A bever-
age called pan-supari nectar has been devel-
oped  by  the  Central  Food  Technological  
Research Institute at Mysore, India, and is 
said to be a good source of calcium (Rama-
murthi and Usha Rani, 2012).

General  characteristics  of  betel  leaves 

are as follows:

 •  The leaves are rich in vitamins B, C and E.
 •  They  have  a  stimulatory  effect  on  the 

heart, brain and liver.

Fig. 5.3.  Essential oil from betel leaves as a retail 
product. From SAT Group, Essential Oil.In, New 
Delhi (available at: http://www.essentialoil.in/
betel-leaf-oil.html, where details are also given of 
the many medicinal uses).

 •  They clean the mouth and throat.
 •  They  help  in  digestion  by  increasing 
salivation and when chewed with lime 
in neutralizing excess acid.

 •  They are good for teeth as they contain 

chlorophyll.

 •  They are useful in catarrhal, pulmonary 

infections and night blindness.

 •  The  fresh  leaf  powder  is  used  as  a  lo-
tion  for  patients  suffering  from  small-
pox and enlarged glands.

 •  They are used with honey as a remedy 

for coughs.

 •  Betel leaf extract are used as an antioxi-
dant  for  the  storage  of  oily  products 
such as fish, fish oil, ghee, etc.

 •  Betel leaves may be used for the manu-
facture  of  essential  oil,  perfume  and 
food additives.

Industrial uses

The essential oil from betel vine is very im-
portant in medicines and in the pan masala 
industry. The oil is used by manufacturers 
of sweet betel nut, zarda (chewing tobacco) 
and  pan  masala  sold  in  the  ‘Pan  shop’. 

 

Betel Vine 

69

There is wide scope for using pan oil in the 
medicine  industry  and  in  perfumery,  cos-
metics, etc., and the prospects are good.

Culinary uses

Betel  leaf  is  a  popular  spice  in  South-east 
Asian cooking, with the leaves being used in 
their  raw  and  cooked  forms.  A  traditional 
way of preparing the leaves is as a wrapping 
for spiced minced meat and other pieces of 
food.  Because  the  leaves  are  so  attractive, 
they are often used as a base for decorating 
platters, with food arranged on top of them. 
The white flower spikes of the betel plant de-
velop into seeds or fruits that look a little like 
a green–brown mulberry when ripe and can 
be eaten; the fruit is a tasty morsel of sweet 
jelly-like pulp (Palaniappan et al., 2012)

5.4.2  Pharmacological uses

The medicinal properties of pan were recog-
nized as early as 600 ad when the Ayurvedic 
system of medicine came into practice. Betel 
leaves are beneficial to the throat and remove 
viscidity.  The  leaves  also  help  in  digestion 
and  tend  to  remove  bad  smells  from  the 
mouth. The juice of betel leaves is used as an 
adjunct to the pills administered in the Ayur-
vedic  medicines.  The  fresh  crushed  leaves 
are used as an antiseptic for cuts and wounds. 
They are also good for the respiratory system 
and are used in the treatment of bronchitis, 
coughs and colds (Chopra et al., 1958). Pan 
chewing  is  considered  to  be  a  good  and 
cheap source of dietary calcium up to a cer-
tain limit. It also increases the digestive cap-
acity  when  used  with  lime,  neutralizes  the 
acidity and acts as a blood purifier.

As  a  folk  medicine,  betel  leaf  is  trad-
itionally  known  to  be  useful  for  the  treat-
ment of various problems and diseases, in-
cluding  bad  breath,  boils  and  abscesses, 
conjunctivitis, constipation, headache, hys-
teria,  itches,  mastitis,  mastoiditis,  leucor-
rhoea, otorrhoea, ringworm, swelling of the 
gums, rheumatism, abrasion, cuts and injur-
ies, etc., while the root is known for its female 
contraceptive effects (Chopra et al., 1956; 
Khanra,  1997).  Furthermore,  the  essential 

oil contained in the leaves has antibacterial, 
antiprotozoal  and  antifungal  properties. 
Therefore,  betel  leaf  oil  kills  or  inhibits 
growth of bacteria such as those causing ty-
phoid, cholera and tuberculosis, a property 
that  needs  proper  evaluation  and  exploit-
ation (Krishnamurthi, 1969).

The  presence  of  hydroxychavicol  and 
chlorogenic acid in betel vine is reported to 
kill cancerous cells without affecting normal 
cells, unlike the common cancer drugs and 
other  therapeutic  means  (Amonkar  et  al., 
1989). The possibility of manufacturing of a 
new blood cancer drug from betel vine can-
not then be ruled out. Interestingly, it is also 
claimed that the inflorescence of betel vine 
contains  carcinogens,  whereas  the  leaves 
contain anticarcinogenic agents, so seeming 
to  indicate  that  different  parts  of  the  same 
plant contain both carcinogenic and anticar-
cinogenic substances (Wu et al., 2004).

Scanty or obstructed urination

Betel leaf juice is reported to possess diur-
etic properties. Its juice, when mixed with 
dilute milk and sweetened slightly, helps in 
easing  the  passage  of  urine  (Palaniappan 
et al., 2012).

Weakness of nerves

Betel leaves are beneficial in the treatment of 
nervous  disorders.  The  juice  of  a  few  betel 
leaves, with a teaspoon of honey, serves as a 
good tonic. A teaspoon of this mixture can be 
taken twice a day (Palaniappan et al., 2012).

Headaches

The  betel  leaf  has  analgesic  and  cooling 
properties.  It  can  be  applied  to  relieve  in-
tense headaches (Palaniappan et al., 2012).

Respiratory disorders

Betel leaves are useful in pulmonary afflic-
tions suffered in childhood and old age. The 
leaves, soaked in mustard oil and warmed, 
may  be  applied  to  the  chest  to  relieve  a 
cough or difficulty in breathing (Palaniappan 
et al., 2012).

70 

S.J.K. Annamalai et al. 

Constipation

In  the  case  of  constipation  in  children,  a 
suppository (a solid medical preparation in 
a roughly conical or cylindrical shape, de-
signed to be inserted into the rectum) made 
of the stalk of betel leaf dipped in castor oil 
can  be  introduced  in  the  rectum.  This  in-
stantly  relieves  constipation  (Palaniappan 
et al., 2012).

Sore throats

Local  application  of  the  leaves  is  effective 
in treating sore throats. The crushed fruit or 
berry should be mixed with honey and taken 
to  relieve  an  irritating  cough  (Palaniappan 
et al., 2012).

Wounds

Betel  leaves  can  be  used  to  heal  wounds. 
The juice of a few leaves should be extracted 
and  applied  on  to  the  wound.  A  betel  leaf 
should  then  be  wrapped  over  it  and  ban-
daged. The wound will heal with just a sin-
gle application, within 2 days (Palaniappan 
et al., 2012).

Boils

The herb is also an effective remedy for boils. 
A leaf is gently warmed until it is softened, 
and then it is coated with a layer of castor oil. 
The  oiled  leaf  is  spread  over  the  inflamed 
part and is replaced every few hours. After a 
few applications, the boil will rupture, drain-
ing out all of the purulent matter. The appli-
cation can be made at night and removed in 
the morning (Palaniappan et al., 2012).

Problems with breast milk secretion

The application of leaves smeared with oil is 
said to promote the secretion of milk when 
applied on to the breasts of feeding mothers 
during lactation (Palaniappan et al., 2012).

Antimicrobial activity

The leaf has significant antimicrobial activity 
against a broad spectrum of microorganisms 
(Jesonbabu et al., 2012). It has antimicrobial 

activity against Streptococcus pyogenes, Staphy-
lococcus  aureus,  Proteus  vulgaris,  Escheri-
chia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, etc. The 
leaf  extract  also  shows  bactericidal  activity 
against  urinary  tract  pathogenic  bacteria 
such  as  Enterocococcus  faecalis,  Citrobacter 
koseri, C. fruendi, Klebsiella pneumoniae, etc. 
(Chakraborty  and  Shah,  2011;  Agarwal  and 
Singh, 2012). The bioactive molecule thought 
to be responsible for antibacterial activity is 
a  sterol,  which  has  been  obtained  in  large 
quantities in betel leaf extracts (Chakraborty 
and Shah, 2011).

Gastroprotective activity

A  hot  water  betel  leaf  extract  can  protect 
against  indomethacin-induced  gastric  ulcer-
ation  owing  to  its  antioxidant  and  mucin- 
protecting properties (Pradhan et al., 2013). 
The  allylpyrocatacol  that  is  present  in  the 
betel leaf has been shown to have powerful 
antioxidant  potential.  Treatment  with  al-
lylpyrocatacol  significantly  accelerates  the 
ulcer-healing  process  by  enhancing  mucus 
production rather than decreasing acid pro-
duction. This assists in the healing process of 
ulcers by protecting the ulcer crater against 
irritant stomach secretions (HCl and pepsin), 
which enhances the rate of the local healing 
process (Bhattacharya et al., 2007).

Antioxidant activity

Oxidative  damage  is  an  important  effect  of 
ionizing radiation on biological membranes. 
The presence of phenolic compounds such as 
catechol  and  allylpyrocatechol  in  betel  leaf 
extract  effectively  inhibits  the  radiation- 
induced lipid peroxidation process in bio-
logical membranes. This can be attributed to 
the ability of phenolics to scavenge the free 
radicals involved in the initiation and propa-
gation steps of peroxidation. Betel leaf extracts 
had  a  strong  reductive  ability  and  reduced 
most of the Fe3+ ions (Manigauha et al., 2009). 
The extract also shows strong hydroxyl rad-
ical and superoxide anion radical scavenging 
properties in comparison with standards such 
as ascorbic acid and BHT (butylated hydroxy-
toluene) (Arambewela et al., 2006; Pin et al., 
2010).

 

Betel Vine 

71

Antidiabetic activity

In  glucose  tolerance  tests  in  streptozocin 
(STZ)-induced  diabetic  rats,  hot  and  cold 
aqueous  extracts  of  betel  leaves  markedly 
reduced  the  external  glucose  load.  In  tests 
with  a  leaf  suspension,  blood  glucose  and 
glycosylated  haemoglobin  were  signifi-
cantly  reduced,  and  the  activities  of  liver 
glucose-6-phosphatase and fructose-1,6-bis-
phosphatase decreased, whereas liver hex-
okinase  increased  in  a  streptozocin  (STZ) 
rat diabetic model compared with untreated 
diabetic  models  (Arambewela  et  al.,  2005; 
Santhakumari et al., 2006).

Anti-fertility activity

Any  small  changes  in  oestrogen  level  may 
lead to altered structural and functional ac-
tivity of the reproductive organs. Earlier stud-
ies with betel leaf extract suggest that it has 
reversible  antifertility  and  anti-oestrogenic 
effects in female rats. The action of the betel 
leaf extract may be via the pituitary-gonadal 
axis, resulting in diminished release of go-
nadotrophin, which in turn reduces repro-
ductive organ weights and oestrogen levels, 
thus  affecting  ovarian  cysts.  Serum  bio-
chemical  analyses  show  that  treatment 
lowers  glucose  but  raises  cholesterol  and 
vitamin  C  concentrations,  indicating  the 
non-utilization of cholesterol by the system, 
and hence a decrease in oestrogen (Pradhan 
et al., 2013).

Oral care agent

Plaque and dietary carbohydrates play roles 
in  the  initiation  of  dental  caries.  Certain 
cariogenic and highly acidogenic strains of 
streptococci, especially S. mutans, have the 
ability  to  metabolize  dietary  sucrose  and 
synthesize glucan by cell-surface and extra-
cellular  glucosyl  transferase,  an  enzyme 
that  is  considered  to  be  of  special  import-
ance  in  the  establishment  of  S.  mutans  in 
dental  plaque.  Aqueous  extracts  of  betel 
leaves  have  been  reported  to  show  anti-
caries  properties  (Zain,  2011).  Razak  and 
Rahim (2003) described the anti-adherence 
effects of aqueous betel extracts on the ad-
hesion of early plaque settlers such as S. mitis, 

S. sanguinis and Actinomyces sp. Aqueous 
extracts of betel vine have also been shown to 
inhibit various acid-producing oral pathogens 
that change the ultrastructure of the  enamel 
and its properties, including streptococci, 
lactobacilli,  staphylococci,  corynebacteria, 
Porphyromonas  gingivalis  and  Treponema 
denticola. Bissa et al. (2007) demonstrated 
the  advantages  of  chewing  betel  leaves  for 
oral hygiene, and in particular the effective-
ness  of  the  mixture  used  in  betel  quids 
against  the  bacterial  population  of  mouth 
cavity.  Betel  is  viewed  as  the  best  natural 
substance  and  rated  the  as  second  most 
popular  daily  consumed  item  in  Asia  that 
contributes to oral hygiene.

Drawbacks

The harmful effects of pan as described in 
Ayurveda are that it weakens teeth, impairs 
health  and  deadens  the  taste  buds  of  the 
tongue.  In  the  Indian  subcontinent,  where 
chewing  tobacco  with  pan  is  a  common 
habit, cancer of the mouth is very common. 
However, educated Indians are of the opin-
ion  that  moderate  use  of  betel  leaf  is  not 
only innocuous but may even be conducive 
to good health. As classically attributed to 
Paracelsus, the saying is that: ‘All things are 
poison and nothing is without poison; only 
the dose makes a thing not a poison’.

Neuropharmacological profile

A  hydroalcoholic  extract  of  betel  leaves 
showed improvement in the discrimination 
index, potentiated haloperidol-induced cata-
lepsy,  reduced  basal  as  well  as  ampheta-
mine-induced  increased  locomotor  activity 
and delayed sodium nitrite-induced respira-
tory arrest. Vyawahare and Bodhankar (2007) 
suggest a possible facilitation of cholinergic 
transmission and the inhibition of dopamin-
ergic  as  well  as  noradrenergic  transmission 
by the extract.

5.5  Summary

Betel  leaf  contains  various  biologically  ac-
tive compounds that are responsible for its 

72 

S.J.K. Annamalai et al. 

antioxidant  and  chemopreventive  activ-
ities, etc. The leaf has a great potency in act-
ing  as  a  natural  antioxidant.  Further  re-
search  needs  to  be  performed  to  study  the 
detailed mechanism of action of betel leaves 
in  various  metabolic  activities  in  humans, 
which  may  be  beneficial  to  mankind.  No 
systematic efforts have been made so far to 
improve the processing, packaging and mar-
keting  of  this  potentially  valuable  cash 
crop, although a large number of villagers/

stakeholders exclusively engage themselves 
traditionally in betel vine cultivation. Such 
businesses  mostly  operate  based  on  per-
sonal  experience.  Scientific  studies  on  the 
optimization of all of the above-mentioned 
parameters will no doubt lead to the mini-
mization  of  losses.  The  medicinal  import-
ance  of  the  herb  that  has  been  discussed 
suggests  that  betel  leaf  is  one  of  the  most 
promising  medicinal  herbs  and  that  it  has 
many therapeutic values.

References

Agarwal, T. and Singh, R. (2012) Evaluation of antimicrobial activity of Piper betel cultivars. Novus 

International Journal of Pharmaceutical Technology 1(1), 50–58.

Ahuja, S.C. and Uma, A. (2011) Betel leaf and betel nut in India: history and uses. Asian Agri-History 15, 

13–35.

Amonkar, A.J., Padma, P.R. and Bhide, S.V. (1989) Protective effect of hydroxychavicol, a phenolic com-

ponent of betel leaf, against the tobacco-specific carcinogens. Mutation Research 210, 249–253.

Arambewela, L.S., Arawwawala, L.D. and Ratnasooriya, W.D. (2005) Antidiabetic activity of aqueous 

and ethanolic extract of Piper betle. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 102, 239–245.

Arambewela, L., Arawwawala, M. and Rajapaksa, D. (2006) Piper betle: a potential natural antioxidant. 

International Journal of Food Science and Technology 41(Supplement s1), 10–14.

Bhattacharya, S., Banerjee, D., Bauri, A.K., Chattopadhyay, S. and Bandyopadhyay, S.K. (2007) Healing 
property of the Piper betel phenol, allylpyrocatechol against indomethacin induced stomach ul-
ceration and mechanism of action. World Journal of Gastroenterology 13, 3705–3713.

Bissa, S., Songara, D. and Bohra, A. (2007) Traditions in oral hygiene: chewing of betel (Piper betle L.) 

leaves. Current Science 92, 26–28.

Chakraborty, D. and Shah, B. (2011) Antimicrobial, antioxidative and antihemolytic activity of Piper 

betel leaf extracts. International Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 3(Supplement 3), 192–199.
Chopra, R.N., Nayar, S.L. and Chopra, I.C. (1956) Glossary of Indian Medicinal Plants. Council of Sci-

entific and Industrial Research, New Delhi.

Chopra, R.N., Chopra, I.C., Handa, K.L. and Kapur, L.D. (1958) Chopra’s Indigenous Drugs of India, 

2nd edn. Academic Publishers, Kolkata, India.

Guha, P. (1997) Exploring Betel Leaves for Cottage Industry. Agricultural and Food Engineering De-

partment, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India, pp. 15–19.

Guha, P. (2006) Betel leaf: the neglected green gold of India. Journal of Human Ecology 19, 87–93.
Guha, P. (2007) Extraction of essential oil: an appropriate rural technology for minimizing wastage of 
 surplus betel leaves. Agricultural Mechanization in Asia, Africa, and Latin America 38(4), 47–50.
Jesonbabu,  J.,  Spandana,  N.  and  Aruna  Lakshmi,  K.  (2012)  In  vitro  antimicrobial  potentialities  of 
chloroform extracts of ethnomedicinal plant against clinically isolated human pathogens. Inter-
national Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Science 4(Supplement 3), 624–626.

Kaleeswari, V. and Sridhar, T. (2013) A study on betel vine cultivation and market crisis in Karur Dis-

trict. Indian Journal of Applied Research 3(10), 1–3.

Khanra, S. (1997) Betel leaf based industry. Nabanna Bharati 30(2), 169.
Krishnamurthi, A. (ed.) (1969) The Wealth of India – Raw Material Series, Vol. 8, Ph–Re. Council of 

Scientific and Industrial Research, New Delhi, pp. 84–94.

Maity, P. (1989) The Betel Vine. Extension Bulletin, All India Coordinated Research Project of Betel 

Vine, Indian Institute for Horticultural Research, Hessarghatta, Bangalore, India.

Manigauha, A., Ali, H. and Maheshwari, M.U. (2009) Antioxidant activity of ethanolic extract of Piper 

betel leaves. Journal of Pharmacy Research 2, 194–195.

Mehrotra,  R.S.  (1981)  Fungal  diseases  of  betelvine  and  their  control.  In:  Khanduja,  S.D.  and  
Balasubrahmanyam,  V.R.  (eds)  Proceedings  of  Group  Discussion  on  Improvement  of  Betelvine 
Cultivation.  National Botanical Research Institute, Lucknow, India, pp. 3–12.

 

Betel Vine 

73

Palaniappan, G., Sengottiyan, A. and Saravanan, T. (2012) Betel leaf: the green gold of India. Facts 

for You, April 2012, pp. 21–24.

Pin,  K.Y.,  Chuah,  A.L.,  Rashih,  A.A.,  Mazura,  M.P.,  Fadzureena,  J.,  Vimala,  S.  and  Rasadah,  M.A. 
(2010) Antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activities of extracts of betel leaves (Piper betle) from 
solvents with different polarities. Journal of Tropical Forest Science 22, 448–455.

Pradhan, D., Suri, K.A., Pradhan, D.K. and Biswasroy, P. (2013) Golden heart of the nature: Piper betle L. 

Journal of Pharmacognosy and Phytochemistry 1(6), 147–167.

Ramamurthi, K. and Usha Rani, O. (2012) Betel leaf: nature’s green medicine. Facts for You, September 

2012, 8–10.

Rathnasoma, H.A. and Senevirathna, J.M. (2002) Technical Bulletin on Betel Cultivation. Department 

of Export Agriculture, Peradeniya, Sri Lanka.

Rayaguru, K., Pal, U.S., Khan, M.K., Sahoo, G.R., Panda, M.K. and Sahoo, N.R. (1999) Post Harvest 
Profile of Betel Leaves. Technical Bulletin OUAT/CAET/PHT5/99/2, Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research, New Delhi.

Rayaguru, K., Khan, K., Sahoo, G. and Pal, U.S. (2007) Post-harvest practices of betel leaves in Orissa, 

India. Agricultural Mechanization in Asia, Africa, and Latin America 38(3), 33–37.

Razak, F.A. and Rahim, Z.H.A. (2003) The anti-adherence effect of Piper betle and Psidium guajava 
extracts on the adhesion of early settlers in dental plaque to saliva-coated glass surfaces. Journal 
of Oral Science 45, 201–206.

Rekha, V.P.B., Kollipara, M., Gupta, B.S., Bharath, Y. and Pulicherla, K.K. (2014) A review on Piper 
betle L.: nature’s promising medicinal reservoir. American Journal of Ethnomedicine 1, 276–289.
Santhakumari, P., Prakasam, A. and Pugalendi, K.V. (2006) Antihyperglycemic activity of Piper betle 

leaf on streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Journal of Medicinal Food 9, 108–112.

Vyawahare, N.S. and Bodhankar, S.L. (2007) Neuropharmacological profile of Piper betel leaves extract 

in mice. Pharmacology Online 2, 146–162.

Wu, M.T., Chen, M.C. and Wu, D.C. (2004) Influences of life-style habits and p53 codon 72 and p21 

codon 31 poly-morphisms on gastric cancer risk in Taiwan. Cancer Letters 205, 61–68.

Zain, N.B.M. (2011) Differential expression of gene of Streptococcus mutans in response to treatment 
with Piper betle aqueous extract – A research framework. In: 2011 International Conference on Bio-
science, Biochemistry and Bioinformatics (IPCBEE), Vol. 5. IACSIT Press, Singapore, pp. 467–469.

6  Celery

 Svein Øivind Solberg*

Nordic Genetic Resource Center, Alnarp, Sweden

6.1  Botany

6.1.1 

Introduction

Celery (Apium graveolens L.) is an import-
ant vegetable but also a spice and medicinal 
plant  (Fig.  6.1).  All  parts  of  the  plant  are 
used.  The  crop  is  grown  in  all  continents, 
with the largest production in the USA, Eur-
ope, China and India. The common name in 
English  is  celery;  in  French  it  is  céleri,  in 
Italian  seleri,  in  Hindi  ajavaina,  in  Urdu 
kharasanior ajwain and in Chinese qíncài.

Taxonomy

Celery belongs to the Apiaceae family and 
to the genus Apium, which contains around 
30 species. The wild form of celery grows on 
the coastlines of Europe, West Asia and North 
Africa. The global database GBIF (2014) re-
ports more than 7000 georeferenced records, 
most of them from Europe (from Sweden in 
the north to Spain, Italy and Greece in the 
south). Records from Southern Africa, from 
North America and from Asia and Australia 
can also be found, most likely owing to the 
occurrence of naturalized plants from earl-
ier cultivation. According to Vavilov (1926), 
the centre of origin is in the Mediterranean.

Cultivated  celery  can  be  divided  into 

three subtypes:

 •  Leaf celery (A. g. var. secalinum (Alef.) 
Mansf.),  also  termed  smallage,  Indian 
celery or Chinese celery, cultivated for 
its  aromatic  leaves  and  seeds.  The 
slender petioles are not as thick as in 
stalk celery. The leaves are dark green 
and  smaller  than  in  stalk  celery.  Leaf 
celery is closest to the wild type and is 
cultivated in Asia.

 •  Stalk  celery  (A.  g.  var.  dulce  (Mill.) 
Pers.), which is cultivated for its fleshy 
aromatic petioles. The leaves are more 
yellowish  green  than  in  leaf  and  root 
celery.

 •  Root celery (A. g. var. rapaceum (Mill.) 
Gaud.), which is cultivated for its aro-
matic tubers (celeriac) derived from the 
hypocotyl  and  upper  part  of  the  tap-
root.  The  tubers  have  a  creamy  white 
and firm flesh.

A recent study on Indian celery, based 
on DNA and phytochemical studies of seeds 
sampled from markets in Pakistan, reported 
the  species  to  be  Seseli  diffusum,  even 
though  workers  said  it  was  A.  graveolens 
(Maruyama et al., 2009).

*Corresponding author, e-mail: svein.solberg63@gmail.com

74 

© CAB International 2016. Leafy Medicinal Herbs: Botany, Chemistry, 
Postharvest Technology and Uses (eds D.C.P. Ambrose et al.)

 

Celery 

75

In  the  USA,  celery  is  produced  on 
12,000 ha annually and California has about 
75%  of  the  production,  followed  by  Mich-
igan,  Florida  and  Texas  (USDA,  2014).  In 
Europe, the most extensive production areas 
can be found in Italy (approx. 5000 ha), but 
Spain  and  France  also  have  extensive  pro-
duction. In Central and Eastern Europe, root 
celery is the most common. In parts of Eur-
ope, such as France, a stalk celery type with 
greenish white tender petioles is also grown 
(Krug,  1991).  The  petioles  acquire  a  light 
colour when straw or mulch are used to pro-
tect them from direct sunlight.

In  India,  celery  is  grown  during  the 
winter season and used as a vegetable, but 
the seeds are used as well. The main pro-
duction is in the north, in Punjab and Uttar 
Pradesh  (Sowbhagya,  2014),  over  a  total 
area of approx. 5000 ha (Fazal and Singla, 
2012).  The  seeds  are  used  directly  as  a 
spice or processed into celery powder, es-
sential  oils  or  other  products.  India  ex-
ports  significant  amounts  of  celery  seeds 
for processing.

Celery is very popular in China (Yuman 
et al., 2004). The leaf type is most commonly 
used and the term ‘Chinese celery’ is a syno-
nym for this type, which has small and aro-
matic leaves. In Africa, celery is cultivated 
in highland regions and for market garden-
ing  (Schippers,  2004),  but  more  recently 
also for processing and the food industry.

6.1.4  Morphology

Celery  is  a  biannual  herb  plant.  In  the  first 
year,  a  tight  rosette  of  leaves  develops  on  a 
compressed stem. The leaves alternate in dir-
ection, and are glossy with long petioles and 
distinct  toothed  sheets.  The  leaflets  are  tri-
angular to rhombic, 2–5 cm × 1.5–3 cm, and 
often deeply lobed. The leaf type of celery has 
a  higher  number  of  leaves  that  are  darker 
green in colour and with thinner petioles than 
other cultivated types (Roz·ek, 2007). The leaf 
petioles are crescentic in cross section, with a 
ribbed surface made of separate collenchyma 
bundles  (Rubatzky  and  Yamaguchi,  1997). 
The  roots  are  deep  and  strongly  branched. 

Fig. 6.1.  Celery stalks. Photo courtesy of A.B. 
Tskhovrebova and S.Ø. Solberg.

6.1.2  History/origin

The first historical record of celery is from 
Egypt  (1200–600  bc),  where  the  plant  was 
used as a medicine. In ancient Greece, due 
to their strong odour, the leaves were used 
in ceremonies. The domestication of celery 
is  believed  to  have  taken  place  in  Roman 
times, most likely during the first centuries 
ad. Since the 17th century, celery has been 
extensively cultivated in Europe. It also has 
a  long  medicinal  tradition  in  Ayurvedic 
medicine in India, in Persian medicine and 
in Chinese medicine (Mathias, 1994).

6.1.3  Location

Celery benefits from humid and mild growth 
conditions, and has an optimal temperature 
range of 15–22°C (59–72°F). At lower tem-
peratures,  growth  is  slow,  and  bolting  can 
destroy the crop, producing flower stalks in-
stead of the marketable produce. At 6–10°C 
(43–50°F), bolting is induced in a couple of 
weeks. Celery is sensitive to both frost and 
very high temperatures; frost will damage the 
plant and very high temperatures will increase 
stress reactions, with a risk of physiological 
calcium  deficit.  The  soils  used  for  celery 
production  are  deep  and  rich,  with  good 
drainage and irrigation. A crop rotation sys-
tem of a minimum of 4–5 years is used in 
order to keep soil-borne fungal diseases (such 
as Septoria apiicola and Phoma apiicola) and 
nematodes  (such  as  Ditylenchus  dipsaci) 
under control (Krug, 1991).

76 

S.Ø. Solberg 

The root type of celery forms 10–20 cm wide 
tubers from the hypocotyl part of the stem 
and  the  upper  part  of  the  taproot.  Flowers 
and seeds develop in the second year. The 
stems are strongly grooved and 70–100 cm 
tall. The flowers are greenish white and bi-
sexual. The male anthers shed pollen before 
the female stigma is ready, thus preventing 
self-pollination. The assistance of flies, hon-
eybees and other hairy insects is needed for 
pollination  and  the  production  of  seeds. 
The fruits (seeds) are broadly ovoid, distinctly 
ribbed and small (up to 1.5 mm long).

6.2  Chemistry

6.2.1  Chemical composition

Celery  contains  vitamins,  minerals  and 
aromatic compounds, and is regarded as a 
healthy,  low-energy  vegetable.  Every  ed-
ible 100 g gives only approx. 20 kcal, but 
32 mg vitamin C and 0.2 mg vitamin A, and 
is  rich  in  potassium  (280  mg)  (Rizzo  and 
Muratore,  2009).  Variation  in  nutritional 
composition  is  due  to  the  soil  and  fertil-
izers  used,  genotype,  harvesting  and  stor-
age conditions. After harvest, the contents 
of  sugars,  minerals  and  other  compounds 
in  leaves  are  reduced  owing  to  transloca-
tion to the storage organs (stalks or tubers). 
Ninfali  and  Bacchiocca  (2003)  reported 
that plant genotype is an important source 
of variation in the antioxidant capacity of 
the  vegetable.  The  leaves  are  normally 
higher  in  vitamins  and  minerals  than  the 
stalks  and  tubers.  Celery  contains  many 
aromatic  compounds,  and  certain  flavone 
glycosides and volatile oils provide its typ-
ical aroma.

Antioxidant activity can be expressed in 
μmol  vitamin  C  equiv./g.  Compared  with 
some  other  vegetables,  the  total  antioxidant 
activity of celery is, however, relatively low: 5 
μmol vitamin C equiv./g compared with val-
ues of over 40 for pepper, broccoli, carrot and 
spinach (Chu et al. 2002). The content of free 
phenolic  compounds  is  also  low  compared 
with that of other vegetables. However, celery 
is  still  regarded  as  a  valuable  and  healthy 

plant, mainly because of its content of flavon-
oids and other secondary metabolites.

Flavonoids

Flavonoids are secondary plant metabolites 
comprising  several  thousand  compounds, 
including  anthocyanins,  flavonols,  fla-
vones, catechins and flavonones (Harborne, 
1994). Studies have shown that celery has a 
high content of flavone glycosides, particu-
larly apigenin-7-O-apiosylglucoside (apiin) 
(Lin et al., 2007) and malonylapiin. The lat-
ter can be transformed to apiin (Hostetler 
et al., 2012). A third flavonoid, luteolin, is 
also found in celery. Crozier et al. (1997) re-
ported  that  flavonoid  content  could  vary 
from  very  low  levels  up  to  40  μg  luteolin 
and 191 μg apigenin/g fresh weight.

Apiin  is  regarded  as  one  of  the  main 
bioactive  components  in  celery  (Rithidech 
et  al.,  2005).  This  has  been  further  con-
firmed in recent studies by Li et al. (2014), 
which  showed  that  the  apiin  could  have 
free radical-scavenging activities as well as 
antioxidant activity in mice, thus protecting 
important organs from oxidative stress. The 
results highlight the potential of using cel-
ery to produce medicines.

Volatile and fatty oils

The  leaves,  roots  and  seeds  of  celery  con-
tain oils, but the seeds have the largest con-
centration. The seeds contain 2–3% essen-
tial,  volatile  oil  and  up  to  15%  fatty  oil 
(Sowbhagya, 2014). The volatile oils include 
d-limonene (60%), b-selinene (10–12%), seda-
noic acid anhydride (0.5%) and sedanolide 
(2.5–3.0%). The latter two components es-
pecially  contribute  to  the  characteristic 
odour of the seeds (Tang et al., 1990). Also 
present  are  chlorogenic  acid,  caffeic  acid, 
bergapten, niacin and inositol.

The essential oil content of celery leaves is 
0.4–0.7% (Roz·ek et al., 2012). 3-Butylphthalide 
is one of the compounds present in the essen-
tial  oil  that  is  one  of  the  well-known  flavour 
compounds of celery (Gold and Wilson, 1963; 
Bjeldanes and Kim, 1977). Bartschat et al. (1997) 
reported the analysis of such compounds for 
testing the quality of natural products.

 

Celery 

77

6.2.2  Phytochemistry

Celery represents an important plant aller-
gen source, causing reactions from mild oral 
allergy  and  skin  symptoms  to  more  severe 
respiratory  symptoms  and  life-threatening 
anaphylactic reactions (Wuthrich and Diet-
schi, 1985; Ballmer-Weber et al., 2000). Due 
to  phototoxic  reactions,  skin  reactions  can 
occur  when  handling  the  leaves  in  light.  
Furocoumarins are present in the leaves at 
2.1–4.5 mg/kg fresh weight (Järvenpää et al., 
1997). Reactive molecules have been found in 
tubers as well (Andre et al., 1994; Wuthrich, 
2005), and two of these are isoforms of the 
major allergen Api g 1 (Bauermeister et al., 
2009).  Recently,  the  function  of  another  
allergen, Api g 6, has been described (Vejvar 
et al., 2013).

The labelling of allergenic foods is es-
sential  for  consumers  for  the  purpose  of 
avoidance diets (Sheth et al., 2010). For cel-
ery, reference doses have so far not been es-
tablished owing to poor model fits with ex-
isting data (Taylor et al., 2014). This should 
be solved within the near future.

6.3  Postharvest Technology

6.3.1  Processing

Shelf life and storage

Fresh  celery,  and  especially  leaves  and 
stalks (petioles), have a short shelf life, even 
under  chilled  conditions.  Fresh  celery 
should  be  taken  from  the  field  as  soon  as 
possible  after  harvesting,  washed,  sorted, 
packed and taken to the market. Stalk celery 
can keep its quality for about a month at low 
temperatures  (2–4°C  or  24–36°F)  and  high 
air  humidity  (up  to  95%  RH).  In  stalk  and 
leaf celery, chilling injuries can be found at 
temperatures slightly above 0°C (32°F), but 
tubers  can  be  stored  at  temperatures  down 
to 0°C, and for a longer time than stalks and 
leaves.  Controlled  atmosphere  storage  of 
celery has not been successful and it is very 
sensitive to high concentrations of CO2 if stored 
under airtight conditions or in non-perforated 

plastic bags (Ryall and Lipton, 1978). Ethyl-
ene has a negative impact on shelf life, as it 
increases respiration and ageing. Celery can 
also absorb flavour from other products kept 
in the same storage area.

Minimally processed fresh celery

Celery  is  included  in  several  ready-to-eat 
dishes such as ready-packed chilled salads. 
This type of processed food is becoming in-
creasingly popular and fits into the healthy 
and busy lifestyle of many people. Despite 
minimal  mechanical  treatment,  the  plant 
products have undergone some kind of peel-
ing,  cutting  and  washing.  The  main  chal-
lenge is related to the shelf life of processed 
fresh products, as fresh celery in particular 
has  a  short  shelf  life.  Even  under  chilled 
conditions and with proper packing, a week 
is a long time. To prolong shelf life, the ap-
plication of citric acid (or other compounds) 
in  preprocessing  is  used  in  combination 
with  modified  atmosphere  packing.  Tamer 
et al. (2012) showed positive effects on shelf 
life of minimally processed celery leaf stalks 
both with the use of citric acid (1.5%) and 
l-cysteine (0.5%) in combination with modi-
fied  atmosphere  packing.  After  20  days  at 
4°C (36°F) antioxidant activity decreased by 
26%  using  this  method.  Generally,  citric 
acid was more effective than  l-cysteine for 
the preservation of phenolic compounds.

One  of  the  main  problems  in  the  pro-
cessing  of  root  celery  is  browning  of  the 
flesh. The mechanism is connected with the 
activity of enzymes catalysing phenolic oxi-
dation. A proper selection of varieties and 
of  raw  material  is  important  here  (Radzie-
jewska-Kubzdela  and  Czapski,  2004).  Vina 
and Chaves (2006) studied the influence of 
storage  temperature  (0,  4  and  10°C)  and 
storage time on the antioxidant capacity of 
fresh-cut  celery  roots  disinfected  by  chlor-
inated  water  (100  ppm  for  3  min)  before 
packing.  The  roots  retained  their  initial 
antioxidant capacity for 3 weeks at 0°C, and 
browning was lowest at this temperature.

Peeling  will  influence  the  content  of 
vitamins and antioxidants, as such compounds 
are more concentrated in the outer surface 
than in the central parts. However, consumers 

78 

S.Ø. Solberg 

prefer  using  peeled  or  half-prepared  roots 
for cooking. For leaf and stalk types of cel-
ery this consideration is not relevant.

Thermal processing

Blanching, steam blanching, boiling, roasting 
or other temperature treatments are applied 
to celery used for ready-made dishes, pickles 
or  other  canned  or  vacuum-packed  storage 
products (Salunkhe and Kadam, 1998).

The aromatic compounds of celery vary 
in  their  thermal  stability.  Hostetler  et  al. 
(2012) examined the effects of thermal pro-
cessing  of  celery  leaves  (5  h  at  100°C).  In 
general, the flavones were resistant to deg-
radation,  and  both  heat  and  low  pH  were 
necessary  for  the  degradation  of  apiin. 
Under such conditions, apiin is hydrolysed 
to  apigenin-7-O-glucoside.  Furthermore, 
apigenin-7-O-glucoside can be converted to 
apigenin, a compound that is of interest to 
the functional food industry. The aim is to 
use celery to make a product with high fla-
vone content and a good bioavailability.

Husband et al. (2011) examined the im-
pact of thermal and high-pressure process-
ing  of  celeriac  on  the  immunoreactivity  of 
Api g 1 and other allergens. They concluded 
that the use of high pressure and high tem-
perature  in  combination  was  the  most  ef-
fective method for reducing allergenicity.

Freezing

Freezing is a common conservation method 
and diced and frozen celery is a trade com-
modity used in the food industry. Raw ma-
terial is blanched before freezing to reduce 
enzymatic activity. After blanching, the ma-
terial should be immediately cooled in cold 
water and left to drip on sieves before freez-
ing. Experiments have shown that freezing 
and  drying  caused  decreasing  content  of 
both  assimilation  pigments  and  vitamin  C 
in investigated raw material. Freezing also 
decreased  the  content  of  essential  oil  and 
flavonoids while drying increased the con-
tent  of  these  compounds  in  comparison 
with fresh raw material (Roslon et al., 2010).
When  comparing  different  freezing 
methods,  Lisiewska  et  al.  (2006)  showed 

that  carrot,  root  celery,  and  parsnip  previ-
ously  cooked  (blanched)  and  then  frozen 
had a significant higher content of sodium 
and manganese than vegetables that had not 
been  blanched,  while  the  chromium  con-
tent did not change (Fig. 6.2).

Dehydration

Drying  is  probably  the  oldest  method  of 
food preservation and conventional air dry-
ing is still the most frequently used method 
for the dehydration of vegetables in the food 
industry.  The  basic  objective  is  to  remove 
water  to  a  level  at  which  microbial  break-
down  and  chemical  reactions  are  minim-
ized. Dehydration operations are commonly 
used for celery leaves and seeds. Tubers can 
also  be  cut,  dried  and  used  in  processed 
foods  such  as  instant  soups.  The  different 
dehydration  methods  affect  the  quality. 
However, there have been only a few stud-
ies carried out on celery and other Apiace-
ae, and these have mainly been done on car-
rot (Rawson et al., 2013). Nevertheless, the 
results that have been obtained from other 
herbs and medicinal plants are relevant to 
increasing the understanding of how to han-
dle  celery  in  an  optimal  way  (see  other 
chapters).  Blanching  before  dehydration 
keeps  the  green  leaf  colour  better  than  no 

Fig. 6.2.  Diced celery before freezing. Photo 
courtesy of A.B. Tskhovrebova and S.Ø. Solberg.

 

Celery 

79

blanching.  This  will  reduce  the  enzymatic 
activity of the leaves and is carried out by 
brief boiling or steaming. Dehydrated celery 
leaves are used as a spice in households and 
within  the  food  industry  in  sauces,  in  to-
mato  juice  and  to  flavour  various  dishes. 
The  seeds  are  also  processed  by  grinding 
and mixing with salt to give celery salt.

Canning

In general, canned vegetables show a more 
pronounced  loss  of  antioxidant  activity 
than frozen vegetables. Murcia et al. (2009) 
showed  that  canned  celery  could  totally 
lose  its  antioxidant  activity,  probably  be-
cause  of  the  filling  medium  used.  They  
detected  a  significant  loss  of  OH  radical 
scavenging  activity  in  canned  compared 
with raw celery.

Extraction of oils

Both volatile oils and fatty oils are interest-
ing to industry. Celery oil is pale yellow in 
colour, with an odour. The essential oils are 
isolated by steam distillation. The seeds are 
ground and immediately steam distilled to 
avoid  any  oil  loss  by  evaporation.  The 
ground  seeds  are  spread  out  evenly  upon 
perforated  grids  for  the  steam  distillation 
process. The oil that is obtained is stored in 
airtight  containers  and  kept  cool,  dry  and 
dark to maintain quality.

hydrolysis time at pH 3.0 and a temperature 
45°C  were  the  optimum  conditions  for  the 
extraction  of  flavonoids  from  celery  stalks. 
Bartusch et al. (2013) examined the effect of 
ethanol concentration, temperature and pH 
on  the  extraction  of  phenolic  compounds 
from  a  range  of  vegetable  and  fruit  plants. 
For most plants, including celery, 50% etha-
nol was found to be the best solvent. Over-
all,  60°C  was  the  optimal  temperature,  but 
for celery leaves, the total extractable phen-
olic content was highest at 40°C. The pH did 
not have any significant effect.

6.3.2  Value addition

In  general,  processing  adds  value  to  pro-
duce. For farmers, the margins for delivery 
to the industry are low compared with pro-
duction for local trade, but deliveries to the 
industry  give  opportunities  to  expand  in 
scale and produce a higher volume. A limit-
ing factor is the presence of a food industry. 
Clusters of production are built around the 
industry,  but  without  an  industry,  farmers 
must rely on the local market or retailers, or 
produce for small-scale processing.

6.4  Uses

6.4.1  General uses

Extraction of flavonoids

The  extraction  of  flavonoids  is  used  as  a 
method  to  concentrate  compounds  with 
health benefits, which must then be isolated 
and  identified.  Several  methods  are  em-
ployed  to  extract  active  substances  from 
plants, most utilizing alcohol or other organic 
solvents.  New  methods,  such  as  supercrit-
ical  water  extraction  using  high  temperat-
ures (110–200°C) for a short period (5–15 min) 
and  under  high  pressure  (about  10  MPa) 
have  shown  better  results  than  traditional 
methods using alcohol (Cheigh et al. 2015). 
Another  new  method  is  to  use  enzymatic 
hydrolysis.  Wu  et  al.  (2012)  found  that  
60  IU/ml  cellulase/hemicellulase  and  4  h 

Celery is used as a fresh vegetable, as a pro-
cessed food or spice, or in industry as medi-
cine or as perfume. All parts of the plant can 
be  used.  The  leaves  and  stalks  are  used 
fresh, as in salads. A classic salad of celery 
is combined with apples, nuts and cheese. 
The  tubers  (celeriac)  are  usually  used 
cooked, but are also be eaten raw in salads. 
As described in Section 6.3.1, celery is fre-
quently processed and used raw, as in min-
imally  processed  salad  mixtures.  Dehy-
drated celery would not be the best option 
for salads, but is good for any cooked dish 
that needs celery flavour. Furthermore, cel-
ery is a basic ingredient in vegetable stock 
and it is used as a spice in both meat and 
vegetable dishes. Celery has been examined 

80 

S.Ø. Solberg 

as an alternative to nitrite as an additive to 
meat  products  (Mandrean  and  Tita,  2011). 
The  seeds  are  used  to  flavour  food  and  li-
quids, but also for oil extraction.

6.4.2  Traditional and  
pharmacological uses

Celery  was,  and  still  is,  used  against 
rheumatism and colds, but also to improve 
digestion and to reduce blood pressure. At-
tempts  have  been  made  to  provide  over-
views  of  the  use  of  plants  in  traditional 
medicine.  One  such  recent  overview  (in 
which celery is included) was published by 
Al-Asmari et al. (2014), with the emphasis 
on Saudi Arabian traditional medicine. An-
other examined the hypoglycaemic effect of 
fumitory leaf, celery leaf and lemon, which 
are recommended in Persian folklore medi-
cine  as  beneficial  to  diabetes  and  for  their 
effect(s) on pancreatic tissue (Jelodar et al., 
2007).  This  particular  study  was  done  on 
rats and it was concluded that fumitory leaf 
and  celery  had  a  potential  hypoglycaemic 
effect. As such, the results support the trad-
itional claims on the use of these plants in 
diabetes. In traditional Chinese medicine, it 
is estimated that more than 200 plant spe-
cies  exhibit  hypoglycaemic  properties,  in-
cluding many that are common – pumpkin, 
celery, lotus root and bitter melon (Jia et al., 
2003).  Evaluations  reported  in  this  review 
indicated  that  the  use  of  these  plants  in 
combination  with  conventional  medical 
treatments permitted the use of lower drug 
doses. A survey among Latinos in the USA 
showed  that  approx.  70%  of  them  used 
herbal  remedies  together  with  prescribed 
medications  for  diabetes,  and  that  celery 
was frequently used (Amirehsani and Wal-
lace, 2013).

In a recent review of claims reported on 
the Internet of the beneficial effects of herbal 
supplements,  celery  was  among  the  ten 
most common plant ingredients mentioned 
(Vamenta-Morris et al., 2014). However, in 
contrast to the many beneficial claims, the 
authors concluded that the substances were 
not adequately studied in humans and that 

one needs to be cognizant of the lack of sub-
stantiated  proven  benefits  of  these  sub-
stances. Nevertheless, a few reports on cel-
ery do support positive health effects, but so 
far  proven  only  in  animals.  Celery  extract 
decreased the blood pressure and increased 
the heart rate in hypertensive rats (Moghad-
am et al., 2013), an action that the authors 
related  to  the  n-butylphthalide  present  in 
the extract. In general, flavonoids have anti-
oxidant  and  free  radical  scavenging  activ-
ities  in  foods  (Shahidi  and  Wanasundara, 
1992).  Epidemiological  studies  have  indi-
cated  that  their  consumption  is  associated 
with  a  reduced  cancer  risk  (Verma  et  al., 
1988;  Wattenburg,  1990;  Wei  et  al.,  1990) 
and  a  reduced  cardiovascular  disease  risk 
(Gregory et al., 1990; Hertog, 1994).

The potential use of flavonoids as a pro-
tector  for  radiation-induced  chromosomal 
damage is of increasing interest due to their 
high  antioxidant  activity  (Rithidech  et  al., 
2005).  This  has  been  shown  in  experiments 
where  blood  samples  have  been  taken  from 
healthy  volunteers  for  lymphocyte  cultures. 
No effect was found with 2.5, 5.0 or 10 μg/ml 
apigenin, but 25 μg/ml apigenin gave a posi-
tive effect and indicated the potential use of 
celery  as  a  radioprotector.  Hostetler  et  al. 
(2012) have worked on functional foods from 
celery, emphasizing improvements in the bio-
availability  of  important  compounds.  They 
say  that  to  fully  understand  and  utilize  the 
potential  benefits  of  flavone-rich  food,  re-
search should place an emphasis on the ab-
sorption of flavones in humans and the stabil-
ity of the active substances during processing. 
As  already  mentioned,  they  also  note  that  
apigenin-7-O-glucoside can be converted to api-
genin, which potentially has a very high bio-
availability. Another interesting compound is 
sedanenaloide (3-n-butyl-4-5-dihydrophthalide),  
which is one of the constituents responsible 
for the typical aroma of celery seed oil. This is 
also claimed to have positive health benefits 
(Rawson et al., 2013).

For pharmacological use, the seeds have 
so far been the most important raw material 
from celery, although other parts of the plant 
can  be  used.  Fatty  oil  extracted  from  the 
seeds is used as an antispasmodic and nerve 
stimulant.  The  seeds  are  mainly  processed 

 

Celery 

81

for essential oils and used as perfume or as 
medicine.  Sowbhagya  and  Srinivas  (2013) 
examined  ways  to  process  celery  seed  oil 
into a phthalide-enriched product with high 
nutraceutical  potential.  Fractional  distilla-
tion afforded a limonene-rich fraction (7.6 g, 
97% purity), a fraction containing b-selinene 
(2.8 g, 90% purity) and a fraction containing 
phthalides (2.9 g, 90% purity). Solvent–solvent 
partition  of  celery  seed  oil  gave  limonene 
(87%)  and  a  fraction  containing  phthalides 
(49%),  which  on  further  fractionation  af-
forded a phthalide-enriched fraction (90%). 
By  conventional  silica  gel  column  chroma-
tography, a product rich in phthalides (53–
74%) could be obtained. Huang et al. (2013) 
examined  celery  in  combination  with  pine 
needles and as a raw material in processing a 
health  beverage  rich  in  flavonoids.  The  re-
sults showed that the best formula was 20% 
pine needles extract, 20% celery extract, 2% 
honey  and  0.1%  citric  acid.  The  beverage 

was a light yellow clear liquid that according 
to the authors tasted good.

6.5  Summary

Celery is an important crop and all parts of 
the plant can be used. The leaves and stalks 
are  commonly  used  as  fresh  herbs.  The 
tubers  (celeriac)  are  used  cooked,  but  also 
fresh. For the food industry, celery is an im-
portant  crop.  All  parts  of  the  plant  can  be 
processed and celery is a major ingredient 
in vegetable stock and other spices used for 
flavouring food. The seeds are processed for 
essential  oils  that  are  used  in  perfume  or 
medicine.  The  crop  contains  important 
minerals  and  vitamins,  but  also  bioactive 
flavonoids useful for human health. Celery 
might  cause  allergic  reactions  and  there  is 
an increasing awareness of how to label and 
set reference doses.

References

Al-Asmari, A.K., Al-Elaiwi, A., Athar, M.T., Tariq, M., Al Eid, A. and Al-Asmary, S.M. (2014) A review 
of hepatoprotective plants used in Saudi traditional medicine. Evidence-Based Complementary 
and Alternative Medicine 2014: Article ID 890842.

Amirehsani, K.A. and Wallace, D.C. (2013) Tés, Licuados, and Cápsulas. Herbal self-care remedies of 

Latino/Hispanic immigrants for type 2 diabetes. The Diabetes Educator 39, 828–840.

Andre, F., Andre, C., Colin, L. and Cacaraci, F. (1994) Role of new allergens and of allergens consump-

tion in the increased incidence of food sensitizations in France. Toxicology 93, 77–83.

Ballmer-Weber, B.K., Vieths, S., Luttkopf, D. and Heuschmann, P. (2000) Celery allergy confirmed by 
double-blind, placebo-controlled food challenge: a clinical study in 32 subjects with a history of 
adverse reactions to celery root. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 106, 373–378.

Bartschat, D., Beck, T. and Mosandl, A. (1997) Stereoisomeric flavor compounds. 79. Simultaneous 
enantioselective  analysis  of  3-butylphthalide  and  3-butylhexahydrophthalide  stereoisomers  in 
celery, celeriac, and fennel. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 45, 4554−4557.

Bartusch, J., Zhou, J. and Saleh, Z. (2013) Recovery of functional horticultural ingredients using cost 
effective  and  commercially  viable  methods.  International  Proceedings  of  Chemical,  Biological 
and Environmental Engineering 50, 103–107.

Bauermeister, K., Ballmer-Weber, B.K., Bublin, M. and Fritsche, P. (2009) Assessment of component- 
resolved  in  vitro  diagnosis  of  celeriac  allergy. Journal  of  Allergy  and  Clinical  Immunology 
124, 1273–1281.

Bjeldanes, L.F. and Kim, I.S. (1977) Phthalide components of celery essential oil. The Journal of Or-

ganic Chemistry 42, 2333–2335.

Cheigh, C.I., Yoo, S.Y., Ko, M.J., Chang, P.S. and Chung, M.S. (2015) Extraction characteristics of subcrit-

ical water depending on the number of hydroxyl group in flavonols. Food Chemistry 168, 21–26.

Chu, Y.F., Sun, J., Wu, X. and Liu, R.H. (2002) Antioxidant and antiproliferative activities of common 

vegetables. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 50, 6910–6916.

Crozier, A., Lean, M.E.J., McDonald, M.S. and Black, C. (1997) Quantitative analysis of the flavonoid 
content of commercial tomatoes, onions, lettuce, and celery. Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry 45, 590–595.

82 

S.Ø. Solberg 

Fazal, S.S. and Singla, R.K. (2012) Review on the pharmacognostical and pharmacological character-

ization of Apium graveolens. Indo Global Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 2, 36–42.

GBIF (2014) Apium graveolens L. Global Biodiversity Information Facility, Copenhagen. Available at: 

http://www.gbif.org/species/5371879 (accessed 26 June 2014).

Gold,  H.J.  and  Wilson,  C.W.  (1963)  Alkylidenephthalides  and  dihydrophthalides  from  celery.  The 

Journal of Organic Chemistry 28, 985–987.

Gregory, J., Foster, K., Tyler, H. and Wiseman, N. (1990) The Dietary and Nutritional Survey of British 

Adults. Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, London.

Harborne, J.B. (1994) The Flavonoids: Advances in Research Since 1986. Chapman and Hall, London.
Hertog, M.G.L. (1994) Flavonols and flavones in foods and their relation with cancer and coronary 

heart disease risk. PhD thesis, Agricultural University Wageningen, The Netherlands.

Hostetler, G., Riedl, K. and Schwartz, S. (2012) Endogenous enzymes, heat, and pH affect flavone pro-
files in parsley (Petroselinum crispum var. neapolitanum) and celery (Apium graveolens) during 
juice processing. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 60, 202–208.

Huang, J.-L., Deng, L.-Y., Lu, M.-Y. and Chen, X.-Y. (2013) Study on processing technology of compound 

beverage of pine needle and celery. Food Research and Development 34(5), 47–50. [In Chinese.]

Husband, F.A., Aldick, T., van der Plancken, I., Grauwet, T., Hendrickx, M., Skypala, I. and Mackie, A.R. 
(2011) High-pressure treatment reduces the immunoreactivity of the major allergens in apple and 
celeriac. Molecular Nutrition and Food Research 55, 1087–1095.

Järvenpää, E.P., Jestoi, M.N. and Huopalahti, R. (1997) Quantitative determination of phototoxic furo-
coumarins in celeriac (Apium graveolens L. var. rapaceum) using supercritical fluid extraction 
and high performance liquid chromatography. Phytochemical Analysis 8, 250–256.

Jelodar, G., Maleki, M. and Sirus, S. (2007) Effect of fumitory, celery and lemon on blood glucose and 
histopathology of pancreas of alloxan diabetic rats. Journal of Applied Animal Research 31, 101–104.
Jia, W., Gao, W.Y. and Tang, L. (2003) Antidiabetic herbal drugs officially approved in China. Phyto-

therapy Research 17, 1127–1134.

Krug, H. (1991) Gemüseproduktion. Verlag Paul Parey, Berlin/Hamburg, Germany, pp. 335–341.
Li, P., Jia, J., Zhang, D., Xie, J., Xu, X. and Wei, D. (2014) In vitro and in vivo antioxidant activities of a 

flavonoid isolated from celery (Apium graveolens L. var. dulce). Food and Function 5, 50–56.

Lin, L.Z., Lu, S. and Harnly, J.M. (2007) Detection and quantification of glycosylated flavonoid malon-
ates in celery, Chinese celery, and celery seed by LC-DAD-ESI/MS. Journal of Agricultural and 
Food Chemistry 55, 1321–1326.

Lisiewska, Z., Kmiecik, W. and Gebczynski, P. (2006) Effects on mineral content of different methods 

of preparing frozen root vegetables. Food Science and Technology International 12, 497–503.

Mandrean, N.L. and Tita, O. (2011) Celery, a natural alternative to chemical nitrite added to meat 
products. Bulletin of University of Agricultural Sciences and Veterinary Medicine (Cluj-Napoca) 
68, 317–320.

Maruyama,  T.,  Abbaskhan,  A.,  Choudhary,  M.I.,  Tsuda,  Y.,  Goda,  Y.,  Farille,  M.  and  Reduron,  J.-P. 

(2009) Botanical origin of Indian celery seed (fruit). Journal of Natural Medicines 63, 248–253.

Mathias, M.E. (1994) Magic, myth and medicine. Economic Botany 48, 3–7.
Moghadam, M.H., Imenshahidi, M. and Mohajeri, S.A. (2013) Antihypertensive effect of celery seed on 

rat blood pressure in chronic administration. Journal of Medicinal Food 16, 558–563.

Murcia, M.A., Jiménez, A.M. and Martínez-Tomé, M. (2009) Vegetables antioxidant losses during in-

dustrial processing and refrigerated storage. Food Research International 42, 1046–1052.

Ninfali, P. and Bacchiocca, M. (2003) Polyphenols and antioxidant capacity of vegetables under fresh 

and frozen conditions. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 51, 2222–2226.

Radziejewska-Kubzdela, E. and Czapski, J. (2004) A comparison of processability of selected varieties 
of  celeriac  for  the  production  of  minimally  processed  shredded  celeriac. Electronic Journal of 
Polish  Agricultural  Universities  7(2),  15.  Available  at:  http://www.ejpau.media.pl/volume7/
issue2/food/abs-15.html (accessed 17 July 2015).

Rawson, A., Brunton, N.P., Rai, D.K., McLoughlin, P., Tiwari, B.K. and Tuohy, M.G. (2013) Stability of 
falcarinol type polyacetylenes during processing of Apiaceae vegetables. Trends in Food Science 
and Technology 30, 133–141.

Rithidech,  K.N.,  Tungjai,  M.  and  Whorton,  E.B.  (2005)  Protective  effect  of  apigenin  on  radiation- 

induced chromosomal damage in human lymphocytes. Mutation Research 585, 96–104.

 

Celery 

83

Rizzo, V. and Muratore, G. (2009) Effects of packaging on shelf life of fresh celery. Journal of Food 

Engineering 90, 124–128.

Roslon, W., Osinska, E. and Gajc-Wolska, J. (2010) The influence of raw material stabilization on the 

quality of celery (Apium graveolens L.) leaves. Acta Horticulturae 877, 201–208.

Roz˙ek, E. (2007) Content of some chemicals and essential oil in leaves of leaf celery Apium graveolens L. 

var. secalinum Alef. Herba Polonica 53, 213–217.

Roz˙ek, E., Nurzyn´ska-Wierdak, R. and Dzida, K. (2012) Factors modifying yield quantity and quality, 
as well as the chemical composition of the leaves of leaf celery Apium graveolens L. var. secalinum 
Alef. grown from seedlings. Acta Scientiarum Polonorum, Hortorum Cultus 11, 201–210.

Rubatzky,  V.E.  and  Yamaguchi,  M.  (1997)  World  Vegetables:  Principles,  Production  and  Nutritive 

Value, 2nd edn. Chapman and Hall, New York.

Ryall, A.L. and Lipton, W.J. (1978) Handling, Transportation and Storage of Fruits and Vegetables, Vol. 1. 

Avi Publishing, Westport, Connecticut.

Salunkhe, D.K. and Kadam, S.S. (eds) (1998) Handbook of Vegetable Science and Technology: Produc-

tion, Composition, Storage, and Processing. Marcel Dekker, New York.

Schippers, R.R. (2004) Apium graveolens L. [Internet] Record from PROTA4U. In: Grubben, G.J.H. and Denton, 
O.A. (eds) PROTA (Plant Resources of Tropical Africa), Wageningen, The Netherlands. Available at: 
http://www.prota4u.org/protav8.asp?h=M4&t=Apium,graveolens&p=Apium+graveolens#Synonyms 
(accessed 17 July 2015).

Shahidi, F. and Wanasundara, P.K. (1992) Phenolic antioxidants. Critical Reviews in Food Science and 

Nutrition 32, 67–103.

Sheth, S.S., Waserman, S., Kagan, R., Alizadehfar, R., Primeau, M.-N., Elliot, S., St. Pierre, Y., Wickett, R., 
Joseph, L., Harada, L. et al. (2010) Role of food labels in accidental exposures in food-allergic indi-
viduals in Canada. Annals of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology 104, 60–65.

Sowbhagya, H.B. (2014) Chemistry, technology, and nutraceutical functions of celery (Apium graveo-

lens L.): an overview. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition 54, 389–398.

Sowbhagya, H.B. and Srinivas, P. (2013) Enrichment of bio-active phthalides in celery seed oil. Journal 

of Pharmacy and Nutrition Sciences 3, 250–257.

Tamer, C.E., Copur, Ö.U., Incedayi, B. and Vural, H. (2012) Evaluation of some quality parameters of 
minimally processed celery by quantitative analysis. Journal of Food Processing and Preservation 
37, 717–726.

Tang, J., Zhang, Y., Hartman, T.G., Rosen, R.T. and Ho, C.T. (1990) Free and glycosidically bound vola-
tile compounds in celery (Apium graveolens L.). Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 38, 
1937–1940.

Taylor, S.L., Baumert, J.L., Kruizinga, A.G., Remington, B.C., Grevel, R. and Brooke-Taylor, S. (2014) 
Establishment  of  Reference  Doses  for  residues  of  allergenic  foods:  report  of  the  VITAL  Expert 
Panel. Food and Chemical Toxicology 63, 9–17.

USDA (2014) Vegetables 2013 Summary. National Agricultural Statistics Service, US Department of 

Agriculture, Washington, DC.

Vamenta-Morris, H., Dreisbach, A., Shoemaker-Moyle, M., Emaad, M. and Abdel-Rahman, E.M. (2014) 
Internet claims on dietary and herbal supplements in advanced nephropathy: truth or myth. Jour-
nal of Nephrology 40, 393–398.

Vavilov, N.I. (1926) Studies on the origin of cultivated plants. Bulletin of Applied Botany and Plant 

Breeding (Russian) 14, 1–245.

Vejvar, E., Himly, M., Briza, P., Eichhorn, S., Ebner, C., Hemmer, W., Ferreira, F. and Gadermaier, G. 
(2013) Allergenic relevance of nonspecific lipid transfer proteins 2: identification and character-
ization  of  Api  g  6  from  celery  tuber  as  representative  of  a  novel  IgE-binding  protein  family. 
 Molecular Nutrition and Food Research 57, 2061–2070.

Verma, A.K., Johnson, J.A., Gould, M.N. and Tanner, M.A. (1988) Inhibition of 7,12-dimethylbenz(a)
anthracene and N-nitromethylurea induced rat mammary cancer by dietary flavonol quercetin. 
Cancer Research 48, 5754–5758.

Vina,  S.Z.  and  Chaves,  A.R.  (2006)  Antioxidant  responses  in  minimally  processed  celery  during 

 refrigerated storage. Food Chemistry 94, 68–74.

Wattenburg, L. (1990) Inhibition of carcinogenesis by minor nutrient constituents of the diet. Proceedings 

of the Nutrition Society 49, 173–183.

84 

S.Ø. Solberg 

Wei, H., Tye, L., Bresnick, E. and Birt, D.F. (1990) Inhibitory effect of apigenin, a plant flavonoid, on epi-
dermal ornithine decarboxylase and skin tumour promotion in mice. Cancer Research 50, 499–502.
Wu, J.C., Huang, G.R. and Cheng, J. (2012) Optimization of enzymatic hydrolysis for extraction of fla-
vonoids from Apium graveolens L. stalks by entropy weight method. Journal of Food, Agriculture 
and Environment 10, 182–185.

Wuthrich, B. (2005) Frequency of food allergies over time – longitudinal statistics from 1978–1988. 

Allergologie 28, 355–358.

Wuthrich, B. and Dietschi, R. (1985) The celery–carrot–mugwort condiment syndrome: skin test and 

RAST results. Schweizerischemedizinische Wochenschrift 115, 258–264.

Yuman, L., Jinsong, C., Zhang, X. and Kamphuis, B. (2004) The Vegetable Industry in China. Develop-
ments in Policies, Production, Marketing and International Trade. Report 6.04.14, Agricultural 
Economics Research Institute, The Hague, The Netherlands.

7  Centella

 Terrence Madhujith1* and Subajiny Sivakanthan2

1University of Peradeniya, Sri Lanka; 2University of Jaffna, Sri Lanka 

7.1  Botany

7.1.1 

Introduction

Taxonomy

Centella asiatica (L.) Urban (or Centella asi-
atica  (L.)  Urb.),  a  tropical  plant  belonging 
to  the  family  Apiaceae  (Umbelliferae),  is 
commonly known as ‘gotu kola’, Asiatic penny-
wort, Indian pennywort, Indian water navel-
wort,  wild  violet,  tiger  herb  and  spadeleaf, 
and also just as Centella or ‘centella’ (Yu 
et al., 2006; James and Dubery, 2009; Orhan, 
2012). Its taxonomic hierarchy is as follows:
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Kingdom: Plantae
Division: Tracheophyta
Subdivision: Spermatophytina
Class: Magnoliopsida
Order: Apiales
Family: Apiaceae
Genus: Centella
Species: asiatica

The species is an ancient medicinal herb 
used in Ayurvedic medicine in India and in 
herbal medicine in Malaysia and China, and 
some other Asian countries. Moreover, it has 
been used in folk and alternative medicines for 

*Corresponding author, e-mail: madujith@yahoo.com

treating numerous human ailments, including 
wounds, psoriasis and leprosy, and improving 
brain function. In contrast to other medicinal 
herbs,  C.  asiatica  has  been  investigated 
experimentally and clinically rather exten-
sively (Brinkhaus et al., 2000).

The use of C. asiatica in food and bev-
erages has become popular owing to its health 
benefits, including its antihypertensive (In-
tharachatorn and Srisawat, 2013), antioxidant 
(Pittella  et  al.,  2009),  immunomodulatory 
(Wang et al., 2003), antimicrobial, anticancer 
(Roy et al., 2013), anti-inflammatory (Som-
chit et al., 2004), wound healing (Suguna 
et al., 1996), memory-enhancing (Meena et al., 
2012)  and  anti-ulcer  (Abdulla  et  al.,  2010) 
properties. Currently, the resources of C. asi-
atica are gradually being depleted and thus 
the species is included in the IUCN (Inter-
national Union for Conservation of Nature) 
list of threatened species (Singh et al., 2010; 
IUCN, 2013).

C.  asiatica  has  various  synonyms  (for 
example, C. coriacea, C. asiatica var. floridana, 
Hydrocotyle  asiatica,  H.  asiatica  var.  flori-
dana, H. lunata and Trisanthus cochinchin-
ensis),  a  detailed  list  of  which  is  given  by 
the  Institute  for  Systematic  Botany  of  the 
University of South Florida (Wunderlin and 

© CAB International 2016. Leafy Medicinal Herbs: Botany, Chemistry, 
Postharvest Technology and Uses (eds D.C.P. Ambrose et al.) 

85

86 

T. Madhujith and S. Sivakanthan 

Hansen, 2008). The herb is known as ‘Brah-
mi’ in Unani medicine and ‘Mandookaparni’ 
in Ayurvedic medicine (Jamil et al., 2007). 
There is an array of vernacular names used 
for  C.  asiatica  worldwide,  many  of  which 
are listed in Table 7.1.

7.1.2  History/origin

Centella is native to South-east Asian coun-
tries such as China, India, Indonesia, Japan, 
Malaysia and Sri Lanka, as well as Madagascar 
and South Africa (Jamil et al., 2007). It is an 
ethnomedical plant used by diverse ethnic 
groups in various parts of the world. It was 
referred to in the ancient Chinese Shennong 

Herbal  and  in  Indian  Ayurvedic  medicine 
about 2000 and 3000 years ago, respectively 
(European Medicines Agency, 2010). It has 
been  listed  in  the  Susruta  Samhita,  an  an-
cient  and  historic  Indian  medical  text.  In 
Ayurvedic medicine, Centella is reputed as 
a  mental  rejuvenator  and  as  a  local  stimu-
lant  of skin,  and  thus is  used to  treat  skin 
diseases  such  as  herpes,  eczema,  psoriasis 
and wounds (Premila, 2006).

In  India  and  Indonesia,  Centella  was 
used to treat wounds and leprosy, enhance 
memory and prolong lifespan. In China, it is 
used for boils, contusions, fractures, snake-
bites,  strains  and  turbid  leucorrhoea.  The 
use of Centella as a drug was first accepted 
in  France  in  the  1980s.  In  India,  Centella 
and its extracts were incorporated into the 

Table 7.1.  Vernacular names of Centella asiatica. From WHO, 1999; EMEA, 2010; Singh et al., 2010.

Region/language

Vernacular name

South Asia

Assam
Bengal
Bihar
Deccan
Gujarati
Hindi
Kanarese
Malayalam
Marathi
Meghalaya
Nepal
Oriya
Sanskrit

Sinhalese
Tamil
Telugu
Tripura
Urdu

Manimuni
Thankuni, tholkuri
Chokiora
Vallarai
Barmi, moti brahmi
Bemgsag, brahma-manduki, gotukola (or gotu kola), khulakhudi, mandookaparni
Brahmisoppu, urage, vandelagaillikiwigidda, vondelaga
Kodagam, kodangal, kutakm, kutannal, muthal, muttil, muyalchevi
Karinga, karivana
Bat-maina
Ghod tapre
Thalkudi
Bhekaparni, bheki, brahmamanduki, darduchhada, divya, mahaushadhi, 

mandukaprnika, manduki, mutthil, supriya, tvasthi

Hingotukola
Babassa, vallarai
Bekaparnamu, bokkudu, saraswataku, mandukbrahmmi, saraswati (plant)
Thankuni, thunimankuni
Brahmi

Other regions

China
Cook Islands
Fiji
Hawaii
Japan
ltalian
Samoa, Tonga
Spanish
Tahiti
USA

Fo-ti-tieng, chi-hsueuh-ts’ao, tungchian, luei gong gen
Kapukapu
Totodro
Pohe kula
Tsubo-kusa
Idrocotile
Tono
Blasteostimulina
Tohetupou
Indian pennywort, marsh pennywort

 

Centella 

87

It attains a height of up to 15 cm (see Fig. 7.1). 
The  stem  is  long,  prostrate  and  emerges 
from the leaf axils of a vertical rootstock; it 
is glabrous, striated, filiform, often reddish, 
with  long  internodes  and  rooting  at  the 
nodes. Leaves emerge alternately in clusters at 
stem nodes; they are 1.3–6.3 cm across, thin, 
long petioled, 2–6 cm long and 1.5 to 5 cm 
wide;  there  are  several  from  each  root-
stock,  one  to  three  from  each  node  of  the 
stems, and they are orbicular–reniform, more 
or  less  cupped,  entire,  crenate  or  lobulate, 
and glabrous. The petioles are  variable in 
length, 7.5 to 15 cm long or more and chan-
nelled. The stipules are short and adnate to 
the petioles forming a sheathing base. The 
peduncle is about 6 mm long with no pedi-
cels; small bracts embrace the flowers. The 
inflorescence  is  in  a  single  umbel,  bearing 
one to five flowers, sessile, white or reddish. 
The fruits are small, compressed, 8 mm long, 
the mericarps are longer than broad, curved, 
rounded  at  the  top,  seven  to  nine-ridged, 
with secondary ridges as prominent as the 
primary, and reticulate between them. The 
pericarp  is  much  thickened.  The  seeds 
have  a  pendulous  embryo  that  is  laterally 

Indian  Pharmacopoeia  in  the  19th  century 
(Murray, 2012).

In 1884, Centella was referred to in the 
French  Pharmacopoeia,  but  regardless  of 
its long history of conventional use, it only 
appeared  in  the  Codex  in  1884.  The  first 
extract of Centella in dried form was created 
after 1941, and 3 years later, the French sci-
entist, Boiteau isolated its triterpenoid mol-
ecules. The use of the aerial part of Centella 
in  rheumatism  and  its  topical  application 
for  leprous  ulcers,  indolent  wounds,  and 
post-surgical wound healing (cicatrization) 
are reported in the British Herbal Pharmaco-
poeia. In Europe, therapeutic products con-
taining the triterpenic fractions extracted from 
Centella  have  been  legitimized  for  cutane-
ous use (as a powder, cream and ointment) 
since  1968.  Oral  tablets  containing  Made-
cassol® have been permitted in Europe since 
1969, but are only allowed in Belgium, France, 
Greece, Italy and Portugal (EMEA, 2010).

7.1.3  Location

Centella is native to South-east Asian countries, 
South Africa and Madagascar. However, it 
is  now  widely  grown  in  the  West  as  well 
(Roy et al., 2013). The species is widespread 
throughout tropical and subtropical countries 
worldwide, including: Angola, Australia, Bhu-
tan, Botswana, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central 
America, China, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Ethi-
opia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, India, 
Indonesia, Iran, Kenya, Korea, Laos, Liberia, 
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Maur-
itius, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Nigeria, 
the Pacific Islands, Pakistan, Sao Tomé and 
Principe,  Saudi  Arabia,  Senegal,  Somalia, 
South  Africa,  South  America,  Sri  Lanka, 
Sudan, Taiwan, Tanzania, Thailand, Vietnam, 
Yemen, Zambia and Zimbabwe (Alternative 
Medicine Review, 2007; Satake et al., 2007; 
Zheng and Qin, 2007; IUCN, 2013).

7.1.4  Morphology

Centella  is  a  perennial,  slender,  prostrate, 
faintly aromatic, stoloniferous, creeper herb. 

Fig. 7.1.  A plant of Centella asiatica.

88 

T. Madhujith and S. Sivakanthan 

compressed. The plant develops quickly and 
extensively  in  shady,  marshy,  damp  and 
wet places. Sandy loam soil is the most fer-
tile soil for regeneration (WHO, 1999; Singh 
et al., 2010; Tiwari et al., 2011). The plant 
grows along stone walls or other rocky areas 
up to an elevation of 2000 ft in India and Sri 
Lanka (Murray, 2012). Propagation is by seeds 
and stolons (Jayasinha et al., 1999).

7.2  Chemistry

7.2.1  Chemical and nutritional  

composition

Centella has been reputed to contain a huge 
number of constituents belonging to various 
chemical classes. The types of phytochemi-
cals  present  depend  on  the  location  and 
environmental conditions (James and Dubery, 
2009). Active constituents of Centella differed 
significantly between samples collected from 
India, Nepal and Madagascar (Randriamam-
pionona et al., 2007; Devkota et al., 2010), 
so that geographical and environmental fac-
tors  can  influence  the  type  and  amount  of 
constituents present. However, the method 
of  extraction  could  also  have  an  influence 
on the diversity of compounds identified in 
Centella from various locations (Booncong, 
1989). The chemical constituents identified 
include terpenes, phenolics, alkaloids, poly-
acetylenes, carbohydrates, amino acids, vita-
mins and minerals. Among these, the main 
active  components  are  the  triterpenoid 
glycosides asiaticoside (40%) and madecas-
soside (1%), and their respective aglycones 
(asiatic acid, 29–30%, and madecassic acid, 
29–30%) (EMEA, 2010), which are used in 
the standardization of Centella as explained 
in  the  European  Pharmacopoeia  (Bosse 
et al., 1979; Randriamampionona et al., 2007). 
The leaves contain higher concentrations of 
these phytochemicals relative to the petioles 
and roots (Zainol et al., 2008). The various 
classes  of  chemical  constituents  found  in 
centella are listed in Table 7.2.

The nutritional value of Centella is prom-
ising as the herb serves as a good source of 
micronutrients and macronutrients. The total 

energy present in Centella is 37 kcal/100 g. 
The herb contains moisture (87.7%), carbo-
hydrate  (6.7%),  protein  (2%),  crude  fibre 
(1.8%), fat (0.2%) and ash (1.6%). Centella is 
rich in minerals such as potassium and cal-
cium (391 and 171 mg/100g, respectively). 
It  is  also  rich  in  vitamin  C  (48.5  mg/100g) 
(Tee et al., 1997). The nutrient composition 
of  Centella  is  influenced  by  its  stage  of 
maturity  (Rosalizan  et  al.,  2008),  morpho-
type  (Chandrika  et  al.,  2011)  and  location 
(Upadhyaya and Saikia, 2012).

7.2.2  Phytochemistry

Terpenes

Centella contains monoterpenes and sesqui-
terpenes  (essential  oils),  diterpenes,  triter-
penes,  tetraterpenes  and  glycosides.  The 
major and most important component of the 
herb is the triterpenes, which are regarded 
as the marker constituents in terms of qual-
ity  control.  The  triterpenes  are  composed  
of many compounds, including asiatic acid, 
madecassic  acid,  asiaticoside,  madecasso-
side, brahmoside, brahmic acid, brahminoside, 
brahmoside, thankuniside, isothankunisode, 
centelloside,  madasiatic  acid,  centic  acid 
and  centellic  acid  (Zheng  and  Qin,  2007). 
Among  all  these  constituents,  asiaticoside 
has  been  subjected  to  extensive  investiga-
tions  and  is  reported  to  be  responsible  for 
most  of  the  pharmacological  activities  of 
Centella. The second most isolated compound 
is  madecassoside,  followed  by  asiatic  acid 
and madecassic acid (Chong and Aziz, 2011). 
The  brahmoside  in  the  plant  is  known  to 
possess tranquilizing and anabolic activity. 
Asiaticoside and centelloside are used for the 
treatment  of  leprosy.  Animal  studies  have 
demonstrated that asiaticoside reduces the 
number  of  tubercular  lesions  in  the  nerve 
ganglia, lungs, liver and spleen. Oxyasiatico-
side (a derivative of asiaticoside) is known 
to inhibit the growth of the tubercle bacillus 
(Mycobacterium tuberculosis). Asiaticosides 
also possess hyperglycaemic activity (Khare, 
2007). Depending on the raw material, the 
amounts of triterpenoids can range from 1 to 

 

Centella 

89

Table 7.2.  Chemical constituents of Centella asiatica.

Main class of chemical  
constituents

Chemical constituents

Alkaloid

Hydrocotylin, vallarine

Amino acids

Carbohydrates

Diterpenes
Essential oil
(0.1% of the plant)

Minerals

Phenols

Polyacetylenes

Triterpenic acid sugar 
esters (glycosides 
or triterpenic 
saponins or 
pseudosaponins)

References

Chong and Aziz, 2011; Roy  

et al., 2013

Chong and Aziz, 2011; Roy  

et al., 2013

James and Dubery, 2009; 

Chong and Aziz, 2011; Roy 
et al., 2013

Chong and Aziz, 2011
Chong and Aziz, 2011; Roy  

et al., 2013

Alanine and serine (major components), 
aminobutyrate, aspartate, glutamate, 
histidine, lysine, threonine, arginine, leucine, 
isoleucine, valine, methionine, tyrosine, 
phenylalanine, proline, cysteine, glycine
Monosaccharides: glucose, mesoinositol
Oligosaccharides: centellose
Polysaccharides: pectin, arabinogalactan
Neophytadiene
Monoterpenes: α-pinene, β-pinene, myrcene, 

γ-terpinene, α-thjuene, bornyl acetate, linalool

Sesquiterpenes: α-copaene , β-elemene, 

β-caryophyllene, trans-β-farnesene, 
germacrene D, bicycloelemene, α-humulene, 
(E)-β-farnesene, δ-cadinene, epi- 
bicyclosesquiphellandrene, epiglobulol

Calcium, phosphorus, iron, potassium, magne-

Chong and Aziz, 2011;  

sium, manganese, zinc, sodium, copper

Flavonoids: kaempferol, kaempferol-3-O-β-d 

glucuronide, castilliferol, catechin, epicatechin, 
quercetin, quercetin-3-O-β-d-glucuronide, 
castillicetin, apigenin, rutin, luteolin, naringin, 
patuletin, myricetin

Tannins: tannin, phlobatannin
Phenylpropanoids: rosmarinic acid, 3,5-di- 

O-caffeoylquinic acid, 1,5-di-O-caffeoylquinic 
acid, 3,4-di-O-caffeoylquinic acid, 4,5-di- 
O-caffeoylquinic acid, ettacrynic acid, 
chlorogenic acid, isochlorogenic acid, 
p-hydroxybenzoic acid, vanillic acid, p-coumaric 
acid, o-coumaric acid, trans cinnamic acid
Cadiyenol, centellin, centellicin, asiaticin, 

8-acetoxycentellynol, dotriacont-8-en-1-oic 
acid, 11-oxoheneicosanyl

Roy et al., 2013

Suntornsuk and Anurukvorakun, 

2005; Yu et al., 2006; 
Subban et al., 2008; Hussin 
et al., 2009; Chong and 
Aziz, 2011; Orhan, 2012; 
Roy et al., 2013

Chong and Aziz, 2011; Roy  

et al., 2013

Asiaticoside (major component), asiaticoside 

Kuroda et al., 2001; Matsuda  

A, B, C, D, E and F, sceffoleoside A, 
madecassoside, centelloside, indocentelloside, 
brahmoside, brahminoside, thankuniside, 
isothankuniside

et al., 2001; Schaneberg  
et al., 2003; Zheng and Qin, 
2007; James and Dubery, 
2009; Chong and Aziz, 2011; 
Orhan, 2012; Roy et al., 2013

Triterpenic acids

Asiatic acid, madecassic acid (6-β-hydroxyasiatic 

Schaneberg et al., 2003; 

acid), madasiatic acid, thankunic acid, 
isothankunic acid, centic acid, centellic acid, 
centoic acid, indocentoic acid, terminolic acid, 
betulinic acid, brahmic acid, isobrahmic acid, 
pomolic acid, corosolic acid, ursolic acid

Yoshida et al., 2005; Yu  
et al., 2006; Zheng and Qin, 
2007; Chong and Aziz, 2011; 
James and Dubery, 2009; 
Orhan, 2012; Roy et al., 2013

Campesterol, stigmasterol, sitosterol

Chong and Aziz, 2011; Roy  

Ascorbic acid, nicotinic acid, β-carotene

Chong and Aziz, 2011; Roy  

et al., 2013

et al., 2013

Triterpenic steroids
(phytosterols)
Vitamins

90 

T. Madhujith and S. Sivakanthan 

8% (ESCOP, 2009). The essential oil present 
in  Centella  is  composed  of  a  wide  array  of 
monoterpenes  and  sesquiterpenes  (Chong 
and Aziz, 2011).

In addition to the classification of terp-
enes  found  in  Centella  as  indicated  in 
Table 7.2, they can be further classified based 
on their cyclic structure. The monoterpenes 
reported to be present exist in acyclic, mono-
cyclic  and  bicyclic  structures,  while  the 
sesquiterpenes  have  tricyclic  structures  as 
well. The triterpenes in Centella are mainly 
pentacyclic triterpenic acids. Two types of 
pentacyclic  triterpenes  are  reported:  the 
ursane type and oleanane type. Triterpenes 
such as asiatic acid, madecassic acid, brahmic 
acid (also known as 6β-hydroxyasiatic acid), 
pomolic acid, corosolic acid and ursolic acid 
are ursane-type pentacyclic triterpenes. The 
ursane-type pentacyclic triterpene saponins 
include asiaticoside and asiaticosides A, C, 
D,  E  and  F,  madecassoside,  brahminoside, 
centellasaponin B and C and scheffuroside B. 
The  oleanane-type  pentacyclic  triterpenes 
are 3-epi-maslinic acid and terminolic acid. 
The  oleanane-type  pentacyclic  triterpenes 
saponins are asiaticoside B, centellasaponin 
D, scheffoleoside A and 23-O-acetylasiaticoside 
B (Chong and Aziz, 2011).

Various acyclic monoterpenes (3-nonen- 
2-one), monocyclic monoterpenes (linalool, 
myrcene, γ-terpinene, terpinolene, limonene, 
terpinen-4-ol, α-terpinene, α-phellandrene, 
ρ-cymene, pulegone, menthone, methyl thymol 
and methyl carvacrol) and bicyclic monoter-
penes (α-thujene, α-pinene, β-pinene, cam-
phene,  chrysanthenyl  acetate  and  bornyl 
acetate) have also been reported (Chong and 
Aziz, 2011).

The  sesquiterpenes  found  in  Centella 
include acyclic sesquiterpenes (decan-1-ol, 
trans-β-farnesene), monocyclic sesquiterpenes 
(germacrene A, B and D, β-elemene, γ-elemene, 
γ-curcumene,  bicycloelemene,  bicycloger-
macrene, α-humulene, humulene epoxide), 
bicyclic  sesquiterpenes  (epibicycloses-
quiphellandrene,  α-cadinene,  δ-cadinene, 
β-acoradiene, β-caryophyllene, caryophyllene 
oxide)  and  tricyclic  sesquiterpenes  (epi-
globulol, allo-aromadendrene, spathulenol, 
mintsulfide, viridiflorol, α-copaene) (Chong 
and Aziz, 2011).

Phenols

Centella contains high amounts of phenolic 
compounds  having  antioxidant  properties 
(Hussin et al., 2009). The phenolic compounds 
found include flavonoids, phenylpropanoids 
and tannins (Zainol et al., 2003; Suntornsuk 
and  Anurukvorakun,  2005;  Subban  et  al., 
2008; Chong and Aziz, 2011).

Polyacetylenes

Centella  is  reported  to  contain  polyacety-
lenes such as cadiyenol, centellin, centellicin, 
asiaticin,  8-acetoxycentellynol,  dotriacont-
8-en-1-oic  acid  and  11-oxoheneicosanyl 
(Chong and Aziz, 2011).

Other constituents

In addition to the above constituents, Centella 
contains  alkaloids,  carbohydrates,  amino 
acids, vitamins and minerals as indicated in 
Table 7.2.

Chong  and  Aziz  (2011)  have  tabulated 
the  chemical  constituents  found  in  differ-
ent  parts  of  Centella  –  such  as  the  whole 
plant, leaves, roots, aerial parts, petioles and 
stolons – using plant samples from different 
countries (China, India, Italy, Japan, Korea, 
Madagascar, Malaysia, Pakistan, South Africa, 
Spain, Sri Lanka and the USA), based on 49 
research findings.

7.3  Postharvest Technology

The value addition and processing techniques 
for commercially important medicinal plants 
that are described in two sets of guidelines 
issued for Indian medicinal plants (Raju and 
Shastry, 2002; Shastry, 2002) are applicable 
to Centella.

7.3.1  Processing

Drying

The whole plant can be sun and shade dried 
and  stored.  The  storage  moisture  content 
should be 10%.

 

Centella 

91

Semi-processing to value-added products

powder.  Cleaned and dried plant parts are 
ground to powder and a homogenous pow-
der of the desired particle size obtained by 
sieving.

tablets/capsules.  Tablets  are  produced  by 
mixing the homogenous powder with a suit-
able binding agent and compressing into a 
tablet;  capsules  are  produced  by  filling  a 
capsule with the homogenous powder at the 
desired dosage.

extracts.  Dried  and  clean  plant  parts  are 
powdered and extracted with a suitable solv-
ent, such as ethyl alcohol or methyl alcohol, 
in a percolator (cold extraction) or in a Soxh-
let extractor (hot extraction). The extract is 
then concentrated by removing the solvent 
under reduced pressure at low temperature. 
The concentrated extract is spray dried. The 
extract can be standardized to the required 
strength of active constituent (Khare, 2007).

crude  drugs.  Cleaned  and  dried  (under 
sun or shade) plant material is packed as the 
crude drug. The season, time of day and the 
maturity stage of the plant should be appro-
priate for the collection of the plant mater-
ial. For example, leaves should be collected 
during the flowering season when the plant 
is highly active.

7.3.2  Value addition

Traditional food preparations

In  Thailand,  blended  leaves  of  Centella  are 
used  to  make  cordial,  tea  and  juice.  In  Sri 
Lanka,  the  juice  extracted  from  Centella  is 
used to make porridge known as ‘Kolakenda’ 
in Sinhala. Extract of Centella is also used in 
the  production  of  food  products  such  as 
herbal noodles. In China, Centella is used as a 
cooling drink. Even though Centella is widely 
used in the form of tea, soft drinks and syrup, 
some  studies  have  been  carried  out  on  fer-
mentation of the plant material to explore the 
feasibility of producing fermented herbal tea 
(Heong et al., 2011).

The leaves of Centella are used to make 
various types of food in various countries, 
for example ‘Sambai oipeugaga’, and salad 
of  the  Aceh  type  in  Indonesia,  drinks  and 
cold rolls in Thailand and Vietnam, the Malay 
salad called ‘Ulam’ and ‘Malluma’, a traditional 
complement to rice and curry in Malaysia, 
and chutney in Brazil (Das, 2011). The leaves 
can  be  cooked  as  a  part  of  a  soup  or  as  a 
main vegetable. Due to its mild bitterness, it 
is cooked and coconut milk and/or shredded 
coconut  and  sometimes  sweet  potatoes  or 
potatoes are added. In Thailand, it is used 
as a vegetable, tea and juice. Centella is also 
commonly used for making herbal tea pre-
pared either using a mixture of many differ-
ent herbs or a single herb (Hashim, 2011).

Commercial products

Pharmaceutical products containing refined 
extracts  of  Centella  have  been  authorized 
and marketed in Europe in several Member 
States (Belgium, France, Greece, Italy, Portu-
gal and Spain) for both external and internal 
medical  uses  since  the  late  1960s  (EMEA, 
2010). Products containing Centella are also 
available in India, Korea and China (Singh 
et al., 2010).

Extracts  of  Centella  are  used  in  the 
manufacture of various pharmaceutical prod-
ucts. Those reported in the literature include: 
TECA  (titrated  extract C. asiatica),  TTFCA 
(total  triterpenoid  fraction  of  C.  asiatica), 
TTF (total triterpenic fraction), ETCA (estrat-
to titolato di C. asiatica) and CATTF (C. asiat-
ica total triterpenic fraction). According to 
the  information  from  the  literature  and  on 
licensed  medicinal  products,  it  is  obvious 
that all the above-mentioned acronyms are 
different names to designate the same extract, 
which is commercially known as Madecas-
sol®,  Centellase®  or  Blastoestimulina®,  and 
contains 40% asiaticoside and 60% asiatic 
acid and madecassic acid (EMEA, 2009).

The  products  are  available  in  various 
forms, such as oral tablets, cream and oint-
ment and cutaneous powder. Cream 1%, cu-
taneous powder 2%, sterilized impregnated 
dressing and ointment 1% are used for healing 
wounds and as a treatment for ulcerations. 
Tablets  containing  TECA  extract,  tablets 

92 

T. Madhujith and S. Sivakanthan 

containing  triterpenic  fraction  extract  and 
hard capsules containing asiatic acid are some 
examples  of  products  for  internal  medical 
uses, such as the treatment of pre-varicose 
syndromes, oedema, itching and leg ulcers 
and pain (EMEA, 2010). Some examples for 
commercial  products  containing  Centella 
include  Mentat,  Gertiforte  (stress  care), 
Abana (heart care), Menosan, Diamond shiny 
pearl  BB  and  Blastoestimulina  (EMEA, 
2010; Singh et al., 2010).

7.4  Uses

The  use  of  Centella  in  food  and  beverages, 
and in medical and cosmetic applications has 
been increasing worldwide over the years.

7.4.1  General uses

Centella  has  been  reputed  to  have  a  wide 
range of pharmacological uses since prehis-
toric times. The herb is also used as a trad-
itional vegetable in China, India, Indonesia 
and Sri Lanka, and is being introduced as a 
cultivated  vegetable  into  developed  coun-
tries  (Zheng  and  Qin,  2007).  The  herb  is 
eaten fresh as salad and juice, as a cooked 
vegetable and is used as a drink – the dried 
leaves  being  used  to  make  tea.  The  whole 
plant, including the leaves, stem and root, is 
consumed (Brinkhaus et al., 2000). Centella 
is  also  used  in  nutraceutical  and  cosmetic 
preparations, and is becoming an important 
commercial  plant  worldwide  (James  and 
Dubery, 2009; Hashim et al., 2011).

7.4.2  Pharmacological uses

Centella is a popular herb owing to its effi-
cacy and versatility, especially as a wound 
healing agent and brain stimulant (in promot-
ing brain growth and improving learning and 
memory) (Zheng and Qin, 2007). In India, it 
has  a  reputation  as  an  ethnomedicine.  In 
Ayurvedic and Unani medicine, it is used 
to treat various diseases. These include re-
spiratory diseases (bronchitis and asthma), 

skin ailments (wound healing, psoriasis and 
eczema), the revitalization of connective tis-
sues, burn and scar treatment, and the treat-
ment of leprosy, elephantiasis, leucorrhoea, 
body aches, gastric catarrh, dropsy, stomach 
disorders and urethritis. Besides these uses, 
it is being used in maternal healthcare and 
to improve memory and as a nervine (nerve) 
tonic  (Singh  et  al.,  2010;  Murray,  2012). 
Further, it acts as a sedative, anti-stress and 
anti-anxiety agent, and is used for the treat-
ment of depression. Its antibacterial properties 
are being used to treat periodontal disease, 
syphilis  and  hepatitis.  Centella  stimulates 
lipolysis and blood circulation and is, thus, 
used in the management of local adiposity 
or  ‘cellulite’.  It  assists  in  destroying  toxin 
accumulated in the brain as well as in the 
nerves, while it helps to clear the body from 
heavy  metals  and  drugs,  and  is  therefore 
useful  as  a  general  health  tonic,  an  aphro-
disiac  and  immune  booster  (James  and 
Dubery, 2009).

Fresh  extracts  of  Centella  are  used  by 
the people of Java and the Malay Peninsula 
as  topical  and  internal  agents  in  wound 
healing (Kartnig, 1986). In China, Centella is 
used for leucorrhoea, dysentery, nosebleeds, 
jaundice and scabies, leprosy, fractures, ton-
sillitis,  measles,  tuberculosis  and  urinary 
difficulties (Singh et al., 2010; Murray, 2012). 
In  Nepal,  it  is  used  to  treat  indigestion, 
rheumatism,  poor  memory  and  leprosy.  In 
Malaysia,  it  is  used  to  treat  hypertension, 
diarrhoea,  mental  fatigue,  anxiety,  eczema 
and  urinary  tract  infections.  In  addition, 
Centella is used to improve memory and as 
a detoxicant and diuretic (Ahmad and Ismail, 
2003; Singh et al., 2010; Murray, 2012). In 
Bangladesh, the whole plant is used to treat 
dog bites, asthma, diabetes, itching, leucor-
rhoea,  malaria,  tumours  and  wounds,  and 
also  as  a  carminative  (Rahmatullah  et  al., 
2009; Rahman et al., 2012). In Madagascar, 
the herb is traditionally used to treat leprosy 
and  tuberculosis  (Kartnig,  1986).  In  trad-
itional African medicine, Centella has been 
used for the treatment of leprosy (James and 
Dubery, 2009). The oiled leaves are eaten for 
urinary  tract  infections  and  the  unfiltered 
juice  is  used  to  treat  scrofula  and  syphilis 
(Khare, 2007).

 

Centella 

93

Both  human  and  animal  studies  have 
proven the pharmacological activities of Cen-
tella as an antimicrobial, and as an anticancer, 
wound-healing,  neuroprotective,  immuno-
modulatory,  anti-inflammatory,  hepatopro-
tective  and  insecticidal,  antioxidant  (Roy 
et al., 2013) and antithrombotic (Satake et al., 
2007) agent.

According to WHO (1999), the medicinal 
uses of Centella supported by clinical data 
include the treatment of wounds, burns and 
ulcerous  skin  diseases  and  the  prevention 
of keloid and hypertrophic scars. Extracts of 
the  plant  have  been  used  to  treat  second- 
and third-degree burns. Topical application 
of extracts is used to improve the healing of 
chronic wounds. Oral administration of ex-
tracts  is  used  to  treat  stress-induced  stom-
ach and duodenal ulcers. Uses reported in 
folk medicine, but not supported by experi-
mental  or  clinical  data,  include  treatment 
for  therapy  for  anaemia,  asthma,  albinism, 
measles, cholera, bronchitis, cellulite, con-
stipation,  epistaxis,  dermatitis,  diarrhoea, 
dysentery,  dysmenorrhoea,  dysuria,  dizzi-
ness,  nervous  disorders,  epilepsy,  haema-
temesis, hepatitis, hypertension, haemorrhoids, 
jaundice, leucorrhoea, nephritis, neuralgia, 
rheumatism, smallpox, syphilis, toothache, 
urethritis and varices, and use as an antipyr-
etic, analgesic, anti-inflammatory and ‘brain 
tonic’ (WHO, 1999).

The  chemical  constituents  of  Centella 
are responsible for its medicinal and nutra-
ceutical  applications.  Its  major  bioactive 
ingredients, triterpenoid derivatives, play an 
important role in its medicinal application, 
and several of its traditional pharmacological 
uses  have  been  validated  scientifically  in 
terms of these bioactive compounds (Zheng 
and  Qin,  2007).  Boiteau  et  al.  (1949),  in  a 
study of derivatives of Centella used against 
leprosy,  first  reported  the  chemical  consti-
tution of asiaticoside, which is responsible 
for most of the pharmacological activities of 
Centella.  Animal  studies  have  proven  that 
asiaticoside  exhibits  protective  effects  on 
the central nervous system such as an anti-
depressant-like effect and an anxiolytic-like 
effect,  and  also  has  wound-healing  and 
anti-ulcer activities (Chong and Aziz, 2011). 
Table 7.3 gives the structure and summarizes 

the  biological  activities  of  the  major  con-
stituents of Centella.

Wound healing

For  universal  use  in  wound  healing  and 
various skin disorders, the effectiveness of 
the  extracts  and  monomers  from  Centella 
have been subjected to and justified by both 
experimental and clinical evaluations. Wound 
healing is a complex physiological process 
that  includes  a  series  of  steps.  Extracts  of 
Centella  have  been  shown  to  produce  dif-
ferent actions on various phases of wound 
healing (Zheng and Quin, 2007); they accel-
erate  wound  healing  when  administered 
both  topically  and  orally  (systemically). 
The  mechanisms  involved  in  wound  heal-
ing activity are probably by the enhancement 
of collagen synthesis, and the stimulation 
of  angiogenesis  and  antioxidant  activity 
(EMEA,  2010).  Research  has  demonstrated 
that  asiatic  acid  is  the  only  component 
responsible for the stimulation of collagen 
synthesis,  while  madecassoside  is  able  to 
increase type III collagen secretion and asi-
aticoside to induce type I collagen synthesis 
(Zheng  and  Quin,  2007).  Topical  applica-
tion  of  Centella  enhances  wound  healing, 
particularly  in  chronic  post-surgical  and 
post-trauma wounds (Khare, 2007).

Based on experimental studies, the trit-
erpenic constituents of Centella are believed 
to have the ability to stimulate collagen syn-
thesis in skin fibroblasts, thus Centella has 
been used in skincare products for restoring 
skin firmness and elasticity, and improving 
skin  appearance  (Hashim  et  al.,  2011). 
Drugs and cosmetic preparations containing 
active constituents of Centella for skincare 
are available worldwide (Randriamampion-
ona et al., 2007).

Antioxidative properties

Generation  of  free  radicals  or  ROS  more 
than the antioxidant capacity of a biological 
system creates oxidative stress. Excess free 
radicals and ROS attack biological molecules 
such  as  lipids,  proteins  and  nucleic  acids, 
causing  tissue  or  cellular  injury  (Halliwell 
and  Gutteridge,  1999;  Stadtman,  2004). 

Table 7.3.  Structure and biological activities of major bioactive compounds isolated from C. asiatica.

Name of  
compound

Apigenin

Structure

Biological activity

Reference

HO

O

OH

Antibacterial, anti-ulcerative, diuretic, aldose 

Intharachatorn and Srisawat, 2013; 

reductase inhibitor, antihypertensive, 
anti-inflammatory, antioxidant

Roy et al., 2013

Ascorbic acid

HO

Asiatic acid

OH

O

OH
O

O

HO

OH

H

OH

O

HO

HO

H

H

OH

Antioxidant, antibacterial, anti-infective, 

Chanwitheesuk et al., 2005; Roy  

antidote, antihypercholesterolaemic, inhibits 
production of carcinogen, induces tissue to 
produce collagen, hematopoietic activity

et al., 2013

Neuroprotective, wound healing, enhancing 
learning and memory, anti-inflammatory, 
anti-apoptotic, anti-hyperglycaemic, 
neuroprotective, anticancer, antimicrobial

Bunpo et al., 2004; Park et al., 2005; 
Khare, 2007; Nasir et al., 2011; Xu 
et al., 2012b; Ramachandran and 
Saravanan, 2013; Roy et al., 2013

Asiaticoside

Anti-inflammatory; anticancer, antioxidant, 

Shukla et al., 1999; Huang et al., 2004; 

HO

HO

HO

H

O

O

O

OH

OH

OH

OO

OH

OH

H

H

HO

OH

OO

OH OH

wound healing, antidepressant, neuropro-
tective, anxiolytic, hepatoprotective, burn 
cure, antimicrobial, antiulcer, antioxidant, 
skin protective

Yoshida et al., 2005; Wijeweera  
et al., 2006; Zheng and Qin, 2007; 
Kimura et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 
2010; Chong and Aziz, 2011; Nhiem 
et al., 2011; Lee et al., 2012; 
Wanasuntronwong et al., 2012; Roy 
et al., 2013; Wan et al., 2013

9
4

 

.
 

T
M
a
d
h
u

j
i
t

h

 

a
n
d
S

 

.
 

i

S
v
a
k
a
n

t

h
a
n

 

Betulic acid (also  

known as  
betulinic acid)

β-Carotene

Catechin

Chlorogenic acid

Kaempferol

H

H

OH

O

HO

H

H

HO

O

OH
OH

O

O

O

HO

OH

OH OH

OH

O

OH

HO

O

OH

OH

OH

OH

OH

 

C
e
n
e

t

l
l

a

 

Antineoplastic, cytotoxic, antitubercular, 

Roy et al., 2013

antibacterial

Antioxidant, antitumour

Chanwitheesuk et al., 2005; Roy  

et al., 2013

Antihypertensive

Intharachatorn and Srisawat, 2013

Antioxidant, antineoplastic, cytotoxic, 
antimutagenic, antiviral, choleretic, 
haemostatic, leucopoietic, antimalarial

Roy et al., 2013

Anti-HIV-1, antibacterial, anti-inflammatory, 

Intharachatorn and Srisawat, 2013; 

antioxidant, antihypertensive

Roy et al., 2013

Continued

9
5

Table 7.3.  Continued

Name of  
compound

Madecassic acid

Structure

Biological activity

Wound healing

Reference

Maquart et al., 1999

H

O

OH

HO

HO

H

OH

HO

Madecassoside

Anti-inflammatory, anti-arthritic, cardioprotec-

Li et al., 2007; Zheng and Quin, 

tive, wound healing

2007; Bian et al., 2008; Liu et al., 
2008a,b; Song et al., 2012; Roy  
et al., 2013

HO

HO

HO

H

H

OH

O

H

OH

O

O

OH

O

O

OH

OH

O

O

OH

OH

OH

OH OH

9
6

 

.
 

T
M
a
d
h
u

j
i
t

h

 

a
n
d
S

 

.
 

i

S
v
a
k
a
n

t

h
a
n

 

Naringin

OH

Antibacterial, anti-inflammatory, antiviral

Roy et al., 2013

HO

O

O

OH

OH

OH

OO

O

OH O

Quercetin

OH

OH

HO

O

OH

OH

O

Rutin

HO

O

OH

OH

OH

OH

O

OH

O

OH

OO

O

OH

OH

OH

OH

OH

Anti-HIV-1, antiasthmatic, antibacterial, 

Intharachatorn and Srisawat, 2013; 

anti-hepatotoxin, antihypertensive, 
anti-inflammatory, antiviral,  
antihypercholesterolaemic, platelet 
aggregation inhibitor, antioxidant

Roy et al., 2013

Anti-inflammatory, antiviral, antihypertensive

Intharachatorn and Srisawat, 2013; 

Roy et al., 2013

Stigmasterol

Antihypercholesterolaemic, antimutagenic, 

Roy et al., 2013

cytotoxic inactive, antileishmanial, 
antimalarial, antitrypanosomal, platelet 
aggregation inhibitor, antiviral

H

H

H

HO

 

C
e
n
e

t

l
l

a

 

9
7

98 

T. Madhujith and S. Sivakanthan 

Oxidative  stress  is  associated  with  athero-
sclerosis, cancer, diabetes, arthritis, reperfu-
sion damage and inflammation (Ames et al., 
1993). Antioxidants scavenge free radicals 
to prevent damage caused by ROS. Many re-
searchers  have  reported  the  antioxidative 
properties  of  Centella  (Hamid  et  al.,  2002; 
Pittella  et  al.,  2009;  Rahman  et  al.,  2013). 
The phenolic compounds with the structural 
characteristics  of  free  radical  scavengers 
(Bandoniene  and  Murkovic,  2002),  are  be-
lieved to be the major contributors to these 
antioxidative properties (EMEA, 2010; Hashim 
et al., 2011). For instance, the phenolic hy-
droxyl group in flavonoids has been found 
to be a strong antioxidant capable of effectively 
scavenging ROS (Cao et al., 1997). Madecas-
soside also has antioxidant properties (Chong 
and Aziz, 2011).

Antihypertensive effects

Intharachatorn and Srisawat (2013) have re-
ported that Centella extract supplement had 
antihypertensive effects in hypertensive rats, 
and quercetin may be in part responsible for 
this effect of the extract. The high total phen-
olic content of Centella that is contributed by 
the flavonoids quercetin, kaempferol, cat-
echin, rutin, apigenin and naringin is said to 
have a direct effect in lowering blood pressure 
and Centella is often referred to as a reju-
venating  pharmaceutical  in  the  Ayurvedic 
Pharmacopoeia (Intharachatorn and Srisawat, 
2013). Raw leaves or a plant decoction are con-
sumed to treat hypertension (Khare, 2007).

Anti-inflammatory activities

Asiatic acid and madecassic acid have anti- 
inflammatory effects (Roy et al., 2013). An 
animal study (in rats) has proven that ethanolic 
extract of Centella (100 mg/kg of body weight) 
has anti-inflammatory activity similar to that 
of standard ibuprofen (an anti-inflammatory 
drug)  (George  et  al.,  2009).  Madecassoside 
also has anti-inflammatory properties, thus it 
may improve type II collagen-induced arth-
ritis (Liu et al., 2008a,b).

Anticancer activity

In alternative healthcare, Centella has been 
used in the treatment of tumours and cancerous 

growths  without  suppressing  the  auto-
immune  system  or  creating  toxic  wastes 
within the body (James and Dubery, 2009). 
Studies  suggested  that  various  extracts  of 
Centella  induce  apoptosis  in  cancerous 
cells. Babu et al. (1995) examined the anti-
tumour effect of crude and partially purified 
fractions by both in vivo and in vitro studies 
and found that oral administration of both 
types  of  extract  suppressed  the  develop-
ment of tumours and increased the lifespan 
of  tumour-bearing  mice.  Further,  the  par-
tially purified fractions were more effective 
in  inhibition  of  the  proliferation  of  the 
transformed cell lines than the crude extract 
and  other  solvent  fractions,  and  was  dose 
dependent (Babu et al., 1995). A methanolic 
extract of Centella can induce apoptosis in 
human  breast  cancerous  cells  (Babykutty 
et al., 2009), and aqueous extracts can induce 
apoptosis  in  colonic  crypts  and  have  a 
chemopreventive effect on colon cancer in 
rats (Bunpo et al., 2004). Park et al. (2005) 
have  demonstrated  that  asiatic  acid  from 
Centella induced apoptosis in human mel-
anoma cells and so may be useful in the pre-
vention  of  human  skin  cancer.  Further,  it 
has been found that asiaticoside may induce 
apoptosis  and  enhance  the  antitumour  ac-
tivity  of  vincristine  (a  chemotherapy  drug) 
in cancer cells, and thus might be useful in 
cancer chemotherapy (Huang et al., 2004).

Brain-stimulating effect

As described in both the Indian and Chinese 
medicine systems, Centella has several effects 
on the central nervous system, such as acting 
as a stimulatory nervine tonic, rejuvenant, 
sedative and tranquillizer, and having mem-
ory-enhancing properties. Leaves of Centel-
la are used to improve the mental ability of 
mentally retarded children and enhance the 
memory (Jared, 2010). An aqueous extract of 
Centella has a cognitive enhancement effect 
through an antioxidant mechanism (Zheng 
and Qin, 2007). Animal studies have proven 
the brain-stimulating effect of Centella. For 
example, the intragastric administration of 
Centella has memory effects in male Wistar 
rats (Jared, 2010) and Centella extract pro-
moted  the  brain  function  of  juvenile  and 
young adult mice (Rao et al., 2005).

 

Centella 

99

Anti-ulcer activity

Cardioprotective activity

Several scientific findings have suggested the 
potential  use  of  Centella  and  its  bioactive 
constituents in the treatment of gastric ulcers. 
Both Centella and its bioactive constituents 
are used in the form of drugs to treat gastric 
ulcers. Other studies have suggested Centel-
la has a significant healing effect against gas-
tric  ulcers  induced  in  rats  by  ethanol,  as-
pirin,  cold  restraint  stress  and  pyloric 
ligation  (Sairam  et  al.,  2001;  Cheng  et  al., 
2004).  Another  study  has  shown  that  the 
aqueous extract of Centella and asiaticoside 
have  anti-inflammatory  properties  brought 
about by the inhibition of nitric oxide syn-
thesis and thus facilitate ulcer healing (Guo 
et al., 2004).

Anti-anxiety activity

Researchers  have  demonstrated  that  pure 
asiaticoside and methanol and ethyl acetate 
extracts of Centella exhibit anxiolytic activity 
in  rats  (Wijeweera  et  al.,  2006;  Wanasun-
tronwong et al., 2012). In a study by Jana 
et al. (2010), the treatment of 33 patients with 
500 mg/capsule of concentrated lyophilized 
70%  hydro-ethanolic  extract  of  Centella, 
twice daily after meals for 60 days, demon-
strated  that  Centella  not  only  significantly 
attenuates anxiety-related disorders but also 
reduces stress and depression.

Hepatoprotective activity

A total glucosides extract of Centella showed 
a protective effect against liver fibrosis effect 
in  rats  (Ming  et  al.,  2004).  Pingale  (2008) 
reported that an aqueous slurry of Centella 
plant powder protect from carbon tetrachlo-
ride-induced  liver  damage  (Pingale,  2008). 
Another study on the hepatoprotective effect 
of Centella juice revealed that pretreatment 
with  the  juice  gave  hepatoprotection  to 
the  same  extent  as  that  given  by  Liv-52  (a 
hepatoprotective agent made from several 
herbs)  against  paracetamol-induced  liver 
damage in broiler chickens (Kumar et al., 
2009). Asiaticoside had a hepatoprotective 
effect against acute liver injury induced 
by  lipopolysaccharide/d-galactosamine  in-
duced liver damage in mice (Zhang et al., 
2010).

Animal studies have proven the cardiopro-
tective activity of Centella. Administration 
of Centella showed protective effect on myo-
cardial damage (Gnanapragasam et al., 2004; 
Pragada et al., 2004; Li et al., 2007; Bian et al., 
2008).

Neuroprotective effect

Extract of Centella has been used in Ayur-
vedic medicine as a nerve tonic. The asiatic 
acid,  asiaticoside  and  micronutrients  in 
the  Centella  have  neuroprotective  effects 
(Hashim, 2011; Xu et al., 2012a,b). A chloro-
form  and  methanolic  extract  of  Centella 
protected  monosodium  glutamate-induced 
neurodegeneration in rats, an action that was 
attributed to its antioxidant and behavioural 
properties  (Ramanathan  et  al.,  2007).  An 
aqueous extract of Centella gave protection 
of the brain against neurodegenerative dis-
orders  such  as  Parkinson’s  disease  (Halea-
grahara and Ponnusamy, 2010). Centella may 
be useful for treating stroke, epilepsy, mul-
tiple  sclerosis  and  other  neuropsychiatric 
disorders (Barbosa et al., 2008).

Antimicrobial activity

Centella shows antibacterial activity against 
both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bac-
teria  which  is  attributed  to  asiaticoside, 
which  weakens  their  membranous  tissues 
(Mamtha et al., 2004). Antibacterial activity 
against  Mycobacterium  tuberculosis  and 
M. leprae, Gram-positive cocci, Pseudomonas 
pyocyaneus  [current  name  P.  aeruginosa], 
Trichoderma mentagrophytes and Entamoeba 
histolytica has been demonstrated. Both the 
alcoholic  and  aqueous  extract  of  Centella 
has an antiviral action against type II herpes 
simplex  virus  (Khare,  2007;  EMEA,  2010). 
The ethanolic extract of Centella at a concen-
tration of 400 mg/ml showed antimicrobial 
activity against an array of enteric pathogens, 
and thus could be used as an antidiarrhoeal 
drug (Mamtha et al., 2004). Arumugam et al. 
(2011)  evaluated  the  in  vitro  antibacterial 
activity of the methanol, acetone, chloroform 
and water extracts of leaf and callus of Cen-
tella against Bacillus cereus, Escherichia coli, 
Staphylococcus  aureus  and  P.  aeruginosa. 

100 

T. Madhujith and S. Sivakanthan 

All of the extracts showed significant anti-
bacterial activity against the test organisms, 
but  the  methanol  extracts  of  both  leaf  and 
callus gave the maximum inhibitory effect 
(Arumugam et al., 2011).

restore the function of the pancreatic tissues 
by causing an increase in insulin secretion 
or a decrease in the intestinal absorption 
of glucose (Chauhan et al., 2010; Rahman 
et al., 2012).

Immunomodulatory activity

Venous insufficiency

The triterpenoid saponins of Centella have 
been reported to possess immunomodulato-
ry activity (Plohmann et al., 1997). Centella 
extracts  showed  an  immunomodulatory  ef-
fect  on  both  non-specific  cellular  immune 
responses and humoral immune responses. 
An aqueous extract of Centella showed an 
immunostimulating activity on the mitogen- 
stimulated  proliferation  of  human  periph-
eral blood mononuclear cells. In an in vivo 
study in mice, significant response was shown 
by  the  aqueous  extract  of  Centella  to  both 
primary  and  secondary  antibodies  against 
bovine serum albumin (Punturee et al., 2005).

Antithrombotic effect

Centella  promotes  blood  circulation  to  re-
move blood stasis. A methanol extract from 
Centella  inhibited  shear-induced  platelet 
activation and dynamic coagulation in rats. 
Consequently, Centella is a potential medi-
cinal plant for use in the prevention of life-
style-related diseases such as hypertension, 
cardiopathy  and  cerebral  apoplexy  caused 
by arteriosclerosis (Satake et al., 2007).

Antidiabetic activity

The antidiabetic activity of Centella has been 
known to the ancient people of Bangladesh 
for centuries in Ayurvedic medicine (Rahman 
et  al.,  2012).  The  glycosides  such  as  bhra-
moside and brahminoside found in Centella 
possess sedative and hypoglycaemic effects. 
In  addition,  the  polyphenolic  polymers  in 
Centella  act  as  antioxidants,  and  improve 
insulin  action,  thus  the  plant  is  useful  in 
treating  glucose  intolerance  and  diabetes 
(Joshi and Chaturvedi, 2013). Animal studies 
have proven that ethanolic and methanolic 
extracts  of Centella  lowered  blood  glucose 
levels. The mechanism by which the plant 
extract exerts a hypoglycaemic effect is un-
clear, but could be attributed to its ability to 

The triterpenoid saponins present in Centella 
can strengthen weakened veins by improv-
ing the wall alterations that occur in chronic 
venous  hypertension  and  thereby  protect 
the venous endothelium (Allegra, 1981).

Skin improvement

Centella  has  been  listed  as  an  anti-ageing 
plant. It can improve the clinical score for 
skin wrinkles, suppleness, firmness, rough-
ness  and  hydration,  and  induces  type-I 
collagen synthesis (Mukherjee et al., 2011). 
Asiaticoside present in Centella can induce 
type I collagen synthesis in human dermal 
fibroblast cells (Lee et al., 2006). An alcoholic 
extract of Centella can improve skin condi-
tions such as pruritis (Gohil et al., 2010). A 
hydroalcoholic extract of Centella was used 
to  make  herbal  creams  for  cutaneous  use 
together  with  four  other  medicinal  herbs 
(Areca catechu, Cinnamon zeylanicum, Cur-
cuma  caesia  and  Tamarindus  indica),  and 
this extract improved skin hydration, sebum 
levels  and  viscoelasticity,  as  well  as  redu-
cing melanin content (Saraf et al., 2012).

Other effects

In addition to the above-mentioned effects, 
other actions of Centella include antifertility 
(Zheng and Qin, 2007), tranquillizing, anti-
pyretic, insecticidal (Jayasinha et al., 1999), 
radioprotective, antiepileptic, antidepressant 
(Gohil et al., 2010) and anti-HIV.

Clinical safety

Centella has no known toxicity at the recom-
mended doses. Side effects are rare, admin-
istration of high doses may cause skin allergy 
and burning sensations (with external use), 
headache, stomach upset, nausea, dizziness 
and drowsiness. The fresh plant may have a 
low potential for skin irritation. Some topical 
preparations may cause contact dermatitis. 

 

Centella 

101

The oral consumption of a high dose of Cen-
tella can cause headaches and transient un-
consciousness (Gohil et al., 2010).

Centella is supposed to be abortifacient 
and to alter the menstrual cycle, so it is ad-
visable to avoid consumption during preg-
nancy due to its emmenagogue action (Brink-
er, 2010; EMEA, 2010), and Centella should 
be  used  during  pregnancy  under  medical 
 advice (ESCOP, 2009). People taking Centella 
for a prolonged period (up to 6 weeks) should 
take a 2 week gap before continuing to take 
the  herb  (Gohil  et  al.,  2010).  Even  though 
asiaticoside has been of concern as a possible 
skin  carcinogen  in  rodents  after  recurring 
topical  application,  further  studies  are  ne-
cessary to prove this claim (WHO, 1999).

7.5  Summary

Centella is one of the herbal remedies with 
multiple therapeutic effects. It has a history 

of use in Ayurvedic and traditional medicine 
systems since prehistoric times for treating 
various  human  ailments.  The  biological 
effects of Centella are mainly attributed to 
its  major  triterpene  derivatives,  including 
asiatic  acid,  madecassic  acid,  asiaticoside, 
madecassoside and brahmic acid. The herb 
has been subjected to several experimental, 
phytochemical  and  clinical  investigations, 
and  the  studies  suggest  that  it  has  several 
pharmacological activities, such as antihy-
pertensive, antioxidant, immunomodulatory, 
antimicrobial, anticancer, anti-inflammatory, 
wound healing, memory enhancing, anti-ulcer, 
antidiabetic and anti-fertility, as well as sev-
eral other properties. Medicinal, nutraceut-
ical  and  cosmetic  preparations  containing 
extracts of Centella are available in the mar-
kets  of  many  countries,  accompanied  by 
several medicinal claims. However, some of 
the proposed therapeutic activities of Cen-
tella and its mechanism of action need to be 
proved by further clinical studies.

References

Abdulla, M.A., Al-Bayaty, F.H., Younis, L.T. and Abu Hassan, M.I. (2010) Anti-ulcer activity of Centella 
asiatica leaf extract against ethanol-induced gastric mucosal injury in rats. Journal of Medicinal 
Plants Research 4, 1253–1259.

Ahmad,  F.B.  and  Ismail,  G.I.  (2003)  Medicinal  plants  used  by  Kadazandusun  communities  around 
Crocker range. ASEAN Review of Biodiversity and Environmental Conservation (ARBEC) January– 
March 2003: art1. Available at: http://kdca.org.my/wp-content/files/medicinal_crange.pdf (accessed 
20 July 2015).

Allegra, C. (1981) Comparative capillaroscopic study of certain bioflavonoids and total triterpenic fractions 

of Centella asiatica in venous insufficiency. Clinical Therapy 99, 507–513.

Alternative Medicine Review (2007) Centella asiatica. Alternative Medicine Review 12, 69–72.
Ames, B.N., Shinenaga, M.K. and Hagen, T.M. (1993) Oxidants, antioxidants and the degenerative diseases 
of aging. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 90, 
7915–7922.

Arumugam, T., Ayyanar, M., Pillai, Y.J.K. and Sekar, T. (2011) Phytochemical screening and antibacterial 
activity of leaf and callus extracts of Centella asiatica. Bangladesh Journal of Pharmacology 6, 
55–60.

Babu, T.D., Kuttan, G. and Padikkala, J. (1995) Cytotoxic and anti-tumour properties of certain taxa of 
Umbelliferae with special reference to Centella asiatica (L.) Urban. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 
48, 53–57.

Babykutty, S., Padikkala, J., Prasanna Sathiadevan, P., Vijayakurup, V., Abdul Azis, T.K., Srinivas, P. 
and Gopala, S. (2009) Apoptosis induction of Centella asiatica on human breast cancer cells. 
African Journal of Traditional, Complementary and Alternative Medicine 6, 9–16.

Bandoniene, D. and Murkovic, M. (2002) On-line HPLC-DPPH screening method for evaluation of 
radical scavenging phenols extracted from apples (Malus domestica L.) Food Chemistry 50, 
2482–2487.

Barbosa, N.R., Pittella, F. and Gattaz, W.F. (2008) Centella asiatica water extract inhibits iPLA2 and 

cPLA2 activities in rat cerebellum. Phytomedicine 15, 896–900.

102 

T. Madhujith and S. Sivakanthan 

Bian, G.X., Li, G.G., Yang, Y., Liu, R.T., Ren, J.P., Wen, L.Q., Guo, S.M. and Lu, Q.J. (2008) Madecassoside 
reduces ischemia-reperfusion injury on regional ischemia induced heart infarction in rat. Biological 
and Pharmaceutical Bulletin 31, 458–463.

Boiteau, P., Buzas, A., Lederer, E. and Polonsky, J. (1949) Derivatives of Centella asiatica used against 

leprosy: Chemical constitution of asiaticoside. Nature 163, 258.

Booncong, P. (1989) A pharmacognostic and taxonomic study of Centella asiatica (Apiaceae). PhD thesis, 

Miami University, Ohio.

Bosse, J.P., Papillon, J., Frenette, G., Dansereau, J., Cadotte, M. and Le Lorier, J. (1979) Clinical study of 

a new antikeloid agent. Annals of Plastic Surgery 3, 13–21.

Brinker, F. (2010) Herbal Contraindications and Drug Interactions: Plus Herbal Adjuncts with Medicines, 

4th edn. Eclectic Medical Publications, Sandy, Oregon.

Brinkhaus, B., Lindner, M., Schuppan, D. and Hahn, E.G. (2000) Chemical, pharmacological and clinical 

profile of the East Asian medical plant Centella asiatica. Phytomedicine 7, 427–428.

Bunpo, P., Kataoka, K., Arimochi, H., Nakayama, H., Kuwahara, T., Bando, Y., Izumi, K., Vinitketkumnuen, U. 
and Ohnishi, Y. (2004) Inhibitory effects of Centella asiatica on azoxymethane-induced aberrant 
crypt focus formation and carcinogenesis in the intestines of F344 rats. Food and Chemical Toxicology 
42, 1987–1997.

Cao, G., Sofic, E. and Prior, R.L. (1997) Antioxidant and prooxidant behavior of flavonoids: structure–

activity relationships. Free Radical Biology and Medicine 22, 749–760.

Chandrika, U.G., Salim, N., Wijepala, G.D.D.J., Perera, K.S.U. and Goonetilleke, A.K.E. (2011) Caroten-
oid and mineral content of different morphotypes of Centella asiatica L. (Gotukola). International 
Journal of Food Sciences and Nutrition 62, 552–557.

Chanwitheesuk, A., Teerawutgulrag, A. and Rakariyatham, N. (2005) Screening of antioxidant activity 

and antioxidant compounds of some edible plants of Thailand. Food Chemistry 92, 491–497.

Chauhan, P.K., Pandey, I.P. and Dhatwalia, V.K. (2010) Evaluation of the anti-diabetic effect of ethanolic 
and methanolic extracts of Centella asiatica leaves extract on alloxan induced diabetic rats. 
Advances in Biological Research 4, 27–30.

Cheng, C.L., Guo, J.S., Luk, J. and Koo, M.W. (2004) The healing effects of Centella extract and asiati-

coside on acetic acid induced gastric ulcers in rats. Life Sciences 74, 2237–2249.

Chong, N.J. and Aziz, Z. (2011) A systematic review on the chemical constituents of Centella asiatica. 

Research Journal of Pharmaceutical, Biological and Chemical Sciences 2, 445–459.

Das, A.J. (2011) Review on nutritional, medicinal and pharmacological properties of Centella asiatica 

(Indian pennywort). Journal of Biologically Active Products from Nature 1, 216–228.

Devkota, A., Dall’Acqua, S., Jha, P.K. and Innocenti, G. (2010) Variation in the active constituent con-
tents in Centella asiatica grown in different habitats in Nepal. Journal of Plant Science 7, 43–47.
EMEA (2009) Evaluation of Medicines for Human Use. Public Statement on Centella asiatica (L.) Urban, 
Herba. European Medicines Agency, London. Available at: http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_
GB/document_library/Public_statement/2009/12/WC500018176.pdf (accessed 20 July 2015).

EMEA (2010) Assessment Report on Centella asiatica (L.) Urban, Herba. European Medicines Agency, 
London. Available at: http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/Herbal_-_HMPC_
assessment_report/2012/06/WC500128144.pdf (accessed 20 July 2015).

ESCOP (2009) Centellae asiaticae herba. In: ESCOP Monographs, 2nd edn, Supplement 2009. European 

Scientific Cooperative on Phytotherapy (ESCOP), Exeter, UK, pp. 36–44.

George, M., Joseph, L. and Ramaswamy (2009) Anti-allergic, anti-pruritic, and anti-inflammatory activities 
of  Centella  asiatica  extracts.  African  Journal  of  Traditional,  Complementary  and  Alternative 
Medicines 6, 554–559.

Gnanapragasam, A., Ebenezar, K.K., Sathish, V., Govindaraju, P. and Devaki, T. (2004) Protective effect 
of Centella asiatica on antioxidant tissue defense system against adriamycin induced cardiomy-
opathy in rats. Life Sciences 76, 585–597.

Gohil, K.J., Patel, J.A. and Gajjar, A.K. (2010) Pharmacological review on Centella asiatica: a potential 

herbal cure-all. Indian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 72, 546–556.

Guo, J.S., Cheng, C.L. and Koo, M.W. (2004) Inhibitory effects of Centella asiatica water extract and 
asiaticoside on inducible nitric oxide synthase during gastric ulcer healing in rats. Planta Medica 
70, 1150–1154.

Haleagrahara, N. and Ponnusamy, K. (2010) Neuroprotective effect of Centella asiatica extract (CAE) 
on  experimentally  induced  Parkinsonism  in  aged  Sprague–Dawley  rats.  Journal  of  Toxicology 
Sciences 35, 41–47.

 

Centella 

103

Halliwell, B. and Gutteridge J.M. (1999) Free Radicals in Biology and Medicine. Oxford University 

Press, Oxford, U.K.

Hamid, A.A., Shah, Z.M., Muse, R. and Mohamed, S. (2002) Characterisation of antioxidative activities 

of various extracts of Centella asiatica (L) Urban. Food Chemistry 77, 465–469.

Hashim, P. (2011) Mini review: Centella asiatica in food and beverage applications and its potential 

antioxidant and neuroprotective effect. International Food Research Journal 18, 1215–1222.

Hashim, P., Sidek, H., Helan, M.H.M., Sabery, A., Palanisamy, U.D. and Ilham, M. (2011) Triterpene 

composition and bioactivities of Centella asiatica. Molecules 16, 1310–1322.

Heong, C.S., Kaur, B., Huda, N., Karim, A.A. and Fazilah, A. (2011) Effect of fermentation on the com-

position of Centella asiatica teas. American Journal of Food Technology 6, 581–593.

Huang, Y.H., Zhang, S.H., Zhen, R.X., Xu, X.D. and Zhen, Y.S. (2004) Asiaticoside inducing apoptosis 

of tumor cells and enhancing anti-tumor activity of vincristine. Ai Zheng 23, 1599–1604.

Hussin, M., Hamid, A.A., Mohamad, S., Saari, N., Bakar, F. and Dek, S.P. (2009) Modulation of lipid 

metabolism by Centella asiatica in oxidative stress rats. Journal of Food Science 74, H72–H78.

Intharachatorn, T. and Srisawat, R. (2013) Antihypertensive effects of Centella asiatica extract. In: 2013 
International Conference on Food and Agricultural Sciences. IPCBEE 55, IACSIT Press, Singapore.
IUCN (2013) The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. International Union for Conservation of Nature, 
UK Office, Cambridge, UK. Available at: http://www.iucnredlist.org/details/168725/0 (accessed 1 
May 2014).

James, J.T. and Dubery, I.A. (2009) Pentacyclic triterpenoids from the medicinal herb, Centella asiatica 

(L.) Urban. Molecules 14, 3922–3941.

Jamil, S.S., Nizami, Q. and Salam, M. (2007) Centella asiatica (Linn.) Urban. A review. Natural Product 

Radiance 6, 158–170.

Jana, U., Sur, T.K., Maity, L.N., Debnath, P.K. and Bhattacharyya, D. (2010) A clinical study on the man-
agement of generalized anxiety disorder with Centella asiatica. Nepal Medical College Journal 
(NMCJ) 12, 8–11.

Jared, S.R. (2010) Enhancement of memory in rats with Centella asiatica. Biomedical Research 21, 

429–432.

Jayasinha, P., Warnasuriya, D. and Dissanayake, H. (1999) Centella asiatica – A Literature Survey. 
Medicinal and Aromatic Plant Series No. 1, Information Service Centre, Industrial Technology 
Institute, Colombo.

Joshi, K. and Chaturvedi, P. (2013) Review article: therapeutic efficiency of Centella asiatica (L.) Urb. 
An underutilized green leafy vegetable: an overview. International Journal of Pharmacy and Bio 
Sciences 4, 135–149.

Kartnig, T. (1986) Clinical applications of Centella asiatica (L) Urb. In: Craker, L.E. and Simon, J.E. 
(eds) Herbs, Spices, and Medicinal Plants: Recent Advances in Botany, Horticulture, and Pharma-
cology, Vol. 3. Oryx Press, Phoenix, Arizona, pp. 145–173.

Khare, C.P. (2007) Indian Medicinal Plants: An Illustrated Dictionary. Springer, New York.
Kimura, Y., Sumiyoshi, M., Samukawa, K.I., Satake, N. and Sakanaka, M. (2008) Facilitating action of 
asiaticoside at low doses on burn wound repair and its mechanism. European Journal of Pharmacology 
584, 415–423.

Kumar, P., Prasad, R., Singh, K.K. and Roy, B.K. (2009) Hepatoprotective effect of Centella asiatica 
against paracetamol induced liver damage in broiler chicken. Indian Journal of Poultry Science 
44, 101–104.

Kuroda, M., Mimaki, Y., Harada, H., Sakagami, H. and Sashida, Y. (2001) Five new triterpene glycosides 

from Centella asiatica. Natural Medicines 55, 134–138.

Lee, J., Jung, E., Kim, Y., Park, J., Park, J., Hong, S., Kim, J., Hyun, C., Kim, Y.S. and Park, D. (2006) 
Asiaticoside  induces  human  collagen  I  synthesis  through  TGF-beta  receptor  I  kinase  (TbetaRI 
kinase)-independent Smad signaling. Planta Medica 72, 324–328.

Lee, J.H., Kim, H.L., Lee, M.H., You, K.E., Kwon, B.J., Seo, H.J. and Park, J.C. (2012) Asiaticoside enhances 
normal human skin cell migration, attachment and growth in vitro wound healing model. Phyto-
medicine 19, 1223–1227.

Li, G.G., Bian, G.X., Ren, J.P., Wen, L.Q., Zhang, M. and Lü, Q.J. (2007) Protective effect of madecasso-
side against reperfusion injury after regional ischemia in rabbit heart in vivo. Acta Pharmaceutica 
Sinica 42, 475–480.

Liu, M., Dai, Y., Li Y, Luo, Y., Huang, F., Gong, Z. and Meng, Q. (2008a) Madecassoside isolated from 

Centella asiatica herbs facilitates burn wound healing in mice. Planta Medica 74, 809–815.

104 

T. Madhujith and S. Sivakanthan 

Liu, M., Dai, Y., Yao, X., Li, Y., Luo, Y., Xia, Y. and Gong, Z. (2008b) Anti-rheumatoid arthritic effect of 
madecassoside on type II collagen-induced arthritis in mice. International Immunopharmacology 
8, 1561–1566.

Mamtha, B., Kavitha, K., Srinivasan, K.K. and Shivananda, P.G. (2004) An in vitro study of the effect of 
Centella asiatica (Indian pennywort) on enteric pathogens. Indian Journal of Pharmacology 36, 
41–44.

Maquart, F.X., Chastang, F., Simeon, A., Birembaut, P., Gillery, P. and Wegrowski, Y. (1999) Triterpenes 
from Centella asiatica stimulate extracellular matrix accumulation in rat experimental wounds. 
European Journal of Dermatology 9, 289–296.

Matsuda, H., Morikawa, T., Ueda, H. and Yoshikawa, M. (2001) Medicinal foodstuffs. XXVII. Saponin 
constituents of gotu kola (2): structures of new ursane- and oleanane-type triterpene oligoglyco-
sides, centellasaponins B, C, and D, from Centella asiatica cultivated in Sri Lanka. Chemical and 
Pharmaceutical Bulletin 49, 1368–1371.

Meena, H., Pandey, H.M., Pandey, P., Arya, M.C. and Ahmed, Z. (2012) Evaluation of antioxidant activity 
of two important memory enhancing medicinal plants Baccopa monnieri and Centella asiatica. 
Indian Journal of Pharmacology 44, 114–117.

Ming, Z., Liu, S. and Cao, L. (2004) Effect of total glucosides of Centella asiatica on antagonizing liver 
fibrosis induced by dimethylnitrosamine in rats. Chinese Journal of Integrated Traditional and 
Western Medicine 24, 731–734.

Mukherjee, P.K., Maity, N., Nema, N.K. and Sarkar, B.K. (2011) Bioactive compounds from natural 

resources against skin aging. Phytomedicine 19, 64–73.

Murray, M.T. (2012) Centella asiatica (gotu kola). In: Pizzorno, J.E. and Murray, M.T. (eds) Text Book 

of Natural Medicine, 4th edn. Elsevier Churchill Livingstone, St Louis, Missouri, pp. 649–654.

Nasir, M.N., Habsah, M., Zamzuri, I., Rammes, G., Hasnan, J. and Abdullah, J. (2011) Effects of asiatic 
acid on passive and active avoidance task in male Spraque–Dawley rats. Journal of Ethnopharma-
cology 134, 203–209.

Nhiem, N.X., Tai, B.H., Quang, T.H., Kiem, P.V., Minh, C.V., Nam, N.H., Kim, J.H., Im, L.R., Lee, Y.M. 
and  Kim,  Y.H.  (2011)  A  new  ursane-type  triterpenoid  glycoside  from  Centella  asiatica  leaves 
modulates the production of nitric oxide and secretion of TNF-α in activated RAW 264.7 cells. 
Bioorganic and Medicinal Chemistry Letters 21, 1777–1781.

Orhan, I.E. (2012) Centella asiatica (L.) Urban: from traditional medicine to modern medicine with 
neuroprotective potential. Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine 2012, Article 
ID 946259. Available at: http://www.hindawi.com/journals/ecam/2012/946259/ (accessed 20 July 
2015).

Park, B.C., Bosire, K.O., Lee, E.S., Lee, Y.S. and Kim, J.A. (2005) Asiatic acid induces apoptosis in 

SK-MEL-2 human melanoma cells. Cancer Letters 218, 81–90.

Pingale, S.S. (2008) Evaluation of effect of Centella asiatica on CCl4 induced rat liver damage. Pharma-

cologyonline 3, 537–543.

Pittella, F., Dutra, R.C., Junior, D.D., Lopes, M.T. and Barbosa, N. (2009) Antioxidant and cyto-
toxic activities of Centella asiatica (L) Urb. International Journal of Molecular Sciences 10, 
3713–3721.

Plohmann, B., Bader, G., Hiller, K. and Franz, G. (1997) Immunomodulatory and antitumoral effects of 

triterpenoid saponins. Die Pharmazie 52, 953–957.

Pragada, R.R., Veeravalli, K.K., Chowdary, K.P.R. and Routhu, K.V. (2004) Cardioprotective activity of 
Hydrocotyle asiatica L. in ischemia-reperfusion induced myocardial infarction in rats. Journal of 
Ethnopharmacology 93, 105–108.

Premila, M.S. (2006) Ayurvedic Herbs: A Clinical Guide to the Healing Plants of Traditional Indian 

Medicine. Haworth Press, Binghamton, New York.

Punturee, K., Wild, C.P., Kasinrerk, W. and Vinitketkumnuen, U. (2005) Immunomodulatory activities 
of Centella asiatica and Rhinacanthus nasutus extracts. Asian Pacific Journal of Cancer Preven-
tion 6, 396–400.

Rahman, M., Sayeed, S.B., Haque, A., Hassan, M. and Islam, S.M.A. (2012) Phytochemical screening, 
antioxidant, anti-Alzheimer and anti-diabetic activities of Centella asiatica. Journal of Natural 
Product and Plant Resources 2, 504–511.

Rahman, P.M., Hossain, S., Rahaman, A., Fatima, N., Nahar, T., Uddin, B. and Basunia, M.A. (2013) 
Antioxidant activity of Centella asiatica (Linn.) Urban: impact of extraction solvent. Journal of 
Pharmacognosy and Phytochemistry 1, 27–32.

 

Centella 

105

Rahmatullah, M., Ferdausi, D., Molli, A.H., Jahan, R., Chowdhury, M.H. and Haque, W.M. (2009) A 
survey of medicinal plants used by Kavirajes of Chalna Area, Khulna District, Bangladesh. Afri-
can Journal of Traditional, Complementary and Alternative Medicines 7, 91–97.

Raju, G. and Shastry, M.S. (2002) Guidelines for Harvesting, Storage, Drying and Grading & Structures 
Required for Value Addition and Storage. AP-CF/Guidelines-GMCL & LAB/Final, prepared for An-
dhra Pradesh Forest Department, Hyderabad, India by Gram Mooligai Company Ltd. . Available at: 
http://www.apforests.gov.in/JFM%20CFM/CFM/Special%20Reports/FRLHT/Reports/11.%20
GMCL%20Guidelines%20Reports.pdf (accessed 1 June 2014).

Ramachandran, V. and Saravanan, R. (2013) Efficacy of asiatic acid, a pentacyclic triterpene on attenu-
ating the key enzymes activities of carbohydrate metabolism in streptozotocin-induced diabetic 
rats. Phytomedicine. 20, 230–236.

Ramanathan, M., Sivakumar, S., Anandvijayakumar, P.R., Saravanababu, C. and Pandian, P.R. (2007) 
Neuroprotective evaluation of standardized extract of C. asiatica in mono sodium glutamate treat-
ed rats. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology 45, 425–431.

Randriamampionona, D., Diallo, B., Rakotoniriana, F., Rabemanantsoa, C., Cheuk, K., Corbisier, A., 
Mahillon, J., Ratsimamanga, S. and Jaziri, M.E.I. (2007) Comparative analysis of active constitu-
ents  in  Centella  asiatica  samples  from  Madagascar:  application  for  ex  situ  conservation  and 
clonal propagation. Fitoterapia 78, 482–489.

Rao, S.B., Chetana, M. and Uma Devi, P. (2005) Centella asiatica treatment during postnatal period 

enhances learning and memory in mice. Physiology and Behaviour 86, 449–457.

Rosalizan, M.S., Rohani, M.Y., Khatijah, I. and Shukri, M.A. (2008) Physical characteristics, nutrient 
contents and triterpene compounds of ratoon crops of Centella asiatica at three different stages of 
maturity. Journal of Tropical Agriculture and Food Science 36, 43–51.

Roy, D.C., Barman, S.K. and Shaik, M. (2013) Current updates on Centella asiatica: phytochemistry, 

pharmacology and traditional uses. Medicinal Plant Research 3, 20–36.

Sairam, K., Rao, C.V. and Goel, R.K. (2001) Effect of Centella asiatica Linn. on physical and chemical 
factors induced gastric ulceration and secretion in rats. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology 
39, 137–142.

Saraf, S., Chhabra, S.K., Kaur, C.D. and Saraf, S. (2012) Development of photochemoprotective herbs 
containing cosmetic formulations for improving skin properties. Journal of Cosmetic Science 63, 
119–131.

Satake, T., Kamiya, K., An, Y., Oishi, T. and Yamamoto, J. (2007) The anti-thrombotic active constitu-

ents from Centella asiatica. Biological and Pharmaceutical Bulletin 30, 935–940.

Schaneberg, B.T., Mikell, J.R., Bedir, E. and Khan, I.A. (2003) An improved HPLC method for quan-
titative determination of six triterpenes in Centella asiatica extracts and commercial products. 
Pharmazie 58, 381–384.

Shastry, M.S. (2002) Value Addition Techniques for Commercially Important Medicinal Plants of Andhra 
Pradesh including Pharmacoepial Standards for 61 species. AP_CF/LAB Report/Final prepared 
for Andhra Pradesh Forest Department, Hyderabad, India. Foundation for Revitalisation of Local 
Health Traditions, Bangalore, India. Available at: http://forest.ap.nic.in/JFM%20CFM/CFM/Spe-
cial%20Reports/FRLHT/Reports/10.%20Lab%20Report.pdf (accessed 20 July 2015).

Shukla, A., Rasik, A.M. and Dhawan, B.N. (1999) Asiaticoside-induced elevation of antioxidant levels 

in healing wounds. Phytotherapy Research 13, 50–54.

Singh, S., Gautam, A., Sharma, A. and Batra, A. (2010) Centella asiatica (L.): a plant with immense 
medicinal potential but threatened. International Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences Review and 
Research 4, 9–17.

Somchit,  M.N.,  Sulaiman,  M.R.,  Zuraini,  A.,  Samsuddin,  L.,  Somchit,  N.,  Israf,  D.A.  and  Moin,  S. 
(2004)  Antinociceptive  and  antiinflammatory  effects  of  Centella  asiatica.  Indian  Journal  of 
Pharmacology 36, 377–380.

Song, J., Xu, H., Lu, Q., Xu, Z., Bian, D., Xia, Y., Wei, Z., Gong, Z. and Dai, Y. (2012) Madecassoside 
suppresses migration of fibroblasts from keloids: involvement of p38 kinase and PI3K signaling 
pathways. Burns 38, 677–684.

Stadtman, E.R. (2004) Role of oxidant species in aging. Current Medicinal Chemistry 11, 1105–1112.
Subban, R., Veerakumar, A., Manimaran, R., Hashim, K.M. and Balachandran, I. (2008) Two new fla-

vonoids from Centella asiatica (Linn.) Journal of Natural Medicines 62, 369–373.

Suguna, L., Sivakumar, P. and Chandrakasan, G. (1996) Effects of Centella asiatica extract on dermal 

wound healing in rats. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology 34, 1208–1211.

106 

T. Madhujith and S. Sivakanthan 

Suntornsuk, L. and Anurukvorakun, O. (2005) Precision improvement for the analysis of flavonoids in 

selected Thai plants by capillary zone electrophoresis. Electrophoresis 26, 648–660.

Tee, E.S., Mohd Idris, N., Mohd Nasir, A. and Khatijah, I. (1997) Nutrient Composition of Malaysian 
Foods, 4th edn. Malaysian Food Composition Database Programme, Institute of Medical Research, 
Kuala Lumpur.

Tiwari, S., Gehlot, S. and Gambhir, I.S. (2011) Review: Centella asiatica: a concise drug review with 

probable clinical uses. Journal of Stress Physiology and Biochemistry 7, 38–44.

Upadhyaya, S. and Saikia, L.R. (2012) Evaluation of phytochemicals, antioxidant activity and nutrient 
content  of  Centella  asiatica  (L.)  Urban  leaves  from  different  localities  of  Assam.  International 
Journal of Pharma and Bio sciences 3, 656–663.

Wan, J., Gong, X., Jiang, R., Zhang, Z. and Zhang, L. (2013) Antipyretic and anti-inflammatory ef-
fects of asiaticoside in lipopolysaccharide-treated rat through up-regulation of heme oxygenase-1. 
Phytotherapy Research 27, 1136–1142.

Wanasuntronwong,  A.,  Tantisira,  M.H.,  Tantisira,  B.  and  Watanabe,  H.  (2012)  Anxiolytic  effects  of 
standardized extract of Centella asiatica (ECa 233) after chronic immobilization stress in mice. 
Journal of Ethnopharmacology 143, 579–585.

Wang, X.S., Dong, Q., Zuo, J.P. and Fang, J.N. (2003) Structure and potential immunological activity of 

a pectin from Centella asiatica (L.) Urban. Carbohydrate Research 338, 2393–2402.

WHO (1999) WHO Monographs on Selected Medicinal Plants – Volume 1. World Health Organization, 
Geneva,  Switzerland.  Available  at:  http://apps.who.int/medicinedocs/pdf/s2200e/s2200e.pdf 
(accessed 20 July 2015).

Wijeweera, P., Arnason, J.T., Koszycki, D. and Merali, Z. (2006) Evaluation of anxiolytic properties of 
gotukola (Centella asiatica) extracts and asiaticoside in rat behavioral models. Phytomedicine 13, 
668–676.

Wunderlin, R.P. and Hansen, B.F. (2008) Centella asiatica. In: Atlas of Florida Vascular Plants. Institute 
for Systematic Botany, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida. Available at: http://florida.
plantatlas.usf.edu/Plant.aspx?id=709 (accessed 20 July 2015).

Xu, C.L., Wang, Q.Z., Sun, L.M., Li, X.M., Deng, J.M., Li, L.F., Zhang, J., Xu, R. and Ma, S.P. (2012a) 
Asiaticoside: attenuation of neurotoxicity induced by MPTP in a rat model of Parkinsonism via 
maintaining redox balance and up-regulating the ratio of Bcl-2/Bax. Pharmacology, Biochemistry 
and Behaviour 100, 413–418.

Xu, M., Xiong, Y., Liu, J., Qian, J., Zhu, L. and Gao, J. (2012b) Asiatic acid, a pentacyclic triterpene in 
Centella asiatica, attenuates glutamate-induced cognitive deficits in mice and apoptosis in SH-SY5Y 
cells. Acta Pharmacologica Sinica 33, 578–587.

Yoshida, M., Fuchigami, M., Nagao, T., Okabe, H., Matsunaga, K., Takata, J., Karube, Y., Tsuchihashi, 
R., Kinjo, J. and Mihashi, K. (2005) Antiproliferative constituents from Umbelliferae plants VII. 
Active  triterpenes  and  rosmarinic  acid  from  Centella  asiatica.  Biological  and  Pharmaceutical 
Bulletin 28, 173–175.

Yu, Q., Duan, H., Takaishi, Y. and Gao, W. (2006) A novel triterpene from Centella asiatica. Molecules 

11, 661–665.

Zainol, M.K., Abd-Hamid, A., Yusof, S. and Muse, S. (2003) Antioxidant activity and total phenolic 
compounds of leaf, root and petiole of four accessions of Centella asiatica (L.) Urban. Food Chem-
istry 81, 575–581.

Zainol, N.A., Voo, S.C., Sarmidi, M.R. and Aziz, R.A. (2008) Profiling of Centella asiatica (L.) Urban 

extract. The Malaysian Journal of Analytical Sciences 12, 322–327.

Zhang, L., Li, H.Z., Gong, X., Luo, F.L., Wang, B., Hu, N., Wang, C.D., Zhang, Z. and Wan, J.Y. (2010) 
Protective effects of asiaticoside on acute liver injury induced by lipopolysaccharide/d-galactosamine 
in mice. Phytomedicine 17, 811–819.

Zheng, C.J. and Qin, L.P. (2007) Chemical components of Centella asiatica and their bioactives. Journal 

of Chinese Integrative Medicine 5, 348–351.

8  Chester

 A.F. Alonge*

University of Uyo, Uyo, Nigeria

8.1  Botany

8.1.1 

Introduction

very conspicuous leafy calyx lobes, produ-
cing  yellow  or  reddish  fruits  and  sweet, 
acidic fruits which are edible.

The  term  ‘vegetable’  is  not  attributed  to 
green  leaves  alone  but  also  to  the  flowers 
and young seeds of some plants and even to 
the  roots  of  herbaceous  plants  that  are  ed-
ible (i.e. not poisonous or toxic to the body). 
A vegetable is a plant whose fruits, shoots, 
stems,  leaves  and  roots  or  other  parts  are 
used for food. They vary in function, i.e. in 
some cases the leaves serve as food or medi-
cine while in others the stems, young roots 
and  seeds  may  also  serve  similar  or  some 
other functions. Traditionally, the people of 
south-eastern  Nigeria  and  other  West  Afri-
can countries utilize chester plants (Heinsia 
crinita)  for  both  food  and  therapeutic  pur-
poses (Fig. 8.1).

8.1.2  History/origin

Heinsia crinita (Afz.) G. Taylor (Rubiaceae), 
or chester is also known as bush apple, and 
in the local Efik dialect of Nigeria as Atama. 
It  is  a  scrambling  shrub  with  lasting  and 

8.1.3  Location

Chester is usually found sparsely distributed 
in tropical rain forest. The shrubs are most 
common in West Africa, mostly in Nigeria 
and might also be found in African countries 
such  as  Ghana,  Cameroon,  Cote  d’Ivoire, 
Congo, Uganda and Upper Volta (Bassir and 
Umoh, 1975). In Nigeria, the plant is widely 
distributed  in  Ika,  Itu,  Etim  Ekpo,  Oron, 
Onna, Abak, Uyo, Ibesikpo Asutan and Eti-
nan in the Local Government Area in Akwa 
Ibom State; it is also distributed in some Local 
Government Areas in Abia, Cross River, Imo 
and  Enugu  States  of  Nigeria.  All  of  these 
areas  are  in  the  south-eastern  region  of 
Nigeria.

8.1.4  Morphology

H. crinita is a branching shrub. The flowers 
are whitish with yellowish throat hairs and 

*Corresponding author, e-mail: akindelealonge@uniuyo.edu.ng

© CAB International 2016. Leafy Medicinal Herbs: Botany, Chemistry, 
Postharvest Technology and Uses (eds D.C.P. Ambrose et al.) 

107

108 

A.F. Alonge 

to 2 m tall and is cylindrical, pubescent with 
short reddish-brown hairs. The young leaves 
are reddish-brown in colour and have short 
oppressed hairs on the veins, opposite and 
up to 1.3 cm long and 1 cm wide with stip-
ules  up  to  1  mm  long,  and  drop  off  early. 
This variety is not used as food because it is 
claimed to be poisonous (Dye, 1956).

8.2  Chemistry

Data  on  the  proximate  composition  (mois-
ture, ash, protein, crude fibre, fat and total 
carbohydrate  contents)  are  given  in  Tables 
8.1–8.3 for fresh, sun-dried and oven-dried 
leaves of chester.

8.2.1  Chemical composition

Nutritionally,  vegetables  are  valuable  be-
cause they serve as a cheap source of differ-
ent  types  of  nutrient.  They  are  also  a  life- 
saving supplement of nutrients when there 
is a meagre diet at times of stress or during 
war (such as the civil war of Nigeria) (Eyo  
et al., 1983).

The  nutrient  content  of  chester  has 
been  described  in  various  accounts  in  the 
literature. Eyo et al. (1983) reported the con-
tents  of  total  dry  matter  (30.33%),  crude 
protein  (15.10%),  crude  fibre  (13.90%), 
ether extract (fat content, 3.02%), N-free ex-
tract  (59.30%),  total  ash  (8.68%),  calcium 
(11.07%) and phosphorus (0.17%).

Etuk et al. (1998) reported on the proxim-
ate, mineral, vitamin (A and C) and anti- nutrient 
composition of three varieties of chester namely, 
the  white,  black  and  Ekoi.  The  proximate 
composition in terms of % dry matter was 
ash (4.0–5.0), crude protein (9.45–14.7), ether 
extract (1.4–4.2), fibre (12.50–14.76), organic 
matter (95–96), carbohydrate (79–82.65) and 
calorific  value  (391–401  kcal/100  g).  The 
moisture content in terms of wet weight was 
33.0–45.2%.  The  vitamin  C  (ascorbic  acid) 
content was also determined and found to 
range from 10 to 15 mg/100 g. The mineral 
composition  was  also  determined  and  the 
results  (as  ppm)  were:  iron  (13.24–19.86), 

Fig. 8.1.  Fresh chester leaves.

the fruits are yellowish with numerous seeds 
in  each  fruit  and  each  seed  is  triangular  
in shape (Tindall, 1983). The branches are 
slightly  pubescent,  the  leaves  are  elliptic–
lanceolate, acutely acuminate, acute at the 
base and 5–10 cm long (Tindall, 1983). The 
white variety (Afiatama) has glossy, leathery 
light green leaves dense and elliptical in shape 
that appear fairly succulent, averaging about 
8.0 cm long and 3.2 cm wide (Hutchinson, 
1973). It is selectively cultivated by subsist-
ence farmers because of its preferred taste.

The  black  variety  (Obubu-Atama)  has 
dull leathery, dark green leaves with scanty 
brown hairs along the ribs, 7.5 cm long and 
3 cm wide on average. It is the black–green 
colour that gives it the name black variety as 
compared with the white variety. The black 
variety  is  harvested  wild  from  forests  for 
food but it is more popular for its supposed 
medicinal uses. It is used for enemas and as 
an abortifacient as well as a remedy for diar-
rhoea,  peptic  ulcers  and  other  problems 
(Ebana et al., 1995). It has a very bitter taste 
and must be thoroughly processed to remove 
the  bitterness  before  it  is  used  as  food 
(Hutchinson, 1973).

The Atama Idim variety has a stem up 
to 3 m tall and is cylindrical and pubescent 
with  short  and  reddish-brown  hairs.  The 
leaves  are  ovate,  acute  and  rounded  at  the 
base,  and  pubescent  with  reddish-brown 
and short oppressed hairs on the veins, op-
posite and up to 10.3 cm long and 6 cm wide 
with stipules up to 2 mm long, and drop off 
early. The Atama Ekpo variety has a stem up 

 

Chester 

109

Table 8.1.  Proximate composition of a sample of 
fresh chester leaves. From Alonge and Essien, 
2014.

Component

Ash
Crude fat
Crude fibre
Crude protein
Moisture
Total carbohydrate

Amount (%)

2.68
17.50
17.5
1.75
40.11
81.54

Table 8.2.  Proximate composition of a sun-dried 
sample of chester leaves. From Alonge and 
Essien, 2014.

Component

Ash
Crude fat
Crude fibre
Crude protein
Moisture
Total carbohydrate

Amount (%)

3.13
9.50
9.50
24.50
15.45
62.17

Table 8.3.  Proximate composition of a sample of 
chester leaves oven dried at 105°C. From Alonge 
and Essien, 2014.

Component

Ash
Crude fat
Crude fibre
Crude protein
Moisture
Total carbohydrate

Amount (%)

14.23
4.50
28.00
3.50
14.22
64.45

magnesium (38.23–81.28), zinc (1.95–2.92) 
and  calcium  (622.90–1056.25).  The  results 
are summarized in Tables 8.4–8.7.

Etuk et al. (1998) also reported that, in 
terms of toxicants, the black variety of ches-
ter contains the highest contents of hydro-
cyanic acid and of tannins – as might be ex-
pected  from  its  very  dark  colour  and  its 
bitterness. It also contains the highest alkal-
oid content of the three varieties.

Other  research  has  demonstrated  that 
chester contains all the (usual) amino acids 
found in protein, but has shown that there 
are variations in the levels of anti-nutritional 

substances  reported  by  different  workers. 
More research is needed on this aspect and 
studies should also be done on the contents 
of the B complex vitamins and vitamins D 
and K in chester.

8.2.2  Phytochemistry

This is the branch of chemistry dealing with 
the chemical processes associated with plant 
life and the chemical compounds produced 
by  plants.  The  levels  of  toxicants  or  anti- 
nutritional substances reported as mg/100 g 
dry matter were oxalate (154.0), hydrocyanic 
acid (8.60) and phytic acid (110.0) (Eyo et al., 
1983).  The  amino  acid  contents  of  the  leaf 
protein  were  found  to  be  high  in  glutamic 
acid, aspartic acid and leucine, but low in 
methionine (a sulfur- containing amino acid) 
and  histidine  (Ifon,  1977;  Ifon  and  Bassir, 
1979;  Umoh  and  Bassir,  1980;  Eyo  et  al., 
1983).

8.3  Postharvest Technology

Food  processing  includes  any  unit  oper-
ation that changes or converts raw material 
into a safe and edible form. Food processing 
also provides us with a means to extend the 
shelf life of otherwise perishable food; with-
out food processing it would not be possible 
to sustain the needs of modern urban popu-
lations  and  the  choice  of  food  available 
would be very limited and largely seasonal. 
Changing  lifestyles  and  family  structure 
have resulted in a largely consumer-led de-
mand for an ever-growing selection of food, 
particularly  ready-prepared  and  partially 
prepared products. Virtually all food under-
goes some form of processing before its con-
sumption.  At  its  most  simple,  processing 
can be peeling a piece of fruit or boiling po-
tatoes.  The  oldest  methods  of  food  pro-
cessing include sun drying, smoking, pick-
ling and salting; these methods utilize the 
fact that water removal increases shelf life. 
Fermentation  and  freezing  are  also  among 
the traditional methods of food processing. 

110 

A.F. Alonge 

Table 8.4.  Proximate composition of three varieties of chester leaf. From Etuk et al., 1998.

Organic 

Ether  

Variety

compoundsa Moistureb

Asha

extract (fat)a

Crude  
proteina

Fibrea

Carbohydratea

Black
Ekoi
White

95.00
95.50
96.00

42.4
33.00
45.20

5.00
4.50
4.00

4.20
3.40
1.40

11.80
9.45
14.70

14.76
13.92
12.50

79.00
82.65
79.90

Calorific  
valuec

401.00
399.00
391.00

a% dry matter; b% wet weight; ckcal/100 g.

Table 8.5.  Mineral content of three varieties of chester leaf (as ppm). From Etuk et al., 1998.

Variety

Black
Ekoi
White

Iron

13.24
14.52
19.86

Magnesium

79.38
81.38
38.23

Zinc

2.20
1.95
2.92

Calcium

  645.80
  622.90
1056.25

Cadmium

0.11
0.11
0.21

Table 8.6.  Vitamin A (retinal) and vitamin C 
(ascorbate) content of three varieties of chester leaf 
as mg/100 g dry weight. From Etuk et al., 1998.

Table 8.7.  Anti-nutrient (toxicant) composition of 
three varieties of chester as mg/100 g dry weight. 
From Etuk et al., 1998.

Variety

Black
Ekoi
White

Vitamin A

Vitamin C

18.89 ± 1.93

133.33 ± 3.72

NDa

ND

11.00 ± 1.73

121.51 ± 1.86

aND = Not determined.

Variety Hydrocyanide

Total  
oxalate

Soluble 
oxalate

Black
Ekoi
White

10.75
10.00
  8.14

13.25
29.17
17.05

  9.76
25.65
14.32

Tannin

11.45
  6.18
  5.01

Canning,  pasteurization  and  sterilization 
are techniques that have been used for many 
decades but are still important in the mod-
ern  food  processing  industry.  However, 
many new processes are now joining them 
and a number of others are already waiting 
in the wings (Jones et al., 1979).

One  of  the  problems  with  products  is 
consumer interest in health and related issues, 
such  as  naturalness  and  added  value.  This 
interest has led to the development of prod-
ucts  that  have  specific  vitamins  or  minerals 
added to them. Fortified foods and drinks are 
used around the world as a cost-effective way 
of ensuring the nutritional quality of food sup-
ply. The addition of nutrients requires careful 
attention to food regulation and a suitable nu-
tritional rationale so that the final product re-
mains acceptable to consumers.

Food  processing  improves  the  nutri-
tional  value  of  certain  foods.  For  example, 

 severe  heat  treatment  destroys  trypsin  in-
hibitors,  which  are  anti-nutritional  factors 
present in a range of foods. For instance, the 
harmful lectins present in red kidney beans 
are  destroyed  by  extended  boiling.  Food 
processing  can  also  increase  the  bioavail-
ability  of  nutrients  in  foods  and  their  or-
ganoleptic qualities. However, any form of 
food processing, even slicing, washing and 
cooking in the home, can result in the loss 
of heat-sensitive, oxygen-sensitive and other-
wise  highly  sensitive  nutrients,  especially 
certain  vitamins.  The  leaching  of  minerals 
into the cooking water can also occur with 
vegetables. The main commercial processes 
that  cause  nutrient  loss  are  blanching,  
other  application  of  heat,  processing  and 
drying.

In  some  cases,  processed  food  actually 
retains more nutrients than the unprocessed 
form. The best example is frozen vegetables, 

 

Chester 

111

which  are  harvested  and  frozen  immedi-
ately  after  collection,  whereas  fresh  veget-
ables may have been stored for several days 
before  purchase  or  use.  Even  with  unpro-
cessed  vegetables  though,  modern  storage 
and  transportation  techniques  can  help  to 
retain nutrients. An example of a potential 
health concern arising from food processing 
involves trans fatty acids (a group of unsat-
urated fatty acids). Vegetable oils are often 
hydrogenated  to  improve  their  oxidative 
stability and functional properties, as in the 
manufacture of margarine, and during this 
process  trans  fatty  acids  can  be  produced. 
These are metabolized in a similar manner 
to  ordinary  fatty  acids  after  ingestion,  and 
can  cause  an  increase  in  ‘bad’  cholesterol, 
although the general consensus in the UK is 
that  current  intakes  of  trans  fatty  acid  do 
not present a problem (Gooding, 1962).

Many new processing techniques have 
been developed in response to changing nu-
tritional  concepts  and  consumer  demand 
for less processed food. The objective is to 
produce high-quality safe foods that are con-
venient,  fresher  and  considered  more  nat-
ural.  The  nutritional  implications  of  some 
of  the  techniques  that  are  still  in  develop-
ment have yet to be established and will al-
most inevitably determine whether or not these 
techniques achieve commercial success (Umoh 
and Bassir, 1977).

Functional foods are the last refinement 
in  a  continuum  of  products  developed  to 
provide added value. One commonly used 
definition  of  a  functional  food  is  a  dietary 
ingredient that affects its host in a targeted 
manner  so  as  to  exert  positive  effects  that 
may include or justify certain health claims. 
Within  this  context,  there  is  increasing 
interest in probiotics and symbiotics. Probiot-
ics are substances, e.g. oligosaccharides, that 
are  not  digested  but  which  beneficially  af-
fect the host by selectively stimulating the 
growth of specific bacteria in the colon. It is 
now recognized that the composition of the 
bacterial population of the bowel is import-
ant for human health and can potentially be 
manipulated by the type of food eaten. The 
incorporation of live microorganisms (as pro-
biotics) into food such as yoghurts influences 
the bacterial population in the gut. A third 

approach,  the  use  of  symbiotics,  is  a  com-
bination of the above two approaches (Umoh 
and Bassir, 1977).

The use of genetic modification in food 
production is a relatively new process and 
has  many  potential  applications.  For  ex-
ample, a plant can be modified to resist dis-
eases, microbial attack or insect infestation, 
or to produce fruit with a better flavour and 
improved keeping qualities. Plants can also 
be  developed  to  resist  certain  herbicides 
that are applied to kill weeds; other possi-
bilities  include  development  for  drought 
 resistance  (very  important  in  developing 
countries)  and  resistance  to  fruit  damage. 
The use of genetic modification offers sub-
stantial potential benefits to the food indus-
try and consumers, but it is recognized that 
some  consumers  may  have  reservations 
about this new and unfamiliar technology. 
To  help  in  the  recognition  of  foods  that 
 contain genetically modified material, regu-
lations  have  recently  been  published  that 
 require all foods containing ingredients pro-
duced  from  genetically  modified  soya  or 
maize to be labelled unless neither protein 
nor DNA resulting from the genetic modifi-
cation is present in the food itself (van het 
Hof et al., 1999).

8.3.1  Processing

The dehydration of vegetables is one of the 
oldest forms of food preservation known to 
man. It involves the removal of moisture by 
sun  drying  or  mechanical  drying.  Apart 
from extending shelf life, drying aids in eas-
ier packaging and transportation due to the 
reduction in volume. The leaves of the ches-
ter plant are sun dried and used in African 
countries because of their otherwise limited 
shelf life; they are used in the preparation of 
soups. The demand for dehydrated food is 
rising due the focus on instant and conveni-
ence foods. (Gooding, 1962).

Dried vegetables can be produced by a 
variety of processes, which differ primarily 
in  the  type  of  drying  method  and  depend 
on  the  type  of  food  and  quality  required 
of  the  end  products.  Size  reduction  is  an 

112 

A.F. Alonge 

important  pretreatment  prior  to  drying 
(Ene-Obong and Obizoba, 1996). The pre- 
drying  treatment  involves  preparation  of 
the raw product, and includes product selec-
tion and sorting, and washing followed by 
size  reduction.

Sun  drying  is  a  conventional  method 
that  has  been  practised  for  centuries.  It  is 
the  cheapest  method  of  drying  for  perish-
able  food.  In  this  method,  the  food  is  dir-
ectly  exposed  to  sunlight  by  placing  it  on 
the floor, in yards and also on roof tops. Cas-
sava  leaves,  sweet  potato,  okra  and  other 
green edible leaves are also dried in the sun 
by farm families. In countries like Nigeria, 
blanching and salting is carried out before 
sun  drying.  Nutritive  quality,  storage  and 
palatability  are  the  key  consideration  dur-
ing  the  drying  of  any  foodstuff.  However, 
sun drying and shade drying result in loss 
of micronutrients (Umoh and Bassir, 1980). 
Chester leaves are shade dried and mechan-
ically dried after harvesting. They are then 
infused  in  water  in  different  proportions. 
Inyang  (2015)  has  reported  the  effect  of 
treatments on the mineral and vitamin con-
tent of the leaves.

The removal of moisture from a typical 
food product will follow a series of drying 
rates, as illustrated in Figs 8.2 and 8.3. The 
initial removal of moisture (AB in Figs 8.2 
and 8.3) occurs as the product and the water 
within the product experience a slight tem-
perature increase. Following the initial stages 

of  drying,  significant  reductions  in  moisture 
content  will  occur  at  a  constant  rate  (BC) 
and at a constant product temperature. The 
constant-rate drying period occurs with the 
product at the wet bulb temperature of the 
air. In most situations, the constant-rate dry-
ing  period  will  continue  until  the  critical 
moisture content (WC in Fig. 8.2) is reached. 
Below the critical moisture content, the rate 
of moisture removal decreases with time. The 
falling-rate drying period (CE, see Fig. 8.1) 
will follow.

The choice of drying method is based on 
economic considerations and on the quality 
and characteristics of the raw material. Some 
of  the  drying  methods  adopted  are  sun  or 
solar drying, stationary or batch drying pro-
cesses  (kiln,  tower  and  cabinet  driers)  and 
continuous  drying  (tunnel  drying,  continu-
ous belt trough drying, fluidized bed drying, 
explosion  puffing,  foam  mat  drying,  spray 
drying, drum and microwave-heated drying 
and  subatmospheric  dehydration,  viz.  vac-
uum shelf, vacuum belt, vacuum drum and 
freeze drying.

Sun drying is susceptible to the vagaries 
of weather, though it is much used (see Fig. 8.4). 
Certain fruits, such as prunes, grapes, dates, 
figs, apricots and pears are sun dried. These 
crops are processed in substantial quantities 
without  much  in  the  way  of  technical  aid. 
Sun-dried products do, however, have limited 
shelf  life  because  the  moisture  is  not  com-
pletely removed from the product.

)
h
/
2
m

t

/
r
e
a
w
g
k
(
 

 

t

e
a
r
 
g
n
y
r

i

D

C

B

WC

A

D

E

A

B

t

n
e

t

n
o
c
 

e
r
u

i

t
s
o
M

 

C

D

Free moisture (kg H2O/kg dry solid)

Drying time

Fig. 8.2.  Drying rate curve 1. A–B, initial removal of 
moisture; B–C, moisture content reduction at a 
constant rate; C–E, lower rate of drying towards 
end of drying process. WC, critical moisture 
content. From Singh and Heldman, 2001, p. 151.

Fig. 8.3.  Drying rate curve 2. A–B, initial removal 
of moisture; B–C, moisture content reduction at a 
constant rate; C–D, lower rate of drying towards 
end of drying process. From Singh and Heldman, 
2001, p. 151.

 

Chester 

113

Fig. 8.4.  Solar drying of chester leaves in a trough.

Mechanical  drying  involves  quicker 
and complete drying, though the capital in-
vestment is higher.

8.3.2  Value addition

Chester  leaves  are  harvested  and  processed 
for preparation of soup. During the produc-
tion season, they can be harvested, dried and 
stored  (Fig.  8.5).  Alonge  and  Essien  (2014) 
noted that the extent of moisture removal de-
pended on the temperature and humidity of 
the  drying  air.  Both  the  sun  drying  method 
and  the  oven  drying  method  were  investi-
gated and the products were compared with 
fresh  samples  to  ascertain  the  changes  that 
took place during drying of the leaves. It was 
concluded that the oven drying method was 
more effective, as the amount of nutrients in-
creases with drying time, although the fat and 
carbohydrate  content  both  decrease.  Hence, 
the  nutritive  value  and  keeping  quality  of 
chester leaves can be increased by drying.

8.4  Uses

prepared  using  these  staples  are  seen  as  in-
complete  if  a  good  amount  of  cooked  green 
leaves does not accompany them. As a result 
of the method of processing chester for preser-
vation, the nutritive value of the vegetable can 
be affected. For example, the period of time 
that leaves spread in the sun are left to dry are 
likely to affect their nutritive value. However, 
there is little or no information on the effect of 
drying of the vegetable for preservation before 
it is being used for preparing soups. Ajibesin 
et al. (2008) reported that the Efiks in south-
ern Nigeria use the leaves in vegetable soup 
and also to treat hypertension and abscesses.

8.4.1  General uses

Atama  (chester  in  the  Efik  local  dialect  of 
Nigeria)  has  for  several  hundreds  of  years 
been exploited by traditional herbalists for 
the treatment of various ailments, including 
typhoid  fever,  diarrhoea  and  candidiasis 
(Andy  et  al.,  2008).  Chester  plants  can  be 
used  in  various  forms  to  treat  various  dis-
eases and this qualifies it to be called a me-
dicinal plant (Andy et al., 2008).

Generally,  chester  is  consumed  as  cooked 
complement to major foodstuffs such as cas-
sava,  cocoyam,  guinea  corn,  maize,  millet, 
rice and plantain. In fact, most of the meals 

8.4.2  Pharmacological uses

Chester  has  a  characteristic  aroma  which 
could possibly be attributed to the presence of 

114 

A.F. Alonge 

 4.  A  decoction  of  chester  root  is  used  for 
the  treatment  of  general  diseases  and  a 
poultice  of  the  leaves  is  used  to  treat  skin 
rashes and head lice (Ebana et al., 1995).
 5.  The  stems  and  branchlets  are  used  as 
chewing sticks for dental hygiene by those 
who  have  mouth  infections  such  as  tooth 
and gum decay (Ebana et al., 1995).
 6.  The leaves are used for treatment of craw 
craw and head lice in children (Abo et al., 
2011).

Fig. 8.5.  Dried chester leaves.

terpenes  and  essential  oils  that  convey  its 
distinctive  taste  and  aroma,  and  also  con-
tribute  to  its  very  high  medicinal  value  as 
summarized below:

 1.  Oral enquiries of the indigenous people of 
Abak (in southern Nigeria) and herbalists re-
vealed that chester is used to cure stomach 
pain such as that caused by ulcers, when it is 
eaten  unprocessed.  It  is  also  reported  that 
when  burned,  ground,  dissolved  in  water 
and taken for few days, it is effective in the 
treatment of dysentery (Ebana et al., 1995).
 2.  The dry leaves are pounded, steeped in 
water and applied to rheumatic joints to re-
lieve pain (Ebana et al., 1995).
 3.  The ground dry leaves are rubbed on to 
the  forehead  for  the  treatment  of  migraine 
headache (Ebana et al., 1995).

8.5  Summary

Chester, also known as bush apple, is a very 
useful  leafy  plant.  It  is  a  shrub  that  is 
mostly found in Africa. It contains import-
ant  nutrients  such  as  carbohydrates,  pro-
teins  and  minerals.  It  is  consumed  as  a 
vegetable along with yams and other tubers 
in  African  countries.  Chester  leaves  are 
used as an ingredient in soups by families 
in  Nigeria.  The  leaves  have  a  short  shelf 
life  and  hence  are  sun  dried  for  use.  The 
effect  of  drying  on  the  nutritive  value  of 
was studied by Alonge and Essien (2013).
The nutritive value of the leaves increased 
on  drying.  The  leaves  have  medicinal 
properties and are used in the treatment of 
various ailments.

References

Abo, K.A., Lawal, I.O. and Ogunkanmi, A. (2011) Evaluation of extracts of Triclisia suboardata Oliv 
and Heinsia crinita (Afz) G. Taylor for antimicrobial activity against some clinical bacterial iso-
lates and fungi. African Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology 5, 125–131.

Ajibesin, K., Ekpo, B.A., Bala, D.N., Essien, E.E. and Adesanya, S.A. (2008) Ethnobotanical survey of 

 AkwaIbom State of Nigeria. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 115, 387–408.

Alonge, A.F. and Essien, M.B. (2014) Effect of drying method on quality of chester (Heinsia crinita). In: 
Proceedings of the 15th International Conference and 35th Annual General Meeting of the Niger-
ian  Institution  of  Agricultural  Engineers  (NIAE)  Held  at  the  Federal  University  of  Technology, 
Akure, Nigeria, 22nd–26th September, 2014. Conference Proceedings Vol. 35, Nigerian Institution 
of Agricultural Engineers (A Division of the Nigerian Society of Engineers), pp. 285–292. Website: 
www.niae.net  (accessed 13 January 2016).

Andy, I.E., Eja, M.E. and Mboto, C.I. (2008) An evaluation of the antimicrobial potency of Lasianthera 
africana (Beauv) and Heinsia crinata (G. Taylor) on Escherichia coli, Salmonella typhi, Staphylo-
coccus aureus and Candida albicans. Malaysian Journal of Microbiology 4(1) 25–29.

Bassir, O. and Umoh, I.B. (1975) The nutritive adequacy of some Nigerian peasant diets. Ecology of 

Food and Nutrition 2, 297–306.

Dye, W.B. (1956) Studies on Halogeton glomeratus. Weeds 4, 55–57.

 

Chester 

115

Ebana, R.U., Essien, A.T. and Ekpa, O.D. (1995) Nutritional and potential medicinal value of leaves of 

 Lasianthera africana and Heinsia crinata. Global Journal of Pure and Applied Sciences 1, 1–8.

Ene-Obong, H.N. and Obizoba, I.C. (1996) Effect of domestic processing on the cooking time, nutrients, 
antinutrients and in vitro protein digestibility of the African yam bean (Sphenostylis stenocarpa). 
Plant Foods for Human Nutrition 49, 43–52.

Etuk, E.U., Bassey, M.N., Umoh, U.O. and Inyang, E.G. (1998) Comparative nutritional studies on three 
local varieties of Heinsia crinita. Plant Varieties and Seeds [later International Journal of Plant 
Varieties and Seeds] 11, 151–158.

Eyo, E.S., Mohme, E. and Abel, H.S. (1983) Chemical composition and amino acid content of Gnetum 
africana, Heinsia crinata and Piper guineense. Nigerian Journal of Nutritional Sciences 4, 57–62.
Gooding, E.G.B. (1962) The storage behaviour of dehydrated foods. In: Hawthorn, J. and Leitch, J.M. 

(eds) Recent Advances in Food Science, Volume 2. Butterworths, London, pp. 22–38.

Hutchinson, J. (1973) The Families of Flowering Plants, 3rd edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 

UK, pp. 184–194.

Ifon, E.T. (1977) The nutrient composition of some Nigerian leafy green vegetables and physiological avail-

ability of their iron contents. PhD thesis, Department of Biochemistry, University of Ibadan, Ibadan.

Ifon, E.T. and Bassir, O. (1979) The nutritive value of some Nigerian leafy vegetables. Part 1: vitamin 

and mineral content. Food Chemistry 5, 263–267.

Inyang, U.E. (2015) Effect of traditional pre-culinary hot water infusion time on the micronutrients and 
health protecting phytochemicals in Heinsia crinita leaf. Journal of Food and Nutrition Sciences 
3, 191–195.

Jones, L.J., Juo, M.C.T., Kyle, P.E., Radding, S.B., Semrau, K.T. and Somogyi, L.P. (1979) Overview of the 
Environmental Control Measures and Problems in the Food Processing Industries. Document No. 
EPA-600/2-79-009,  US  Environmental  Protection  Agency,  Industrial  Environmental  Research 
Laboratory Cincinnati, Ohio.

Singh, R.P. and Heldman, D.R. (2001) Introduction to Food Engineering, 3rd edn. Academic Press, New York.
Tindall, H.D. (1983) Vegetables in the Tropics. McMillan Press, London.
Umoh, I.B. and Bassir, O. (1977) Nutrient changes in some traditional peasant foods during cooking II. 
Proximate, mineral composition, metabolizable energy and protein calories percent. West African 
Journal of Biological and Applied Chemistry 20, 19–26.

Umoh, I.B. and Bassir, O. (1980) Nutrient changes in some Nigerian traditional peasant foods during 

cooking III. Essential amino-acid composition. Nigerian Journal of Nutrition Science 1, 48–53.

van het Hof, K.H., Brouwer, I.A., West, C.E., Haddeman, E., Steegers-Theunissen, R.P., van DusselDorp, M., 
West Strate, J.A., Eskes, T.K. and Haut Vast, J.G. (1999) Bioavailability of lutein from vegetable is 5 
time higher than that of beta carotene. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 70, 261–268.

9  Coriander

 Maripillai Munusamy Pragalyaashree* and Venkatachalam Thirupathi

Agricultural Engineering College and Research Institute (AEC & RI), Tamil Nadu 

Agricultural University, Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore, India

Plants have been a rich source of medicines 
because they produce a host of bioactive 
molecules, most of which probably evolved 
as chemical defences against predation or 
infection.

(Cox and Balick, 1994, p. 82)

9.1  Botany

9.1.1 

Introduction

Coriander (Coriandrum sativum), is a deli-
cate culinary and medicinal branched herb 
belonging to the Apiaceae family (Fig. 9.1). 
The name ‘coriander’ was derived from the 
French  coriandre,  which  comes  from  the 
Latin coriandrum. It is thought to have been 
derived from the Greek word ‘Koris’, which 
means ‘bug’, which is believed to have been 
used  because  the  seeds  apparently  smell 
like bed bugs. It is known by several other 
names,  including  cilantro  (in  North  Amer-
ica), cilantrillo, Arab parsley, Chinese pars-
ley, Mexican parsley, Dhanya and Yuen sai, 
and Pak Chee. Cilantro is the Spanish word 
for  coriander  leaves,  and  these  are  much 
used in Mexican cuisine in North America.

Owing to its flavouring properties, the 
herb is used in food preparations, perfumes 
and cosmetics, and it has a high economic 
value. It is also listed as a medicinal plant 
because of its ability to cure many diseases. 
The essential oils extracted from coriander 
have antibacterial, antioxidant, antidiabetic, 
anticancerous and antimutagenic activities 
due  to  the  presence  of  various  chemical 
compounds,  viz.  geranyl  acetate,  linalool, 
dihydrocarvone, anethole, camphor, a-pinene, 
hellandrene,  linalyl  acetate,  limonene, 
p-cymene, decanal, etc.

9.1.2  History/origin

The medicinal importance of coriander was 
known to people over 3000 years ago. It is 
considered to have been one of the first cul-
tivated spices in the world and the people 
of Greece have used and cultivated corian-
der since the second millennium bc. Chad-
wick (1976) reported that the coriander plant 
was used in two forms, the seeds as a spice 
and the leaves as food flavouring, and this 
was  confirmed  by  archaeological  evidence 

*Corresponding author, e-mail: shreepragalyaa@gmail.com

116 

© CAB International 2016. Leafy Medicinal Herbs: Botany, Chemistry,  
Postharvest Technology and Uses (eds D.C.P. Ambrose et al.)

 

Coriander 

117

9.1.4  Morphology

The herb is soft and delicate and grows to a 
height of 50 cm. The shape of leaf is broad 
at the base and slender and feathery at the 
top. The leaves are compound simple and are 
arranged  in  alternate  pattern;  there  is  one 
leaf  per  node  along  the  stem.  The  edge  of 
the leaf blade has either lobes or both teeth 
and lobes.

9.2  Chemistry

9.2.1  Chemical composition

The aroma of coriander leaves is mainly due 
to  its  content  of  aldehyde  compounds  with 
6–10  carbon  atoms,  particularly  decyl  and 
nonyl aldehydes, and 2-decenoic acid, deca-
noic acid (also known as capric acid) and tet-
radecenoic acid. The quantity of volatile oil 
in the leaves is less than that of the fruit and 
it  contains  decyl  and  nonyl  aldehydes  and 
linalool  (Potter,  1996).  The  leaves  also  con-
tain 5% fat, 22% protein, vitamin C, sugars, 
coumarins  and  flavonoids  including  glyco-
sides and chlorogenic and caffeic acids.

9.2.2  Nutritional composition

Coriander  leaves  have  a  good  nutritional 
value. This herb has a high content of vita-
mins A, K and C, minerals such as iron, cal-
cium and magnesium, and more antioxidants 
than most fruits and vegetables. Data on the 
nutritional value of the leaves are presented 
in Table 9.1.

9.2.3  Phytochemistry

Coriander has long been regarded as one of 
the  world’s  important  essential  oil  plants 
(Lawrence,  1993).  It  is  suggested  that  the 
aroma of fresh herb oil is mainly due to ali-
phatic aldehydes (mainly C10–C16 aldehydes). 
Many  researchers  have  identified  several 
volatile compounds (alkenals, alkanals, alk-
enols,  and  alkanols)  from  the  vegetative 

Fig. 9.1.  Fresh coriander leaves.

of the period. Other evidence from the early 
Bronze  Age  at  Sitagroi  in  Macedonia  also 
proved the cultivation of the plant at that time. 
Zahary and Hopf (2000) mentioned that the 
crop grew wild over an area of the Near East 
and  in  southern  Europe.  It  was  clear  that 
coriander  was  cultivated  by  the  ancient 
Egyptians  from  1323  bc  to  add  to  wine  in 
order to increase intoxication. The Romans 
are credited with bringing the herb to northern 
Europe,  where  it  was  used  in  combination 
with cumin and vinegar to rub on to meat as 
a  preservative.  Coriander  is  native  to  re-
gions extending from southern Europe and 
North  Africa  to  south-western  Asia.  Early 
settlers  of  the  British  colonies  in  North 
America first cultivated coriander in 1670.

9.1.3  Location

Coriander originated from the Mediterranean 
countries but nowadays it is mostly grown 
and  used  in  Italy,  India,  Morocco,  Eastern 
Europe,  Latin  America,  Africa  and  South- 
east Asia.

118 

M.M. Pragalyaashree and V. Thirupathi 

Table 9.1.  Nutritional composition of coriander 
leaves. From various sources.

Constituent

Content/100 g

RDAa

Energy
Carbohydrates
Cholesterol
Dietary fibre
Protein
Total fat

Vitamins
Folates
Niacin
Pantothenic acid
Pyridoxine
Riboflavin
Thiamine
Vitamin A
Vitamin C
Vitamin E
Vitamin K
Electrolytes

Sodium
Potassium

Minerals

Calcium
Iron
Magnesium
Manganese
Phosphorus
Selenium
Zinc

Phytochemicals

a-Carotene
β Carotene
β-Cryptoxanthin
Lutein/zeaxanthin

23 kcal
3.67 g
0 mg
2.80 g
2.13 g
0.52 g

62 μg
1.114 mg
0.570 mg
0.149 mg
0.162 mg
0.067 mg
6748 IU
27 mg
2.50 mg
310 mcg

46 mg
521 mg

67 mg
1.77 mg
26 mg
0.426 mg
48 mg
0.9 mg
0.50 mg

36 μg
3930 μg
202 μg
865 μg

1%
3%
0%
6.5%
4%
2%

15.5%
7%
11%
11%
12%
5.5%
225%
45%
17%
258%

3%
11%

7%
22%
6.5%
18.5%
7%
2%
4.5%

–
–
–
–

aRecommended daily allowance.

organs of coriander and all of these are ex-
tracted by steam distillation or by the solvent 
extraction method. Among the many volatile 
compounds, (E)-2-decenal was identified as 
the most abundant in coriander leaves.

9.3  Postharvest Technology

Fresh coriander leaves are highly perishable 
produce with a very short shelf life under ambi-
ent conditions. As the need for fresh processed 
leaves has increased, growers and processors 
have continued to search for ways to enhance 

the shelf life of their produce so that it can 
withstand  the  conditions  of  the  shipping 
process, which may be accompanied by prob-
lems such as mechanical failure of the ship-
ping vehicles or storage facilities, and power 
failures.

The production of high-quality, conveni-
ent, processed coriander leaves poses unique 
challenges to food processors, which include 
the destruction of enzymes and substrates, 
loss  of  chlorophyll  and  formation  of  un-
wanted secondary metabolites. As a result, 
senescence  and  ‘off’  flavours  may  develop 
during respiration. Also, the exudates from 
the surface constitute a favourable medium 
for  bacterial  and  fungal  growth.  When  the 
material is handled, there are further oppor-
tunities  for  contamination  and  growth  by 
microflora, and yet more health hazards may 
occur.  Besides  these  problems,  the  leaves 
are highly perishable due to their high water 
content.  Hence,  it  is  essential  to  mitigate 
damage by proper handling and postharvest 
processing techniques. This section describes 
the various techniques used to improve the 
quality of the product and help to increase 
its  shelf  life,  and  also  to  add  value  by  the 
extraction of essential oil.

9.3.1  Processing

Drying

Drying is an important unit operation used 
to increase the shelf life of food materials. 
It  removes moisture that is responsible for 
microbial attack and poor shelf life. Coriander 
is  one  of  the  herbs  that  is  much  used  for 
 culinary purposes and has very little stor-
age life. The shelf life of such herbs can be 
enhanced  by  different  drying  techniques, 
and the dried leaves can be powdered  and 
 incorporated  into  food  and  nutraceutical 
formulations.

The retention of essential nutrients after 
dehydration by several techniques, such as 
direct  solar  drying,  shade  drying,  drying 
 using  an  electric  cabinet  and  pretreated 
shade drying, has been studied for different 
foods and varies from 25 to 90%. In general, 
the removal of moisture leads to substantial 

 

Coriander 

119

loss  in  nutrients  and  the  heat  that  is  used 
diminishes their aroma rapidly. Many drying 
methods are in vogue for the production of 
shelf-stable  products,  but  none  of  the  cur-
rent  methods  are  efficient  in  drying  herbs 
such as coriander.

Modern drying methods such as micro-
wave drying, refractance window and vacuum 
drying  methods  are  used  to  maximize  and 
retain the quality parameters such as texture, 
colour, flavour and nutrition (Sablani, 2006). 
Convective  drying  method  is  adopted  for 
many of the heat sensitive products. Several 
research works had proven that air tempera-
ture is the most important factor that affects 
the drying rate and quality.

Air drying and its effects on the charac-
teristics of coriander have been studied by 
various researchers (Pande et al., 2000; Ahmed 
et al., 2001; Kaur et al., 2006). Pande et al. 
(2000) reported that the drying of coriander 
leaves revealed that there was no constant 
rate  drying  and  exhibited  only  falling  rate 
period. The suitable drying temperature to 
get  quality  product  was  between  40–50°C. 
Overall, the results obtained indicated that 
as  aroma,  colour  and  medicinal  properties 
(all heat-sensitive properties) provide high 
market value to coriander leaves, to prevent 
the loss of these properties and to preserve 
them, drying should be done at a low tem-
perature for a longer period of time.

Studies by Shaw et al. (2005, 2007) com-
paring  microwave  drying  and  convective 
thin layer drying indicated that microwave 
drying helps to retain the colour and nutri-
tional  qualities  of  coriander  leaves  better 
than convective drying.

Packaging

Coriander is highly perishable and has a very 
short shelf life for several reasons, including 
the following:

 • 

 • 

It has a high water content, resulting in 
withering if water loss is excessive.
It  has  high  respiration  rates  compared 
with those of apples, oranges and pears.

 •  The leafy herbs are very delicate, which 
increases their susceptibility to damage 
and bruising.

Spoilage  of  coriander  also  occurs  as  a 

result of:

 •  mechanical damage during harvesting;
 •  handling damage;
 •  microbiological decay; and
 • 

loss of cellular integrity with a subsequent 
spread of cellular damage during transport 
due to improper packing technologies.

The above-mentioned problems should 
be mitigated by proper handling and posthar-
vest processing techniques. Modified atmos-
phere  packaging  is  one  of  the  techniques 
adopted to enhance the shelf life of corian-
der leaves.

modified atmosphere packaging (map).  MAP is 
the most commonly used technique for ex-
tending  the  shelf  life  of  highly  perishable 
commodities and effectively retards deteri-
oration  of  fruits  and  vegetables.  It  utilizes 
polymeric  packaging  films  with  selective 
permeability for O2, CO2 and water vapour 
to create a modified atmosphere around the 
packaged product resulting from the respir-
ation of the product and the permeability of 
the packaging material (Guevara et al., 2003). 
MAP is mainly applied to horticultural prod-
ucts, and the reduced O2 and increased CO2 
in  the  atmosphere  surrounding  the  fresh 
produce  has  several  positive  effects:  it  de-
creases the rate of respiration, ethylene pro-
duction  and  texture  losses,  but  improves 
pigment retention, delays ripening and sen-
escence, and reduces spoilage (Aguilera and 
Olivera,  2009).  Various  other  research  on 
MAP has reported that it is used to delay sen-
escence and decay, and maintains very good 
visual quality of the product for 18–22 days 
at  0°C,  12–14  days  at  5°C  and  7–8  days  at 
7.5°C, but only 4–5 days at 10°C. This is due to 
low temperature and high humidity storage.
In a study on controlled atmosphere stor-
age of coriander leaves, Loaiza and Cantwell 
(1997)  evaluated  the  respiration  rates  and 
quality  characteristics  of  freshly  harvested 
leaves at different temperatures, for different 
times and under different atmospheric com-
positions (controlled atmospheres). The sam-
ples were stored under two sets of conditions. 
In the first experiment, samples were stored 

120 

M.M. Pragalyaashree and V. Thirupathi 

and analysed for up to 21 days at 0, 5 and 
10°C  inside  glass  containers.  The  humidi-
fied  atmospheres  flowing  through  the  con-
tainers were air (21% O2), air containing 10 
or 20% CO2, 3% O2, and 3% O2 containing 
10  or  20%  CO2.  The  quality  of  the  stored 
products  was  evaluated  after  7,  14  and  21 
days. In the second experiment, the leaf sam-
ples were kept at 0, 5 and 7.5°C for 22 days 
in air or in air containing 5 or 9% O2. The 
stored samples were evaluated after 10, 14, 18 
and 22 days. The respiration rates of freshly 
harvested leaves were moderately high and 
the  ethylene  production  rates  low  at  5°C. 
Periodic evaluation of stored samples (kept 
in the dark at a range of temperatures in air 
or  controlled  atmospheres)  noted  visual 
quality, decay, aroma, off odour, colour and 
chlorophyll  content.  Leaves  stored  in  air 
at 0°C had good visual quality for 18 and 
22 days, while at 5 and 7.5°C, they maintained 
good quality up to 14 and 7 days, respect-
ively. An atmosphere of air plus 5 or 10% 
CO2 increased the shelf life of leaves stored 
at 7.5°C to about 14 days. Leaves stored in 
3% O2 plus CO2 were similar to those stored 
in air plus CO2. CO2-enriched atmospheres 
(9–19%)  caused  dark  lesions  after  18  days 
and 20% CO2 caused severe injury after 7 days. 
It  was  noted  that  visual  quality  could  be 
maintained for up to 22 days, but the aroma 
decreased  notably  after  14  days  of  storage 
irrespective  of  storage  conditions.  It  was 
concluded that controlled atmospheres with 
5–10% CO2 were beneficial in retaining col-
our and visual quality at 7.5°C, and that the 
best  postharvest  conditions  for  coriander 
leaves are low temperature and high humid-
ity storage in air, when the samples can be 
stored up to 14 days.

Research was done by Luo et al. (2004) 
on the effect of MAPs with different oxygen 
transmission rates (OTRs) on package atmos-
phere and on the quality and microbial safety 
of  coriander  leaves.  The  different  OTRs  of 
package  films  chosen  for  the  study  were 
3500, 6200 and 1700 ml/day/m2. It was found 
that an OTR rate of 3500 ml/day/m2 was equili-
brated by the third day of storage and then 
started maintaining the same O2 and CO2 con-
ditions (1.5–2.3 kPa and 3.6–4.1 kPa). High 
OTR (6200 ml/day/m2) packages equilibrated 
at a higher O2 pressure (3.6–5.6 kPa) and 

a lower CO2 (2.7–3.3 kPa) until the 12th day 
of storage. Freshly cut leaves had the high-
est  tissue  integrity  (lowest  electrolyte  leak-
age), with high visual scores, whereas sam-
ples  kept  at  1700  ml/day/m2  OTR  had 
atmospheres  with  less  O2  (0.02  kPa),  as  it 
was rapidly depleted, and higher CO2 (7.7–
9.0 kPa) from the 6th day of storage until the 
end  of  the  storage  period.  It  was  observed 
that  rapid  depletion  of  oxygen  resulted  in 
the development of off odour and the loss of 
visual quality and aroma during storage, so 
that the product became unacceptable. There 
was  also  an  increase  in  anaerobic  micro-
organisms on coriander leaves stored in this 
package atmosphere. Control samples stored 
in perforated bags (without MAP) exhibited 
loss of moisture and wilting, and slow growth 
of aerobic microorganisms in the packages. 
It  was  concluded  that  OTRs  of  3500  and 
6200 ml/day/m2 were effective in maintain-
ing  the  freshness  of  coriander  leaves  until 
the 12th day of storage, and that an OTR of 
1700 ml/day/m2 and perforated bags failed 
to maintain the colour, moisture and micro-
bial load of fresh cut leaves.

Pragalyaashree et al. (2013) conducted 
experiments to optimize the packaging ma-
terials and gas composition for enhancing the 
shelf life of coriander leaves by MAP. Three 
different  thicknesses  each  of  low-density 
polyethylene (LDPE) bags and polypropylene 
(PP) packaging materials were assessed for 
their permeability to O2 and CO2. The LDPE bag 
with a thickness of 152 μm recorded the low-
est permeability to oxygen (1067 ml/m2/day) 
and was selected for testing. The leaves were 
packaged  in  LDPE  bags  with  product  vol-
ume ratios of 1:11, 1:10 and 1:7 to assess the 
respiration rate under ambient and refriger-
ated conditions. The optimization of gas com-
position  for  MAP  was  done  by  calculating 
the respiration rate of the leaves using the 
Michaelis–Menten equation (Lakakul et al., 
1999).  The  bags  were  stored  under  ambi-
ent and refrigerated conditions for 30 days. 
A product volume ratio of 1:7 and gas com-
position  of  5%  O2,  5%  CO2  and  90%  N2 
were optimized based on the lowest respir-
ation  rate.  No  significance  differences  in 
quality were observed for characters such as 
physiological  weight 
loss,  chlorophyll, 
β-carotene  content  and  microbial  load  for 

 

Coriander 

121

the  optimized  parameters.  The  keeping 
quality of leaves stored under ambient con-
ditions had a shelf life of 4 days compared 
with  20  days  for  refrigerated  conditions. 
The MAP-stored leaves kept under refriger-
ated conditions had a longer shelf life than 
those stored under ambient conditions.

Other methods of preservation

preservation  of  leaves  using  uv-c  treatment.   
Green leafy vegetables have been preserved 
by a number of methods, but thermal process-
ing is a popular method that is being adopted 
by the food industries as it effectively inacti-
vates microorganisms and enhances shelf life. 
However, the thermal approach commonly 
results in a loss of nutrients and results in 
poor quality products. This can be prevented 
by using non-thermal technologies that rely 
on techniques other than heating or cooling 
operations.

Ultraviolet (UV) light processing is one 
of the advanced emerging non-thermal pro-
cessing methods and is currently undergo-
ing  intensive  scientific  and  developmental 
evaluation. UV light irradiation can be used 
to inactivate several organisms and has been 
used for many years in the pharmaceutical, 
electronic  and  aquaculture  industries  as  a 
disinfection medium. The UV light acts as a 
physical method for microbial disinfection. 
The effectiveness of UV-C light (short wave 
UV light of wavelength 200–400 nm) treat-
ment  depends  on  several  factors,  such  as 
the dosage applied, intensity, exposure period 
and the distance between the source of radi-
ation and the sample port.

Mahesh and Thirupathi (2007) studied 
the preservation of the quality of coriander 
leaves using UV-C radiation. Monochromatic 
UV  light  (254  nm)  was  supplied  by  low- 
pressure mercury vapour germicidal lamps. 
The UV treatment was done at four dosages 
(7.06, 8.00, 8.82 and 9.77 kJ/m2) achieved by 
varying the exposure time at constant inten-
sity.  The  treated  samples  were  packed  in 
polypropylene films and stored under ambi-
ent  or  refrigerated  conditions.  The  effect-
iveness  of  the  treatment  on  microorgan-
isms was determined by recording the mean 
log population of bacteria and fungi in the 
treated  samples  at  regular  intervals  during 

storage periods. The bacterial populations in 
the treated samples under ambient and refriger-
ated conditions were reduced from an initial 
value  of  3.11  to  1.45  mean  log  population 
(cfu/g) at 8.82 kJ/m2 after a period of 4 days, 
and to 0.75 mean log cfu/g after a period of 
10 days. The fungal population was reduced 
from 1.87 to 1.05 and 0.83 cfu/g after 4 and 
10 days under ambient and refrigerated con-
ditions, respectively. Changes in the nutri-
ent composition of the coriander leaves (Fe, 
vitamin C, protein and P content) were min-
imum under both ambient and refrigerated 
conditions at 8.82 kJ/m2 UV dosage.

preservation  of  leaves  using  1-methylcyclo-
propene  (mcp).  Demand  for  packaged  fresh 
cut culinary herbs has increased. The prep-
aration  of  fresh  cut  coriander  leaves  and 
maintenance  of  their  shelf  life  remains 
challenged owing to their high perishability 
(Loaiza  and  Cantwell,  1997).  The  quality 
of  fresh  coriander  leaves  quality  is  best 
maintained under low temperature and high- 
humidity storage (Cantwell and Reid, 1993). 
Luo  et  al.  (2004)  observed  that  modified 
 atmosphere  packages  with  oxygen  trans-
mission rates of 6.5 and 29.2 pmol/s/m2/Pa 
were  effective  in  maintaining  quality  of 
fresh- cut  coriander  leaves  but  that  the  mi-
crobial populations were high. Hence, it is 
necessary to reduce or inactivate the micro-
organisms present by washing before pack-
aging  is  done.  Chlorine  has  been  used  on 
produce  for  this  purpose  for  a  long  time 
(Wei  et  al.,  1985),  but  its  efficacy  in  redu-
cing  the  microbial  population  has  been 
found to be less than was originally thought 
(Zhang  and  Farber,  1996),  and  there  is  a 
need to develop safer and more effective anti-
microbial  alternatives.  Acidified  sodium 
chlorite  (ASC)  has  been  approved  as  an 
alternative  strong  antimicrobial  agent  and 
was effective against various microorganisms 
inoculated on to cantaloupes and asparagus 
(Park and Beuchat, 1999).

Various studies on 1-methylcyclopropene 
(1-MCP)  showed  that  it  delays  ethylene- 
induced senescence by delaying chlorophyll 
degradation but has no antimicrobial effect 
(Blankenship  and  Dole,  2003).  The  effects 
of  1-MCP  and  sanitizer  (acidified  sodium 
chlorite  or  sodium  hypochlorite),  either 

122 

M.M. Pragalyaashree and V. Thirupathi 

alone  or  in  combination,  indicated  that 
1-MCP delayed the decrease in O2 and accu-
mulation  of  CO2,  and  acidified  sodium 
chlorite  effectively  reduced  the  decay  of 
samples due to coliforms (Kim et al., 2007).

preservation  through  irradiation.  Fresh  cori-
ander  leaves  are  much  used  in  soups  and 
salsas,  and  have  resulted  in  outbreaks  of 
food-borne  illness  (CDHS,  2000).  The  FDA 
(2001a,b) reported high rates of Salmonella 
and Shigella on coriander leaves and, hence, 
it has become essential to remove such food-
borne  pathogens.  Various  studies  have 
 demonstrated that irradiation effectively in-
activated food-borne parasites, but the effect 
of the irradiation on the quality of the prod-
uct was not reported. However, later findings 
confirmed that irradiation treatment resulted 
in a reduction of aroma value (Fan and Sokorai, 
2002),  a  quality  that  usually  decreases  be-
fore there is an impact on visual quality. In 
their study, Fan and Sokorai (2002) inves-
tigated  the  effect  of  irradiation  on  volatile 
compounds of fresh coriander leaves by treat-
ing them with 0, 1, 2, or 3 kGy γ-radiation and 
then storing at 3°C up to 14 days. The vola-
tile  compounds  present  were  identified  us-
ing GC-MS (gas chromatography–mass spec-
trometry) 0, 3, 7 and 14 days after irradiation. 
The amount of volatile compounds in irradi-
ated leaves was less than that in non- irradiated 
samples  during  storage,  but  the  important 
volatile compounds (decanal and (E)-2-decenal) 
were not affected by irradiation in any con-
sistent  manner.  Based  on  these  results,  it 
was suggested that coriander leaves can be 
irradiated with up to 3 kGy γ-radiation with-
out  much  change  in  volatile  compounds. 
Thus, irradiation can be used for pathogen 
inactivation without a major loss of volatile 
compounds.

hydrodistillation  method.  This  method  is 
described as used by Bhuiyan et al. (2009). 
Well-grown fresh leaves were harvested and 
ground in a blender. They were then put into 
a  modified  Clevenger  apparatus  and  sub-
jected to hydrodistillation for 4 h. Moisture 
was removed from the collected oil by drying 
it  over  anhydrous  sodium  sulfate.  The  oil 
samples were then transferred to an airtight 
container and stored at 0°C. The samples were 
analysed using GC-MS (the electron impact 
ionization  method).  The  results  indicated 
that the oil contained 44 aromatic acids, with 
the major constituents decenoic acid (30.82%), 
(E)-11-tetradecenoic  acid  (13.4%),  capric 
acid  (12.7%),  undecyl  alcohol  (6.4%)  and 
tridecanoic acid (5.5%). The other constitu-
ents were present in small amounts only.

solvent  extraction  method.  Solvents  such 
as  ethanol,  petroleum  ether  and  water  can 
be used to extract essential oil from corian-
der  leaves.  In  a  study  by  Nirmala  et  al. 
(2013), the leaves were washed and dried in 
a  drier  with  a  good  air  circulation  system. 
The dried samples were subjected to drying 
in  a  hot  air  oven  at  60°C  for  3  days  and 
ground in a mechanical grinder to a coarse 
sample. Approximately 300 g of the sample 
was taken  for  extraction  using  the  Soxhlet 
apparatus.  Ethanol  was  used  as  a  solvent 
and  the  extraction  continued  for  24  h.  Si-
phoning of a colourless liquid from the ap-
paratus  indicated  completion  of  the  pro-
cess.  The  liquid  was  then  filtered  using 
sterilized  cotton  and  the  solvent  was  re-
moved by heating over a water bath to obtain 
a  crude  extract.  A  similar  procedure  was 
used to extract essential oil using petroleum 
ether  and  water.  The  process  was  carried 
out  at  room  temperature  and  the  oil  was 
stored under refrigerated conditions.

9.3.2  Value addition

Extraction of essential oil

9.4  Uses

9.4.1  Culinary uses

Essential oil is extracted from coriander leaves 
by two methods: hydrodistillation and solv-
ent extraction.

Fresh  coriander  leaves  and  seeds  are  used 
in all types of cuisine all over the world in 
many  food  preparations  They  are  used  to 

 

Coriander 

123

flavour  curries,  chutneys,  breads,  cakes, 
pickles, salsas, soups, salads and liqueurs. 
In Indian, Chinese and Thai dishes, and in 
Mexican cooking, chopped coriander leaves 
are used to garnish dishes.

Coriander leaves are often juiced with 
celery  and  apples  to  prepare  a  medicinal 
drink. They can also be added to smoothies, 
salsas, salads, guacamole, soups, pesto, to-
matoes, beans and vegetable dishes.

9.4.2  Pharmacological uses

 1.  Coriander  assists  digestion  by  stimulat-
ing  the  secretion  of  gastric  juices,  which 
eases colic and flatulence.
 2.  The  chemical  substances  derived  from 
coriander leaves have antibacterial activity 
against Salmonella choleraesuis.
 3.  The extract from coriander leaves is used as 
folk medicine for various purposes, such as to 
improve the appetite, to relieve flatulence and 
indigestion, to treat arthritis, rheumatism, sore 
muscles  and  diabetes,  and  as  an  anxiolytic 
and anthelmintic, etc.
 4.  The essential oil has antimicrobial effects.
 5.  Coriander  leaves  alleviate  irritations  in 
the intestines, probably because of their plen-
tiful magnesium, potassium and fibre content.
 6.  The regular consumption of coriander in-
creases immunity and also purifies the blood 
owing to the presence of magnesium, potas-
sium and fibre.

 7.  Coriander helps to stimulate insulin pro-
duction and to prevent diabetes.
 8.  Coriander  is  used  for  digestive  system 
problems, including stomach upset, loss of 
appetite,  hernia,  nausea,  diarrhoea,  bowel 
spasms and intestinal gas.
 9.  Coriander  is  also  used  to  treat  measles, 
haemorrhoids,  toothache,  worms  and  joint 
pain, as well as infections caused by bacteria 
and fungi.
 10.  Different parts of the herb contain vari-
ous amounts of phenolic compounds and thus 
have  different  antioxidant  activities.  The 
phenolic content and antioxidant activity of 
leaf  extracts  is  higher  than  those  of  stem 
extracts (Juhaimi and Ghafoor, 2011).

9.5  Summary

Coriander is an important culinary herb cul-
tivated all over the world. It is economically 
important for its use as a flavouring agent in 
food products, perfumes and cosmetics. The 
herb is also credited with medicinal proper-
ties and the essential oil extracted from the 
leaves  is  used  for  curing  many  ailments. 
The delicate nature of coriander leaves does 
not allow it to be stored for a long period. 
Much research has been done on enhancing 
the shelf life of the leaves after harvesting, 
and a lot more work is needed to exploit the 
usage of the herb.

References

Aguilera, R. and Olivera, J.C. (2009) Review of design engineering methods and applications of active 

and modified atmosphere packaging systems. Food Engineering Reviews 1, 66–83.

Ahmed, J., Shivhare, U.S. and Singh, G. (2001) Drying characteristics and product quality of coriander 

leaves. Food and Bioproducts Processing 79, 103–106.

Bhuiyan, M.N.I., Begum, J. and Sultana, M. (2009) Chemical composition of leaf and seed essential oil 

of Coriandrum sativum L. from Bangladesh. Bangladesh Journal of Pharmacology 4, 150–153.

Blankenship, S.M. and Dole, J.M. (2003) 1-Methylycyclopropene: a review. Postharvest Biology and 

Technology 28, 1–25.

Cantwell, M. and Reid, M.S. (1993) Postharvest physiology and handling of fresh culinary herbs. Jour-

nal of Herbs, Spices and Medicinal Plants 1, 93–127.

Chadwick, J. (1976) The Mycenaean World. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
CDHS (2000) Foodborne Disease Outbreaks Reported in California (1998). California Department of 

Health Services, Berkeley, California.

124 

M.M. Pragalyaashree and V. Thirupathi 

Cox, P.A. and Balick, M.J. (1994) The ethnobotanical approach to drug discovery. Scientific American 

270(6), 82–87.

Fan, X. and Sokorai, K.J.B. (2002) Changes in volatile compounds of g-irradiated fresh cilantro leaves 

during cold storage. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 50, 7622–7626.

FDA (2001a) FDA Survey of Imported Fresh Produce FY 1999, Field Assignment. US Food and Drug 
Administration,  Washington,  DC.  Available  at:  www.fda.gov/Food/GuidanceRegulation/Guidance 
DocumentsRegulatoryInformation/ProducePlantProducts/ucm118891.htm  http://vm.cfsan.fda.gov/_
dms/prodsurv.html (accessed 14 January 2016).

FDA (2001b) Survey of Domestic Fresh Produce: Interim Results, (June 30, 2001). US Food and Drug 
Administration,  Washington,  DC.  Available  at:  http://www.fda.gov/Food/GuidanceRegulation/
GuidanceDocumentsRegulatoryInformation/ProducePlantProducts/ucm118825.htm  (accessed  14 
January 2016).

Guevara, J.C., Yahia, E.M., Brito de la Fuente, E. and Biserka, S.P. (2003) Effects of elevated concentrations 
of CO2 in modified atmosphere packaging on the quality of prickly pear cactus stems (Opuntia 
spp.). Postharvest Biological Technology 29, 167–176.

Juhaimi, F.A and Ghafoor, K. (2011) Total phenols and antioxidant activities of leaf and stem extract from 

coriander, mint and parsley grown in Saudi Arabia. Pakistan Journal of Botany 43, 2235–2237.

Kaur, P., Kumar, A., Arora, S. and Ghuman, B.S. (2006) Quality of dried coriander leaves as affected by 

pretreatments and method of drying. European Food Research and Technology 223, 189–194.

Lakakul, R., Beaudry, R.M. and Hernandez, R.J. (1999) Modeling respiration of apple slices in modified- 

atmosphere packages. Journal of Food Science 64, 105–110.

Lawrence, B.M. (1993) A planning scheme to evaluate new aromatic plants for the flavor and fragrance 

industries. In: Janick, J. and Simon, J.E. (eds) New Crops. Wiley, New York, pp. 620–627.

Loaiza, J. and Cantwell, M. (1997) Postharvest physiology and quality of cilantro (Coriandrum sativum L.). 

HortScience 32, 104–107.

Luo, Y., McEvoy, J.L., Wachtel, M.R., Kim, J.G. and Huang, Y. (2004) Package atmosphere affects post 

harvest biology and quality of fresh cut cilantro leaves. HortScience 39, 567–570.

Mahesh, N. and Thirupathi, V. (2007) Studies on preservation of green leafy vegetables by UV-C treatment. 
M. Tech thesis, Department of Food and Agricultural Process Engineering, Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University, Coimbatore, India.

Nirmala, P., Sen, S.K., Karim, M.F.B., Hassan, N. and Faruque, A. (2013) Phytochemical and biological 
investigation of Coriandrum sativum (Cilantro) leaves. International Journal of Innovative Pharma-
ceutical Sciences and Research 1(1), 170–184.

Pande, V.K., Sonune, A.V. and Philip, S.K. (2000) Solar drying of coriander and methi leaves. Journal 

of Food Science and Technology 37, 592–595.

Park, C.M. and Beuchat, L.R. (1999) Evaluation of sanitizers for killing Escherichia coli O157:H7, Salmon-
ella and naturally occurring microorganisms on cantaloupes, honeydew melons, and asparagus. 
Dairy, Food and Environmental Sanitation 19, 842–847.

Potter, T.L. (1996) Essential oil composition of cilantro. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 44, 

1824–1826.

Pragalyaashree, M.M., Thirupathi, V., Kasthuri, R. and Raj Kumar, P. (2013) Enhancing the shelf life of 
culinary herbs by modified atmosphere packaging. The Madras Agricultural Journal 100, 612–618.
Sablani, S.S. (2006) Drying of fruits and vegetables: retention of nutritional/functional quality. Drying Tech-

nology 24, 123–135.

Shaw, M., Meda, V., Tabil, L. Jr and Leduc, P. (2005) Development and Trends in Drying of Herbs and 
Specialty Crops in Western Canada. Written for presentation at the CSAE/SCGR 2005 Meeting Winni-
peg, Manitoba, June 26–29, 2005. CSAE/SCGR Paper No. 05-030, Canadian Society for Engineer-
ing  in  Agricultural,  Food,  and  Biological  Systems,  Winnipeg,  Manitoba,  Canada.  Available  at: 
http://www.csbe-scgab.ca/docs/meetings/2005/05-030.pdf (accessed 14 January 2016).

Shaw, M., Meda, V., Tabil, L. Jr and Opoku, A. (2007) Drying and color characteristics of coriander fo-
liage using convective thin layer and microwave drying. Journal of Microwave Power and Electro-
magnetic Energy 41(2), 56–65.

Wei, C.I., Cook, D.L. and Kirk, J.R. (1985) Use of chlorine compounds in the food industry. Food Technol-

ogy 39, 107–115.

Zahary, D. and Hopf, M. (2000) Domestication of Plants in the Old World, 3rd edn. Oxford University 

Press, Oxford, UK.

Zhang, H. and Farber, J.M. (1996) The effects of various disinfectants against Listeria monocytogenes 

on fresh-cut vegetables. Food Microbiology 13, 311–321.

10  Curry Leaf Plant

 Dawn C.P. Ambrose*

ICAR – Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering,  

Regional Centre, Coimbatore, India

10.1  Botany

10.1.1 

Introduction

Indian  cuisine  is  characterized  by  flavour-
ing with many spices that also have medi-
cinal properties. One of the leafy medicinal 
crops used as a spice is the curry leaf plant. 
Its  botanical  name  is  Murraya  koenigii 
Spreng. and it belongs to the family Rutace-
ae. The leaves are widely used as a flavour-
ing in the recipes of southern India, where 
the  herb  is  grown  as  a  homestead  garden 
crop  (Charles,  2013).  Curry  leaves  are  also 
widely  used  for  food  flavouring  in  Sri 
Lanka.  They  have  a  stimulatory  effect  on 
the  tongue  and  a  peculiar  aroma.  Curry 
leaves  are  used  in  a  manner  similar  to  bay 
leaf  in  culinary  preparations.  Apart  from 
their  use  in  food  preparations,  the  leaves 
have  many  health  benefits,  and  in  India 
they are one of the ingredients of Ayurvedic 
formulations. The leaves taste pungent, bit-
ter and lightly acidic, and they retain their 
flavour and other qualities even after drying 
(Sinha et al., 2012). The various medicinal 
properties  of  the  species  that  have  been 
 reported  and  the  migration  of  users  across 
the  globe  have  created  a  demand  for  this 

*Corresponding author, e-mail: dawncp@yahoo.com

medicinal crop. India produces curry leaves 
for both internal and external consumption, 
and is the leading exporter of the leaves in 
the world. The shelf life of the leaves can be 
extended by various processing techniques.
Derived  from  the  Tamil  word  kari, 
meaning soup or spicy sauce, curry leaves 
are  widely  known  in  India  as  karipatta 
(Charles, 2013). They are also known by nu-
merous  vernacular  names  in  India  and  in 
other countries. Some of these are listed in 
Table 10.1.

10.1.2  History

The curry leaf is mentioned in Tamil literature 
dating back as far as the 1st to 4th centuries 
ad as a flavouring agent for vegetables. It is 
also mentioned in the Kannada language a 
few centuries later.

10.1.3  Location

The curry plant is a native of India. It is a 
forest  crop  found  in  the  Himalayas  in  the 
Indian  subcontinent.  In  India,  the  plant  is 

© CAB International 2016. Leafy Medicinal Herbs: Botany, Chemistry, 
Postharvest Technology and Uses (eds D.C.P. Ambrose et al.) 

125

126 

D.C.P. Ambrose 

Table 10.1.  Vernacular names of curry leaves in 
different languages. From the Spices Board, India.

Indian languages

Assamese
Bengali
Hindi

Gujarati
Kannada
Malayalam
Marathi

Oriya
Punjabi
Sanskrit
Tamil
Telugu

Bisharhari, narsinghs
Barsanga, kariphulli
Bareanga, curry or kurry patta, 

gandhela, kathnim, mitha neem

Goranimb, kadhilimbdo
Karibevue
Karriveppilei
Gandla, jhirang, karhinimb, 

poospala

Barsan, basango, bhuraunga
Curry patta
Krishna nimba
Karivempu, karuveppilei
Karepaku

Other languages

Chinese
Dutch
English
French
German
Spanish

Ga lei yihp
Kerriebladeren
Curry leaves
Feuilles de cari
Curryblatter
Hoja

found in West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh and 
in  the  southern  and  south-western  states, 
namely  Maharashtra,  Tamil  Nadu,  Kerala 
and  Andhra  Pradesh.  The  plant  originated 
in the tarai region of Uttar Pradesh, India, it 
is currently grown in Myanmar, Sri Lanka, 
China,  Australia  and  the  Pacific  Islands. 
The  curry  plant  reached  Malaysia,  South 
Africa  and  Réunion  Island  with  south  In-
dian  immigrants.  There  are  recent  reports 
that  it  is  being  grown  in  Central  African 
countries.  The  curry  plant  is  an  emerging 
commercial crop (Fig. 10.1) owing to its de-
mand in the international market.

Fig. 10.1.  Curry leaf plant.

which  are  white  in  colour.  The  ripened 
fruits are of dark purple colour and ovoid, 
and give rise to dark green seeds.

Cultivars

Generally. the curry leaf plant is cultivated 
in  the  kitchen  garden,  but  in  south  India, 
especially in Tamil Nadu and Karnataka, it 
is  grown  as  a  cash  crop.  ‘Senkaambu’  is  a 
local  cultivar  grown  in  different  parts  of 
Tamil  Nadu,  especially  in  the  Karamadai 
tract of Coimbatore District. The petiole is 
purplish  red  in  colour.  The  leaves  have  a 
good aroma and flavour due to their high oil 
content. At the Department of Horticulture 
of  the  University  of  Agricultural  Sciences 
at  Dharwad  in  Karnataka,  two  genetically 
distinct cultivars, viz. ‘DWD 1’ and ‘DWD 2’ 
have been identified and being multiplied 
(Spice India, 2003). The seeds are used for 
propagation.

10.1.4  Morphology

10.2  Chemistry

10.2.1  Chemical composition

The  curry  plant  is  a  strong-smelling  shrub 
or small tree and has leaves that are pinnate 
and about 15–30 cm long, with 9–27 alter-
nate  leaflets  on  a  slender  stalk;  these  are 
small,  pubescent  or  glabrous,  obliquely 
ovate, elliptic, lanceolate or rhomboid, and 
crenulate.  On  an  average,  a  tree  can  yield 
100 kg of leaves a year. The plant has an in-
florescence  of  scented  bisexual  flowers, 

Curry leaves contain volatile oils which are 
responsible for their aroma. They are a rich 
source of b-carotene and are known to pro-
mote  hair  growth  and  also  to  aid  in  good 
 vision.  The  leaves  also  contain  proteins, 
carbohydrates, fibre, minerals, etc. Table 10.2 
presents data on the major nutrients found 
in fresh curry leaves.

 

Curry Leaf Plant 

127

Table 10.2.  Composition of curry leaves. From the 
Spices Board, India.

Constituent

Energy
Carbohydrates
Fat
Fibre
Minerals
Moisture
Protein
Vitamins

Carotene
Thiamine
Riboflavin
Niacin
Folic acid (free)
Folic acid (total)
Vitamin C

Minerals/Elements

Calcium
Chlorine
Chromium
Copper
Iron
Magnesium
Manganese
Phosphorus
Sulfur
Zinc

Phytochemicals

Oxalic acid
Phytin phosphorus

Content/100 g

108.0 kcal
18.7 g
1.0 g
6.4 g
4.0 g
63.8 g
6.1 g

7560.0 μg
0.8 mg
0.21 mg
2.3 mg
23.5 μg
93.9 μg
4.0 mg

830.0 mg
198.0 mg

0.006 mg
0.10 mg
0.93 mg
44.0 mg
0.15 mg
57.0 mg
81.0 mg
0.20 mg

132.0 mg
35.0 mg

The  chemical  composition  of  green 
(fresh) curry leaves at three stages of matur-
ity,  namely,  tender,  medium  mature  and 
mature  as  measured  at  the  Central  Food 
Technological Research Institute (CFTRI) of 
the Indian Council of Scientific and Indus-
trial Research (CSIR) was as (expressed on a 
moisture free basis): protein, 5.44, 6.44 and 
7.19%;  fat,  3.3,  4.74  and  6.15%;  sugars, 
14.9, 17.9 and 18.9%; starch, 11.4, 14.2 and 
14.6%; crude fibre, 6.0, 6.2 and 6.2%; vola-
tile oil, 0.82, 0.55 and 0.48%; and total ash, 
12.54, 12.7 and 13.1%) (Pruthi, 2001).

10.2.2  Phytochemistry

The screening of various curry leaf extracts 
for phytochemicals showed that they contain 

flavonoids, alkaloids, sterols, etc. The leaves 
have been found to have anthelmintic and 
anti-inflammatory properties, among others. 
The leaf extracts yield 2–5% volatile oil and 
are  rich  in  carbazole  alkaloids,  including 
murrayastine, murrayaline, pyrayafoline and 
others. The major compounds responsible for 
the aroma and flavour of curry leaves are 
pinene, sabinene, caryophyllene, cadinol and 
cadinene. The leaves are also a rich source of 
calcium, but owing to the presence of oxalic 
acid in high concentration (total oxalates, 
1.35%; soluble oxalates, 1.15%), its nutritional 
availability is affected. Tachibana et al. (2001) 
isolated  8,10¢-{3,3¢,11,  11¢- tetrahydro-9,9¢ dihy-
droxy-3,3¢,5,8¢-tetra  methyl-3,3¢-bis (4-methyl-3- 
pentenyl)}bis  pyrano  (3,2  a)  carbazole  from 
the  leaf  extract  together  with  koenimbine, 
O-methyl-murrayamine,  O-methyl- mahanine, 
isomahanine and bismahanine, and bispyraya-
foline.  Jain  et  al.  (2012)  have  reported  the 
isolation of glycozoline, 1-formyl- 3-methoxy-
6-methyl  carbazole  and  6,7-    dimethoxy- 1-
hydroxy-3-methyl  carbazole  from  dried 
leaves. The aerial parts of the plant are also 
reported to contain murrayanine and 8,8¢ bis 
koenigine.

10.3  Postharvest Technology

10.3.1  Processing

Curry leaves can be processed in both fresh 
and  dried  form.  Although  the  leaves  are 
available  throughout  the  year,  they  are 
highly perishable and cannot be kept fresh 
for more than a day. There is a need to in-
crease research on postharvest handling in 
view of the growing global demand for the 
leaves. To enable cheaper shipment to other 
countries, which will play a pivotal role in 
global marketing, simpler techniques for ex-
tending  the  shelf  life  during  transport  are 
needed. There is a potential for increasing 
demand for the export of leafy spices from 
India if a suitable method is evolved for dry-
ing  them  while  retaining  their  flavour 
(Omanakutty Amma et al., 1984). The huge 
demand in India and abroad has made curry 
leaves a commodity of immense trade value, 

128 

D.C.P. Ambrose 

and both proper cultivation and postharvest 
management  practices  for  this  commer-
cially important plant have to be developed 
to  reach  maximum  returns  (Lathan  Kumar 
et al., 2003).

Stripping

Stripping of leaves is a major operation that 
is involved in both the wet and dry methods 
of  processing,  and  aids  in  the  handling  of 
large  volumes  of  leaves;  it  also  promotes 
quicker  and  uniform  drying  of  the  leaves. 
Presently,  leaf  stripping  before  further  pro-
cessing  done  by  hand,  which  is  laborious 
and  time-consuming.  It  is  also  unhygienic 
and there is every possible risk of contamin-
ation during handling. Furthermore, as both 
the fresh leaves and the powdered form (ma-
sala) are exported, there is also a possibility 
of  contamination  being  carried  over  to  the 
processed product. A machine for stripping 
curry leaves has been developed and evalu-
ated. The leaf stalks are fed into the machine 
via a nylon plate which is fitted with slots 
that are placed radially from the periphery 
of the centre hole; these enable the petiole to 
pass through the plate, and as a result of the 
to-and-fro motion of the plate, the leaves are 
stripped from the stalks. The stripped leaves 
are  collected  at  the  bottom  of  the  machine 
and the stalks are removed through a separ-
ate  outlet.  The  capacity  of  the  machine  is 
about  40–50  kg/h,  and  the  stripping  effi-
ciency is about 90–95% (Naik et al., 2013).

Pre-packaging

Food products undergo numerous physical, 
chemical  and  microbiological  changes  dur-
ing storage. Their stability is a function of the 
changes  occurring  in  various  constituents, 
such  as  proteins,  lipids,  carbohydrates  and 
water, as a result of environmental and pro-
cessing factors (exposure to light, moisture, 
temperature, etc.). Any protective coating or 
barrier  provided  during  processing,  storage 
and handling not only retards deterioration 
of  food,  but  may  also  enhance  its  quality. 
Suitable  packaging  can  slow  the  deterior-
ation rate and also may extend product shelf 
life.  A  variety  of  packages  and  approaches 

have been used to provide desirable effects. 
Examples  of  these  include  incorporating 
scavengers  for  removing  moisture,  and  the 
use of gases and flavour-imparting or scaven-
ging chemicals. These agents may be physic-
ally incorporated into the packaging mater-
ial,  or  placed  on  or  between  the  packaging 
and the food. Such approaches, designed to 
perform some desirable function other than 
providing  an  inert  barrier,  are  called  active 
packaging,  interactive  packaging  and  smart 
packaging.  The  use  of  plastics  in  the  pack-
aging of foods has been increasing at an ac-
celerated rate. The reason for this is the re-
duction  in  the  cost  due  to  technological 
innovations  and  the  inherent  properties  of 
plastic  films,  which  make  them  very  well 
suited  to  food  packaging.  Active  packaging 
technology is a relatively novel concept de-
signed  to  provide  interactions  between  the 
food and packaging material, while sustain-
ing  the  microenvironment  within  for  ex-
tended  shelf  life  of  good  quality  and  with 
microbial safety (King, 2006). The marketing 
of  perishable  commodities  often  requires 
some  storage  to  balance  day-to-day  fluctu-
ations between product harvesting and sale, 
and also long storage to extend marketing be-
yond  the  end  of  harvest  season.  Among 
horticultural  products,  leafy  vegetables  are 
ones  that  spoil  rapidly,  mainly  because  of 
leaf senescence due to physiological and bio-
chemical changes. The most obvious symp-
toms of this are loss of fresh weight, drying, 
shrivelling,  flavour  changes  and  losses  in 
chlorophyll, ascorbic acid and protein con-
tent (Halevy and Mayak, 1981).

A  study  on  the  pre-packaging  of  fresh 
curry  leaves  in  different  packaging  mater-
ials,  followed  by  storage  under  ambient 
(30 ± 2°C) and refrigerated (5 ± 1°C) conditions 
demonstrated that 20 μm thick polypropyl-
ene  bags  with  a  0.1%  vent  area  of  5  mm 
diameter could keep curry leaves fresh for  
4 days under ambient storage; they were also 
suitable for sale in retail outlets. Under re-
frigerated conditions, samples kept well for 
16 days in a 75 μm thick polyethylene bag 
(Ambrose  et  al.,  2014).  Ambrose  and  Naik 
(2007)  reported  that  self-help  groups  have 
been  trained  and  encouraged  to  pre-pack 
curry leaves for retail outlets.

 

Curry Leaf Plant 

129

Drying

Curry leaves can be stored for a long time by 
removing their moisture, and several stud-
ies  have  been  conducted  on  the  drying  of 
the leaves, which are then both used in the 
masala industries and exported. Studies on 
the  drying  of  curry  leaves  in  cross-flow, 
through-flow  and  vacuum  dryers  showed 
that the vacuum shelf-dried product had a 
better green colour than the other products 
(Prakash and Natarajan, 1974). Drying under 
controlled  conditions  also  gave  a  superior 
quality product compared with natural dry-
ing.  Organoleptic  analysis  of  the  powder 
showed that though the characteristic green 
colour  was  lacking  in  the  naturally  dried 
product, the products from cross-flow dry-
ing and oven drying were superior (Omana-
kutty Amma et al., 1984). In another study, 
curry  leaves  were  dried  under  sun  and 
shade in the summer and in winter months. 
The drying time was longer in the winter 
than  in  the  summer  because  of  the  diffe-
rence  in  solar  intensity.  The  results  were 
compared with those from the herbal dryer 
of the CSIR’s Central Research Institute for 
Dryland  Agriculture  (CRIDA),  and  it  was 
found  that  the  drying  time  was  less  than 
with sun and shade drying, and that leaf col-
our was retained (Pratiba et al., 1998).

In a different study, the chemical com-
position  of  dehydrated  curry  leaves  was 
analysed  and  they  were  incorporated  into 
various products. The organoleptic and nu-
tritive values of the prepared products were 
analysed and it was found that the calcium, 
iron and b-carotene content of the prepared 
products  increased  significantly  as  the 
amounts of incorporation increased. Hence, 
the nutrient content of different food prod-
ucts  could  be  improved  by  incorporating 
dried  curry  leaves  (Khatoon  et  al.,  2011). 
The microwave drying of curry leaves also 
yields a product with high lutein content.

The  drying  of  curry  leaves  in  a  fluid-
ized bed dryer at 45ºC at an air velocity of 
4 m/s under laboratory conditions resulted 
in a good-quality product with better retention 
of  colour  and  flavour  than  drying  at  other 
temperatures  and  air  velocities  (Ambrose 
and  Naik,  2014).  Based  on  this  laboratory 

study, a forced flow type dryer of 50 kg/
batch capacity has been developed for curry 
leaf  drying.  The  dryer  consists  of  a  drying 
chamber, a plenum chamber, a blower and a 
stirrer with stainless steel paddles operated 
by  a  hand  wheel  for  intermittent  stirring 
during drying (see Fig. 10.2). It takes 6 h to 
dry 50 kg curry leaves from an initial mois-
ture  content  of  65%  (wet  basis,  w.b.)  to  a 
final moisture content of 5% (w.b).

Radiation treatment

Radiation  processing  offers  a  very  effective 
and  safe  alternative  for  disinfestation  and 
microbial  decontamination  of  spices  and 
herbs. It is a cold process, sometimes also re-
ferred to as cold pasteurization, therefore it 
does not affect the delicate aroma and flavour 
compounds  in  spices.  Radiation  processing 
can  be  carried  out  on  prepacked  spices 
without  running  the  risk  of  post-treatment 
contamination. The process is very effective 
compared with fumigation and does not leave 
any  harmful  residues  on  spices  (Sharma, 
2006).  Radiation  processing  involves  con-
trolled application of the energy of ionizing 
radiations such as a-rays, X-rays and acceler-
ated  electrons  to  food  commodities  includ-
ing spices. It can be used as a chemical-free 
technology and an alternative when conven-
tional technologies are found to be inadequate. 

Fig. 10.2.  Curry leaf dryer.

130 

D.C.P. Ambrose 

The benefits of the technique are mainly be-
cause the process is heat free and the ioniz-
ing  radiation  has  high  penetrating  power. 
Being a cold process, the technology is par-
ticularly appropriate for spices that are val-
ued for their delicate aroma and flavour con-
stituents.  The  irradiation  of  curry  leaves 
prior  to  export  is  a  possible  technique  for 
controlling pest infestation.

by  various  methods  from  curry  leaves  ori-
ginating  from  various  agroclimatic  condi-
tions  and  geographical  areas.  Fresh  leaves 
subjected to steam distillation have been re-
ported to yield as much as 2.5% volatile oil 
which  is  light  yellow  in  colour  and  aro-
matic  with  a  spicy  note  (Supriya,  2004); 
lower contents have also been reported.

Extraction of essential oils

Curry leaves contain volatile oils which can be 
extracted using different extraction methods. 
There are several methods employed in the 
extraction  of  essential  oils  from  herbs  and 
spices,  including  steam  distillation,  hydro-
distillation and solvent extraction.

Steam  distillation  is  commonly  used 
to  extract  essential  oil  from  aromatic  and 
medicinal  crops.  Heat-intolerant  materials 
such as resins and oils are prone to be lost at 
higher boiling temperatures, and are not sol-
uble in water. In steam distillation, the com-
pounds are distilled at a temperature lower 
than  the  boiling  point  of  the  ingredients, 
which  in  essential  oils  is  >200°C.  These 
components are volatized at a temperature 
near to 100°C at atmospheric pressure when 
exposed to steam.

Solvent  extraction  is  another  method 
employed in the extraction of essential oils 
from  plant  sources.  The  process  involves 
dissolving  the  extractable  material  (which 
is  composed  of  aromatic  compounds  and 
waxes)  in  the  solvent.  The  solvent  can  be 
reused by distilling the extract. The portion 
remaining after distillation is solid. This is 
further processed by warming and the add-
ition  of  ethyl  alcohol,  which  separates  the 
aromatic molecules (essential oil) from the 
wax  as  they  are  more  soluble  in  alcohol. 
The essential oil obtained by this extraction 
can be used to impart an aroma like that of 
fresh  curry  leaves  and  can  be  used  when 
fresh curry leaf is not available. The chem-
ical  composition  of  the  essential  oils  is 
tested by chromatographic methods.

Jain  et  al.  (2012)  review  results  from 
some of the studies that have been carried out 
on the composition of essential oils prepared 

10.3.2  Value addition

Curry  leaves  can  be  processed  to  value- 
added products in the form of powder, essen-
tial oils, etc. which find use in food applica-
tions. Apart from the food uses, the essential 
oils are used in soap making, lotions, massage 
oils, diffusers, pot pourri, scent, air fresheners, 
body fragrances, perfume oils, aromatherapy 
products,  bath  oils,  towel  scenting  prod-
ucts, incense, facial steams, hair treatments, 
and at spas, etc. Curry leaves can also be in-
corporated with wheat flour to prepare bakery 
products and into dough for making Indian 
bread. Experiments have shown that curry 
leaf can be incorporated into chicken-based 
products such as kebabs, nuggets, etc. Chicken 
nuggets  with  curry  leaf  powder  incorpor-
ated were found to be highly acceptable to 
consumers (Kondaiah et al., 2005). As curry 
leaves are a natural antioxidant, they can be 
used to prevent rancidity, and studies have 
been done on the use of curry leaves to con-
trol rancidity in such products as rice bran 
and palm olein oil.

10.4  Uses

10.4.1  General uses

Curry leaves have been used in south Indian 
cuisine since time immemorial for flavour-
ing dishes. They aid in the emanation of a 
special aroma in the preparation of ghee by 
the melting of butter, a traditional practice 
in the rural areas of south India. Fresh curry 
leaves  on  steam  distillation  yield  2.5% 
volatile oil, which is used as a fixative in the 
soap industry (Lathan Kumar et al., 2003).

 

Curry Leaf Plant 

131

10.4.2  Pharmacological uses

Curry leaves are normally discarded while 
eating  as  they  are  just  regarded  as  having 
been  added  to  flavour  the  food.  However, 
more importantly, the leaves offer a number 
of health benefits without any side effects. 
Consumption  of  the  leaves  helps  to  arrest 
dysentery. The leaves promote wound heal-
ing when applied externally. After roasting, 
they can be made into a tea which helps to 
stop vomiting (Mhaskar et al., 2000). Curry 
leaves are also a rich source of iron and can 
be used to prevent anaemia. In south India, 
fresh  curry  leaves,  after  grinding  and  dry-
ing, are boiled with coconut oil. The result-
ing  oil  seems  to  promote  hair  growth  and 
also  to  prevent  premature  greying  of  the 
hair. Curry leaves have also been found to 
aid good digestion. They are used as a folk 
medicine to cure wounds and bruises, and 
in herbal formulations for the treatment of 
digestive disorders in the Ayurvedic system 
of medicine in India.

The  pharmacological  benefits  of  curry 
leaves  have  been  described  by  various 
 researchers.  According  to  Vinuthan  et  al. 
(2004), curry leaves have been found to con-
trol blood sugar levels in the management of 
diabetes. They are also used as a nephropro-
tective agent in traditional medicine (Yankuzo 

et  al.,  2010).  Based  on  the  clinical  studies 
with diabetic mice, leaf extracts were effect-
ive  in  blood  cholesterol  and  blood  glucose 
levels, suggesting that they could be used to 
manage high cholesterol and type 2 diabetes 
diseases (Xie et al., 2006).

10.5  Summary

The curry leaf plant is an age-old medicinal 
and aromatic plant widely used for the fla-
vouring of dishes in Asian cuisine, particu-
larly  in  South  Asia.  Curry  leaves  are  de-
manded worldwide, and are imported to the 
US, European Union and West Asian mar-
kets, as the herb is grown in very few coun-
tries.  The  leaves  contain  antioxidants  and 
are rich in iron and b-carotene. They can be 
processed  in  fresh  and  dried  form.  The 
dried leaves can be pulverized and the pow-
der  incorporated  into  food  formulations. 
The essential oil extracted from the leaves is 
used  in  cosmetic  applications.  The  leaves 
have many health benefits, such as antidia-
betic  and  anti-anaemia  activity,  it  lowers 
cholesterol  and  aids  in  digestion,  along 
with  many  other  health  benefits.  The  crop 
has  great  promise  for  use  in  various  bio-
chemical and industrial applications in the 
future.

References

Ambrose, D.C.P. and Naik, R. (2007) Investigation on extending the shelf life of fresh curry leaf (curry 
patha). FoodPack.Com 1(9, March), 16–17. [ValueBase Publications, Mumbai, India.]. Copy avail-
able from the author.

Ambrose, D.C.P. and Naik, R. (2014) Studies on the mechanical drying of curry leaf. International Jour-

nal of Processing and Post Harvest Technology 5, 8–11.

Ambrose, D.C.P., Annamalai, S.J.K. and Naik, R. (2015) Effect of packaging in extending the shelf life 

of fresh curry leaves. Journal of Applied Horticulture 17, 165–168.

Charles, D.J. (2013) Antioxidant Properties of Spices, Herbs and Other Sources. Springer, New York, 

pp. 273–279.

Halevy, A.H. and Mayak, S.( 1981) Senescence and postharvest physiology of cut flowers. Part II. Horti-

cultural Reviews 3, 59-143.

Jain, V., Momin, M. and Laddha, K. (2012) Murraya koenigii: an updated review. International Journal 

of Ayurvedic and Herbal Medicine 2, 607–627.

Khatoon, J.A., Verma, N.C. and Sheikh, S. (2011) Utilization of dehydrated curry leaves in different 

food products. Indian Journal of Natural Products and Resources 2, 508–511.

King, K. (2006) Packaging and storage of herbs and spices: In: Peter, K.V. (ed.) Handbook of Herbs and 

Spices, Volume 3. Woodhead Publishing, Cambridge, UK, pp. 86–102.

132 

D.C.P. Ambrose 

Kondaiah, N., Anjaneyulu, A.S.R. and Mendiratta, S.K. (2005) Curry leaf powder – a promising spice 
ingredient for value added chicken products. Available at: http://www.poulvet.com/poultry/articles/
tech_products/10.php (accessed 15 January 2016).

Lathan Kumar, K.J., Dassharma, K. and Mohandas, A. (2003) Curry leaf – an inevitable spice of Indian 

cuisine. Spice India 3(9), 8–9.

Mhaskar, K.S., Blatter, E. and Caius, J.F. (eds) (2000) Kirtikar and Basu’s Illustrated Indian Medicinal Plants, 

Volume I. XI, 3rd edn. Indian Medical Science Series # 86–96. Sri Satguru Publications, Delhi.

Naik,  R.,  Annamalai,  S.J.K.  and  Ambrose,  D.C.P.  (2013)  Development  of  power  operated  curry  leaf 
(Murraya koenigii) stripper. Agricultural Mechanization in Asia, Africa and Latin America 44(1), 
69–72.

Omanakutty Amma, M., Rajaraman, K., Sankarikutty, B. and Sumathikutty, M.A. (1984) Processing of 

curry leaves. Indian Food Packer 38(4), 32–36.

Prakash, V. and Natarajan, C.P. (1974) Studies on curry leaf (Murraya koenigii L.). Journal of Food Science 

and Technology 11, 284–286.

Pratibha,  G.,  Srinivas,  I.,  Korwar,  G.R.,  Ramakrishna,  Y.S.  and  Mayande,  V.M.  (1998)  Onfarm  Value 
Addition  with  CRIDA  Herbal  Dryer.  Central  Research  Institute  for  Dryland  Agriculture,  San-
toshnagar, Hyderabad, India. Available at: www.crida.in/Bulletins/Dryer.pdf (accessed 15 January 
2016).

Pruthi,  J.S.  (2001)  Minor  Spices  of  India:  Crop  Management  and  Post-Harvest  Technology.  Indian 

Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi.

Sharma, A. (2006) Irradiation to decontaminate herbs and spices. In: Peter, K.V. (ed.) Handbook of 

Herbs and Spices, Vol.3. Woodhead Publishing Limited, Cambridge, UK, pp. 60–73.

Sinha, P., Akhtar, J., Batra, N., Jain, H. and Bhardwaj, A. (2012) Curry leaves – a medicinal herb. Asian 

Journal of Pharmaceutical Research 2, 51–53.

Spice India (2003) Curry leaf. Spice India 3(9), 35–36.
Supriya, K.B. (2004) Hand Book of Medicinal Plants. Pointer Publishers, Jaipur, India.
Tachibana, Y., Kikuzaki, H., Lajis, N.H. and Nakatani, N. (2001) Antioxidative activity of carbazoles 

from Murraya koenigii leaves. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 49, 5589–5594.

Vinuthan, M.K., Girish, K.V., Ravindra, J.P. and Jayaprakash, N.K. (2004) Effect of extracts of Murraya 
koengii leaves on levels of blood glucose and plasma insulin in alloxan-induced diabetic rats. 
Indian Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology 48, 348–352.

Xie,  J.-T.,  Chang,  W.-T.,  Wang,  C.-Z.,  Mehendale,  S.R.,  Li,  J.,  Ambihaipahar,  R.,  Ambihaipahar,  U., 
Fong, H.H. and Yuan, C.-S. (2006) Curry leaf (Murraya koenigii Spreng.) reduces blood cholesterol 
and glucose levels in ob/ob mice. The American Journal of Chinese Medicine 34, 279–284.

Yankuzo, H., Santosa, R.I., Ahmed, Q.U., Akter, S.F.U. and Talib, N.A. (2010) Nephroprotective effect of 
the leaves of Murraya koenigii L. Spreng. in vivo. In: 3rd International Conference on Advancement 
in Science and Technology (iCAST) 2010, 27–29 November 2010, Vistana Hotel, Kuantan, Pahang, 
Malaysia. Abstract available at: http://irep.iium.edu.my/18885/ (accessed 15 January 2016).

11  Fenugreek

Gopal Amuthaselvi1* and  Dawn C.P. Ambrose2

1Krishi Vigyan Kendra, Sirugamani, Tiruchirappalli, Tamil Nadu, India;  

2ICAR – Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering,  

Regional Centre, Coimbatore, India

11.1  Botany

11.1.1 

Introduction

Fenugreek  belongs  to  the  family  Fabaceae. 
Its  botanical  name  is  Trigonella  foenum- 
graecum. The leaves of the plant are used as 
a herb and the seeds as a spice. It is culti-
vated worldwide as a semi-arid crop. Fenu-
greek  is  an  age-old  medicinal  herb  that  is 
used in many parts of the world (Srinivasan, 
2006). The taxonomic position of fenugreek 
is as follows:

  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Kingdom: Plantae
Division: Magnoliophyta
Class: Magnoliopsida
Order: Fabales
Family: Fabaceae
Genus: Trigonella
Species: foenum-graecum Linn.

Consumption of the leaves of fenugreek 
has been found to control the sugar level in 
diabetic  patients.  In  addition,  fenugreek 
leaves are believed to aid in digestive problems, 
liver  problems  and  anaemia  (Deshmukh 
et  al.,  2013).  The  vernacular  name  of  the 
plant  in  many  Indian  languages  is  methi 

(or  methe).  Details  of  its  various  names  in 
different languages are given in Table 11.1.

The leaves and seeds are consumed for 
culinary purposes across the globe. The dried 
leaves  add  flavour  to  dishes.  The  seeds, 
after drying, are powdered and used in the 
preparation  of  curry  in  Asian  countries; 
they are also used in bakery products and in 
cheese, and as an insect repellent during the 
storage of grain. The fresh leaves, as well as 
sprouted seeds, are used in salads. The crop 
is  of  short  duration  and  helps  in  fixing 
 nitrogen in the soil.

Fenugreek leaves have been used in trad-
itional  Chinese  medicine  curing  urinary  re-
lated problems. They have also been used as 
a herbal remedy in African and Asian coun-
tries. Historical accounts indicate that fenu-
greek  leaves  were  used  for  many  medicinal 
purposes in countries such as India, Greece 
and China, and in Arab countries. These in-
clude  the  treatment  of  mouth  ulcers  and 
chapped  lips,  curing  of  baldness,  reduction 
in abdominal pain and pain from abscesses, 
prevention of cardiovascular and hepatic dis-
orders, treatment of arthritis, dropsy, spleen 
and liver enlargement and kidney ailments, 
and  as  an  aid  to  lactation  in  breastfeeding 
women (Weiss, 2002; Tiran, 2003).

*Corresponding author. E-mail: g.amuthaselvi@gmail.com

© CAB International 2016. Leafy Medicinal Herbs: Botany, Chemistry, 
Postharvest Technology and Uses (eds D.C.P. Ambrose et al.) 

133

134 

G. Amuthaselvi and D.C.P. Ambrose 

Table 11.1.  Vernacular names of fenugreek in 
different languages. From the Spices Board, India.

Arabic
Chinese
Dutch
French
German
Italian
Japanese
Portuguese
Russian
Spanish
Swedish

Hulba
K’u-Tou
Fenegriek
Fenugrec
Bockshorklee
Fieno Greco
Koroha
Alforva
Pazhitnik
Alholva
Bockshornklee

11.1.2  History

Fenugreek  is  mentioned  in  various  histor-
ical texts, including one of the oldest med-
ical  documents,  the  Egyptian  Ebers  Pa-
pyrus, which dates to 1550 bc (Brier, 1998). 
It  has  been  known  in  Asian  countries  for 
thousands of years, and in ancient Egyptian 
culture,  it  was  used  to  scent  embalmed 
mummies.

11.1.3  Location

Although  fenugreek  is  a  native  of  south- 
eastern Europe and West Asia, it is now cul-
tivated in countries across the globe. It is a 
cold season crop and is resistant to very low 
temperatures and to frost. It is best suited to 
tracts  of  moderate  to  low  rainfall  and  is 
sown in all types of soil, but performs better 
in loam and clayey loam with proper drain-
age. Some of the countries where it is grown 
have a long history of use, while others only 
started cultivating the crop during the past 
two to three decades. Asia ranks first among 
the  continents  in  terms  of  fenugreek  pro-
duction  and  acreage,  followed  by  Africa. 
India is the leading country in the produc-
tion  of  fenugreek  seed,  accounting  for 
90%  of  global  production  (Petropoulos, 
2002).  Among  other  Asian  countries,  Iran, 
Israel,  China  and  Pakistan  also  have  high 
levels  of  production.  In  Africa,  fenugreek 
production is mostly concentrated in Egypt, 
Ethiopia, Kenya and Morocco. Spain, Turkey, 

Greece  and  Germany  are  notable  for  fenu-
greek cultivation in Europe, whereas Argen-
tina  is  important  for  production  in  South 
America.

11.1.4  Morphology

Fenugreek is an annual plant that grows to 
around 60 cm tall. The leaves are similar to 
clover in shape (Fig. 11.1). The flowers are 
pea shaped and yellow or white, and appear 
in the leaf axils. Leaves from fenugreek are 
simple,  distinctly  petiolate  and  consist  of 
three leaflets. The leaflets are slightly dented 
at the edge, oval to orbicular in shape and 
green  in  colour.  They  are  arranged  alter-
nately throughout the plant (Slinkard et al., 
2006).

11.2  Chemistry

11.2.1  Chemical composition

The  leaves  are  bitter  in  taste,  and  rich  in 
minerals and vitamins. They are also rich in 
proteins, like other pulses, and can be used 
as a protein supplement. The dried leaves are 
known for their aroma. There are 19–25 mg 
b-carotene and 221–378 mg of ascorbic acid 
in  100  g  of  fresh  fenugreek  leaves  (Yadav 
and  Sehgal,  1997).  Leaves  contain  86.1% 
moisture, 4.4% protein, 0.9% fat, 1.5% min-
erals, 1.1% fibre, and 6% carbohydrates. The 
mineral  and  vitamin  contents  are  calcium, 
iron, phosphorus, carotene, thiamine, ribo-
flavin, niacin and vitamin C (Prajapati Ashish 
et al., 2014).

11.2.2  Phytochemistry

Green leafy plants are good sources of carot-
enoids,  tocopherols  and  flavonoids,  which 
determine  the  antioxidant  properties  of  a 
plant.  Several  phytochemical  compounds 
have been extracted from the leaves of fenu-
greek. They are mostly flavonoids, tannins 

 

Fenugreek 

135

Fig. 11.1.  Fresh fenugreek leaves.

and other phenolic compounds, glycosides, 
alkaloids  and  steroids.  Steroidal  saponins 
are  responsible  for  the  bitter  taste  of  the 
leaves.  Graecunins  are  the  major  saponins 
present  in  fenugreek  leaves.  These  com-
pounds are glycosides of diosgenin, and are 
considered to be anti-nutritional factors.

11.3  Postharvest Technology

11.3.1  Processing

Drying

Fenugreek leaves are a highly perishable food 
commodity  and  cannot  be  stored  for  long. 
Drying is the usual preservation method for 
its  long  term-storage.  Dried  leaves  of  fenu-
greek are known as methi in India (Fig. 11.2). 
The  effect  of  different  pretreatments  on  the 
quality  of  dried  fenugreek  leaves  has  been 
studied  by  Bajaj  et  al.  (1993),  who  demon-
strated that their vitamin C content was high-
est in samples treated with 0.5% potassium 
metabisulfite, while blanching in water prior 
to  dehydration  resulted  in  good  quality  in 
terms of chlorophyll retention.

The  sun  drying  of  fenugreek  leaves 
leads to loss of nutrients, especially vitamin 
C, and mechanical drying is a better alterna-
tive for retaining nutrient content. Various 
studies  have  shown  that  fenugreek  leaves 
can  be  dried  well  in  a  solar  dryer  or  by 
microwave drying, etc.

Fig. 11.2.  Dried fenugreek leaves.

Karva et al. (2010) contrasted the dry-
ing of fenugreek leaves in a microwave oven 
(100% power, 2250 Hz), hot air oven (60°C), 
in the sun (38–42°C) and in the shade (24 ± 1oC) 
after  washing  and  blanching  of  the  leaves. 
Microwave drying resulted in samples with 
a better quality.

The drying behaviour of fresh leaves of 
fenugreek  was  investigated  by  Kalaskar 
et  al.  (2012).  The  leaves  were  dried  in  a 
cabinet  dryer  or  sun  dried  after  different 
pretreatments. Of these pretreatments and 
drying  methods,  leaves  that  had  been 
blanched  for  2  min  in  water  containing 
0.1% MgO + 0.5% KMS (potassium meta-
bisulfite)  +  0.1%  NaHCO3  and  dried  in 
cabinet  dryer  were  superior  in  terms  of 
maintaining minimum moisture and dehy-
dration  ratio,  and  maximum  rehydration 
ratio,  chlorophyll  and  vitamin  C  content 
throughout  the  storage  period  compared 
with sun-dried samples.

Fenugreek leaves can also be dried by 
washing  and  cutting  into  uniform  pieces 
and blanching in water with known concen-
trations  of  MgO,  KMS  and  NaHCO3  added 
and  drying  in  a  mechanical  dryer.  The 
recovery  of  dried  fenugreek  leaves  was 
8.5–9.7% with 45.89 mg/100 g ascorbic acid. 
Sensorial studies indicated good acceptabil-
ity  of  the  samples  by  the  consumers  and 
the quality of the dried leaves was retained 

136 

G. Amuthaselvi and D.C.P. Ambrose 

during storage for 5–6 months under ambi-
ent conditions (Singh et al., 2012).

In  a  solar  cabinet  dryer,  fenugreek 
leaves could be dried when the temperature 
was about 20–22°C more than the surround-
ing  temperature  during  a  clear  sunny  day. 
The  average  efficiency  and  the  rate  of  en-
ergy utilization were high in a cabinet solar 
dryer,  and  the  drying  time  was  43%  less 
than for open sun drying. Nutritive analysis 
of  the  powdered  samples  showed  an  in-
crease of all nutrients except for vitamin C 
(Navale et al., 2014).

Packaging

The  retention  of  shelf  life  is  an  important 
aspect  of  leafy  crop  products  due  to  their 
perishable  nature.  The  packaging  of  fenu-
greek leaves in polyethylene bags results in 
better shelf life and good nutritive value of 
the product (Negi and Roy, 2003). The pri-
mary  processing  of  fenugreek  plants  can 
also  be  combined  with  packaging  to  pro-
duce a ready-to-use vegetable. This involves 
removing  undesirable  parts  like  the  roots 
and  yellowed  leaves,  and  packing  clean 
leaves in plastic baskets covered with cling 
film, thereby arresting wilting of the leaves 
(Gomez et al., 2003).

The effect of different packaging mater-
ials on the physiological weight loss of eight 
different  vegetables,  including  fenugreek 
leaves,  was  studied  under  household  and 
laboratory  refrigeration  conditions  in 
Karnataka, India. There was less weight loss 
under laboratory than household conditions. 
The weight loss was maximum in brown paper 
and minimum in polyethylene (PE) bags, and 
the percentage spoilage was much higher in 
low-density  polyethylene  (LDPE)  bags  than 
in ordinary PE bags (Korradi and Devendrappa, 
2011).

Modified  atmosphere  packaging  (MAP) 
could also be beneficial for storing fenugreek 
leaves for extended shelf life and quality.

11.3.2  Value addition

Fenugreek leaves are rich in iron and could 
be consumed as a vegetable to alleviate iron 

deficiency in women and children. Leaves 
could be dried, powdered and incorporated 
into  flour  for  preparation  of  bakery  prod-
ucts. Dried leaves of both methi (T. foenum- 
graecum) and kasuri methi (T. corniculata, a 
fenugreek that is cultivated in the Pakistani 
state of Kasur), could be used as a nutraceut-
ical, as they are a rich source of iron, alkal-
oids, protein, etc. and have good antioxidant 
and  antibacterial  activities  (Pasricha and 
Gupta, 2014).

11.4  Uses

11.4.1  General uses

The leaves of fenugreek are used as a vege-
table in Indian cuisine, and also to enhance 
flavour when added to dishes as dried leaves. 
The seeds are dried, powdered and used as a 
spice. Kasuri methi is widely used in Indian 
and Pakistani cuisine. The fresh and tender 
leaves of fenugreek are also used in salads. 
Samudra  methi  is  popular  in  Maharashtra 
state  in  India,  where  it  is  known  as  micro- 
greens. The seeds of fenugreek are used as a 
herbal insecticide.

11.4.2  Pharmaceutical uses

Fenugreek  was  used  for  embalming  mum-
mies by the ancient Egyptians. In the Ebers 
Papyrus, fenugreek is listed as one of the in-
gredients  for  the  treatment  of  burns.  Hip-
pocrates, the father of medicine, thought it a 
valuable  soothing  herb,  while  Dioscorides 
used it in treating swelling of the genitals. 
French researchers believe that it is a good 
aid to digestion. Basch et al. (2003) reported 
that fresh fenugreek leaves aid in digestive 
problems. Mouth ulcers could be cured by 
fenugreek tea. In India, paste prepared from 
fenugreek is used as a hair mask to control 
dandruff.

Other  experiments  indicate  that  fenu-
greek leaves can control diabetes. In a study 
by Devi et al. (2003), the diet of streptozoto-
cin (STZ)-induced diabetic rats was supple-
mented with fenugreek leaves, and a number 

 

Fenugreek 

137

of antidiabetic effects demonstrated. Also in 
STZ-induced  diabetic  rats,  Annida  and 
Prince  (2004)  showed  a  reduction  in  the 
lipid profile by supplementation with fenu-
greek leaves (Annida and Prince, 2004).

In a review of the use of herbal medicines 
for  the  reduction  of  cholesterol,  Thompson 
Coon  and  Ernst  (2003)  mentioned  that  the 
consumption of fenugreek leaves and seeds 
could  reduce  cholesterol  in  people  with  a 
high risk of cardiovascular disorders.

Fenugreek is rich in antioxidant and anti-
toxic potentials. In an in vitro study, Durga 
et al. (2014) demonstrated that an aqueous ex-
tract of fenugreek leaves protected red blood 
cells against the toxic effects of petrol exhaust 
nanoparticles  and  replenished  their  antioxi-
dant levels.

11.5  Summary

Fenugreek  leaves  are  consumed  in  every 
part  of  the  world  because  of  their  various 
benefits. The chemical constituents of both 
the seeds and leaves have made them valu-
able as both food and medicine, in addition 
to  being  a  rich  source  of  nutrients.  The 
leaves  can  be  preserved  in  fresh  form  in 
ventilated and modified atmospheric pack-
aging and also dehydrated to produce dried 
leaves.  The  fresh  leaves  are  consumed  as 
greens and the dried leaves are used as a fla-
vouring agent in dishes owing to their dis-
tinct  aroma.  Supplementation  of  the  diet 
with fenugreek aids in protecting the human 
body against ailments such as diabetes, high 
cholesterol, etc.

References

Annida, B. and Prince, P.S.M. (2004) Supplementation of fenugreek leaves lower lipid profile in strep-

tozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Journal of Medicinal Food 7, 153–156.

Bajaj, M., Aggarwal, P., Minhas, K.S. and Sidhu, J.S. (1993) Effect of blanching treatments on the 
quality characteristics of dehydrated fenugreek leaves. Journal of Food Science and Technology 
30, 196–198.

Basch, E., Ulbricht, C., Kuo, G., Szapary, P. and Smith, M. (2003) Therapeutic applications of fenugreek. 

Alternative Medicine Review 8, 20–27.

Brier, B. (1998) Ancient Egyptian Magic. William Morrow, New York.
Deshmukh, D., Pawade, C., Nalawade, V., Dongare, K. and Padwal, K. (2013) Anti-inflammatory activity 
of ethanolic extract of Trigonella foenum graecum and Ziziphus jujube. International Research 
Journal for Inventions in Pharmaceutical Sciences 1(1), 30–33.

Devi, B.A., Kamalakkannan, N. and Prince, P.S.M. (2003) Supplementation of fenugreek leaves to diabetic 
rats. Effect on carbohydrate metabolic enzymes in diabetic liver and kidney. Phytotherapy Research 
17, 1231–1233.

Durga, M., Nathiya, S. and Devasena, T. (2014) Protective role of fenugreek leaf extract and quercetin 
against petrol exhaust nanoparticle induced lipid peroxidation and oxidative stress in rat erythro-
cytes in vitro. Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical and Clinical Research 8, 237–241.

Gomez, S., Roy, S.K. and Pal, R.K. (2003) Primary processing of fenugreek (Trigonella foenum graecum L.) – an 
eco-friendly approach for convenience and quality. Plant Foods for Human Nutrition 58(3), 
10 pp. Available at: http://link.springer.com/article/10.1023/B%3AQUAL.0000040366.42996.1f 
(accessed 18 January 2016).

Kalaskar, A.B., Sonkamble, A.M. and Patil, P.S. (2012) Studies on drying and dehydration of fenugreek 

leaves. International Journal of Processing and Post Harvest Technology 3(1), 15–17.

Karva, S., Bharati, P. and Chimmad, B. (2010) Postharvest processing of green leafy vegetables for iron 

security. Karnataka Journal of Agricultural Sciences 23, 306–310.

Korradi, V.V. and Devendrappa, S. (2011) Analysis of physiological weight loss of vegetables under 

refrigerated conditions. Journal of Farm Sciences 1(1), 61–68.

Navale, S.R., Upasni Supriya, Harpale, V.M. and Mohite, K.C. (2014) Effect of solar drying on the nutritive 
value of fenugreek leaves. International Journal of Engineering and Advanced Technology 4, 133–136.
Negi, P.S. and Roy, S.K. (2003) Changes in beta carotene and ascorbic acid content of fresh amaranth 
and fenugreek leaves during storage by low cost technique. Plant Foods for Human Nutrition 
58, 225–230.

138 

G. Amuthaselvi and D.C.P. Ambrose 

Pasricha, V. and Gupta, R.K. (2014) Nutraceutical potential of methi (Trigonella foenum graecum L.) and 
kasuri methi (Trigonella corniculata L.). Journal of Pharmacognosy and Phytochemistry 3(4), 47–57.
Petropoulos, G.A. (2002) Fenugreek – the Genus Trigonella. Taylor and Francis, London and New York.
Prajapati Ashish, D., Sancheti, V.P. and Shinde Puja, M. (2014) Review article on fenugreek plant with 

it’s [sic] medicinal uses. International Journal of Phytotherapy Research 4(4), 39–55.

Singh, S., Singh, K.P. and Koley, T.K. (2012) Drying of fenugreek leaves. In: Annual Report 2011–12. 

Indian Institute of Vegetable Research, Varanasi, India, pp. 63–64.

Slinkard, A.E., McVicar, R., Brenzil, C., Pearse, P., Panchuk, K. and Hartley, S. (2006) Fenugreek in 
Saskatchewan. Fact Sheet, Saskatchewan Ministry of Agriculture, Regina, Canada. Available at: 
http://www.agriculture.gov.sk.ca/Default.aspx?DN=c6428c37-cab6-4e93-b862-e20a55af3586

Srinivasan, K. (2006) Fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-graecum): a review of health beneficial physio-

logical effects. Food Reviews International 22, 203–224.

Thompson Coon, J.S. and Ernst, E. (2003) Herbs for serum cholesterol reduction: a systematic review. 

Journal of Family Practice 52, 468–478.

Tiran, D. (2003) The use of fenugreek for breast feeding woman. Complementary Therapies in Nursing 

and Midwifery 9(3), 155–156.

Weiss, E.A. (2002) Fenugreek. In: Weiss, E.A. (ed.) Spice Crops. CAB International, Wallingford, UK, 

pp. 77–85.

Yadav, S.K. and Sehgal, S. (1997) Effect of home processing and storage on ascorbic acid and, b-carotene 
content  of  bathua  (Chenopodium  album)  and  fenugreek  (Trigonella  foenum  graecum)  leaves. 
Plant Foods for Human Nutrition 50, 239–247.

12  Lemongrass

 Salome Amarachi Chime* and Ikechukwu V. Onyishi

University of Nigeria, Nsukka, Nigeria

12.1  Botany

12.1.1 

Introduction

Lemongrass is a herb belonging to the grass 
family Poaceae. It is grown in South-east Asia 
and  Sri  Lanka.  The  herb  is  used  in  Asian 
cuisine and has a lemony flavour. In India, 
it is known as ‘choomana poolu’ and is used 
in Ayurvedic medicine and as an ingredient 
in the perfumery industry. Cymbopogon flex-
uosus Stapf originated from Kerala, is very 
hardy and grows in humid climatic condi-
tion requiring plenty of sunlight. The species 
C. citratus is believed to be a native of Malay-
sia. In English, the herb is commonly known 
as lemongrass, citronella grass or fever grass. 
In other languages and designations, it is called 
Herba Andropogonis (a pharmaceutical des-
ignation), hashisha al-limun (Arabic), limon-
ova treva (Bulgarian), sabalin (Burmese), chou 
geung (Cantonese), vlaska (Croatian), citro-
engras (Dutch), citronelo (Esperanto), verveine 
des Indes (French), herba de limón (Galician), 
zitronengras (German), essef limon (Hebrew), 
sera (Hindi), cimbopogone (Italian), remon- 
gurasu (Korean), erva-principe (Portuguese), 

limonnoe sorgo (Russian), zacate de limon 
(Spanish), limon out (Turkish), serai (Indo-
nesian), sereh (Dutch) and takrai (Thai).

Cymbopogon is a very large genus, con-
sisting of over 500 species, of which the spe-
cies C. citratus and C. flexuosus are generally 
called lemongrass.

12.1.2  History/origin

Lemongrass is an aromatic plant that grows 
in tropical and subtropical South-east Asia 
and Africa. In India, it is cultivated in the 
southern states and the north-eastern hills. 
The  oldest  known  record  of  lemongrass  is 
from  the  Philippines  in  17th  century.  The 
herb is claimed to have been introduced to 
Jamaica in 1799 and to Haiti and the USA 
in 1917. The cultivation of lemongrass as a 
commercial crop was reported in the USA 
and Haiti in 1947. It is not known when or by 
whom  it  was  introduced  to  Sri  Lanka;  ac-
cording to the reports available at the na-
tional herbarium in 1905, a Sri Lankan re-
searcher  called  J.F  Jovit  had  acquired 
several plants of ‘kochin sera’ (C. citratus) 

*Corresponding author, e-mail: salome.chime@unn.edu.ng

© CAB International 2016. Leafy Medicinal Herbs: Botany, Chemistry, 
Postharvest Technology and Uses (eds D.C.P. Ambrose et al.) 

139

140 

S.A. Chime and I.V. Onyishi 

from  south  India  and  had  planted  them  at 
Bandarawela  Farm  for  research  purposes 
(Bor,  1960).  Several  large-scale  cultivated 
areas of lemongrass existed in Sri Lanka for 
some decades, but currently there are only a 
few small ones.

The  use  of  lemongrass  for  medicinal 
uses has been known since antiquity, and 
it  has  been  claimed  to  cure  a  long  list  of 
diseases.

12.1.3  Location

Fig. 12.1.  Lemongrass plant.

Lemongrass is grown in Brazil, Guatemala, 
Argentina,  Mexico,  West  Indies,  Vietnam, 
Thailand, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and China, 
among  others.  Wild  species  of  lemongrass 
are  reported  to  have  been  found  in  Latin 
America  and  Asia  (Lonkar  et  al.,  2013).  In 
India,  it  is  grown  in  the  states  of  Kerala, 
 Karnataka,  Tamil  Nadu,  Sikkim,  Bengal, 
Madhya  Pradesh,  Arunachal  Pradesh  and 
Maharashtra.  It  is  also  grown  throughout 
 Africa,  in  the  Democratic  Republic  of  the 
Congo (DRC), Central African Republic, Ni-
geria,  Ghana,  Angola,  Gabon,  Chad,  Mada-
gascar and the Comoros Islands.

The ideal climate for lemongrass culti-
vation  is  humid  with  plenty  of  sunshine. 
Seeds are produced from healthy plants, and 
are threshed manually from the dried inflor-
escence and used for propagation.

12.1.4  Morphology

Lemongrass  is  a  large  perennial  and  fast- 
growing aromatic grass with clumped, slightly 
branched cylindrical culms that arise from a 
short  rhizome  and  often  reach  up  to  2  m 
(Fig. 12.1). The stems (culms) are composed 
of  sheaths,  which  are  parallel  veined  and 
are narrow at the base and sharp at the top. 
The leaves are up to 1 m long and 2 cm wide. 
The plants flower at the mature stage. New 
plants  emerge  from  the  tillers  produced 
from the rhizomes. The plant produces a 
network  of  roots  and  rootlets  that  rapidly 
exhaust the soil.

12.2  Chemistry

12.2.1  Chemical composition

Lemongrass  contains  a  large  amount  of  es-
sential oils (1–2% on a dry weight basis), of 
which the major component is the terpenoid 
aldehyde citral, which imparts its aromatic 
odour (Carlson et al., 2001; Schaneberg and 
Khan, 2002). Research reports have indicated 
that  overall  essential  oil  content  is  greater 
during the early growth stage in C. flexuo-
sus (Singh et al., 1989). In general, the yield of 
essential oil is correlated with biomass yield. 
The production of higher quality oil with high 
citral content (75%) is determined by the pro-
portion of young leaves to older leaves when 
the leaves are harvested at any given point.

The biological effects often ascribed to 
lemongrass are attributed to the primary bio-
active constituents of extracts from its leaves, 
stems and roots. The three major methodolo-
gies used to extract bioactive compounds lead 
to the production of decoctions, infusions and 
essential oils. Oven drying, boiling and filtra-
tion  produces  a  decoction,  while  grinding 
and boiling produces infusions. Steam distil-
lation and drying with anhydrous sodium sul-
fate produces essential oils from the leaves.

12.2.2  Phytochemistry

Various  research  studies  have  indicated 
the  presence  of  bioactive  compounds 

 

Lemongrass 

141

 including myrcene, citral (α-citral or gera-
nial,  and  β-citral  or  neral),  heptenone, 
 racemic  limonene  (dipentene),  linalool, 
borneol,  geraniol, β-myrcene,  6-methyl-5-
hepten- 2-one,  undecan-2-one  and  citron-
ellol  (references  include:  Schaneberg  and 
Khan,  2002;  Pengelly,  2004;  Mirghani 
et al., 2012).

A large number of studies have reported 
data on the chemical composition and phyto-
chemistry of lemongrass (including: Alves  
et al., 1960; Chisowa et al., 1988; Aftab et al., 
2011;  Zheljazkov  et  al.,  2011;  Ewansiha  
et al., 2012; Idrees et al., 2012; Tajidin et al., 
2012).  These  studies  have  indicated  that 
the  chemical  composition  of  lemongrass 
 extracts  depends on the location where the 
plant is growing, genetic differences between 
plants,  part  of  the  plant  used,  method  of 
 extraction,  age/stage  of  maturity,  season  of 
harvesting and the species. After the extrac-
tion  of  citral  from  lemongrass,  the  leftover 
oil  consists  of  limonene  and  myrcene,  be-
sides methyl heptenone, linalool, geranyl acet-
ate, nerol and geraniol. Clearly, these could 
produce minor fractions in high purity that 
could be valuable.

12.3  Postharvest Technology

12.3.1  Processing

After harvesting, the first treatment involves 
washing the plants in order to remove sand 
and other extraneous materials. Any further 
treatment depends on the final end product 
desired.  In  the  preparation  of  lemongrass 
powder, for example, the following posthar-
vest  processing  steps  may  be  involved  as 
shown in Fig. 12.2.

 •  The leaves are first washed.
 •  Cutting:  the  whole  leaves  may  be  cut 
into 5 cm pieces. This helps the plant to 
dry faster as well as to pack well in vari-
ous pieces of equipment, e.g. a milling 
machine for further processing.

 •  Blanching:  blanching  is  done  in  hot 
water at 80°C for 1 min or in 1% Na2CO3 
at 80°C for 1 min.

Selection of leaves

Washing/cleaning

Pretreatments

Drying (tray drying at 40 ± 2°C

or sun drying)

Grinding

Sieving (80 mesh)

Packaging and storage

Fig. 12.2.  Processing of lemongrass powder. From 
Lonkar et al., 2013.

 •  Drying: this may be done by sun drying 
or shade drying, or by oven drying at a 
temperature not above 40–45°C.

 •  Milling: lemongrass powder is prepared 
by milling the dried leaves. Milling can 
be  carried  out  using  a  hammer  mill. 
Lemongrass has a very wide demand in 
nutritional,  medicinal  and  flavouring 
industries, but it cannot be stored fresh 
for a long time under ambient conditions 
because it rots. Hence, lemongrass pow-
der is preferred and is in huge demand 
in the world market (Lonkar et al., 2013).
 •  Sieving: this can be carried out using a 
0.25 mm sieve in order to remove over-
sized pieces and produce very fine pow-
der.  The  oversized  pieces  can  then  be 
milled again in order to produce more 
fine powder.

 •  Packaging: powder for use as tea is often 
packaged in moisture and light resistant 
containers for storing under the appro-
priate conditions (Lonkar et al., 2013).

Lemongrass  powder  may  also  be  pre-
sented in various dosage forms which may 
include:

 • 
 • 
 • 

granulated lemongrass powder;
tablets; and
capsules (Chime et al., 2012a,b).

Granules may be prepared by a wet or 
dry  granulation  method  and  encapsulated 

142 

S.A. Chime and I.V. Onyishi 

in a hard gelatin capsule shell or tabletted 
using a tablet press (Chime et al., 2012a,b).

Extraction

In one approach, the powdered leaves can be 
extracted  by  maceration  in  90%  methanol 
for 48 h. The extract is filtered and concen-
trated  using  a  rotary  evaporator  attached 
to a vacuum pump. The crude powdered ex-
tract that is obtained can be stored and used 
in the preparation of various dosage forms, e.g. 
tablets and granules (Chime et al., 2012a,b).
Figure 12.3 summarizes other methods 
that are used to extract bioactive compounds 
from lemongrass.

Distillation

Distillation is the process of extracting essen-
tial oil from lemongrass. Lemongrass oil is 
obtained mainly by steam distillation. After 
shade drying to a reduced moisture content, 
the leaves (or stems) are reduced in size and 
subjected  to  steam  distillation.  The  oil  is 

extracted after distillation at a certain tem-
perature and after a certain extraction time 
to yield essential oil. Dichloromethane can 
be used to separate the essential oil from the 
condensate. The oil obtained is further puri-
fied  by  using  anhydrous  sodium  sulfate. 
The insoluble particles present in the oil are 
filtered off. Using leaves infected with rust 
may lead to change of colour of the extracted 
oil  and  this  can  be  corrected  by  a  steam 
rectification process (Mirghani et al., 2012; 
Srivastava  et  al.,  2013).  The  oil  comprises 
75–85%  citral  and  has  a  lemon-like  odour 
and is yellowish in colour; the recovery is 
0.5–0.8%.  The  whole  process  can  be  com-
pleted within 4 h (Srivastava et al., 2013).

Newer techniques viz. the use of super-
critical  fluids,  ultrasound  and  microwave 
extraction can also be used to extract oil from 
lemongrass. Microwave-assisted extraction 
has been found to be successful under labora-
tory conditions. In terms of high recovery of 
oil and simplicity, microwave-assisted hydro-
distillation (MAHD) and solvent-free micro-
wave extraction (SFME) have been found to 

Lemongrass

plant

Leaves

Oven drying
(37–40°C)

Steam distillation

Boiling in water

(5 min)

Grinding

Filtration

(muslin cloth)

Boiling

(5 g + 150 ml

water)

Dry with
anhydrous

sodium sulfate

Decoction

Infusion

Essential oil

Fig. 12.3.  Processes for extracting bioactive compounds from lemongrass. From Olorunnisola et al., 2014.

 

Lemongrass 

143

be suitable at the industrial level. The use of 
a modified household microwave oven with 
a  microwave  frequency  of  2450  MHz  at 
atmospheric  pressure  could  facilitate  the 
hydrodistillation of essential oil from lem-
ongrass.

When cleaned and dried stalks (Fig. 12.4) 
are reduced in size and subjected to MAHD, 
the resulting oil is a light yellow (Chen and 
Spiro, 1994; Singh et al., 2014). Solvent free 
microwave extraction is similar to MAHD, 
however without using solvents which is faster 
but with less oil yield (Singh et al., 2014).

Grading

The quality of lemongrass oil is determined 
by the content of citral, which is mainly used 
for the manufacturing of vitamin A (Director-
ate Plant Production, 2009).

Packaging and storage

As  essential  oils  are  volatile,  lemongrass 
leaves need to be handled with care before 
they  are  subjected  to  steam  distillation. 
They also need to be packed firmly to pre-
vent  the  formation  of  steam  channels. 
Stainless  steel/  aluminium  or  galvanized 
iron  containers  and  glass  bottles  can  be 
used  for  the  storage  of  the  essential  oil, 
which, because it is acidic, would destroy 
plastic  and  rubber.  The  oil  should  not  be 
exposed  to  heat  or  light  and  it  should  be 
refrigerated  if  the  containers  are  opened. 
Spoilage has begun if the oil is much darker 
or  more  viscous  than  normal  (Directorate 
Plant Production, 2009).

12.3.2  Value addition

Essential oil

The  citral-rich  oil  from  lemongrass  has 
germicidal, medicinal and flavouring prop-
erties.  Due  to  the  predominance  of  citral, 
the  oil  has  a  strong  lemon-like  odour,  and 
because of this characteristic smell, the oil 
is used in soap industries and also as an in-
gredient  in  insect  repellent  preparations. 
Citral  is  used  as  a  major  source  in  per-
fumery,  cosmetics,  beverages  and  the  syn-
thetic preparation of vitamin A. India held a 
monopoly both in the production of lemon-
grass essential oil and its world trade during 
the early 1950s, but the crop is now widely 
cultivated in a number of countries, so this 
situation has changed. The citral content of 
lemongrass  essential  oil  has  been  reported 
in varying ranges, such as 44.3–91.4% and 
79–91.5% (Lonkar et al., 2013).

Lemongrass has better antioxidant cap-
acity than coriander leaves, ginger, tomato and 
garlic (Nambiar and Matela, 2012). Lemon-
grass  may  also  serve  as  a  good  source  for 
biofuel production.

Lemongrass powder

Traditionally, lemongrass powder is prepared 
by grinding the dried leaves (or stems). Per 
100 g, it contains approximately 22.2 calories 
along with 4.59 g protein, 0.96 g sugar and 
1.80 mg ascorbic acid (Lonkar et al., 2013). 
Lemongrass  powder  is  used  for  culinary 
purposes  and  for  treating  various  ailments 
(Husain, 1993). As already noted, it can be 
encapsulated in capsule shells and or tablet-
ted for use. In various countries, the powder 
is used as lemongrass tea to relieve conges-
tion, coughing, bladder disorders, headaches, 
fever,  stomach  ache,  digestive  problems, 
diarrhoea, gas, bowel spasms, vomiting and 
flu symptoms; it is also used to promote per-
spiration and as a possible cholesterol lower-
ing agent (Lonkar et al., 2013).

Fig. 12.4.  Dried lemongrass stalks.

Powdered 

lemongrass 

is  marketed 
under the name of ‘Sereh powder’. It can be 
used in recipes such as those for lemongrass 
rice, sweet lemongrass blend and lemongrass 
beef.

144 

S.A. Chime and I.V. Onyishi 

12.4  Uses

12.4.1  General uses

Food ingredient

The stem and fresh leaves of lemongrass are 
used in culinary preparations in the Eastern 
world and other regions because of their dis-
tinct lemon flavour. The dried grass is blended 
with teas and used as herbal drink (Director-
ate  Plant  Production,  2009).  It  is  also  often 
used  as  an  ingredient  in  curries,  marinades 
and seafood dishes and soup, salads, etc.

Cosmetics and industrial uses

Lemongrass  is  used  in  products  including 
soaps, perfumes, candles, and mosquito and 
other insect repellents (Directorate Plant Pro-
duction, 2009; Nambiar and Matela, 2012).

Folk medicine

Lemongrass is used in traditional medicine 
for the treatment of diseases such as digest-
ive  disorders,  fevers,  menstrual  disorders, 
and rheumatism and other joint pains.

12.4.2  Pharmacological uses

Manvitha and Bidya (2014) and Olorunniso-
la  et  al.  (2014)  have  presented  reviews  on 
the biological and pharmacological activities 
of lemongrass. Some details of the individual 
pharmacological  uses  of  lemongrass  are 
briefly discussed below.

Antibacterial properties

There are a number of reports that indicate 
that lemongrass has good antibacterial prop-
erties (Syed et al., 1990; Wannissorn et al., 
2005;  Oleyede,  2009).  The  major  bioactive 
compounds  in  the  oil  include α-citral  and 
β-citral (Onawunmia et al., 1984).

Antifungal activity

The essential oil inhibits the growth of patho-
gens and the development of mycotoxins. 
It  is  among  the  most  active  agents  against 

human dermatophytes and is active against 
dermatophytic species such as Trichophyton 
mentagrophytes,  T.  rubrum,  Epidermophy-
ton  floccosum  and  Microsporum  gypseum. 
Other studies have shown that the oil from 
lemongrass inhibits keratinophilic fungi, ring-
worm and food storage fungi, plant patho-
genic fungi, etc. (Kishore et al., 1993; Mishra 
and  Dubey,  1994;  Wannissorn  et  al.,  1996; 
Abe et al., 2003; Anaruma et al., 2010; Shah 
et al., 2011).

Antiprotozoal activity

Lemongrass essential oil exerts antiprotozoal 
activity  against  Crithidia  deanei  (Pedroso 
et  al.,  2006)  and  has  amoebicidal  activity 
(Blasi et al., 1990).

Antidiarrhoeal activity

A lemongrass infusion has been found to cure 
diarrhoea  (Tangpu  and  Yadav,  2006),  and 
the  consumption  of  lemongrass  tea  has 
been found to be a good remedy for digest-
ive disorders.

Anthelmintic activity

A leaf extract of lemongrass oil and its formu-
lation as an emulsion has been reported to 
have anthelmintic (antihelmintolytic) poten-
tial (Gore et al., 2010; Dama et al., 2011).

Antimalarial activity

Based on in vivo studies using mice infected 
with  Plasmodium  berghei,  lemongrass  has 
antimalarial activity (Tchoumbougnang et al., 
2005). In another study of mice infected with 
P.  yoelii  nigeriensis,  aqueous  extracts  of 
C. citratus in the drinking water cleared the 
parasites (Onabanjo et al., 1993).

Hypolipidaemic, hypoglycaemic and 

antihypertensive properties

Investigations have shown that lemongrass 
extract has hypoglycaemic and hypolipidae-
mic properties (Adejuwon and Esther, 2007) 
and  can  reduce  obesity  and  hypertension 
problems (Olorunnisola et al., 2014).

 

Lemongrass 

145

Antioxidant activity

The antioxidant and free radical scavenging 
properties of lemongrass are due the phen-
olic compounds such as flavonoids present 
in the leaves. Cheel et al. (2005) studied the 
antioxidant and free radical scavenging ac-
tivity of extracts, infusions and decoctions 
of the aerial parts, as well as their activity in 
inhibiting  lipoperoxidation.  The  authors 
also  identified  the  compounds  responsible 
for  these  activities  and  compared  their  re-
sults with those of other published studies.

Antimutagenic and cytotoxic properties

Several studies have indicated that extracts 
of lemongrass have antimutagenic properties 
(Vinitketkumnuen et al., 1994; Suaeyun et al., 
1997;  Puatanachokchai  et  al.,  2002;  Shah 
et al., 2011).

Anti-inflammatory and anti-nociceptive 

properties

Various researchers have reported that lem-
ongrass extracts and other preparations ex-
hibit  anti-inflammatory  activities  (Oleyade, 
2009;  Gore  et  al.,  2010;  Figueirinha  et  al., 
2010; Tiwari et al., 2010; Cruz and Batista, 
2011; Dama et al., 2011).

Anti-hepatotoxic activity

The  aqueous  leaf  extracts  of  lemongrass 
showed  anti-hepatotoxic  action  against 

cisplatin-induced  hepatic  toxicity  in  rats 
(Arhoghro et al., 2012).

Anxiolytic properties

Lemongrass  tea  consumption  has  shown 
anxiolytic effects and other neurobehaviour-
al effects (Blanco et al., 2007; Olorunnisola 
et al., 2014).

Anti-filarial activity

Fresh lemongrass was found to be effective in 
the treatment of filariasis (Shah et al., 2011).

12.5  Summary

Lemongrass can be taken as a decoction or 
essential oil, used as a tea, taken with meals 
as a salad ingredient, and used in the treat-
ment  of  various  ailments  in  patients  of  all 
ages. The essential oil resulting from steam 
distillation  of  lemongrass  is  used  as  a  fra-
grance and flavouring ingredient, while the 
powdered  leaves  and  stalk  can  be  used  as 
teas.  The  powders  can  also  be  tabletted  or 
encapsulated  and  utilized  in  the  treatment 
of diseases. Lemongrass has a wide applica-
tion both industrially and pharmacologically. 
Efforts should be made to propagate, cultivate 
and process lemongrass in order to produce 
the  dosage  forms  and  edible  products  and 
make them easily available for use and sale 
internationally.

References

Abe, S., Sato, Y., Inoue, S., Ishibashi, H., Maruyama, N. and Takizawa, T. (2003) Anti-Candida albicans 
activity of essential oils including lemongrass (Cymbopogon citratus) oil and its component, citral. 
Nippon Ishinkin Gakkai Zasshi 44, 285–291.

Adejuwon, A.A. and Esther, O.A. (2007) Hypoglycemic and hypolipidemic effects of fresh leaf aque-

ous extract of Cymbopogon citratus Stapf in rats. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 112, 440–444.

Aftab, K., Ali, M.D., Aijaz, P., Beena, N., Gulzar, H.J. and Sheikh, K. (2011) Determination of different 
trace and essential element[s] in lemon grass samples by X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy technique. 
International Food Research Journal 18, 265–270.

Alves, A.C., Prista, L.N. and Souza, A.F. (1960) A preliminary note on the phytochemical study of Cymbopo-

gon citratus. Garcia de Orta 8, 629–638.

Anaruma, N.D., Schmidt, F.L., Duarte, M.C.T., Figueira, G.M., Delarmelina, C., Benato, E.A. and Sartoratto, A. 
(2010) Control of Colletotrichum gloeosporioides (Penz.) Sacc. in yellow passion fruit using 
Cymbopogon citratus essential oil. Brazilian Journal of Microbiology 41, 66–73.

146 

S.A. Chime and I.V. Onyishi 

Arhoghro,  E.M.,  Kpomah,  D.E.  and  Uwakwe,  A.A.  (2012)  Curative  potential  of  aqueous  extract  of 
lemon  grass  (Cymbopogon  citratus)  on  cisplatin  induced  hepatotoxicity  in  albino  Wistar  rats. 
Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology Advances 2, 282–294.

Blanco, M.M., Costa, C.A., Freire, A.O., Santos, J.G. and Costa, I.M. (2007) Neurobehavioral effect of 

essential oil of Cymbopogon citratus in mice. Phytomedicine 16, 265–270.

Blasi, D.V., Debrot, S., Menound, P.A., Gendre, L. and Schowing, J. (1990) Amoebicidal effect of essential 

oils in vitro. Journal Toxicologie Clinique Experimentale 10, 361–373.

Bor, N.L. (1960) The Grasses of Burma, Ceylon, India and Pakistan. Pergamon Press, Oxford, London, 

New York.

Carlson, L.H.C., Machado, R.A.F., Spricigo, C.B., Pereira, L.K. and Bolzan, A. (2001) Extraction of lemon-

grass essential oil with dense carbon dioxide. The Journal of Supercritical Fluids 21, 33–39.

Cheel, J., Theoduloz, C., Rodriguez, J. and Schmeda, H.G. (2005) Free radical scavengers and antioxidants 
from lemongrass (Cymbopogon citratus (DC.) Stapf). Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 53, 
2511–2517.

Chen, S.S. and Spiro, M. (1994) Study of microwave extraction of essential oil constituents from plant ma-

terials. Journal of Microwave Power and Electromagnetic Energy 4, 231–241.

Chime, S.A., Ugwuoke, C.E.C., Onyishi, I.V., Brown, S.A., Ugwu, C.E. and Onunkwo, G.C. (2012a) 
Formulation and evaluation of Cymbopogon citratus dried leaf-powder tablets. African Journal of 
Pharmacy and Pharmacology 6, 3274–3279.

Chime, S.A., Brown, S.A., Ugwoke, C.E.C., Agubata, C.O., Ubah, J.O. and Onunkwo, G.C. (2012b) 
Formulation  of  methanolic  extract  of  Cymbopogon  citratus  tablets:  in  vitro  evaluation.  Drug 
Invention Today 4, 397–400.

Chisowa, E.H., Hall, D.R. and Farman, D.I. (1998) Volatile constituents of the essential oils of Cymbopogon 

citratus Stapf grown in Zambia. Flavour and Fragrance Journal 13, 29–30.

Cruz, M.T. and Batista, M.T. (2011) Cymbopogon citratus as source of new and safe anti-inflammatory 
drugs: bio-guided assay using lipopolysaccharide-stimulated macrophages. Journal of Ethnophar-
macology 133, 818–827.

Dama, G.Y., Tare, H.L., Gore, M.S., Deore, S.R. and Bidkar, J.S. (2011) Comparative hemintholytic poten-
tial of extracts obtained from Cymbopogon citratus (DC) Stapf. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 
12, 279–286.

Directorate Plant Production (2009) Essential oil crops: Production Guidelines for Lemongrass: Lemongrass 
Production. Produced in collaboration with SAEOPA (Southern African Essential Oil Producers 
Association) and the KARWIL Consultancy. Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, 
Directorate Communication Services, Pretoria. Available at: http://www.nda.agric.za/docs/Brochures/
ProGuiLemonGrass.pdf (accessed 19 January 2016).

Ewansiha, J.U., Garba, S.A., Mawak, J.D. and Oyewole, O.A. (2012) Antimicrobial activity of Cymbopogon 

citratus (lemon grass) and its phytochemical properties. Frontiers in Science 2, 214–220.

Figueirinha, A., Cruz, M.T., Francisco, V., Lopes, M.C. and Batista, M.T. (2010) Anti-inflammatory 
activity of Cymbopogon citratus leaf infusion in lipopolysaccharide-stimulated dendritic cells: 
contribution of the polyphenols. Journal of Medicinal Food 13, 681–690.

Gore,  M.S.,  Tare,  H.L.,  Deore,  S.R.,  Bidkar,  J.S.  and  Dama,  G.Y.  (2010)  Hemintholytic  potential  of 
Cymbopogon  citratus  leaves  extract  and  its  formulation  as  an  emulsion.  International  Journal  of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences and Research 1(10), 174–177.

Husain, A. (1993) Essential Oil Plants and Their Cultivation. Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic 

Plant (CIMAP), Lucknow, India.

Idrees, M., Naeem, M., Khan, M.N., Aftab, T., Khan, M.M.A. and Moinuddin (2012) Alleviation of salt 

stress in lemongrass by salicylic acid. Protoplasma 249, 709–720.

Kishore, N., Mishra, A.K. and Chansouria, J.P. (1993) Fungitoxicty of essential oils against dermatophytes. 

Mycoses 36, 211–215.

Lonkar, P.B., Chavan, U.D., Pawar, V.D., Bansode, V.V. and Amarowicz, R. (2013) Studies on preparation 
and preservation of lemongrass (Cymbopogon flexuosus (Steud) Wats) powder for tea. Emirates 
Journal of Food and Agriculture 25, 585–592.

Manvitha, K. and Bidya, B. (2014) Review on pharmacological activity of Cymbopogon citratus. Inter-

national Journal of Herbal Medicine 1(6), 5–7.

Mirghani, M.E.S., Liyana, Y. and Parveen, J. (2012) Bioactivity analysis of lemongrass (Cymbopogon 

citratus) essential oil. International Food Research Journal 19, 569–575.

 

Lemongrass 

147

Mishra, A.K. and Dubey, N.K. (1994) Evaluation of some essential oils for their toxicity against fungi 
causing deterioration of stored food commodities. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 60, 
1101–1105.

Nambiar,  S.V.  and  Matela,  H.  (2012)  Potential  functions  of  lemon  grass  (Cymbopogon  citratus)  
in  health  and  disease.  International  Journal  of  Pharmaceutical  and  Biological  Archive  3,  
1035–1043.

Oleyede, O.I. (2009) Chemical profile and antimicrobial activity of Cymbopogon citratus leaves. Journal 

of Natural Products 2, 98–103.

Olorunnisola, S.K., Asiyanbi, H.T., Hammed, A.M. and Simsek, S. (2014) Biological properties of lemongrass: 

an overview. International Food Research Journal 21, 455–462.

Onabanjo, A.O., Agbaje, E.O. and Odusote, O.O. (1993) Effects of aqueous extracts of Cymbopogon citratus 

in malaria. Journal of Protozoology Research 3, 40–45.

Onawunmia, G.O., Yisak, W.A. and Ogunlana, E.O. (1984) Antibacterial constituents in the essential 

oil of Cymbopogon citratus (DC.) Stapf. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 12, 279–286.

Pedroso, R.B., Nakamura, T.U., Filho, B.P.D., Cortez, D.A.G., Cortez, L.E.R., Morgado-Diaz, J.A. and 
Nakamura, C.V. (2006) Biological activities of essential oil obtained from Cymbopogon citratus on 
Crithidia deanei. Acta Protozoologica 45, 231–240.

Pengelly, A. (2004) Chapter 7: Essential oils and resins. In: The Constituents of Medicinal Plants: An 
Introduction to the Chemistry and Therapeutics of Herbal Medicine, 2nd edn. CAB International, 
Wallingford, UK, pp. 85–109.

Puatonachokchai, R., Kishida, H., Denda, A., Murata, N., Konishi, Y. and Vinitketkumnuen, U. 
(2002)  Inhibitory  effects  of  lemon  grass  (Cymbopogon  citratus  Stapf)  extract  on  the  early 
phase of hepatocarcinogenesis after initiation with ethyinitrosamine in male Fischer 344 rats. 
Cancer Letters 183, 9–15.

Schaneberg, B.T. and Khan, I.A. (2002) Comparison of extraction methods for marker compounds in 
the essential oil of lemongrass by GC. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 50, 1345–1349.
Shah, G., Richa, S., Vivek, P., Narender, S., Bharpur, S. and Mann, A.S. (2011) Scientific basis for the 
therapeutic use of Cymbopogon citratus Stapf (lemon grass). Journal of Advanced Pharmaceut-
ical Technology and Research 2, 3–8.

Singh, N., Luthra, R., Sangwan, R.S. and Thakur, R.S. (1989) Metabolism of monoterpenoids in aro-

matic plants. Current Research on Medicinal and Aromatic Plants 11, 174–197.

Singh, N., Shrivastava, P. and Shah, M. (2014) Microwave-assisted extraction of lemongrass essential 
oil: study of the influence of extraction method and process parameters on extraction process. 
Journal of Chemical and Pharmaceutical Research 6, 385–389.

Srivastava, V., Dubey, S. and Mishra, A. (2013) A review on lemongrass: agricultural and medicinal 

aspect[s]. International Research Journal of Pharmacy 4(8), 42–44.

Suaeyun, R., Kinouchi, T., Arimochi, H., Vinitketkumnuen, U. and Ohnishi, Y. (1997) Inhibitory effects 
of lemon grass (Cymbopogon citratus Stapf) on formation of azoxymethane-induced DNA adducts 
and aberrant crypt foci in the rat colon. Carcinogenesis 18, 949–955.

Syed, M., Khalid, M.R. and Chaudhary, F.M. (1990) Essential oils of Gramineae family having antibacterial 
activity Part 1 (Cymbopogon citratus, C. martinii and C. jawarancusa oils). Pakistan Journal of 
Scientific and Industrial Research 33, 529–531.

Tajidin, N.E., Ahmad, S.H., Rosenani, A.B., Azimah, H. and Munirah, M. (2012) Chemical composition 
and citral content in lemongrass (Cymbopogon citratus) essential oil at three maturity stages. African 
Journal of Biotechnology 11, 2685–2693.

Tangpu, V. and Yadav, A.K. (2006) Antidiarrhoeal activity of Cymbopogon citratus and its main constituent, 

citral. Pharmacologyonline 2, 290–298.

Tchoumbougnang, F., Zollo, P.H., Dagne, E. and Mekonnen, Y. (2005) In vivo anti malaria activity of essen-
tial oils from Cymbopogon citratus and Ocimum gratissimum on mice injected with Plasmodium 
berghei. Planta Medica 71, 20–23.

Tiwari, M., Dwivedi, U.N. and Kakkar, P. (2010) Suppression of oxidative stress and pro-inflamma-
tory mediators by Cymbopogon citratus D. Stapf extract in lipopolysaccharide stimulated murine 
alveolar macrophages. Food and Chemical Toxicology 48, 2913–2919.

Vinitketkumnuen, U., Puatanachokchai, R., Kongtawelert, P., Lertprasertsuke, N. and Matsushima, T. 
(1994) Antimutagenicity of lemon grass (Cymbopogon citratus, Stapf) to various known mutagens 
in Salmonella mutation assay. Mutation Research 341, 71–75.

148 

S.A. Chime and I.V. Onyishi 

Wannissorn, B., Jarikasem, S. and Soontorntanasart, T. (1996) Antifungal activity of lemon grass and 

lemon grass oil cream. Phytotherapy Research 10, 551–554.

Wannissorn, B., Jarikasem, S., Siriwangchai, T. and Thubthimthed, S. (2005) Anti-bacterial properties 

of essential oils from Thai medicinal plants. Fitoterapia 76, 233–236.

Zheljazkov, V.D., Cantrell, C.L., Astatkie, T. and Cannon, J.B. (2011) Lemongrass productivity, oil con-
tent, and composition as a function of nitrogen, sulfur, and harvest time. Agronomy Journal 103, 
805–812.

13  Mint

Maria do Carmo Ferreira* and Aline de Holanda Rosanova
Federal University of São Carlos, São Carlos, São Paulo, Brazil

13.1  Botany

13.1.1 

Introduction

The Lamiaceae or mint family is one of the 
most diverse and widespread dicotyledonous 
plant families. Several species in this family 
have  external  glandular  structures  that  pro-
duce  volatile  oil  and  are  highly  aromatic 
 (Giuliani and Maleci Bini, 2008). The family 
includes  about  236  genera  and  6900–7200 
species, including many culinary herbs, such 
as mint, basil, rosemary, marjoram and thyme 
(Venkateshappa  and  Sreenath,  2013).  The 
genus  Mentha  is  considered  to  be  the  most 
important in this family because its essential 
oil has a high economic value and is used in 
several  different  industrial  sectors,  such  as 
food,  flavouring,  fragrances,  cosmetics  and 
pharmaceuticals.  Mint  species  have  been 
traditionally used in natural (or complemen-
tary) medicine and ethnomedicine against a 
wide variety of diseases. They are also used 
for culinary purposes, owing to the pleasant 
and aromatic flavour of their leaves (Andrews, 
1996;  Bhat  et  al.,  2002;  Abbaszadeh  et  al., 
2009;  Kunnumakkara  et  al.,  2009;  Chawla 
and  Thakur,  2013;  Sujana  et  al.,  2013).  As 
well as being known as mint in English, the 

*Corresponding author, e-mail: mariaf@ufscar.br

genus Mentha is popularly known as minzen 
in  Germany,  menta  in  Spain,  menthe  in 
France,  menta  in  Italy,  munt  in  the  Nether-
lands and hortelã in Brazil and Portugal.

Mentha  species  are  perennial  herbs, 
meaning  they  will  either  remain  green  all 
winter or go dormant over the winter season 
and  revive  in  the  spring.  The  herbs  grow 
fast and spread quickly in open areas, and 
for these reasons, they are considered to be 
invasive (Abbaszadeh et al., 2009). Accord-
ing to Harley and Brighton (1977), the genus 
Mentha  includes  five  sections,  25–30  spe-
cies and hundreds of varieties. The precise 
number  of  taxonomically  valid  species  in 
the genus is unknown, as species cross freely, 
producing  many  intermediate  forms  (Bhat 
et  al.,  2002).  The  different  species  include 
peppermint (M. piperita), spearmint (M. spi-
cata),  corn  or  menthol  mint  (M.  arvensis), 
apple  mint  or  pineapple  mint  (M.  suaveo-
lens), pennyroyal (M. pulegium), chocolate 
mint (M. × piperita), basil mint (M. × piper-
ita),  water  mint  (M.  aquatica),  ginger  mint 
(M. gracilis) and horsemint (M. longifolia). All 
but the pennyroyal (M. pulegium) varieties 
can be eaten safely (Barrett, 2009; Buckland 
and Drost, 2009; Kunnumakkara et al., 2009; 
Duea and Murphy, 2011).

© CAB International 2016. Leafy Medicinal Herbs: Botany, Chemistry, 
Postharvest Technology and Uses (eds D.C.P. Ambrose et al.) 

149

150 

M.C. Ferreira and A.H. Rosanova 

According  to  Chen  et  al.  (2012),  only 
four  species,  namely  spearmint,  American 
wild mint (M. canadensis), ginger mint and 
peppermint,  are  cultivated  worldwide  for 
commercial oil production. The most common 
and cultivated mint types are the peppermint 
and  spearmint  varieties  (Abbaszadeh  et  al., 
2009). Spearmint (named M. spicata because 
of  the  plant’s  spiky  shape)  is  native  mainly 
from part of Europe and south-west Asia, but 
its exact original location is uncertain. Some 
references point out that the name comes from 
one of its first known locations – the monas-
tery  at  St  Pierre,  in  France.  This  particular 
variety  has  many  aromatic  and  medicinal 
properties and is widely used in manufactured 
products, medicine and cooking (Abbaszadeh 
et al., 2009; Lyle, 2010; Sulieman et al., 2011). 
Peppermint (also known as ‘peppery mint’) is 
originally from England and was discovered 
in the 17th century as a wild plant. Nowadays 
it is found in various countries, in both culti-
vated and wild forms (Raghavan, 2006). This 
variety is a sterile hybrid derived from a cross 
between water mint and spearmint. Its leaves 
have a strong scent and flavour, and for these 
features, peppermint is considered the ‘king 
of all mints’ (Abbaszadeh et al., 2009; Lyle, 
2010; Duea and Murphy, 2011; Chawla and 
Thakur, 2013; Sujana et al., 2013).

Other commercially less important cul-
tivars  include  water  mint,  a  variety  that 
grows in wet places; horsemint, a wild mint 
introduced into America from Europe; and 
apple mint, which is often used as an orna-
mental  plant.  Other  varieties  are  bergamot 
mint (M. citrata), which has a savoury and 
fruity aroma, regular, small-leaved or creep-
ing mint (M. × villosa), a very common var-
iety in Brazil, and pennyroyal, whose essen-
tial oil is used in aromatherapy, and is also 
high in pulegone, an extremely toxic vola-
tile organic compound (Barrett, 2009; Duea 
and Murphy, 2011).

13.1.2  History/origin

The name ‘mint’ originates from the Latin word 
‘menthe’, which is rooted in the Greek word 
‘minthe’.  According  to  Greek  mythology, 

Minthe  was  a  beautiful  nymph  and  Pluto, 
the god of the underworld, fell in love with 
her.  Pluto’s  wife,  Proserpine,  became  furi-
ous  when  she  got  to  know  about  her  hus-
band’s  love  for  the  nymph  and  punished 
Minthe by turning her into an ordinary plant. 
As compensation for being unable to restore 
Minthe to her original state, Pluto created a 
characteristic  and  pleasant  scent  that  she 
would  give  off  whenever  she  was  crushed. 
The name Minthe was further changed to Men-
tha and used as the genus of aromatic plants 
that includes all the mint varieties (Barrett, 
2009; Kunnumakkara et al., 2009; Gerritsen, 
2010; Lyle, 2010).

According  to  the  literature,  the  first 
mint species seem to have appeared in Euro-
pean and Mediterranean countries, and they 
have been important herbs from the begin-
ning of civilization. As they grow very eas-
ily, their medicinal, aromatic and flavouring 
properties  have  been  enjoyed  for  centuries 
(Barrett,  2009).  There  are  reports  on  mint 
usage dating back to as long ago as Biblical 
times, when mint was accepted as payment 
to the temple, and it is even known that the 
Pharisees  paid  tax  with  mint  leaves.  Dried 
mint leaves have also been found in Egyp-
tian  tombs  (Barrett,  2009;  Gerritsen,  2010). 
Mint  has  been  traditionally  known  as  the 
herb of fun and hospitality. The Romans and 
Greeks commonly crowned themselves with 
it and decorated tables using it for their par-
ties, and the ancient Romans used to spread 
mint  in  their  homes  for  freshness  (Barrett, 
2009; Palmer, 2012). Like the ancient  Romans, 
during many years before the advent of fin-
ished floors, people used to spread herbs on 
the dirty floors of houses. These gave off a 
slight scent where they were scattered, and 
when they were trampled on, a strong and 
pleasant aroma scented the place. Although 
many  types  of  aromatic  plants  served  this 
purpose,  mint  was  preferred  over  alterna-
tives owing to its stronger effect (Andrews, 
1996).

The  usage  of  mint  for  medicinal  pur-
poses  is  also  traditional,  though  scientific 
knowledge  on  its  antimicrobial,  antiviral, 
antioxidant, antitumor and other potentially 
relevant  medical  properties  is  quite  recent 
(Palmer, 2012; Chawla and Thakur, 2013).

 

Mint 

151

13.1.3  Location

Most  mint  varieties  grow  best  in  rich  and 
moist soils that are slightly acidic. Cultiva-
tion is benefited by a wet environment and 
exposure to full sun to partial shade, while 
some  species  require  full  light  to  develop, 
and at least 12 h of daylight to bloom. The 
spread occurs by dividing rhizomes, which 
must be planted at a space of 20 × 30 cm. 
The plant adapts well to sandy soils rich in 
organic matter, with pH values between 6.0 
and  7.0  (Radünz,  2004).  Cultivation  may 
take up to 4 years, and produce two or three 
crops  a  year.  Cultivation  procedures  may 
also  affect  the  contents  of  bioactive  con-
stituents and aromatic compounds (Radünz, 
2004;  Maia,  2007).  However,  in  general, 
mint species tolerate a wide range of condi-
tions, and grow well in places of varying cli-
matic  conditions  and  soil  types  (Abbasza-
deh et al., 2009; Buckland and Drost, 2009; 
Chawla and Thakur, 2013). As a result, even 
though  mint  is  cultivated  mostly  in  the 
temperate  and  subtemperate  regions,  it  is 
widely  distributed  throughout  the  world 
(Bhat et al., 2002; Abbaszadeh et al., 2009; 
Barrett, 2009).

The leading countries in mint produc-
tion  are  India,  the  USA,  China  and  Brazil. 
India accounts for nearly 80% of the world 
production  of  mint  oil,  with  an  estimated 
production of 15,000 t/year of essential oil 
and a mint cultivation area of over 150,000 
ha  in  2005/6  (Tzanetakis  et  al.,  2010), 
mainly of menthol mint. According to Chen 
et  al.  (2012),  China,  despite  being  a  large 
producer, presently faces a variety degener-
ation problem that is causing a decrease in 
mint oil quality and yield.

In  the  USA,  the  cultivated  mint  area 
covers around 50,000 ha, with peppermint 
and spearmint corresponding, respectively, 
to roughly 80% and 20% of the cultivation 
area  and  crop  value.  The  states  of  Oregon 
and  Washington  are  the  largest  producers, 
followed by Idaho, Indiana and Wisconsin 
(Tzanetakis  et  al.,  2010).  Along  with  the 
USA,  Japan  and  the  UK  are  the  biggest 
world  producers  and  exporters  of  pepper-
mint  essential  oil  and  raw  material.  Other 
countries,  such  as  Germany,  Russia,  Italy, 

Bulgaria, Greece and Norway, also cultivate 
peppermint,  but  their  production  volumes 
are  smaller  compared  to  the  three  former 
countries  (Bhat  et  al.,  2002;  Sústriková 
and  Salamon, 2004). The cultivated spear-
mint areas in the USA are located mainly 
in   Indiana  and  Michigan.  The  production 
of spearmint also takes place in France, the 
UK,  Italy,  the  former  Yugoslavia,  Hungary, 
 Bulgaria,  Russia,  South  Africa,  Thailand 
and Vietnam (Bhat et al., 2002).

Other countries, such as China, Taiwan 
and India, cultivate bergamot mint commer-
cially. These countries, along with Thailand, 
Japan and Brazil, are producers of Japanese 
mint  (M.  arvensis),  also  known  as  corn  or 
menthol  mint,  wild  mint,  field  mint  and 
pudina  (Bhat  et  al.,  2002;  Kunnumakkara 
et al., 2009).

13.1.4  Morphology

Although  mint  species  differ  somewhat  in 
form  and  growth  habit,  they  share  many 
common morphological characteristics. Most 
mints are aromatic and perennial herbs that 
grow  quickly  up  to  10–120  cm  tall.  More-
over, they have horizontal, wide-spreading 
underground rhizomes, overground stolons 
and  vertical,  square  and  branched  stems 
(Abbaszadeh et al., 2009; Chawla and Thakur, 
2013). The leaves are arranged in opposite 
pairs,  with  profiles  varying  from  simple 
oblong to lance shaped (see an example in 
Fig. 13.1). They often have a downy surface 
and  serrated  margins,  and  their  colours 
range  from  dark  green  and  grey–green  to 
blue  or  purple  (Abbaszadeh  et  al.,  2009; 
Chawla and Thakur, 2013). The flowers are 
morphologically described as tubular, with 
clusters  (‘verticils’)  produced  on  an  erect 
spike,  and  colours  varying  from  white  to 
purple.  The  flower  corolla  is  two  lipped 
with  four  subequal  lobes,  and  the  upper 
lobe  is  usually  the  largest.  The  fruit  is  a 
small,  dry  capsule  containing  from  one  to 
four seeds (Abbaszadeh et al., 2009; Chawla 
and Thakur, 2013).

Given the large number of varieties, only 
the two most popular types, spearmint and 

152 

M.C. Ferreira and A.H. Rosanova 

13.2  Chemistry

13.2.1  Chemical composition

Mints contain a large amount of fibre and of 
vitamins  A,  B6,  C  and  K,  folate,  folic  acid, 
thiamine and riboflavin, as well as minerals 
such as calcium, potassium, sodium, mag-
nesium, manganese, phosphorus and iron 
(Raghavan,  2006).  So  eating  fresh  mint 
(Fig. 13.1) is healthy, though the ingestion 
of dried mint (Fig. 13.2) is also recommended, 
as  it  will  have  significantly  higher  nutri-
tional values than a fresh serving (Buckland 
and Drost, 2009; Palmer, 2012; Chawla and 
Thakur, 2013).

The  Agricultural  Research  Service  of 
the  US  Department  of  Agriculture  (USDA) 
reports that 100 g of fresh peppermint leaves 
contain 78.65 g water, 3.75 g protein, 0.94 g 
total lipid, 14.89 g carbohydrates and 8.0 g 
fibre. A serving of 100 g of leaves contains the 
minerals calcium (243 mg), iron (5.08 mg), 
magnesium  (80  mg),  phosphorus  (73  mg), 
potassium (569 mg), sodium (31 mg) and zinc 
(1.11  mg),  and  the  vitamins  C  (31.8  mg), 
B6  (0.129  mg)  and  A  (212  μg),  thiamine 
(0.082  mg),  riboflavin  (0.266  mg),  niacin 
(1.706 mg) and folate (114 μg).

Even though the direct consumption of 
fresh or dried mint is substantial, a signifi-
cant  part  of  cultivation  is  to  raise  mint  for 
the extraction of essential oils, which can be 
done by various processes. There is a strong 
demand  for  mint  essential  oils  worldwide, 
as  they  contain  a  large  variety  of  volatiles 
and aromatic chemical compounds, such as 
menthol, carvone, menthone, pulegone and 
menthyl acetate. These substances give the 
mints  their  characteristic  aromas  and  fla-
vours.  The  oil  composition  varies  depend-
ing on the species and plant variety, and also 
on cultivation and handling. Factors such as 
the  part  of  the  plant  used  for  extraction 
(leaves,  stems,  etc.),  growth  stage,  harvest 
season, geographic origin and environmen-
tal conditions (climate, soil, topography) in-
fluence both oil yield and composition. The 
largest  amount  of  mint  oils  produced  over 
the world is extracted from leaves of pepper-
mint, spearmint and corn mint. The leaves of 
these  species  contain,  respectively,  around 

Fig. 13.1.  Fresh mint shoot with leaves.

peppermint,  are  described  here.  Blamey 
and  Grey-Wilson  (1989)  described  spear-
mint  as  a  herbaceous  rhizomatous  peren-
nial  plant  growing  up  to  30–100  cm  tall 
(average about 60 cm), with variably hair-
less  to  hairy  stems  and  foliage,  and  a 
wide-spreading  fleshy  underground  rhi-
zome. The leaves are opposite, 5–9 cm long 
and 1.5–3 cm wide, with a serrated margin. 
The flowers are produced in slender spikes, 
each flower pink or white, 2.5–3 mm long 
and  broad.  Peppermint  may  grow  up  to 
90 cm in height. The stems are usually red-
dish purple and smooth. The leaves are fra-
grant, toothed and hairy on the underside. 
The flowers are bisexual and zygomorphic, 
and of a pinkish or purple colour (Abbasza-
deh et al., 2009).

Despite the similarities among the var-
ieties, the different mint types can be distin-
guished by morphological analysis. A com-
parison of spearmint and peppermint shows 
that  peppermint  has  wider,  shorter  and 
slightly  darker  green  leaves,  and  that  the 
stalks  have  a  purplish  colour.  In  compari-
son  with  some  other  mint  types,  they  are 
both most obvious due to their sharp scent 
(Andrews, 1996; Lyle, 2010).

 

Mint 

153

Table 13.1.  Data on the chemical composition of 
peppermint (Mentha piperita) leaf essential oil 
from two sources.

Composition (%)
(Bhat et al., 2002)

Composition (%)
(Chawla and 
Thakur, 2013)

NAa

Traces

NA

50–55

10
20
NA
NA

2–8
2.5
2–8
26–46
16–36
3.8–7
1.5–2
1.4–4

Constituent

Isomenthone
Limonene
Menthofurane
Menthol
Menthone
Menthyl acetate
b-Pinene
Pulegnone

aNot available.

Table 13.2.  Data on the chemical composition of 
spearmint (Mentha spicata) leaf essential oil. From 
Bhat et al., 2002.

Constituent

Composition (%)

Carvone
Dihydocarveol
Dihydrocarveol acetate
Dipentene
Limonene

58
7
12
10
8

6–13% isomenthone, 5–10% limonene and 
a higher content of a- and b-pinenes.

Martins et al. (2007) characterized the 
essential oil from leaves of regular mint and 
obtained  a  total  volatile  content  of  99.5%. 
From  28  compounds  detected  in  the  ori-
ginal  essential  oil,  13  were  monoterpenes 
and  ten  were  sesquiterpenes.  Piperitenone 
oxide was the major component (35.4%).

It  is  clear  from  those  results  that  the 
oil composition may vary widely, even for 
plants  of  the  same  species  and  variety. 
 Nowadays,  the  analysis  and  identification 
of  essential oils composition are performed 
using gas chromatographic (GC) techniques, 
as  these  are  suited  for  detecting  volatile 
compounds. In most cases, GC is coupled to 
flame ionization (FID) or mass spectrometry 
(MS)  detection  modes,  which  are  suitable 
for  terpenoid  determinations.  Analysis  is 
limited to a relatively low number of com-
pounds  that  are  stable  upon  vaporization 
and separation (Turek and Stintzing, 2013). 

Fig. 13.2.  Dried mint shoot and leaves.

1–3, 0.5 and 1–2% of essential oils of com-
plex  composition  (Oksman-Caldentey  and 
Barz, 2002).

Over 200 constituents have been found 
in  peppermint  oil  (Oksman-Caldentey  and 
Barz, 2002; Palmer, 2012; Chawla and Tha-
kur, 2013), and while the different chemical 
compounds  found  in  distinct  mint  plants 
may vary greatly, menthol is found in nearly 
all of them (Bhat et al., 2002; Barrett, 2009; 
Palmer,  2012;  Pirbalouti  et  al.,  2013).  The 
average  values  of  the  main  compounds  of 
peppermint oil from two literature sources 
are given in Table 13.1.

Data  on  the  chemical  composition  of 
spearmint oil reported by Bhat et al. (2002) 
are given in Table 13.2. Chawla and Thakur 
(2013) reported that spearmint essential oil 
contains  50–70%  of  carvone  and  dihydro-
carvone, but also includes dihydrocuminyl 
acetate, limonene, menthone, menthol and 
1,8-cineol in small quantities.

According  to  Bhat  et  al.  (2002),  corn 
mint  oil  contains  70–80%  menthol,  10% 
menthyl acetate, 8% menthone, and limon-
ene,  pinene  and  caryophyllene  (in  traces). 
Chawla and Thakur (2013) report contents 
of  28–34%  menthol,  16–31%  menthone, 

154 

M.C. Ferreira and A.H. Rosanova 

High  performance  liquid  chromatography 
(HPLC)  is  also  a  very  popular  method  for 
the analysis of essential oils. The analytical 
sensitivity of this method can be enhanced 
by its association with other detectors, such 
UV or photodiode array (PDA) (Gurib-Fakim, 
2006). HPLC coupled with mass spectrom-
etry (HPLC/MS) is another technique used 
for compound identification.

13.2.2  Phytochemistry

A  wide  range  of  bioactive  phytochemical 
constituents  of  medicinal  plants  produces 
defined physiological actions on the human 
body and may play a protective role against 
some pathogens. Some of the most import-
ant phytochemicals of medicinal plants are 
tannins,  terpenes,  alkaloids,  flavonoids, 
steroids, saponins, anthraquinones, couma-
rins  and  sterols  (Gershenzon  et  al.,  2000; 
Ullah et al., 2011).

The extensive use of mint species for me-
dicinal purposes occurs mostly because their 
essential oil contains two classes of secondary 
metabolites, and different structural types of 
phenolic compounds. The secondary metab-
olites act as antioxidants, anti-inflammatory 
compounds, antispasmodics, antiemetics,  dia-
phoretics or antiviral agents (Mimica- Dukic 
and Bozin, 2008). Menthol is the main mono-
terpene  in  mint  essential  oils,  followed  by 
menthone, and the derivatives of both these 
compounds (e.g. acetyl menthol, isomen-
thone, pulegone). Other secondary metabol-
ites  include  alkaloids,  tannins  and  steroids. 
The phenolic compounds include the poly-
phenol  rosmarinic  acid  and  flavonoids 
(Mimica- Dukic and Bozin, 2008, Ullah et al., 
2011; Palmer, 2012; Sujana et al., 2013).

Menthol is mostly found in older leaves 
and has antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, an-
tifungal,  antibacterial,  antiseptic,  antispas-
modic and stimulant properties (Barrett, 2009; 
Chawla and Thakur, 2013; Sujana et al., 2013). 
The phenolic compounds have a wide range 
of pharmacological actions, including anti-
oxidant, hepatoprotective, anti-inflammatory, 
antidiabetogenic  and  anti-ulcer  activities 
(Mimica- Dukic and Bozin, 2008).

13.3  Postharvest Technology

The  proper  timing  for  harvesting  herbs  de-
pends  on  their  intended  use.  To  preserve 
their flavour and aroma, mint plants should 
be harvested when their essential oil content 
is at its peak. As the oils of such plants are 
concentrated in their leaves, it has been re-
commended  that  the  leaves  be  harvested 
before flowering and at dawn, although accord-
ing to Rohloff et al. (2005), mint plants are 
normally harvested in full bloom. The same 
authors report that peppermint oil yield in-
creased from early to full bloom and that the 
flavour compounds, menthol and menthone, 
reached their optimum at full bloom.

13.3.1  Processing

The water content of fresh mint leaves var-
ies, on average, from 75 to 85% (wet basis, 
w.b.)  (Rosanova  and  Ferreira,  2014),  and 
like the majority of plants, they suffer rapid 
deterioration  under  ambient  conditions. 
One practical approach to ensure optimized 
yield and quality of essential oils is direct 
distillation  immediately  after  harvesting 
(Tarhan et al., 2010). However, when fresh 
plant  processing  is  not  feasible,  dehydra-
tion and thermal drying are the most popular 
preservation techniques. Additionally, drying 
reduces  shipping  weights  and  minimizes 
packing requirements, as after dehydration, 
mint  plants  may  lose  up  to  85%  of  their 
weight. The mint leaves shrink significantly 
when  moisture  content  is  reduced,  as  ob-
served by Costa et al. (2014) and Rosanova 
and Ferreira (2014) (see also Fig. 13.2).

Drying and storage

There is no agreement in the literature about 
a proper moisture level for storing herbs in 
general.  Likewise,  a  particular  moisture 
range considered adequate for mint storage 
has  not  been  found  in  the  references  that 
have  been  consulted.  It  is  well  known 
though that the essential oil chemical com-
position  is  highly  dependent  on  the  plant 
processing  and  storage  conditions  (Turek 

 

Mint 

155

and  Stintzing,  2012).  The  terpenoids  con-
tained in essential oils are likely volatile and 
thermolabile  and,  depending  on  their  re-
spective structure, may be easily oxidized or 
hydrolysed (Scott, 2005). According to Mar-
tins  et  al.  (2002),  leaf  and  flower  moisture 
must be reduced to around 5–10% (w.b.) for 
storage, while Farias (2003) establishes val-
ues  around  8–14%.  The  choice  of  drying 
technique will depend on the quantity to be 
processed and on the specified quality attri-
butes for dry plant and essential oils.

When  processing  small  quantities, 
bunches  of  mint  stems  can  be  dehydrated 
by hanging them outside from lines so that 
they are exposed to a fresh breeze until all 
the  moisture  is  evaporated.  Another  com-
mon procedure is to use trays upon which 
thin layers of leaves are spread and exposed 
to warm air either in an oven or under mod-
erate  sunlight.  The  material  must  be  re-
volved periodically to avoid moisture gradi-
ents that may lead to non-uniform moisture 
distribution  in  the  final  product.  After  de-
hydration,  the  stalks  and  other  hard  parts 
can  be  rejected,  and  the  remaining  crisp 
parts  crumbled  to  produce  a  powder  that 
may be conveniently stored in glass or metal 
containers.

As the plant contains many volatile and 
thermolabile  compounds,  thermal  drying 
has to be performed with care to avoid the 
loss of active ingredients caused by too high 
a temperature. Batch convective dryers are 
extensively used for drying aromatic herbs 
and  medicinal  plants  in  large  quantities. 
Many studies have been reported in the lit-
erature  focusing  on  investigating  how  the 
drying conditions affect the extraction yield 
and  composition  of  mint  essential  oils. 
However,  given  the  great  number  of  mint 
varieties and the lack of standardized pro-
cedures,  the  results  obtained  are  often  re-
stricted to a narrow range of conditions or 
even discrepant among themselves.

Radünz (2004) investigated the thermal 
drying  of  leaves  of  regular  mint  leaves  at 
temperatures  ranging  from  40  to  80°C  and 
compared  the  oil  extraction  yield  obtained 
from dry plants with that from fresh mater-
ial. There was an increase in the oil extrac-
tion  yield  from  mint  dried  at  temperatures 

up to 50°C (0.87 g/g of dry matter) in com-
parison  with  the  yield  obtained  from  fresh 
material (0.57 g/g of dry matter). At higher 
temperatures, the extraction yield decreased, 
and at 80°C it was greatly reduced (to 0.37 g/g 
of  dry  matter).  The  composition  of  the  oil 
obtained  from  dried  and  fresh  plants  was 
also compared, and it was found that while 
the  main  constituents  of  mint  essential  oil 
were  preserved  after  drying,  their  content 
was significantly reduced by the drying tem-
perature,  with  50°C  being  the  temperature 
that  best  preserved  them.  The  best  drying 
temperature will therefore depend on the in-
tended usage for the oil, as its chemical con-
stituents are not equally affected by drying.

The  necessity  of  constantly  revolving 
the material to avoid moisture gradients in 
the  final  product  is  a  difficulty  that  may 
limit  the  use  of  a  static  bed  configuration 
for  drying  plants  on  a  commercial  scale. 
The use of moving beds, such as the rotary 
drum (Tarhan et al., 2010), or the innovative 
rotating  drum  proposed  by  Rosanova  and 
Ferreira  (2014),  may  offer  alternatives  for 
overcoming this drawback.

Tarhan  et  al.  (2010)  dried  peppermint 
in  a  rotary  drum  dryer  with  a  capacity  for 
processing  up  to  15  kg  of  leaves  and  pro-
grammed  to  operate  under  two  different 
drying schemes: the air could be heated ei-
ther  at  a  constant  temperature  or  to  give  a 
rectangular  wave-shaped  temperature  pro-
file. Drying was performed over 15–18 h at 
the  constant  temperature  profile  or  over 
12–15  h  for  the  rectangular  wave-shaped 
temperature  profile.  Hot  air  drying  caused 
considerable darkening of the dried pepper-
mint  leaves.  The  essential  oil  contents  of 
the  samples  dried  according  to  these  two 
procedures  were  relatively  unaffected  by 
the  drying  scheme  (2.08–2.7  ml  per  100  g 
dry  matter).  The  menthol  content  of  the 
leaves  increased  from  32.5%  (fresh)  up  to 
44.5%  (dried),  while  their  menthone  con-
tent decreased from 24.9% (fresh) down to 
9.1% (dried). The variations within replica-
tions  were  relatively  high  in  terms  of  the 
menthol (25.4–44.5%) and menthone (9.1–
18.5%)  contents  in  the  dried  leaves,  and 
such  variations  were  attributed  to  the  un-
controlled morphological and physiological 

156 

M.C. Ferreira and A.H. Rosanova 

changes in the fresh peppermint leaves that 
were  associated  with  their  maturity.  Ac-
cording to the authors, these variations are 
the main obstacle to the reproducibility of 
results and hence to obtaining dried pepper-
mint products with consistent quality.

Rosanova and Ferreira (2014) described 
the  development  of  a  rotating  drum  dryer 
for  drying  the  leaves  and  stems  of  regular 
mint.  The  dryer  consists  of  a  cylindrical 
drum with perforated walls into which air 
is  blown,  resulting  in  a  radial  air  flux 
through the samples. The drum is rotated at 
a low velocity (2 rpm), just enough to keep 
the  material  mixing  throughout  the  drying 
process. The equipment proved to be effect-
ive,  and  at  an  air  temperature  of  80°C,  it 
took  about  9  h  to  reduce  the  moisture  of 
the  leaves  to  9.4%  (w.b.)  and  the  stems  to 
6.2% (w.b.). There was strong shrinkage of 
both leaves and stems as the moisture was 
removed.

Pääkkönen  (1999)  reported  on  the  use 
of an infrared convective static bed dryer to 
dry peppermint. The dryer had three cham-
bers distributed over steel mesh trays, and a 
capacity of 13.5 kg for batch samples. The 
thermal energy was provided by eleven in-
frared lamps, with a spectrum ranging from 
a  wavelength  <2  μm  to  4–5  μm,  and  with 
nominal  powers  of  13  kW  for  chamber  1, 
and 9 kW for chambers 2 and 3. Intermittent 
radiation  periods  were  tempered  with  air-
flow. The drying was performed at an aver-
age  temperature  of  45°C,  and  the  total  oil 
content  and  composition  were  compared 
with  those  obtained  from  oven-dried  sam-
ples. The author reported on higher drying 
rates using infrared radiation than oven dry-
ing at 40°C for 2 or 3 days. The total oil con-
tent did not differ significantly when dried 
with oven heat or infrared radiation, but the 
menthol content was slightly higher for the 
sample  dried  with  infrared  radiation.  This 
combined infrared/convection process may 
be an appealing alternative for drying herbs, 
though it does require further investigation.
Thin-layer drying is a classical approach 
for assessing the drying behaviour of herbs 
and aromatic leaves under different condi-
tions.  This  technique  allows  the  effects  of 
process variables such as the air temperature 

and velocity on the moisture reduction and 
drying  rates  to  be  identified.  This  may  be 
done by simple experiments based on meas-
urements of small samples weight as a func-
tion of time. Because the internal gradients 
are  small  enough  to  be  neglected  in  such 
samples, a lumped analysis may be applied 
for modelling. Using this approach, simple 
equations  can  be  fitted  to  predict  drying 
rates. Although the operating conditions in 
commercial- scale  equipment  are  often  very 
different  from  those  in  thin-layer  drying, 
many  researchers  rely  on  this  approach  as 
being  effective  for  providing  fundamental 
information on drying processes and for ob-
taining  suitable  equations  to  estimate  dry-
ing rates.

Akpinar  (2010)  investigated  thin-layer 
drying  of  mint  leaves  using  an  indirect 
forced convection solar dryer and drying under 
open  sun  with  natural  convection.  Several 
empirical equations were tested for predict-
ing the drying rates, and the Wang and Singh 
model was found to be the best for predicting 
the kinetics of both forced solar drying and 
natural  sun  drying.  A  comparison  between 
the two drying techniques indicated no dif-
ference  in  the  quality  of  the  dried  mint 
leaves.  Sallam  et  al.  (2015)  also  evaluated 
prototype  direct  and  indirect  solar  dryers 
operating under natural and forced convec-
tion  modes  for  drying  whole  mint  leaves. 
They tested ten empirical equations for pre-
dicting thin-layer drying rates in mint solar 
drying  and  verified  that  all  of  them  repre-
sented  drying  behaviour  to  an  acceptable 
degree of accuracy, the only exception being 
the Wang and Singh equation, which did not 
fit their experimental data well.

Costa et al. (2014) investigated the dry-
ing  of  small  samples  (18–42  g)  of  leaves  of 
regular mint in a horizontal flow convective 
dryer  under  different  air  temperatures  (36–
64°C) and air velocities (1.0–2.0 m/s). Drying 
was mostly affected by the air temperature, 
with a much weaker influence of air velocity, 
although the latter might be relevant in some 
operational  conditions.  The  samples  essen-
tially offered an internal resistance to mass 
transfer, which was reduced by an increase 
in  air  temperature.  Even  though  the  leaf 
samples  consisted  of  very  heterogeneous 

 

Mint 

157

particulate media, an empirical model based 
on  a  neural  network  technique  performed 
well to estimate moisture content within the 
range  of  conditions  tested.  The  classical 
thin-layer  drying  methods  were  also  tested 
and best fit of the kinetic data was obtained 
with Page and Henderson–Pabis equations.

Lima-Corrêa  et  al.  (2014)  analysed  the 
use  of  thin-layer  drying  technique  to  de-
scribe the drying of basil leaves (which have 
a similar structure to mint leaves) and dem-
onstrated that is not always possible to apply 
this  approach  to  the  convective  drying  of 
leaves, particularly when these leaves have a 
high initial moisture content and shrink con-
siderably  during  drying,  as  so  mint  leaves. 
They affirmed that, considering the intrinsic 
variability in the composition and physical 
properties  of  leaves,  the  random  packing 
structure of samples exposed to air flow and 
the  deformation  caused  by  shrinking,  it  is 
very  difficult  to  reproduce  similar  samples 
and  identical  drying  conditions.  Therefore, 
discrepancies  among  results  from  different 
authors are very common, even for plants of 
a same species and variety.

Extraction of essential oils

The use of the phytochemicals from a plant 
depends  upon  an  appropriate  extraction 
method.  Some  traditional  techniques  are 
Soxhlet  extraction,  maceration  and  hydro-
distillation (Azmir et al., 2013). The Soxhlet 
extractor  is  the  most  common  and  widely 
employed  extractor  for  obtaining  essential 
oils from plants and natural products, des-
pite  its  use  being  very  time-consuming.  It 
requires  previously  dehydrated  plants  and 
the choice of solvent is a key factor for an 
efficient  extraction.  The  method  may  des-
troy some plant components and consumes 
relatively  large  amounts  of  polluting  solv-
ents, which are important drawbacks for its 
use. Ethanol and methanol are some of the 
solvents used to extract the terpenoids and 
tannins present in mint essential oils (Azmir 
et al., 2013).

The  use  of  maceration  enables  extrac-
tion to be done cheaply and is adequate for 
small-scale  operation.  In  this  method,  the 
plant  materials  are  ground  into  smaller 

pieces  and  then  extracted  by  contact  with 
an  appropriate  solvent  in  a  closed  vessel. 
Three types of hydrodistillation can also be 
used:  water  distillation,  water  and  steam 
distillation,  and  direct  steam  distillation. 
Hydrodistillation is a method that does not 
use  organic  compounds  and  may  be  ap-
plied to fresh material. However, the use of 
a high extraction temperature may cause the 
loss of volatile compounds and it may not 
be  suitable  for  thermolabile  compounds 
(Vankar, 2004).

Some  novel  techniques  have  recently 
been  introduced  to  overcome  the  limita-
tions  of  conventional  extraction  methods, 
and these include supercritical fluid extrac-
tion, ultrasound-assisted extraction, micro-
wave–assisted  extraction  and  pressurized 
solvent extraction (Kaufmann and Christen, 
2002; Azmir et al., 2013). These techniques 
are  recognized  as  being  fast  and  efficient, 
and  some  of  them  are  even  categorized  as 
‘green  techniques’,  as  they  comply  with 
standards set by the US Environmental Pro-
tection  Agency.  Such  non-conventional 
techniques  are  described  and  discussed  in 
detail elsewhere (Azmir et al., 2013).

13.3.2  Value addition

Drying  is  the  best  known  alternative  for 
adding value to fresh herbs, and dehydrated 
mint leaves and their essential oils have po-
tential  applications  in  several  commercial 
sectors, including the pharmaceutical, food 
and chemical industries (Oksman-Caldentey 
and  Barz,  2002).  Additionally,  because  it 
is  highly  aromatic,  dry  mint  may  be  used 
directly, e.g. for flavouring dishes or in tea 
infusions, and so may be commercialized in 
supermarkets and food shops, and also sold 
to restaurants. Beyond these common uses 
for culinary purposes and in industry, many 
other  applications  are  now  being  explored 
and may open opportunities for the devel-
opment of new value-added products based 
on mint plants. An example is the microen-
capsulation  of  essential  oils,  in  which  the 
sensitive  ingredients  and  volatile  com-
pounds may be entrapped in solid carriers 

158 

M.C. Ferreira and A.H. Rosanova 

to  increase  their  protection  against  oxida-
tion, promote easier handling, reduce evap-
oration and control their release (Pegg and 
Shahidi, 2007). Baranauskiene et al. (2006) 
investigated  the  microencapsulation  of 
peppermint essential oil in several commer-
cial  food  starch-based  matrices  by  spray- 
drying.  All  of  the  modified  starch  matrices 
tested retained oil very efficiently, and it was 
possible to retain up to 97.4% of peppermint 
oil volatiles after spray-drying, although the 
matrices varied in their release of volatiles 
under different conditions.

Kanatt  et  al.  (2007,  2008)  investigated 
the antioxidant activity of mint extracts for 
use  in  the  preservation  of  meat  and  meat 
products. The antioxidant activity of the ex-
tract is comparable to that of the synthetic 
antioxidant  BHT  (butylated  hydroxytolu-
ene), owing to its content of total phenolic 
and  flavonoid  compounds.  They  demon-
strated that, if blended with chitosan, a sub-
stance with excellent antimicrobial activity, 
mint extract produced a potent mixture that 
was  effective  in  extending  the  shelf  life  of 
meat products.

13.4  Uses

13.4.1  General uses

Mint  leaves  and  stems,  as  well  as  their  es-
sential oils, are used for various medicinal 
purposes,  as  food  flavouring  and  as  a  fra-
grance in cosmetics (Oksman-Caldentey and 
Barz,  2002;  Abbaszadeh  et  al.,  2009).  The 
use of mint as a flavouring in cooking dates 
from a long time ago and has been recorded 
in  different  parts  of  the  world  (Thailand, 
North  Africa,  England  and  Greece).  The 
Greeks and Romans used mint for flavouring 
sauces, food and wines. Its use for culinary 
purposes  remains  widespread  (Andrews, 
1996; Barrett, 2009), and its usage as a (nat-
ural) flavouring agent is reported as coming 
third worldwide after vanilla and citrus fla-
vours  (Arslan  et  al.,  2010;  Sallam  et  al., 
2013). Mint is in the category of tender and 
delicate herbs used for culinary purposes as 
a garnish. Such herbs are added preferably 

in the final cooking stages, or added raw to 
salads or relishes, to maintain their pungency 
and retain their green colour.

Some  mint  varieties  are  particularly 
suited for cosmetic applications. Bergamot 
mint and its oil, for instance, have high cos-
metic  value.  The  distinctive  lavender  and 
floral  scent  of  bergamot  mint  make  it  a 
highly  valuable  scent  for  soaps,  perfumes 
and colognes, and for use as bath teas and in 
masks for facial care; it is also used for ex-
foliation  purposes.  The  leaves  and  the 
petals, either dried or fresh, may be added 
to scent hot bathing water.

13.4.2  Pharmacological uses

For  centuries,  folk  healers  have  used  mint 
herbs to treat ailments such as colic and di-
gestive  disorders.  Mint  is  still  widely  em-
ployed  for  medicinal  purposes,  but  now-
adays  with  a  scientific  foundation  that 
provides  better  understanding  of 
its 
pharmacological effects and of the best uses 
of  this  plant  (Palmer,  2012;  Chawla  and 
Thakur, 2013). From the many species and 
hundreds  of  varieties  and  cultivars  of  the 
genus Mentha, two stand out for their medi-
cinal  applications:  spearmint  and  pepper-
mint (Abbaszadeh et al., 2009; Barrett, 2009). 
However,  in  an  ethnobotanical  survey  re-
cently conducted by Cartaxo et al. (2010) to 
evaluate  promising  medicinal  plants  for 
bioprospecting  studies  in  a  rural  commu-
nity  in  the  state  of  Ceará,  Brazil,  regular 
mint (M. × villosa) was classified as the se-
cond most versatile plant with potential for 
medicinal use out of a total of 119 species.

According to information published on 
the  website  of  the  Medical  Center  of  the 
University  of  Maryland  (https://umm.edu/
health/medical/altmed/herb/peppermint), 
peppermint is used to soothe an upset stom-
ach or to aid digestion. It has an anaesthetiz-
ing  effect,  and  is  therefore  used  to  treat 
headaches,  skin  irritations,  anxiety  associ-
ated  with  depression,  nausea,  diarrhoea, 
menstrual  cramps  and  flatulence.  Pepper-
mint  is  also  an  ingredient  in  topical  oint-
ments used as chest rubs in the treatment of 

 

Mint 

159

cold symptoms. Evidence of its pharmaco-
logical activities has been reported by sev-
eral  researchers.  Significant  antimicrobial 
and  antiviral  activities,  strong  antioxidant 
and  antitumour  activities,  and  some  an-
tiallergenic  potential  of  peppermint  have 
been detected in tests in vitro (McKay and 
Blumberg,  2006).  Several  studies  support 
the  use  of  peppermint  for  indigestion  and 
irritable bowel syndrome (Kline et al., 2001; 
Cappello  et  al.,  2007;  Magge  and  Lembo, 
2011). A medical study showed the benefits 
of an enteric-coated peppermint oil formu-
lation  to  reduce  abdominal  distention  and 
flatulence. Nearly 80% of the patients who 
took peppermint also showed alleviation of 
abdominal pain (Liu et al., 2006). There is 
also evidence that the topical application of 
peppermint is effective in soothing skin irri-
tations caused by hives, poison ivy or poi-
son oak (Herro and Jacob, 2010). In animal 
models,  peppermint  has  demonstrated  re-
laxant effects on gastrointestinal tissue, an-
algesic and anaesthetic effects in the central 
and  peripheral  nervous  systems,  immuno-
modulatory  activity  and  chemopreventive 
potential (McKay and Blumberg, 2006). The 
prescription  of  menthol  has  also  been  re-
ported  as  a  medication  for  gastrointestinal 
disorders,  common  cold  and  musculoskel-
etal pain (Patel et al., 2007).

13.5  Summary

In this chapter, a review of published infor-
mation on the biological and chemical char-
acteristics of mint leaves and their essential 
oils has been presented. The most common 
processing  techniques  and  uses  of  these 
herbs and their derived products have also 
been  addressed.  The  large  number  of  spe-
cies in the genus Mentha and their accessi-
bility certainly contribute to the great versa-
tility  of  these  plants  in  their  possible 
commercial  applications  and  potential 
manufactured  products,  while  at  the  same 
time, they introduce important issues con-
cerning  the  identification  of  constituents 
and the standardization of analysis method-
ologies and processing techniques. Explor-
ing the full potential of mints for use in dif-
ferent  industrial  sectors  is  a  challenge  for 
multidisciplinary  fields  of  knowledge,  in-
cluding the basic sciences (botany, chemis-
try,  pharmacology)  and  technical  areas 
(agriculture,  biotechnology,  food  engineer-
ing  and  chemical  engineering,  among 
others).  The  development  of  therapeutics 
based on mint phytochemicals is probably 
the  most  promising  application  to  be  ex-
plored,  but  further  research  is  required  in 
order  to  provide  safe  products  on  a  com-
mercial scale.

References

Abbaszadeh, B., Valadabadi, S.A., Farahani, H.A. and Darvishi, H.H. (2009) Studying of essential oil 

variations in leaves of Mentha species. African Journal of Plant Science 3, 217–221.

Akpinar, E.K. (2010) Drying of mint leaves in a solar dryer and under open sun: modeling, perform-

ance analyses. Energy Conversion and Management 51, 2407–2418.

Andrews, G. (1996) Growing and Cooking with Mint: Storey Country Wisdom Bulletim A-145. Storey 

Publishing, North Adams, Massachusetts.

Arslan, D., Özcan, M.M. and Menges, H.O. (2010) Evaluation of drying methods with respect to drying 
parameters,  some  nutritional  and  colour  characteristics  of  peppermint  (Mentha  x  piperita  L.). 
 Energy Conversion and Management 51, 2769–2775.

Azmir,  J.,  Zaidul,  I.S.M.,  Rahman,  M.M.,  Sharif,  K.M.,  Mohamed,  A.,  Sahena,  F.,  Jahurul,  M.H.A., 
Ghafoor, K., Norulaini, N.A.N. and Omar, A.K.M. (2013) Techniques for extraction of bioactive 
compounds from plant materials: a review. Journal of Food Engineering 117, 426–436.

Baranauskiene, R., Zukauskaite, J., Bylaite, E. and Venskutonis, P.R. (2006) Aroma retention and flavour 
release of peppermint essential oil encapsulated by spray-drying into food starch based matrices. 
In: Wandrey, C. and Poncelet, D. (eds) Proceedings of XIVth International Workshop on Bioencap-
sulation & COST 865 Meeting, Lausanne, Switzerland, Oct. 5–7, 2006. EPFL (École Polytechnique 
Fédérale de Lausanne), Lausanne, Switzerland, Contribution P-06. Available at: http://impasci-
ence.eu/bioencapsulation/340_contribution_texts/2006-10-05_P0-6.pdf (accessed 20 January 2016).

160 

M.C. Ferreira and A.H. Rosanova 

Barrett, J. (2009) What Can I Do with My Herbs? How to Grow, Use, and Enjoy These Versatile Plants, 

1st edn. Texas A&M University Press, College Station, Texas.

Bhat, S., Maheshwari, P., Kumar, S. and Kumar, A. (2002) Mentha species: in vitro regeneration and 

genetic transformation. Molecular Biology Today 3, 11–23.

Blamey, M. and Grey-Wilson, C. (1989) The Illustrated Flora of Britain and Northern Europe, 1st edn. 

 Hodder & Stoughton, London.

Buckland, K. and Drost, D. (2009) Mint in the Garden. Publication No. Horticulture/Garden/2009-05pr, 
Utah State University Cooperative Extension, Logan Utah. Available at: https://extension.usu.edu/
files/ publications/publication/Horticulture_Garden_2009-05pr.pdf (accessed 19 January 2016).

Cappello, G., Spezzaferro, M., Grossi, L., Manzoli, L. and Marzio, L. (2007) Peppermint oil (mint oil) 
in the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome: a prospective double blind placebo-controlled ran-
domized trial. Digestive and Liver Disease 39, 530–536.

Cartaxo, S.L., Souza, M.M.A. and Albuquerque, U.P. (2010) Medicinal plants with bioprospecting po-

tential used in semi-arid northeastern Brazil. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 131, 326–342.

Chawla, S. and Thakur, M. (2013) Overview of mint (Mentha L.) as a promising health-promoting herb. 

International Journal of Pharmaceutical Research and Development 5, 73–80.

Chen, X.H, Zhang, F. and Yao, L. (2012) Chloroplast DNA molecular characterization and leaf volatiles 
analysis of mint (Mentha; Lamiaceae) populations in China. Industrial Crops and Products 37, 
270–274.

Costa,  A.B.S.,  Freire,  F.B.,  Ferreira,  M.C.  and  Freire,  J.T.  (2014)  Convective  drying  of  regular  mint 
leaves: analysis based on fitting empirical correlations, response surface methodology and neural 
networks. Acta Scientiarum 36, 271–278.

Duea, A.W. and Murphy D. (2011) The Complete Guide to Growing Windowsill Plants: Everything You 

Need to Know Explained Simply. Atlantic Publishing Group, Ocala, Florida.

Farias, M.R. (2003) Assessment of quality of raw vegetables. In: Simões, C.M.O., Schenkel, E.P., Gosmann, G., 
Mello, J.C.P., Mentz, L.A. and Petrovick, P.R. (eds) Farmacognosia: From Plant to Medicament, 5th 
edn. Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul and Federal University of Santa Catarina Publishers, 
Porto Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul and Florianópolis, Santa Catarina, Brazil. [In Portuguese.]

Gerritsen, V.B. (2010) Mint condition. Protein Spotlight No. 113, 1–2. Available at: http://web.expasy.

org/spotlight/back_issues/113/ (accessed 20 January 2016).

Gershenzon, J., McConkey, M.E. and Croteau, R.B. (2000) Regulation of monoterpene accumulation in 

leaves of peppermint. Plant Physiology 122, 205–213.

Giuliani, C. and Maleci Bini, L. (2008) Insight into the structure and chemistry of glandular trichomes of 
Labiatae, with emphasis on subfamily Lamioideae. Plant Systematics and Evolution 276, 199–208.
Gurib-Fakim, A. (2006) Medicinal plants: traditions of yesterday and drugs of tomorrow. Molecular 

Aspects of Medicine 27, 1–93.

Harley, R.M. and Brighton, C.A. (1977) Chromosome numbers in the genus Mentha L. Botanical Jour-

nal of the Linnean Society 74, 71–96.

Herro, E. and Jacob, S.E. (2010) Mentha piperita (peppermint). Dermatitis 21, 327–329.
Kanatt, S.R., Chander, R. and Sharma, A. (2007) Antioxidant potential of mint (Mentha spicata L.) in 

radiation-processed lamb meat. Food Chemistry 100, 451–458.

Kanatt, S.R., Chander, R. and Sharma, A. (2008) Chitosan and mint mixture: a new preservative for 

meat and meat products. Food Chemistry 107, 845–852.

Kaufmann, B. and Christen, P. (2002) Recent extraction techniques for natural products: microwave 

assisted extraction and pressurized solvent extraction. Phytochemical Analysis 12, 105–112.

Kline, R.M., Kline, J.J., Di Palma, J. and Barbero, G.J. (2001) Enteric-coated, pH-dependent peppermint 
oil capsules for the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome in children. Journal of Pediatrics 138, 
125–128.

Kunnumakkara, A.B., Chung, J.-G., Koca, C. and Dey, S. (2009) Mint and its constituents. In: Aggarwal, 
B.B. and Kunnumakkara, A.B. (eds) Molecular Targets and Therapeutic Uses of Spices: Modern 
Uses for Ancient Medicine. World Scientific Publishing Co., Singapore, pp. 373–402.

Lima-Corrêa, R.A.B., Ribeiro, K.C., Freire, J.T. and Ferreira, M.C. (2014) A critical analysis about using 
of a thin layer drying concept to model the drying of leaves. In: Andrieu, J., Peczalski, R. and 
Vessot-Crastes,  S.  (eds)  Proceedings  of  the  19th  International  Drying  Symposium  (IDS  2014), 
Lyon, France, August 24–27. CD-ROM, EDP Sciences, Les Ulis, France, pp. 1–10.

Liu, J.P., Yang, M., Liu, Y.X., et al. (2006) Herbal medicines for treatment of irritable bowel syndrome. 

Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 1, CD004116.

 

Mint 

161

Lyle,  K.L.  (2010)  The  Complete  Guide  to  Edible  Wild  Plants,  Mushrooms,  Fruits  and  Nuts:  How  to 

Find, Identify and Cook Them. FalconGuides, Globe Pequot Press, Guilford, Connecticut.

Magge, S. and Lembo, A. (2011) Complementary and alternative medicine for the irritable bowel syn-

drome. Gastroenterology Clinics 40, 245–254.

Maia, J.T.L.S. (2007) Cultivation of aromatic and medicinal herbs intercropped with vegetables. M.Sc. 
dissertation, Graduating Program in Agricultural Sciences, Federal University of Minas Gerais, 
Montes Claros, Minas Gerais, Brazil. [In Portuguese.]

Martins, E.R., Castro, D.M., Castellani, D.C. and Dias, J.E. (2002) Medicinal Plants, 4th edn. Federal 

University of Viçosa, Minas Gerais, Brazil. [In Portuguese.]

Martins,  A.P.,  Craveiro,  A.A.,  Machado,  M.I.L.,  Raffin,  D.N.,  Moura,  T.F.,  Novák,  Cs.  and  Éhen,  A. 
(2007) Preparation and characterization of Mentha × villosa Hudson oil–b-cyclodextrin complex. 
Journal of Thermal Analysis and Calorimetry 88, 363–371.

McKay,  D.L.  and  Blumberg,  J.B.  (2006)  A  review  of  the  bioactivity  and  potential  health  benefits  of 

peppermint tea (Mentha piperita L.). Phytotherapy Research 20, 619–633.

Mimica-Dukic, N. and Bozin, B. (2008) Mentha L. species (Lamiaceae) as promising sources of bio-

active secondary metabolites. Current Pharmaceutical Design 14, 3141–3150.

Oksman-Caldentey, K.-M. and Barz, W.H. (2002) Plant Biotechnology and Transgenic Plants. Marcel 

Dekker, New York.

Pääkkönen, K. (1999) Infrared drying of herbs. Agricultural and Food Science in Finland 8, 19–27.
Palmer, S. (2012) The Plant-Powered Diet: The Lifelong Eating Plan for Achieving Optimal Health, Be-

ginning Today, 1st edn. Experiment LLC, New York.

Patel, T., Ishiuji, Y. and Yosipovitch, G. (2007) Menthol: a refreshing look at this ancient compound. 

Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology 53, 873–878.

Pegg, R.B. and Shahidi, F. (2007) Encapsulation, stabilization and controlled release of food ingredi-
ents.  In:  Shafiur  Rahman,  M.  (ed.) Handbook of Food Preservation,  2nd  edn.  CRC  Press,  Boca 
Raton, Florida.

Pirbalouti, A.G., Amirkhosravi, A., Bordbar, F. and Hamedi, B. (2013) Diversity in the chemical com-
position  of  essential  oils  of  Ziziphora  tenuior  as  a  potential  source  of  pulegone.  Chemija  24, 
234–239.

Radünz, L.L. (2004) Effect of air temperature in content and composition of guaco (Mikania glomera-
ta Sprengel) and regular mint (Mentha × villosa Huds) essential oils. MSc Dissertation, Graduat-
ing Program in Agricultural Engineering, Federal University of Viçosa, Minas Gerais, Brazil. 
[In  Portuguese.]

Raghavan, S. (2006) Handbook of Spices, Seasoning and Flavourings, 2nd edn. CRC Press and Taylor 

& Francis Group, Boca Raton, Florida.

Rohloff, J., Dragland, S., Mordal, R. and Iversen, T.-H. (2005) Effect of harvest time and drying method 
on biomass production, essential oil yield, and quality of peppermint (Mentha × piperita L.). Jour-
nal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 53, 4143–4148.

Rosanova, A.H. and Ferreira, M.C. (2014) Secagem de Hortelã em Secador de Cesto Rotativo [Drying of 
mint in rotating basket dryer]. In: XX Congresso Brasileiro de Engenharia Química (COBEQ 2014), 
CentroSul – Florianópolis/SC, 19 a 22 de Outubro [Proceedings of XX Brazilian Conference on 
Chemical Engineering, October 19–22, Florianópolis, Santa Catarina, Brazil]. Blucher Proceed-
ings 6, Volume 1(2) February 2015. Available on CD-ROM [In Portuguese.] Full text available at: 
http://www.proceedings.blucher.com.br/article-details/secagem-de-hortel-em-secador-de-cesto- 
rotativo-17330 (accessed 20 January 2016).

Sallam, Y.I., Aly, M.H., Nassar, A.F. and Mohamed, E.A. (2015) Solar drying of whole mint plant under 

natural and forced convection. Journal of Advanced Research 6, 171–178.

Scott, R.P.W. (2005) Essential oils. In: Worsfold, P., Townshend, A. and Poole, C. (eds) Encyclopedia of 

Analytical Science, 2nd edn. Elsevier, Oxford, UK, pp. 554–561.

Sujana, P., Sridhar, T.M., Josthna, P. and Naidu, C.V. (2013) Antibacterial activity and phytochemical 
analysis of Mentha piperita L. (peppermint) – an important multipurpose medicinal plant. Ameri-
can Journal of Plant Sciences 4, 77–83.

Sulieman,  A.M.E.,  Abdelrahman,  S.E.  and  Rahim  A.M.A.  (2011)  Phytochemical  analysis  of  local 
spearmint (Mentha spicata) leaves and detection of the antimicrobial activity of its oil. Journal of 
Microbiology Research 1, 1–4.

Sústriková, A. and Salamon, I. (2004) Essential oil of peppermint (Mentha × piperita L.) from fields in 

eastern Slovakia. Horticultural Science (Prague) 31, 31–36.

162 

M.C. Ferreira and A.H. Rosanova 

Tarhan, S., Telci, I., Tuncay, M.T. and Polatci, H. (2010) Product quality and energy consumption when 

drying peppermint by rotary drum dryer. Industrial Crops and Products 32, 420–427.

Turek, C. and Stintzing, F.C. (2012) Impact of different storage conditions on the quality of selected 

essential oils. Food Research International 46, 341–353.

Turek,  C.  and  Stintzing,  F.C.  (2013)  Stability  of  essential  oils:  a  review.  Comprehensive  Reviews  in 

Food Science and Food Safety 12, 40–53.

Tzanetakis, I.E., Postman, J.D., Samad, A. and Martin, R.R. (2010) Mint viruses: beauty, stealth, and 

disease. Plant Disease 94, 4–12.

Ullah,  N.,  Khurram,  M.,  Amin,  M.U.,  Afridi,  H.H.,  Khan,  F.A.,  Khayam,  S.M.U.,  Ullah,  S.,  Najeeb,  U., 
 Hussain, J. and Khan, M.A. (2011) Comparison of phytochemical constituents and antimicrobial 
activities of Mentha spicata from four northern districts of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. Journal of Applied 
Pharmaceutical Science 7, 72–76.

Vankar, P.S. (2004) Essential oils and fragrances from natural sources. Resonance – Journal of Science 

Education 9, 30–41.

Venkateshappa,  S.M.  and  Sreenath,  K.P.  (2013)  Potential  medicinal  plants  of  Lamiaceae.  American 

International Journal of Research in Formal, Applied and Natural Sciences 3, 82–87.

14  Moringa

Anthonia O. Oluduro,1* Dawn C.P. Ambrose,2 Aregbesola  

Oladipupo Abiodun1 and Alice L. Daunty3

1Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile-Ife, Nigeria; 2ICAR – Central Institute  

of Agricultural Engineering, Regional Centre, Coimbatore, India;  

3Mcrennet Foods, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India

14.1  Botany

14.1.1 

Introduction

Moringa oleifera, also commonly called mo-
ringa or drumstick, is a cultivated tree crop 
belonging  to  the  family,  Moringaceae.  It  is 
known as the ‘miracle tree’ due to its various 
medicinal benefits. The name of the genus 
comes from ‘murunggi’ or ‘muringa’ in the 
Tamil and Malayalam languages. Other com-
mon names by which the tree is known are the 
horseradish  tree  and  the  ben  oil  tree.  The 
tree is widely found in Asian countries such 
as India, Sri Lanka and the Philippines, and 
also in South America and African continent. 
In India, it is cultivated widely in the south-
ern states and is drought resistant and rapid 
growing.

As well as the leaves, various other parts 
of the tree (the pods, seeds and bark) are used 
in various medicinal and industrial applica-
tions. The leaf yield of the tree is dependent 
on the season, with the highest yield obtained 
in the summer. In countries such as India, 
the  leaves  are  harvested  once  in  every 
3 months if the tree is exclusively used for its 
foliage. The leaves of M. oleifera can be eaten 
as vegetable and also used as a nutritional 

supplement in the form of dried leaves and 
powder, which have greater shelf life (Fahey, 
2005;  Arabshahi  et  al.,  2007).  After  strip-
ping from their stalks, the leaves are used as a 
vegetable  in  various  recipes  in  India  and 
 Africa; they can also be used as a pot herb in 
the  preparation  of  sauces  (Price,  1985,  rev. 
2007). As they are a rich source of minerals, 
in  many  African  countries,  the  leaves  are 
used  in  combating  malnutrition  problems, 
and moringa leaf powder is used as a food 
supplement to combat malnutrition.

14.1.2  History

Historical writings reveal that ancient kings 
and  queens  used  moringa  leaves  and  fruit 
in their diets to maintain mental alertness 
and a healthy skin (Mahmood et al., 2010). 
The  moringa  plant  is  native  to  northern 
India,  where  it  was  first  described  around 
2000  bc  as  a  plant  with  many  medicinal 
 values. The health benefits of moringa were 
discovered by the Greeks, who then intro-
duced it to the Romans. As well as having 
been used by ancient civilizations, moringa 
has  gained  popularity  across  the  globe  in 
 recent times.

*Corresponding author, e-mail: aoluduro2003@yahoo.co.uk

© CAB International 2016. Leafy Medicinal Herbs: Botany, Chemistry,  
Postharvest Technology and Uses (eds D.C.P. Ambrose et al.) 

163

164 

A.O. Oluduro et al. 

14.1.3  Location

twigs. The twigs are green when fresh and 
turn brown when dried.

Moringa  is  believed  to  be  native  to  sub- 
Himalayan  tracts  of  northern  India  but  is 
now  found  worldwide  in  the  tropics  and 
subtropics. It is grown in the southern states 
of India as a commercial crop (see Fig. 14.1), 
and is also cultivated in Africa, South Amer-
ica, the Philippines and other regions/coun-
tries  owing  to  its  nutritional  benefits.  The 
trees require good sunlight for their growth, 
and they grow well at altitudes under 500 m 
and in any type of soil, although well-drained 
sandy or loamy soil with a pH of 6.3–7.0 is 
the ideal soil type. The presence of a long 
taproot makes the tree resistant to periods of 
drought. The trees can be easily grown from 
seed or from cuttings.

14.1.4  Morphology

Moringa  is  a  fast-growing  tree  which  can 
reach  a  maximum  height  of  7–12  m  and  a 
diameter of 20–40 cm at chest height (Foidl 
et al., 2001). Moringa leaves are green and 
double  or  triple  pinnate,  20–70  cm  long, 
with  the  leaflets  elliptical  or  obovate  and 
1–2 cm long. The leaves grow mostly at the 
branch tips and are greyish and downy when 
young. They have a long petiole with 8–10 
pairs of pinnae each bearing two pairs of op-
posite leaflets. There are glands at the bases 
of the petioles and pinnae (Morton, 1991, in 
Foidl et al., 2001). The leaves are arranged 
alternatively  as  compound  leaves  on  the 

Fig. 14.1.  A plantation of Moringa oleifera.

14.2  Chemistry

14.2.1  Chemical composition

The Trees for Life organization has reported 
that,  ounce-for-ounce,  moringa  leaves  con-
tain more vitamin A than carrots, more cal-
cium than milk, more iron than spinach, more 
vitamin C than oranges, and more potassium 
than bananas, and that their protein quality 
rivals  that  of  milk  and  eggs.  The  nutrient 
comparison  for  fresh  and  dehydrated  mo-
ringa leaves, with other common foods is pre-
sented in Table 14.1. The protein content of 
the  leaves is high (20–35% on a dry weight 
basis), and its amino acid balance is unusual 
in plant foods. Foidl and Paul (2008) present 
somewhat different data on the amounts of 
nutrients present in 100 g of fresh moringa 
leaves (vitamin A, 7564 IU; vitamin C, 51.7 mg; 
calcium,  185  mg;  and  potassium,  337  mg), 
and according to Yameogo et al. (2011), mo-
ringa  leaves  contain  27.2%  protein,  5.9% 
moisture, 17.1% fat, and 38.6% carbohydrates 
on a dry matter basis.

14.2.2  Phytochemistry

For the preparation of health drugs, know-
ledge  is  necessary  of  the  phytochemicals 
present  in  medicinal  plants.  Moringa  leaf 
extract is reported to contain phytosterols, 

Table 14.1.  Nutrient comparison of fresh and 
dried moringa leaves per 100 g compared with 
that of some common foods. From Fuglie, 1999, 
rev. 2001.

Fresh 
moringa 
leaves

Dried 
moringa 
leaves

Nutrient

Common foods

Calcium
440 mg
Potassium 259 mg
Protein
Vitamin A 6.8 mg
Vitamin C 220 mg

6.7 g

2003 mg Milk 120 mg
1324 mg Bananas 88 mg
27.1 g
Yoghurt 3.1 g
18.9 mg Carrots 1.8 mg
17 mg
Oranges 30 mg

 

Moringa 

165

triterpenoids, flavonoids and saponins. Ter-
penoids and saponins are compounds that 
have been found suitable for treating diabetes, 
and alkaloids and saponins for controlling 
cardiovascular anomalies, while flavonoids 
have antioxidant properties. Glycosides have 
also been reported in the ethanolic extract 
of moringa leaves, and the leaves have also 
been found to contain sugars such as rham-
nose in abundance.

14.3  Postharvest Technology

14.3.1  Processing

Moringa leaves can be used fresh as a minim-
ally processed vegetable, but they can also be 
used as the dried leaves. The various oper-
ations involved in the production of the dried 
leaves are described below.

Stripping of leaves

Stripping is the primary processing of morin-
ga leaves and is done manually. In African 
countries, the leaflets are removed from the 
tender  stalks  by  human  labour  before  the 
drying  operation.  Unwanted  and  yellowed 
leaves are discarded. However, in India, the 
harvested  branches  are  field  dried  and  the 
leaves are shed naturally (Fig. 14.2). Stripping 
before drying aids quicker and more uniform 
drying of the leaves with resulting better qual-
ity;  it  also  reduces  the  volume  of  material 
that needs to be handled. A prototype moringa 

Fig. 14.2.  Field drying of Moringa oleifera.

leaf stripper has been developed at the Cen-
tral  Institute  of  Agricultural  Engineering 
(CIAE), Regional Centre, Coimbatore, India, 
for mechanically stripping the leaflets. The 
machine is operated by a 2 hp single phase 
electric  motor  and  is  capable  of  stripping 
100 kg leaves in an hour (CIAE News, 2014).

Washing

For the preparation of minimally processed 
produce, washing is an important step. Water 
can reduce potential contamination by patho-
genic microorganisms, but it can also transfer 
them,  so  the  use  of  sanitizers  is  important 
for  removing  soil,  debris  and  any  pesti-
cide  residues,  but  especially  in  avoiding 
cross- contamination  between  clean  and 
contaminated product. In a study of wash-
ing of moringa leaves, Mishra et al. (2012) 
washed  the  leaves  in  running  water  to  re-
move dirt, and then soaked them in 1% sa-
line  solution  for  5  min  to  remove  microbes. 
Further washing  was  done  with  70%  etha-
nol  and  distilled  water  to  remove  the  dust 
and  pathogens  present  on  the  leaf  surface. 
Washing  studies  were  also  conducted  by 
Daunty  (2014)  who  soaked  and  rinsed  the 
fresh  and  mechanically  stripped  leaves  in 
plain water and chlorinated water. The mi-
crobial  load  before  and  after  washing  was 
estimated. In the fresh leaves, the initial mi-
crobial load was too numerous to count at 
10−5 dilution but at 10−6 dilution it was 212 
× 107 cfu. The total viable count for leaves 
washed with plain water was 165 × 107 at 10−5 
dilution.  Leaves  washed  with  chlorinated 
water (100 ppm sodium hypochlorite) had 
the least microbial count compared with all 
other treatments, with 4 × 107 cfu at 10−5 di-
lution and no colonies at 10−6 dilution.

Packaging

Packaging minimizes postharvest losses by 
protecting against mechanical damage, mi-
crobes, pests, dust, air pollution and moisture 
loss by acting as a barrier between the product 
and the environment. The influence of differ-
ent packaging materials on minimally pro-
cessed drumstick leaves was studied during 
storage. Pretreated (cleaned) drumstick leaves 

166 

A.O. Oluduro et al. 

were packaged in low density polyethylene 
(LDPE) and polypropylene materials of dif-
ferent thicknesses (150, 250 and 350) and stored 
under ambient (25 ± 2°C), and refrigerated 
(5 ± 2°C) conditions. The quality of the leaves 
was  analysed  during  storage.  The  results 
showed  that  350  gauge  LDPE  maintained 
leaf quality in terms of colour, β-carotene con-
tent, etc. and also with a smaller microbial 
load (Arun Kumar et al., 2013).

Other  packaging  treatments  have  also 
been tested for extending the shelf life of fresh 
moringa leaves. Leaves packed in 40 μm thick 
polypropylene bags with a 1% vent remained 
fresh under ambient conditions for two days 
and could be stored for up to 14 days when 
packed in 80 μm LDPE bags with a 1% vent 
under refrigerated conditions, based on the 
colour as measured by a colour meter. Quality 
analysis  of  the  packaged  samples  revealed 
that not much difference was observed be-
tween them except in ascorbic acid (vitamin C) 
content.  Sensory  evaluation  studies  also 
showed little difference in taste, colour, tex-
ture  and  overall  acceptability  between  the 
stored samples and the fresh sample when 
cooked for consumption. The market results 
based on consumer acceptance were prom-
ising (Daunty, 2014).

Drying

Drying is one of the oldest methods of food 
preservation and represents a very important 
aspect  of  food  processing.  Traditionally  in 
India,  farmers  dry  harvest  moringa  stems 
in the field under the sun, which results in 
more microbes and dust on the leaves and is 
therefore an unhygienic practice. Sun drying 
also  results  in  a  loss  of  nutrients  from  the 
leaves and a deterioration in quality. Several 
studies on the drying of moringa leaves have 
been conducted.

Leaves were dried in a convective type 
dryer at a temperature range 50–80°C and a 
constant air velocity of 0.5 m/s. The sample 
dried at 60°C had a better colour than those 
dried at 50, 70 and 80°C. The chroma (colour 
difference from the control [fresh] leaves) of 
the  samples  dried  at  50–80°C  ranged  from 

4.9238 to 9.5258, and was the least for the 
sample  dried  at  60°C,  which  validated  the 
sensory  results  that  were  obtained  (Premi 
et al., 2010). A study of the nutritive value 
of moringa leaves dried by different methods 
showed  that  nutrient  retention  was  higher 
in shade-dried than sun and oven dried leaves. 
(Joshi and Mehta, 2010).

Arun Prabhu et al. (2011) reported that 
dehydrating moringa leaves by oven, wind 
and sun drying yielded more or less similar 
results when used in combination with ger-
micide, salt and turmeric treatments. The pro-
cess of moisture removal prevents a favourable 
environment  for  the  growth  of  microbes, 
and so the dried product can be stored for a 
longer period of time. Preservation techniques 
involving  dehydration  could  be  effectively 
used to extend the shelf life of moringa leaves 
without altering their nutritional value.

Gyamfi et al. (2011) dried moringa leaves 
by air, freeze and oven drying. The mineral 
content was more in the powdered samples 
obtained  by  freeze  drying,  followed  by  air 
drying and oven drying. However, air drying 
could be the preferred drying method as it is 
better economically and the air-dried pow-
der  also  recorded  higher  concentrations  of 
elements.

In another study, moringa leaf powder 
was prepared by sun, shade, cabinet and oven 
drying. The air temperature for cabinet and 
oven  drying  was  fixed  at  60°C.  The  study 
showed that cabinet drying allowed superior 
retention  of  nutrients  compared  with  the 
other  drying  methods  (Satwase  et  al., 
2012).

Ambrose  et  al.  (2013)  attempted  to  up-
grade the drying method to produce a better 
quality end product, by studying the effect of 
different drying methods on the colour of the 
product.  Harvested  moringa  leaves  (PKM–I 
variety) were stripped, washed and dried in a 
polyhouse dryer or a forced flow mechanical 
dryer (CIAE-IEP model), and under sun and 
shade for comparison. It took 6 h to dry from 
an initial moisture content of 85% (wet basis, 
w.b) to 5% (w.b) in the polyhouse dryer, 3 h in 
the mechanical dryer, a day under sun drying 
and  2  days  under  shade  drying.  The  colour 

 

Moringa 

167

scores  measured  using  a  HunterLab  colour 
spectrophotometer indicated that mechanical 
drying,  followed  by  polyhouse  drying,  were 
superior to shade and sun drying.

In another study by Ambrose et al. (2015), 
fresh moringa leaves (PKM-1) were mechan-
ically stripped and dried by sun drying and 
by solar, vacuum and cabinet drying (at 45, 
50, 55 and 60°C). The drying characteristics 
of the leaves showed that most drying took 
place in the falling rate period, and that dry-
ing rate increased with drying time. Various 
thin layer drying models were fitted to the 
experimental  data  for  stripped  and  dried 
leaves.  Among  them,  the  Wang  and  Singh 
model gave the best fit with the highest R2 
and least χ2 values. Cabinet drying at 50°C 
resulted in better quality in terms of colour 
and nutrient content.

14.3.2  Value addition

Dried moringa leaves can be further processed 
as  a  value  added  product  in  the  form  of 
powder. When the leaves are plentiful, drying 
and pulverizing them as moringa leaf pow-
der  provides  an  easy  storage  method.  The 
powder can be consumed by adding to food 
preparations as a supplement. In India, it has 
a  great  export  potential,  and  moringa  leaf 
processing is carried out in Coimbatore and 
Erode districts of Tamil Nadu by small-scale 
processors. The leaves are exported in dried 
form as powder,  capsules,  tablets,  moringa 
tea leaf etc., and are used as health supple-
ments (Ambrose et al., 2014).

In African countries, moringa leaves are 
used as a flavorant, and can be added to meat 
preparations (Teye et al., 2013).

Salem  et  al.  (2013)  investigated  the 
nutritional benefits of dried moringa leaves 
added to Labneh cheese, and found that this 
led to an increase in the vitamin and mineral 
contents. Sensory studies revealed that the 
product was acceptable to consumers. Dried 
moringa leaves can also be added to buttermilk 
to  improve  its  nutritional  value.  Amala,  a 
product made from yam flour, can be fortified 

by the addition of 2.5% moringa leaf powder 
to the flour in order to improve its nutritional 
value (Karim et al., 2013).

14.4  Uses

14.4.1  General uses

Both fresh and dried moringa leaves are used 
in food preparations in many countries. Young 
leaves  of  the  plant  are  consumed  as  cooked 
vegetable, and the leaflets can be used in any 
vegetable recipe. The fresh leaves can be used 
in  the  preparation  of  soups  and  salads.  The 
dried leaves can be used as tea and also as a 
pot herb in the preparation of soup and por-
ridge. After grinding, dried leaves store well 
for a long time and can be used as a flavorant 
or as a health supplement, for which use there 
are also capsule and tablet preparations. Mo-
ringa leaves are also considered to be a pana-
cea  for  malnutrition  (Ambrose  and  Daunty, 
2015)  because  of  their  rich  nutrient  content. 
Apart from being used as a food, the leaves are 
also fed as mulch to animals to increase their 
milk yield. They also assist nitrogen fixation 
in the soil when used as a manure.

14.4.2  Pharmacological uses

The moringa tree is a valuable crop due to its 
various health benefits. The leaves, being rich 
in iron, are used in childhood malnutrition in 
children, and also as a healthy iron substitute 
in lactating and pregnant women. The tree is 
known as ‘mother’s milk’ in the African con-
tinent, as it increases milk production in lac-
tating women.

Traditional health practitioners have sug-
gested that tumours could be cured by morin-
ga leaves. Studies on the effect of moringa leaf 
extracts and fractions therefrom on a cancer-
ous cell line and mouse cancer model showed 
that  they  had  anticancer  properties  towards 
the  cells  and  increased  the  mouse  survival 
rate.  The  anticancer  fraction  was  character-
ized (Krishnamurthy et al., 2015).

168 

A.O. Oluduro et al. 

The bioactive phytochemical β-sitosterol 
found in aqueous extracts of Moringa leaves 
has been found to have anti-ulcer properties, 
and  Marcu  (2005)  indicated  that  moringa 
has the following health benefits: it reduces 
cholesterol  levels  and  triglycerides  (‘bad’ 
fats);  it  controls  blood  sugar  and  helps  nor-
mal  sugar  and  energy  balance;  it  provides 
vitamins and minerals that are necessary for 
maintaining normal physiology; and it offers 
powerful  anti-ageing  and  anti-inflammatory 
substances, many with anticancer properties. 
It has also been reported that the antioxidants 
present  in  moringa  leaves  aid  in  the  treat-
ment  of  oxidative  stress,  liver  ailments  and 
stomach disorders. In addition, moringa is ef-
fective  against  nervous  disorders,  including 
headaches, migraines, hysteria, and epilepsy 
(Richardson, 2009, cited in Bey (2010).

14.5  Summary

The overall aspects of moringa in terms of 
its  nutritional  benefits,  processing  and 
uses have been reported elsewhere, and it 
is regarded as the ‘miracle tree’ known for 
its nutritional benefits and grown at a com-
mercial scale in many countries. It is also 
grown in the kitchen garden for household 
purposes  in  countries  such  as  India.  The 
leaves, which are high in nutrient content 
can be processed either as a fresh product 
or as dehydrated/dried leaves and powder. 
Mechanical processing of the leaves results 
in  better  quality  and  more  hygienic  prod-
ucts  than  does  conventional  manual  pro-
cessing. Moringa is considered as a crop for 
combating  malnutrition  in  many  African 
countries.

References

Ambrose, D.C.P. and Daunty, A.L. (2015) Moringa oleifera mother’s best friend – an ideal health food. 

Food and Beverage World 42(2), 33–34.

Ambrose, D.C.P., Naik, R. and Annamalai, S.J.K. (2013) A comparative study on the different drying 
methods  of  Moringa  oleifera  leaves  for  powder  production.  In:  Sasikumar,  B.,  Dinesh,  R., 
Prasath,  D., Biju, C.N. and Srinavasan, V. (eds) National Symposium on Spices and Aromatic 
Crops, SYMSAC-VII, Postharvest Processing of Spices and Fruit Crops, 27–29 November, 2013, 
Madikeri,  Karnataka.  Souvenir  and  Abstracts.  Indian  Society  for  Spices,  Kozhikode,  Kerala, 
India, p. 241. Available at: http://www.indianspicesociety.in/iss/pdf/SYMSAC%20VII%20-%20
Souvenir.pdf (accessed 21 January 2016).

Ambrose, D.C.P., Naik, R. and Daunty, A.L. (2014) Moringa oleifera leaves – an excellent health food. 
In: Rajendran, A. (ed.) The National Seminar on Emerging Trends in Biodiversity Conservation & 
Sustainable Utilisation (NSBCS-2014), held at Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, on 29–30 January 
2014. Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India, pp. 96–97.

Ambrose, D.C.P., Naik, R. and Daunty, A.L. (2015) Investigation on the thin layer drying characteristics 
of Moringa oleifera leaves. In: National Seminar on Emerging Solutions for Sustainable Agricul-
ture and Food Processing, Punjab Agricultural University, Punjab, India, 23–25 February 2015. 
Indian Society of Agricultural Engineers, New Delhi, p. 31.

Arun Kumar, P., Nirmala, R., Bhavya, E.P. (2013) Effect of different packaging and storage conditions 
on shelf-life of processed drumstick leaves. International Journal of Agricultural Engineering 6, 
28–31.

Arabshahi, D.S., Devi, D.V. and Urooj, A. (2007) Evaluation of antioxidant activity of some plant ex-

tracts and their heat, pH and storage stability. Food Chemistry 100, 1100–1105.

Arun Prabhu, R., Rajan, A.P. and Santhalia, S. (2011) Comparative analysis of preservation techniques 

on Moringa oleifera. International Journal of Agricultural and Food Science 1, 12–22.

Bey, H.H. (2010) All Things Moringa. The Story of an Amazing Tree of Life. Published by www.
allthingsmoringa.com. Available at: http://www.remediosnaturales.es/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/ 
eBook-moringa-ingles.pdf (accessed 21 January 2016).

CIAE News (2014) Mechanical processing of Moringa oleifera leaves. CIAE News 23(2), 2.
Daunty, A.L. (2014) Investigation on mechanical processing of Moringa oleifera leaves in its fresh 
and  dried  form.  Unpublished  M.  Tech.  (Food  Processing  and  Engineering)  thesis,  Karunya 
University, Coimbatore, India.

 

Moringa 

169

Fahey, J.W. (2005) Moringa oleifera: a review of the medical evidence for its nutritional, therapeutic, 
and prophylactic properties. Part 1. Trees for Life Journal 1:5. Available at: http://www.tfljournal.
org/article.php/20051201124931586 (accessed 21 January 2016).

Foidl, N. and Paul, R. (2008) Moringa oleifera. In: Janick, J. and Paull, R.E. (eds) The Encyclopedia of 

Fruit & Nuts. CAB International, Wallingford, UK, pp. 509–512.

Foidl, N., Makkar, H.P.S and Becker, K. (2001) The potential of Moringa oleifera  for agricultural and 
 industrial uses. Available at: http://miracletrees.org/moringa-doc/the_potential_of_moringa_oleifera_for_ 
agricultural_and_industrial_uses.pdf (accessed 21 January 2016).

Fuglie, L.J. (ed.) (1999) The Miracle Tree: Moringa oleifera: Natural Nutrition for the Tropics. Church 
World  Service,  Dakar.  Data  used  in  Table  14.1  available  at:  http://www.moringatree.co.za/ana-
lysis.html (accessed 21 January 2016).

Gyamfi, E.T., Kwarteng, I.K., Ansah, M.O., Anim, A.K., Ackah, M., Kpattah, L. and Bentil, N.O. (2011) 
Effects of processing on Moringa oleifera. Proceedings of the International Academy of Ecology 
and Environmental Sciences 1, 179–185.

Joshi, P. and Mehta, D. (2010) Effect of dehydration on the nutritive value of drumstick leaves. Journal 

of Metabolomics and Systems Biology 1(1), 5–9.

Karim, O.R., Kayode, R.M., Oyeyinka, S.A. and Oyeyinka, A.T. (2013) Proximate, mineral and sensory 
qualities of ‘amala’ prepared from yam flour fortified with moringa leaf powder. Food Science and 
Quality Management 12(2), 10–22.

Krishnamurthy, P.T., Vardarajalu, A., Wadhwani, A. and Patel, V. (2015) Identification and character-
ization of a potent anticancer fraction from the leaf extracts of Moringa oleifera L. Indian Journal 
of Experimental Biology 53, 98–103.

Mahmood, K.T., Mugal, T. and Ul Haq, I. (2010) Moringa oleifera: a natural gift – a review. Journal of 

Pharmaceutical Science and Research 2, 775–781.

Marcu, M.G. (2005) Miracle Tree. KOS Health Publications, La Canada, California.
Mishra, S.P., Singh, P. and Singh, S. (2012) Processing of Moringa oleifera for human consumption. 

Bulletin of Environment, Pharmacology and Life Sciences 2(1), 28–31.

Morton, J.F. (1991) The horseradish tree, Moringa pterygosperma (Moringaceae) – a boon to arid lands. 

Economic Botany 45, 318–333.

Premi, M., Sharma, H.K., Sarkar, B.C. and Singh, C. (2010) Kinetics of drumstick leaves (Moringa oleifera) 

during convective drying. African Journal of Plant Science 4, 391–400.

Price, M.L. (1985, rev. 2007) The Moringa Tree. ECHO Technical Note, ECHO Community, North Fort 
Myers, Florida. Revised version (2007) available at: http://miracletrees.org/moringa-doc/ebook_
moringa.pdf (accessed 21 January 2016).

Richardson, A. (2009) Moringa oleifera – Food, Medicine and Forage Crop. Cited in Bey, H.H. (2010) 

All Things on Moringa. p. 23. Available at: www.allthingsmoringa.com (accessed 10 June 2016).
Salem, A.S., Salama, W.M., Hassanein, A.M. and El Ghandour, H.M.A. (2013) Enhancement of nutri-
tional and biological values of Labneh by adding dry leaves of Moringa oleifera as innovative 
dairy products. World Applied Sciences Journal 22, 1594–1602.

Satwase, A.N., Pandhre, G.R., Sirsat, P.G. and Wade, Y.R. (2012) Studies on drying characteristic and 
nutritional  composition  of  drumstick  leaves  by  using  sun,  shadow,  cabinet  and  oven  drying 
methods. Open Access Scientific Reports 2, 584. Available at: http://www.omicsonline.org/scientific- 
reports/srep584.digital/srep584.html (accessed 21 January 2016).

Teye, G.A., Baffoe, F. and Teye, M. (2013) Effects of moringa (Moringa oleifera) leaf powder and dawadawa 
(Parkia biglobosa), on sensory characteristics and nutritional quality of frankfurter-type sausages – a 
preliminary study. Global Advanced Research Journal of Agricultural Science 2(1), 29–33.

Yameogo, C.W., Bengaly, M.D., Savadogo, A., Nikiema, P.A. and Traore, S.A. (2011) Determination 
of chemical composition and nutritional values Moringa oleifera leaves. Pakistan Journal of 
Nutrition 10, 264–268.

15  Oregano

K. Hüsnü Can Bas¸er1,2* and Ne¸set Arslan3

1Anadolu University, Eskis¸ehir, Turkey; 2Near East University, Nicosia,  

N. Cyprus; 3Ankara University, Ankara, Turkey

15.1  Botany

15.1.1 

Introduction

The  family  Lamiaceae  is  composed  of  an-
nual  or  perennial  plants  that  are  herbs  or 
shrubs  and  are  distributed  mainly  in  the 
northern hemisphere and especially in the 
Mediterranean region. Their stems are gen-
erally square in cross section. The botanical 
description is as follows: Leaves simple or 
lobed, opposite, each pair at right angles to 
the previous one (decussate). Flowers bisex-
ual  and  zygomorphic,  emerging  from  the 
bottom of bracts, in dense clusters and ver-
ticillastrate. Bracts similar to leaves. Calyx 5 
toothed, campanulate or tubular. Corolla tubu-
lar  at  base,  bilabiate  above.  Upper  lip  2, 
lower lip 3 toothed. Stamen 4, 2 fertile and 
2 sterile; 2 with long and 2 with short fila-
ments.  Ovary  superior,  2-celled  and  each 
cell  2-ovuled,  style  subterminal  or  ovary 
4-parted  and  each  lobe  1-ovuled  and  style 
gynobasic with 2-cleft apex. Fruits schizocarp 
usually with 4 dry nutlets (Ietswaart, 1982; 
Baytop,  1999;  Zeybek  and  Zeybek,  2002; 
Fakılı, 2010).

Origanum is the most important genus 
in the Lamiaceae family. The genera Thymus, 

*Corresponding author, e-mail: khcbaser@gmail.com

Thymbra,  Coridothymus  and  Satureja  are 
close  to  Origanum,  and  all  five  are  com-
monly  called  ‘kekik’,  and  are  used  and 
traded  similarly.  In  Turkey,  78  species,  of 
which  39  are  endemic,  belong  to  these  five 
genera  (Table  15.1).  They  all  smell  similar 
owing  to  the  presence  of  thymol  and/or 
carvacrol in their essential oils.

The most important of the Thymus spe-
cies  is  the  cultivated  T.  vulgaris,  which  is 
not  a  native  species  in  Turkey.  However, 
T.  longicaulis,  T.  eigii,  T.  kotschyanus, 
T. pulvinatus and T. praecox are native and 
are used locally or traded.

Of  the  Satureja  species,  S.  hortensis 
(Bahçe  sateri,  Bakla  kekig˘i)  is  cultivated 
and traded as a fresh herb for use in salads 
and  soups.  S.  cuneifolia,  S.  wiedemannia, 
S. thymbra, S. macrantha and S. spicigera 
are collected from the wild and traded.

Of the Coridothymus species, C. capitatus 
(Spanish oregano, timari) is another traded 
oregano species. Among the Thymbra spe-
cies,  T.  spicata  (Karabas¸  kekig˘ i,  zahter)  is 
wildcrafted and locally traded and in Turkey 
it ranks second to Origanum species (Bas¸er 
et al., 1993; Arslan, 1994; Ceylan, 1996; Arslan, 
2002;  Bas¸er,  2002b;  Sarı  and  Og˘ uz,  2002; 
Bayram, 2003).

170 

© CAB International 2016. Leafy Medicinal Herbs: Botany, Chemistry,  
Postharvest Technology and Uses (eds D.C.P. Ambrose et al.)

 

Oregano 

171

Table 15.1.  Number of kekika species in Turkey. 
From (Ietswaart, 1982; Bas¸er et al., 1993; Baytop, 
1999; Arslan, 2002; Bas¸er, 2002a,b; Zeybek and 
Zeybek, 2002; Sadıkog˘lu, 2005; Fakılı, 2010.

Genera of kekik

Thymus
Origanum
Satureja
Thymbra
Coridothymus
Total species in all genera

Endemic 
species

Total 
species

20
15
  4
–
–
39

38
23
14
  2
  1
78

aThe name kekik includes all of the genera listed in the table.

Worldwide, Thymus (thyme), Origanum 
(oregano) and Satureja (savory) species are 
separately  traded  as  commercial  commod-
ities; C. capitatus is known in world trade 
as Spanish oregano. Thymbra is not recog-
nized in the world trade, but is used locally 
and traded under the name of wild thyme. 
This  chapter  places  the  greatest  emphasis 
on Origanum species, which are referred to 
as either oregano or kekik.

Classification

The genus Origanum belongs to the family 
Lamiaceae.  Origanum  species  are  treated 
under  ten  sections:  Amaracus  (Gleditsch) 
Bentham, Anatolicon Bentham, Brevifilamen-
tum  Ietsw.,  Longitubus  Ietsw.,  Chilocalyx 
(Briquet) Ietsw., Majorana (Miller) Bentham 
(O. onites L., O. majorana L.), Campanulat-
icalyx Ietsw., Elongatispica Ietsw., Origanum 
(O.  vulgare  L.)  and  Prolaticorolla  Ietsw. 
Some 56 species have been characterized in 
these  sections  in  the  world.  The  most  im-
portant  species  (including  subspecies)  are 
O.  vulgare,  O.  onites  and  O.  majorana.  In 
Turkey, important species are O. onites (Izmir 
kekig˘i, Bilyalı kekik, Turkish oregano), O. vul-
gare L. subsp. hirtum (Link) Ietsw. ( Istanbul 
kekig˘ i, Kara kekik, Greek oregano) and O. du-
bium Boiss. (syn. O. majorana L. – Turkish 
type) (Alanya kekig˘i, beyaz kekik, yag˘ kekig˘i). 
O.  vulgare  is  cultivated  worldwide.  It  has 
six subspecies, namely, O. vulgare L. subsp. 
glandulosum (Desf.) Ietsw., O. vulgare subsp. 
gracile  (K.  Koch)  Ietsw.,  O.  vulgare  subsp. 

hirtum  (Link)  Ietsw.,  O.  vulgare  L.  subsp. 
virens  (Hoffmanns.  &  Link)  Ietsw.,  O.  vul-
gare  L.  subsp.  viridulum  (Martrin-Donos) 
Nyman  and  O.  vulgare  L.  subsp.  vulgare. 
Four of these subspecies grow wild in Turkey 
and the most important of them commercially 
is O. vulgare subsp. hirtum.

Other commercially important Origanum 
species  in  Turkey  are  O.  minutiflorum 
Schwartz et Davis (Tota kekig˘ i, Toka kekig˘ i, 
Yayla  kekig˘ i,  Sütçüler  Kekig˘ i),  an  endemic 
species, and  O. syriacum L. subsp.  bevanii 
(Holmes)  Greuter  et  Burdet  (Suriye  Kekig˘ i, 
Tarsus kekig˘ i, zahter). Some other Origanum 
species are also locally consumed as herbal 
tea  or  condiment.  However,  here  we  shall 
concentrate  more  on  O.  onites.  It  should 
also  be  noted  here  that  Lippia  graveolens 
Kunth.  (Verbenaceae)  is  known  in  world 
trade as Mexican oregano (Ietswaart, 1982; 
Davis,  1988;  Bas¸er,  1993;  Arslan,  2002; 
Bas¸er, 2002b; Sadıkog˘ lu, 2005; Anonymous, 
2011).

15.1.2  Origin

Most Origanum L. species are mainly distrib-
uted in the Mediterranean region, and being 
locally endemic naturally grow in countries 
neighbouring the Mediterranean sea, such as 
Turkey,  Greece,  Morocco,  Algeria,  Tunisia, 
Spain, Italy, Croatia, Albania, Cyprus, Syria, 
Lebanon,  Israel,  Egypt  and  Palestine.  Some 
75% of all Origanum species occur only in 
the eastern Mediterranean region (Fig. 15.1).

15.1.3  Location

The  economically  important  O.  vulgare  is 
the most widely distributed Origanum spe-
cies,  growing  naturally  in  Portugal,  Spain, 
Albania, Greece, Croatia, Turkey, Iran, India, 
China,  Afghanistan,  Russia,  Pakistan,  Mo-
rocco, the Azores islands and the Canary is-
lands.  It  has  six  subspecies  and  has  been 
introduced to many countries of the world. 
It is the most widely distributed species in 
Turkey, and four subspecies occur in Turkey. 
These are: O. vulgare subsp. gracile, subsp. 
hirtum (Fig. 15.2), subsp. viridulum and subsp. 

172 

K.H.C. Bas¸er and N. Arslan 

3 taxa

2 taxa

46 locally
grown taxa

9 taxa

21 taxa

8 taxa

3 taxa

Fig. 15.1.  Distribution of locally grown Origanum taxa in different Mediterranean countries/regions 
(Kokkini, 1996).

above 100 cm. The stems are four angled as 
in  other  Lamiaceae  species.  The  plants  are 
generally  branched  and  the  branches  are 
somewhat  hairy.  The  leaves  are  sessile  in  a 
couple of species and with stalks in others. 
The  lamina  is  diverse  in  shape  and  size; 
while  in  some  species  its  width  and  length 
are  similar,  in  others  its  length  is  2–2.5× 
greater than its width. The leaves have two 
types  of  glandular  trichomes:  sessile  and 
stalked. These are also present on the stem, 
bract, calyx and corolla. The leaves are pale 
bluish green and leathery. The colour is due 
to the waxy cuticle covering the surface (Iet-
swaart, 1982; Sadıkog˘lu, 2005; Fakılı, 2010). 
Generally, each stem and branch has a spike 
and  these  are  of  different  shapes  and  sizes. 
The  inflorescence  is  paniculate.  The  bracts 
are generally round or oval and of different 
sizes (Sadıkog˘lu, 2005). The calyces are vari-
able. The corolla is two toothed, the upper 
lip emarginate or with two short teeth, and 
the lower lip three toothed. There are four 
stamens. The style is quite variable in shape 
and  size.  The  nutlet  is  small,  ovoid  and 
brown. The weight of 1000 seeds is 0.1–0.2 g 
(Ietswaart, 1982; Sadıkog˘lu, 2005; Marquard 
and Malko, 2006; Fakılı, 2010).

Fig. 15.2.  Oregano – Origanum vulgare ssp. hirtum. 
Seedlings. Photo courtesy of Muzaffer Özdemir

vulgare. O. onites, in contrast, is distributed 
in  Turkey,  Greece,  the  Aegean  islands  and 
Sicily. Some Origanum species grow natur-
ally outside the Mediterranean area (Ietswaart, 
1982;  Bas¸er,  1993;  Ceylan,  1996;  Kokkini, 
1996; Arslan, 2002).

15.1.4  Morphology

Origanum  species  are  perennial  and  are 
usually  30–60  cm  tall  or,  in  some  species, 

 

Oregano 

173

15.2  Agronomy

15.2.1  Soil requirements

Origanum  species  grow  in  almost  every 
type of soil, including dry, stony, lime and 
slightly alkaline soils, but they prefer loamy, 
alluvial, permeable, fast warming and humus- 
rich  soils.  Moist,  cold,  sandy,  hard  and 
lumpy soils are not suitable. However, some 
of  the  species  do  not  follow  these  criteria, 
and  can  thrive  in  lime-rich  and  lime-poor 
soils. The soil pH should be neutral or slightly 
alkaline  (Ceylan,  1996;  Arslan,  2002;  Sarı 
and Og˘ uz, 2002; Bayram, 2003).

Soils  from  natural  growing  areas  of  
O.  onites  showed  the  following  features:  pH 
6.03–7.99, sandy, limey, saltless or slightly salty, 
rich  in  organic  matter,  nitrogen  and  phos-
phorus and poor in potassium (Gönüz and 
Özgörücü, 1999).

15.2.2  Climatic requirements

As  a  Mediterranean  plant,  Origanum  species 
grow in all areas under the Mediterranean in-
fluence or in neighbouring areas. They thrive 
in the temperate and subtropical belts of Eur-
ope and Asia, and can be found on sunny hills, 
open  areas  and  roadsides  in  central  Europe. 

Day  length,  light  density,  vegetation  period, 
temperature  and  precipitation  are  important 
climatic factors for oregano, and it likes direct 
sunlight and is resistant to drought conditions.
O. vulgare is more resistant to cold than 
other species and O. onites is more sensitive 
to cold. Cold-resistant types are also avail-
able. O. onites shows seasonal dimorphism, 
and forms two basic leaf types that enable it 
to withstand extreme dry summer months. 
The plant develops small and short leaves 
in summertime, and bigger leaves in other 
months – an adaptation to changing envir-
onmental conditions (Ceylan, 1996; Arslan, 
2002;  Sarı  and  Og˘uz,  2002;  Bayram,  2003; 
Marquard and Malko, 2006).

15.2.3  Production

O. onites is the most widely cultivated ore-
gano species in Turkey, although the cultiva-
tion  of  O.  vulgare  subsp.  hirtum  has  just 
started.  The  domestication  of  some  other 
Origanum  species  is  ongoing.  The  cultiva-
tion of O. onites in the Izmir area started in 
1990 as an alternative crop to the ailing to-
bacco farming industry and has become suc-
cessful (Table 15.2). Cultivated areas reached 
9428 ha in 2012, with a crop yield of 11,598 
tons.  Although  oregano  is  cultivated  in  19 

Table 15.2.  Annual production and export of oregano (kekik) in Turkey.a From TUIK, 2014.

Export

Year

1995
1999
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013

Cultivation (ha)

Production (ton)

Yield (kg/da)

Amount (kg)

Revenue (US$)

–
–
–

5250.0
4700.0
5885.3
6075.1
8413.3
8495.7
8535.1
7770.7
9428.3
8913.7

–
–
–
7,000
6,400
7,979
5,350
10,082
12,329
11,190
10953
11,598
13,658

–
–
–
133
136
136
  88
120
145
131
141
123
153

5,501,000
7,640,000
8,783,887
9,759,878
10,661,968
12,262,814
11,242,264
9,999,780
11,339,670
12,923,995
13,261,353
14,003,696
14,813,000

13,690,000
16,556,000
14,807,927
17,411,576
18,342,331
23,486,761
41,032,769
44,786,064
29,173,121
28,992,794
30,903,286
40,582,079
56,324,000

aProduction records have been kept only since 2004.

174 

K.H.C. Bas¸er and N. Arslan 

provinces, Denizli alone comprises 92% of 
the cultivation areas and is responsible for 
86% of the production (TUIK, 2014).

O. vulgare and O. majorana (sweet mar-
joram, mercankös¸k) are cultivated worldwide.

15.2.4  Cultivars

Domestication  studies  on  O.  onites  started 
in 1970s at the Faculty of Agriculture of Ege 
University and two cultivars were eventually 
registered as ‘Ceylan-2002’ and ‘Tays¸i-2002’. 
They were developed by selective breeding 
and  cloning  techniques,  but  have  not  yet 
been used in cultivation. There are several 
cultivars of O. vulgare and O. majorana in 
Turkey  and  abroad.  Two  new  cultivars  of 
O.  vulgare  subsp.  hirtum,  called  ‘Tınmaz’ 
and ‘Bas¸er’, are in the process of registration 
at the Turkish Ministry of Food, Agriculture 
and Livestock.

15.2.5  Harvesting

No crop is expected in the first year of culti-
vation.  However,  if  seedlings  have  been 
transplanted  early  in  the  field  and  show 
good development, one harvest may be pos-
sible. Harvest time is important for the qual-
ity  of  the  crop.  Harvesting  is  appropriate 
when 50% of the plants are flowering. Leaf 
fall  is  also  a  determinant  of  harvest  time, 
and if the leaves start drying early, an early 
harvest is recommended. Depending on the 
climatic  and  maintenance  conditions,  two 
to  six  harvests  a  year  may  be  possible.  In 
non-irrigated  fields,  one  harvest  is  made. 
For  O.  onites  in  irrigated  fields,  generally 
three harvests are possible, the first in mid-
May, the second at the end of July and the 
third in mid-October. Depending on the ex-
tent  of  the  field,  harvesting  is  done  manu-
ally, or by using a scythe, lawnmower or a 
special machine designed to harvest kekik. 
Harvesting  height  must  be  10  cm  above 
ground. Mid-September is suitable for seed 
harvesting  (Ceylan,  1996;  Bayram  et  al., 
1999;  Arslan,  2002;  Sarı  and  Og˘ uz,  2002; 
Marquard and Malko; 2006).

15.3  Postharvest Technology

15.3.1  Drying

Harvested  kekik  plants  (kekiks)  are  dried. 
Stack  height  must  not  exceed  35–40  cm 
during  drying,  and  stacks  must  be  turned 
over  frequently  to  enable  good  drying. 
Otherwise, darkening or rotting may occur. 
Artificial drying over a short period is ideal 
for quality, and is performed by blowing hot 
air not exceeding 35–40oC over the plants. 
In  Turkey,  both  wildcrafted  and  cultivated 
kekiks are sun dried. The dried kekiks are 
beaten with wooden sticks or other such im-
plements  to  separate  the  leaves  from  the 
stems.  Sieving  is  then  performed  to  com-
plete the process. The fresh herbage yield is 
1500–3000  kg/da  (decare)  from  the  second 
year onward. If the crop is well maintained, the 
dried herbage yield may go up to 800 kg/da; 
otherwise, it may go down to 150–200 kg/da; 
3.5–4.5 kg fresh kekik yields 1 kg of dried 
kekik.  The  seed  yield  is  28–30  kg/da.  
Depending on the crop and the essential oil 
yield, 2–5 kg/da or more of essential oil can 
be  obtained  (Arslan,  1994,  2002;  Ceylan, 
1996;  Sarı  and  Og˘ uz,  2002;  Bayram,  2003; 
Marquard and Malko, 2006).

15.3.2  Value addition

Oregano oil, oregano water and oregano tea 
have been used for their regulatory proper-
ties on the gastrointestinal system, and for 
their  antitussive  and  antimicrobial  proper-
ties  on  the  respiratory  system.  There  is  a 
monograph ‘Origani herba’ (Oregano herb), 
in  the  European  Pharmacopoeia  (EDQM, 
2014) that requires the use of dried herbs of 
O. onites and O. vulgare subsp. hirtum, or a 
mixture of these) containing 2.5% essential 
oil with at least 60% carvacrol and thymol 
(which are found in the essential oil of ore-
gano).  As  80%  of  the  immune  system  is 
regulated  by  the  small  intestines,  oregano 
and  carvacrol  can  be  considered  useful  in 
immune  system-related  disorders  (Furness 
et al., 1999).

 

Oregano 

175

15.4  Uses

15.4.1  General uses

Kekik has been used as a spice or condiment 
in salads, soups, pizzas and other foods and 
food products. As noted above, it is a source 
of  essential  oil  that  contains  carvacrol  and 
thymol  –  two  isomeric  monoterpenoid 
phenols,  as  main  constituents.  These  com-
pounds have been shown to be antimicrobial 
and antioxidant. Many other activities of these 
constituents and of the essential oils that con-
tain them have been reported (Bas¸er, 2008).

15.4.2  Pharmacological uses

Oregano is mainly used for gastrointestinal 
system disorders in Turkish folk medicine. 
The following biological activities of carvac-
rol and carvacrol-bearing essential oils have 
been proven:

 • 

 • 

 • 

 • 

 • 
 • 

activity against dental caries and peri-
odontal  disease  (Botelho  et  al.,  2007, 
2008);
analgesic, antinociceptive, antiangiogenic 
and  anti-inflammatory  activities  (Wag-
ner et al., 1986; Cingi et al.,1992; Aydin 
et al., 1996; Demirci et al., 2004; Xu 
et al., 2006; Landa et al., 2009; Ocana- 
Fuentes et al., 2010; Yamada et al., 2010; 
Doerner  et  al.,  2011;  Joca  et  al.,  2012; 
Guimaraes  et  al.,  2012a,b;  Liu  et  al., 
2012; Silva et al., 2012; Spiering et al., 
2012; Boskabady and Jalali, 2013; Lima 
et al., 2013; Pahlavan et al., 2013);
anticancer  activity  (Zeytinoglu  et  al., 
1998,  2003;  Ipek  et  al.,  2003,  2005; 
Koparal and Zeytinoglu, 2003; Andersen, 
2006; Karkabounas et al., 2006; Mezzoug 
et al., 2007; Ozkan and Erdogan, 2011; 
Aydin et al., 2014; Subramaniyan et al., 
2014);
anticonvulsant activity (Quintans-Junior 
et al., 2010);
antidepressant activity (Melo et al., 2011);
antidiabetic activity (Deng et al.,2013; Gul 
et al., 2013; Ezhumalai et al., 2014; Hajial-
izadeh et al., 2014; Hyun et al., 2014);

 • 

 • 

 • 

 • 

 • 

 • 

 • 

 • 

 • 

 • 
 • 

 • 

antimutagenic 

anti-elastase  properties  (Kacem  and 
Meraihi, 2006);
anti-gnawing properties against rodents 
(Ahn et al., 1995);
anti-genotoxic, 
and 
DNA-protective  activities  (Ipek  et  al., 
2005; Aydin et al., 2005a,b; Horvathova 
et  al.,  2007;  Slamenova  et  al.,  2007; 
Carolina Vicuna et al., 2010);
antihistamine activity (Boskabady et al., 
2012);
antihypercholesterolaemic  activity  (Case  
et al., 1995; Ozdemir et al., 2008; Akkol 
et al., 2009);
anti-lipoxygenase activity (Albano et al., 
2012);
antimicrobial  activity  (Rideal  et  al., 
1930; Martin-Smith and Khatoon, 1963; 
Sticher,  1977;  Knobloch  et  al.,  1986; 
Helander et al., 1998; Ultee et al., 1999, 
2002; Lambert et al., 2001; Pauli, 2001; 
Baricevic et al., 2002; Burt et al., 2005, 
2007; Kristinsson et al., 2005; Bayramo-
glu  et  al.,  2006;  Ben  Arfa  et  al.,  2006; 
Demirci  et  al.,  2006;  Di  Pasqua  et  al., 
2006;  Friedman  et  al.,  2006;  Gill  and 
Holley, 2006a,b; Neri et al., 2006; Nos-
tro et al., 2006; Soylu et al., 2006; Veld-
huizen et al., 2006; Botelho et al., 2007; 
Guilen et al., 2007; Lopez et al., 2007; 
Martinez-Romero  et  al.,  2007;  Bakkali 
et  al.,  2008;  Nowotarska  et  al.,  2014; 
Zabka et al., 2014; Zanini et al., 2014);
antioxidant and free-radical scavenging 
activity (Prieto et al., 2007; Kosar et al., 
2008;  Ozkan  et  al.,  2010;  Yin  et  al., 
2012;  Alinkina  et  al.,  2013;  Inanc  and 
Maskan, 2013; Slamenova et al., 2013; 
Carbone-Howell et al., 2014; Yousefzadi 
et al., 2014);
anti-parasitic  activity  against,  e.g. 
protozoa,  Schistosoma,  Leishmania, 
Trypanosoma, Plasmodium (Force et al., 
2000;  Tampieri  et  al.,  2003;  Morillas 
Marquez  et  al.,  2004;  Tasdemir  et  al., 
2006; Hussain et al., 2011; Farias-Junior 
et al., 2012);
anti-platelet activity (Son et al., 2005);
antispasmodic activity (Van Den Boucke 
and Limli, 1980, 1982; Goze et al., 2010);
antitussive  and  bronchodilatory  activ-
ities  (Van  Den  Broucke  and  Lemli, 

176 

K.H.C. Bas¸er and N. Arslan 

1981;  Boskabady  and  Jandaghi,  2003; 
Boskabady  et  al.,  2003,  2005;  Hudaib 
and Aburjai, 2007);
antiviral  activity  (Dunkic  et  al.,  2010; 
Pilau et al., 2011; Santoyo et al., 2014);
cardioprotective activity (Magyar et al., 
2004; Earley et al., 2010; Santos et al., 
2011; Yu et al., 2013);
cognitive-enhancing  activity 
et al., 2012);

(Azizi  

 • 

 • 

 • 

 • 

 • 

 • 

 •  deodorant  activity  (Varel  and  Miller, 
2001a,b; Varel, 2002; Varel et al., 2004, 
2006);
effectiveness  in  honey  bee  diseases 
(Ozkirim, 2006; Ozkirim et al., 2012);
effects  on  female  hormones  (Trabace  
et al., 2011);
food preservative and feed additive activ-
ity  (Bassett,  2000;  Losa,  2001;  Krimpen 
and Binnendijk, 2001; Moller, 2001; Oni-
bala et al., 2001; Botsoglou et al., 2002a,b; 
Bozkurt and Baser, 2002a,b; Alcicek et al., 
2003, 2004; Busquet et al., 2006; Cabuk  
et  al.,  2006a,b;  Horosova  et  al.,  2006; 
Oviedo-Rondon  et  al.,  2006;  Si  et  al., 
2006; Garcia et al., 2007; Jang et al., 2007; 
Janz et al., 2007; Doyle et al., 2008; Ah-
madifar  et  al.,  2011;  Tunc  and  Duman, 
2011; Giannenas et al., 2012; Zodrow et al., 
2012; Belda-Galbis et al., 2013, 2014; Cas-
tillo et al., 2014; Gormez and Diler, 2014; 
Jouki et al., 2014; Kamimura et al., 2014; 
Otoni  et  al.,  2014;  Pirgozliev  et  al., 
2014; Quintero et al., 2014; Ramos et al., 
2014; Upadhyay et al., 2014);
inhibitor  of  gastrointestinal  contrac-
tion,  choleretic  and  antidiarrhoeal  ac-
tivity  (Cingi  et  al.,  1992;  Tabata  et  al., 
1993;  Aydin  et  al.,  1997d;  Skocibusic 
and Bezic, 2003; Oliveira et al., 2012);
 •  hepatoprotective/anti-hepatotoxic activ-
ity (Canbek et al., 2008; Slamenova et al., 
2008, 2011, 2013; Uyanoglu et al., 2008, 
2011; Aristatile et al., 2009, 2011, 2013, 
2014);

 • 

 • 

 • 

 •  hypotensive  (essential  oil)  and  hyper-
tensive activity (aromatic water) (Aydin 
et al., 1997a,b,c,d, 2007);
immunomodulatory activity (Chan et al., 
2005);
insecticidal and acaricidal activity (Kar-
pouhtsis et al., 1998; Aslan et al., 2005; 
Erler, 2005; Park et al., 2005; Sampson 
et al., 2005; Dietrich et al., 2006; Cetin 
et  al.,  2007,  2009,  2010;  Choi  et  al., 
2007;  Cos¸kun  et  al.,  2008;  Vucinic 
et al., 2011; Koc et al., 2013; Tabanca 
et  al.,  2013;  Tong  et  al.,  2013;  Yilmaz 
and Tunaz, 2013; Ma et al., 2014);

 •  nematicidal  activity  (Oka  et  al.,  2000; 
Tsao  and  Yu,  2000;  Lei  et  al.,  2010; 
Ntalli  et  al.,  2010,  2011;  Faria  et  al., 
2013);

 •  neuroprotective  activity  (Peters  et  al., 
2012;  Celik  et  al.,  2013;  Zhong  et  al., 
2013);
active  in  prevention  of  obesity  (Cho  
et al., 2012);

 • 

 •  phytotoxic, herbicidal and allelopathic 
activity (Dudai et al., 1999; Taban et al., 
2013; Vasilakoglou et al., 2013); and

 •  wound  healing  activity  (Altiok  et  al., 

2010; Suntar et al., 2011).

15.5  Summary

Oregano has been found to have many bene-
ficial properties as a medicinal herb. In recent 
years, after the ban of the use of antibiotics in 
animal  feed,  essential  oils,  and  especially 
oregano oil rich in carvacrol, have been stud-
ied as alternatives to antibiotics. Their use in 
animal feed has been shown to improve health, 
yield and quality of poultry and pigs, and many 
such products are on the market. In some of 
these, essential oil is micro-encapsulated for 
easy availability to the animals (Franz et al., 
2010; Wallace et al., 2010).

References

Ahmadifar, E., Falahatkar, B. and Akrami, R. (2011) Effects of dietary thymol–carvacrol on growth 
performance,  hematological  parameters  and  tissue  composition  of  juvenile  rainbow  trout, 
Oncorhynchus mykiss. Journal of Applied Ichthyology 27, 1057–1060.

 

Oregano 

177

Ahn, Y.J., Lee, S.B., Okubo, T. and Kim, M. (1995) Antignawing factor of crude-oil derived from Thujopsis 

dolabrata S-et-Z var. hondai sawdust against mice. Journal of Chemical Ecology 21, 263–271.

Akkol, E.K., Avci, G., Kucukkurt, I., Keles, H., Tamer, U., Ince, S. and Yesilada, E. (2009) Cholesterol- 
reducer, antioxidant and liver protective effects of Thymbra spicata L. var. spicata. Journal of 
Ethnopharmacology 126, 314–319.

Albano, S.M., Sofia Lima, A., Graca Miguel, M., Pedro, L.G., Barroso, J.G. and Cristina Figueiredo, A. 
(2012) Antioxidant, anti-5-lipoxygenase and antiacetylcholinesterase activities of essential oils 
and decoction waters of some aromatic plants. Records of Natural Products 6(1), 35–48.

Alcicek, A., Bozkurt, M. and Cabuk, M. (2003) The effect of an essential oil combination derived from 
selected herbs growing wild in Turkey on broiler performance. South African Journal of Animal 
Science 33, 89–94.

Alcicek, A., Bozkurt, M. and Cabuk, M. (2004) The effect of a mixture of herbal essential oils, an organic 
acid or a probiotic on broiler performance. South African Journal of Animal Science 34, 217–222.
Alinkina, E.S., Misharina, T.A. and Fatkullina, L.D. (2013) Antiradical properties of oregano, thyme, 

and savory essential oils. Applied Biochemistry and Microbiology 49, 73–78.

Altiok, D., Altiok, E. and Tihminlioglu, F. (2010) Physical, antibacterial and antioxidant properties of 
chitosan films incorporated with thyme oil for potential wound healing applications. Journal of 
Materials Science – Materials in Medicine 21, 2227–2236.

Andersen, A. (2006) Final report on the safety assessment of sodium p-chloro-m-cresol, p-chloro-m-cresol, 
chlorothymol, mixed cresols, m-cresol, o-cresol, p-cresol, isopropyl cresols, thymol, o-cymen-5-ol, and 
carvacrol. International Journal of Toxicology 25(Suppl 1), 29–127.

Anonymous (2011) Türkiye Bitkileri Veri Servisi (TÜBI˙VES) (Turkish Plant Data Service). Available at: 
http://web.archive.org/web/20071028083719/http://turkherb.ibu.edu.tr/  (accessed  25  January 
2016).

Aristatile, B., Al-Numair, K.S., Veeramani, C. and Pugalendi, K.V. (2009) Antihyperlipidemic effect of 
carvacrol on d-galactosamine-induced hepatotoxic rats. Journal of Basic and Clinical Physiology 
and Pharmacology 20, 15–27.

Aristatile,  B.,  Al-Numair,  K.S.,  Al-Assaf,  A.H.  and  Pugalendi,  K.V.  (2011)  Pharmacological  effect  of 
carvacrol on d-galactosamine-induced mitochondrial enzymes and DNA damage by single-cell gel 
electrophoresis. Journal of Natural Medicines 65, 568–577.

Aristatile, B., Al-Assaf, A.H. and Pugalendi, K.V. (2013) Carvacrol suppresses the expression of inflam-
matory marker genes in d-galactosamine-hepatotoxic rats. Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Medi-
cine 6, 205–211.

Aristatile, B., Al-Assaf, A.H. and Pugalendi, K.V. (2014) Carvacrol ameliorates the Ppar-A and cyto-
chrome P450 expression on d-galactosamine induced hepatotoxicity rats. African Journal of Trad-
itional Complementary and Alternative Medicines 11, 118–123.

Arslan, N. (1994) Tütün, ilaç ve baharat bitkileri ders notları. (Unpublished Lecture Notes), Ankara 

University, Ankara.

Arslan, N. (2002) Kokulu bitkiler yetis¸tirme ve ıslahı ders notları. (Unpublished Lecture Notes), Ankara 

University, Ankara.

Aslan, I., Calmasur, O., Sahin, F. and Caglar, O. (2005) Insecticidal effects of essential plant oils against 
Ephestia kuehniella, Lasioderma serricorne and Sitophilus granarius. Zeitschrift für Pflanzenk-
rankheiten und Pflanzenschutz 112, 257–267.

Aydin, E., Turkez, H. and Keles, M.S. (2014) The effect of carvacrol on healthy neurons and N2a cancer 
cells: some biochemical, anticancerogenicity and genotoxicity studies. Cytotechnology 66, 149–157.
Aydin,  S.,  Ozturk,  Y.,  Beis,  R.  and  Baser,  K.H.C.  (1996)  Investigation  of  Origanum  onites,  Sideritis 

congesta and Satureja cuneifolia oils for analgesic activity. Phytotherapy Research 10, 342–344.

Aydın, S., Ozturk, Y. and Baser, K.H.C. (1997a) Cardiovascular actions of kekik (Origanum onites L.) 
essential oil. In: Cos¸kun, M.(ed.) Proceedings of the 11th Symposium on Plant Originated Crude 
Drugs (11th BIHAT), Ankara, 22–24 May 1996. Üniversitesi Eczacılık Fakültesi Yayınları No. 75, 
Ankara University, Ankara, pp. 332–338.

Aydin, S., Ozturk, Y. and Baser, K.H.C. (1997a) Cardiovascular actions of kekik (Origanum onites L.) 
aqueous distillate which accumulates under the essential oil. In: Cos¸kun, M. (ed.) Proceedings of 
the 11th Symposium on Plant Originated Crude Drugs (11th BIHAT), Ankara, 22–24 May 1996. 
Ankara Üniversitesi Eczacılık Fakültesi Yayınları No. 75, Ankara University, Ankara, pp. 339–344.
Aydin, S., Ozturk, Y. and Baser, K.H.C. (1997b) Choleretic actions of kekik (Origanum onites L.) aque-
ous distillate which accumulates under the essential oil. In: Cos¸kun, M. (ed.) Proceedings of the 

178 

K.H.C. Bas¸er and N. Arslan 

11th Symposium on Plant Originated Crude Drugs (11th BIHAT), Ankara, 22–24 May 1996. Ankara 
Üniversitesi Eczacılık Fakültesi Yayınları No. 75, Ankara University, Ankara, pp. 345–351.

Aydin, S., Baser, K.H.C. and Ozturk, Y. (1997d) The chemistry and pharmacology of Origanum (kekik) 
water. In: Franz, C., Máthé, A. and Buchbauer, G. (eds) Proceedings of the 27th International Sym-
posium  on  Essential  Oils,  September  8–11,  1996.  Essential  Oils:  Basic  and  Applied  Research. 
 Allured Publishing, Vienna, pp. 52–60.

Aydin, S., Basaran, A.A. and Basaran, N. (2005a) The effects of thyme volatiles on the induction of 

DNA damage by the heterocyclic amine IQ and mitomycin C. Mutation Research 581, 43–53.

Aydin, S., Basaran, A.A. and Basaran, N. (2005b) Modulating effects of thyme and its major ingredients on oxi-
dative DNA damage in human lymphocytes. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 53, 1299–1305.
Aydin, Y., Kutlay, O., Ari, S., Duman, S., Uzuner, K. and Aydin, S. (2007) Hypotensive effects of car-

vacrol on the blood pressure of normotensive rats. Planta Medica 73, 1365–1371.

Azizi, Z., Ebrahimi, S., Saadatfar, E., Kamalinejad, M. and Majlessi, N. (2012) Cognitive-enhancing 
activity of thymol and carvacrol in two rat models of dementia. Behavioural Pharmacology 23, 
241–249.

Bakkali, F., Averbeck, S., Averbeck, D. and Idaomar, M. (2008) Biological effects of essential oils –a 

review. Food and Chemical Toxicology 46, 446–475.

Baricevic, D. and Bartol, T. (2002) The biological/pharmacological activity of the Origanum genus. In: 
Kintzios, S.E. (ed.) Oregano, the Genera Origanum and Lippia. Taylor and Francis, London and 
New York, pp. 177–213.

Bas¸er, K.H.C. (1993) Essential oils of Anatolian Labiatae: a profile. Acta Horticulture 333, 217–238.
Bas¸er,  K.H.C.  (2002a)  The  Turkish  Origanum  species.  In:  Kintzios,  S.E.  (ed.)  Oregano,  the  Genera 

 Origanum and Lippia. Taylor and Francis, London and New York, pp. 109–126.

Bas¸er, K.H.C. (2002b) Aromatic biodiversity among the flowering plant taxa of Turkey. Pure and Applied 

Chemistry 74, 527–545.

Bas¸er, K.H.C. (2008) Biological and pharmacological activities of carvacrol and carvacrol bearing essential 

oils. Current Pharmaceutical Design 14, 3106–3120.

Bas¸er, K.H.C., Özek, T., Tümen, G. and Sezik, E. (1993) Composition of the essential oils of Turkish 

 Origanum species with commercial importance. Journal of Essential Oil Research 5, 619–623.

Bassett, R. (2000) Oregano’s positive impact on poultry production. World Poultry 16, 31–34.
Bayram,  E.  (2003)  Kekik  Yetis¸tiricilig˘i.  Ege  Üniversitesi  Tarımsal  Aras¸tırma  ve  Uygulama  Merkezi 

Bülteni, Yayım Bülteni No. 42, Izmir, Turkey.

Bayram, E., Geren, H., Ceylan, A. and Özay, N. (1999) I˙zmir kekig˘i (Origanum onites L.) ’nde farkli 
biçim ve yükseklig˘in verim ve kaliteye etkisi. In: Türkiye III: Tarla Bitkileri Kongresi, 15–18 Kasım 
1999, Adana, Turkey, pp. 222–226.

Bayramoglu, E.E., Gulumser, G. and Karaboz, I. (2006) Ecological and innovative fungicide for leather 

industry: essential oil of Origanum minutiflorum. JALCA 101, 96–104.

Baytop, T. (1999) Türkiye’de Bitkiler ile Tedavi. Nobel Tıp Yayınevleri, I˙stanbul, Turkey.
Belda-Galbis, C.M., Pina-Perez, M.C., Leufven, A., Martinez, A. and Rodrigo, D. (2013) Impact assess-
ment of carvacrol and citral effect on Escherichia coli K12 and Listeria innocua growth. Food 
Control 33, 536–544.

Belda-Galbis, C.M., Leufven, A., Martinez, A. and Rodrigo, D. (2014) Predictive microbiology quantifi-

cation of the antimicrobial effect of carvacrol. Journal of Food Engineering 141, 37–43.

Ben Arfa, A., Combes, S., Preziosi-Bellov, L., Gontard, N. and Chalier, P. (2006) Antimicrobial activity 

of carvacrol related to its chemical structure. Letters in Applied Microbiology 43, 149–154.

Boskabady, M.H. and Jalali, S. (2013) Effect of carvacrol on tracheal responsiveness, inflammatory me-
diators, total and differential WBC count in blood of sensitized guinea pigs. Experimental Biology 
and Medicine 238, 200–208.

Boskabady, M.H. and Jandaghi, P. (2003) Relaxant effects of carvacrol on guinea pig tracheal chains 

and its possible mechanisms. Pharmazie 58, 661–663.

Boskabady, M.H., Ramazani, M. and Tabei, T. (2003) Relaxant effects of different fractions of essential 

oil from Carum copticum on guinea pig tracheal chains. Phytotherapy Research 17, 1145–1149.
Boskabady, M.H., Jandaghi, R., Kiani, S. and Hasanzadeh, L. (2005) Antitussive effect of Carum copti-

cum in guinea pigs. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 97, 79–82.

Boskabady, M.H., Tabanfar, H., Gholamnezhad, Z. and Sadeghnia, H.R. (2012) Inhibitory effect of Zataria 
multiflora Boiss and carvacrol on histamine (H1) receptors of guinea-pig tracheal chains. Funda-
mental and Clinical Pharmacology 26, 609–620.

 

Oregano 

179

Botelho, M.A., Nogueira, N.A.P., Bastos, G.M., Forseca, S.G.C., Lemos, T.L.G. and Matos, F.J.A. (2007) 
Antimicrobial activity of the essential oil from Lippia sidoides, carvacrol and thymol against oral 
pathogens. Brazilian Journal of Medical and Biological Research 40, 349–356.

Botelho, M.A., Rao, V.S., Montenegro, D., Menezes Bandeira, M.A., Cruz Fonseca, S.G., Pinto Noguei-
ra, N.A., Ribeiro, R.A. and Castro Brito, G.A. (2008) Effects of a herbal gel containing carvacrol 
and chalcones on alveolar bone resorption in rats on experimental periodontitis. Phytotherapy 
Research 22, 442–449.

Botsoglou, N.A., Floron-Paneri, P., Christaki, E., Fletouris, D.J. and Spais, A.B. (2002a) Effect of dietary 
oregano  essential  oil  on  performance  of  chickens  and  on  iron-induced  lipid  peroxidation  of 
breast, thigh and abdominal fat tissues. British Poultry Science 43, 223–230.

Botsoglou, N.A., Christaki, E., Fletouris, D.J., Florou-Paneri, P. and Spais, A.B. (2002b) The effect of 
dietary oregano essential oil on lipid oxidation in raw and cooked chicken during refrigerated 
storage. Meat Science 62, 259–265.

Bozkurt, M. and Bas¸er, K.H.C. (2002a) The effect of commercial organic acid, probiotic and essential 
oil mixture at two levels on the performance of broilers. In: First European Symposium on Bioactive 
Secondary Plant Products in Veterinary Medicine, 4–5 October 2002, Vienna, Austria.

Bozkurt, M. and Bas¸er, K.H.C. (2002b) The effect of antibiotic, mannan oligosaccharide and essential oil 
mixture on the laying hen performance. In: First European Symposium on Bioactive Secondary 
Plant Products in Veterinary Medicine, 4–5 October 2002, Vienna, Austria.

Busquet, M., Calsamiglia, S., Ferret, A. and Kamel, C. (2006) Plant extracts affect in vitro rumen microbial 

fermentation. Journal of Dairy Science 89, 761–771.

Burt, S.A., Vlielander, R., Haagsman, H.P. and Veldhuizen, E.J.A. (2005) Increase in activity of essential 
oil components carvacrol and thymol against Escherichia coli O157:H7 by addition of food stabilizers. 
Journal of Food Protection 68, 919–926.

Burt, S.A., van der Zee, R., Koets, A.P., de Graaff, A.M., van Knapen, F. and Gaastra, W. (2007) Carvacrol 
induces heat shock protein 60 and inhibits synthesis of flagellin in Escherichia coli O157:H7. 
Applied and Environmental Microbiology 73, 4484–4490.

Cabuk, M., Bozkurt, M., Alcicek, A., Akbas, Y. and Kucukyilmaz, K. (2006a) Effect of a herbal essential 
oil mixture on growth and internal organ weight of broilers from young and old breeder flocks. 
South African Journal of Animal Science 36, 135–141.

Cabuk, M., Bozkurt, M., Alcicek, A., Catli, A.U. and Bas¸er, K.H.C. (2006b) Effect of a dietary essential 
oil mixture on performance of laying hens in the summer season. South African Journal of Animal 
Science 36, 215–221.

Canbek, M., Uyanoglu, M., Bayramoglu, G., Senturk, H., Erkasap, N. and Koken, T. (2008) Effects of 

carvacrol on defects of ischemia reperfusion in the liver. Phytomedicine 15, 447–452.

Carbone-Howell, A.L., Stebbins, N.D. and Uhrich, K.E. (2014) Poly(anhydride-esters) comprised exclu-
sively of naturally occurring antimicrobials and EDTA: antioxidant and antibacterial activities. 
Biomacromolecules 15, 1889–1895.

Carolina Vicuna, G., Stashenko, E.E. and Luis Fuentes, J. (2010) Chemical composition of the Lippia 
origanoides  essential  oils  and  their  antigenotoxicity  against  bleomycin-induced  DNA  damage. 
Fitoterapia 81, 343–349.

Case, G.I., He, L., Mo, H.B. and Elson, C.E. (1995) Induction of geranyl pyrophosphate pyrophosphatase 

activity by cholesterol-suppressive isoprenoids. Lipids 30, 357–359.

Castillo, S., Perez-Alfonso, C.O., Martinez-Romero, D., Guillen, F., Serrano, M. and Valero, D. (2014) 
The essential oils thymol and carvacrol applied in the packing lines avoid lemon spoilage and 
maintain quality during storage. Food Control 35, 132–136.

Celik, F., Gocmez, C., Bozkurt, M., Kaplan, I., Kamasak, K., Akil, E., Dogan, E., Guzel, A. and Uzar, E. 
(2013) Neuroprotective effects of carvacrol and pomegranate against methotrexate-induced toxicity 
in rats. European Review for Medical and Pharmacological Sciences 17, 2988–2993.

Cetin, H., Erler, F. and Yanikoglu, A. (2007) A comparative evaluation of Origanum onites essential oil 
and its four major components as larvicides against the pine processionary moth. Thaumetopoea 
wilkinsoni Tams. Pest Management Science 63, 830–833.

Cetin, H., Cilek, J.E., Aydin, L. and Yanikoglu, A. (2009) Acaricidal effects of the essential oil of 
Origanum minutiflorum (Lamiaceae) against Rhipicephalus turanicus (Acari: Ixodidae). Veterinary 
Parasitology 160, 359–361.

Cetin, H., Cilek, J.E., Oz, E., Aydin, L., Deveci, O. and Yanikoglu, A. (2010) Acaricidal activity of Satureja 
thymbra L. essential oil and its major components, carvacrol and gamma-terpinene against adult 
Hyalomma marginatum (Acari: Ixodidae). Veterinary Parasitology 170, 287–290.

180 

K.H.C. Bas¸er and N. Arslan 

Ceylan, A. (1996) Tıbbi Bitkiler-II (Uçucu yag˘ bitkileri). Ege Üniversitesi Ziraat Fakültesi Yayınları No. 

481, Izmir Turkey.

Chan, A.S.L., Pang, H.H., Yip, E.C.H., Tam, Y.K. and Wong, Y.H. (2005) Carvacrol and eugenol differ-
entially stimulate intracellular Ca2+ mobilization and mitogen-activated protein kinases in Jurkat 
T-cells and monocytic THP-1 cells. Planta Medica 71, 634–639.

Cho, S., Choi, Y., Park, S. and Park, T. (2012) Carvacrol prevents diet-induced obesity by modulating 
gene expressions involved in adipogenesis and inflammation in mice fed with high-fat diet. Journal 
of Nutritional Biochemistry 23, 192–201.

Choi, I.-H., Kim, J., Shin, S.-C. and Park, I.-K. (2007) Nematicidal activity of monoterpenoids against 
the pine wood nematode (Bursaphelenchus xylophilus). Russian Journal of Nematology 15, 35–40.
Cingi, M.I., Kirimer, N., Sarikardasoglu, I., Cingi, C. and Bas¸er, K.H.C. (1992) Pharmacological activities 
of the essential oils of Origanum onites and Origanum minutiflorum. In: Bas¸er, K.H.C. (ed.) 
Proceedings of the 9th Symposium on Plant Drugs. Anadolu Universitesi Yayınları No. 641, Anadolu 
University Press, Eskis¸ehir, Turkey, pp. 10–15.

Cos¸kun, S., Giriskin, O., Kurkcuoglu, M., Giriskin, A.O., Kirimer, N. and Bas¸er, K.H.C. (2008) Acaricidal 
efficacy of Origanum onites L. essential oil against Rhipicephalus turanicus (Ixodidae). Parasitology 
Research 103, 259–261.

Davis, P.H. (1982) Flora of Turkey and Aegean Islands, Vol. 7. Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh, UK.
Davis, P.H. (1988) Flora of Turkey and Aegean Islands, Vol. 10. Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh, UK.
Demirci, F., Paper, D.H., Franz, G. and Bas¸er, K.H.C. (2004) Investigation of the Origanum onites L. es-
sential oil using the chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) assay. Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry 52, 251–254.

Demirci, B., Baser, K.H.C., Tabanca, N. and Wedge, D.E. (2006) Characterization of volatile constituents 
of Haplopappus greenei and studies on the antifungal activity against phytopathogens. Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry 54, 3146–3150.

Deng, W., Lu, H. and Teng, J. (2013) Carvacrol attenuates diabetes-associated cognitive deficits in rats. 

Journal of Molecular Neuroscience 51, 813–819.

Dietrich, G., Dolan, M.C., Peralta-Cruz, J., Schmidt, J., Piesman, J. and Eisen, R.J. (2006) Repellent 
activity  of  fractioned  compounds  from  Chamaecyparis  nootkatensis  essential  oil  against 
nymphal Ixodes scapularis (Acari: Ixodidae). Journal of Medical Entomology 43, 957–961.

Di Pasqua, R., Hoskins, N., Betts, G. and Mauriello, G. (2006) Changes in membrane fatty acids composition 
of microbial cells induced by addition of thymol, carvacrol, limonene, cinnamaldehyde and eugenol 
in the growing media. Journal of Agricultural Food Chemistry 54, 2745–2749.

Doerner, J.F., Hatt, H. and Ramsey, I.S. (2011) Voltage- and temperature-dependent activation of TRPV3 
channels is potentiated by receptor-mediated PI(4,5)P-2 hydrolysis. Journal of General Physiology 
137, 271–288.

Doyle, P.S., Sajid, M., O’Brien, T., Dubois, K., Engel, J.C. and Mackey, Z.B. (2008) Drugs targeting 

parasite lysosomes. Current Pharmaceutical Design 14, 889–900.

Dudai, N., Poljakoff-Mayber, A., Mayer, A.M., Putievsky, E. and Lerner, H.R. (1999) Essential oils as 
allelochemicals and their potential use as bioherbicides. Journal of Chemical Ecology 25, 1079–
1089.

Dunkic, V., Bezic, N., Vuko, E. and Cukrov, D. (2010) Antiphytoviral activity of Satureja montana L. 
ssp variegata (Host) P.W. Ball essential oil and phenol compounds on CMV and TMV. Molecules 
15, 6713–6721.

Earley, S., Gonzales, A.L. and Garcia, Z.I. (2010) A dietary agonist of transient receptor potential 
cation  channel  V3  elicits  endothelium-dependent  vasodilation.  Molecular  Pharmacology 
77(4), 612–620.

Erler, F. (2005) Fumigant activity of six monoterpenoids from aromatic plants in Turkey against the two 
stored-product pests confused flour beetle, Tribolium confusum and Mediterranean flour moth, 
Ephestia kuehniella. Zeitschrift für Pflanzenkrankheiten und Pflanzenschutz 112, 602–611.

EDQM (2014) European Pharmacopoeia, 8th edn. European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines – 

Council of Europe, Strasbourg, France.

Ezhumalai, M., Radhiga, T. and Pugalendi, K.V. (2014) Antihyperglycemic effect of carvacrol in com-
bination with rosiglitazone in high-fat diet-induced type 2 diabetic C57BL/6J mice. Molecular 
and Cellular Biochemistry 385, 23–31.

Fakılı, O. (2010) Türkiye’de Kekik Adı Ile Anılan Bitkiler Konusunda Yapılan Çalıs¸maların Envanteri. Ç.Ü. 

Fen Bilimleri Enstitüsü Yüksek Lisans Tezi, Adana, Turkey.

 

Oregano 

181

Faria, J.M.S., Barbosa, P., Bennett, R.N., Mota, M. and Cristina Figueiredo, A. (2013) Bioactivity against 
Bursaphelenchus xylophilus: nematotoxics from essential oils, essential oils fractions and decoc-
tion waters. Phytochemistry 94, 220–228.

Farias-Junior, P.A., Rios, M.C., Moura, T.A., Almeida, R.P., Alves, P.B., Blank, A.F., Fernandes, R.P. and 
Scher, R. (2012) Leishmanicidal activity of carvacrol-rich essential oil from Lippia sidoides Cham. 
Biological Research 45, 399–402.

Force, M., Sparks, W.S. and Ronzio, R.A. (2000) Inhibition of enteric parasites by emulsified oil of oregano 

in vivo. Phytotherapy Research 14, 213–214.

Franz, C., Bas¸er, K.H.C. and Windisch, W. (2010) Aromatic plants, essential oils and volatiles in animal 

feeding – a European perspective. Flavour and Fragrance Journal 25, 327–340.

Friedman, M., Henika, P.R., Levin, C.E. and Mandrell, R.E. (2006) Antimicrobial wine formulations 
active against the foodborne pathogens Escherichia coli O157:H7 and Salmonella enterica. Journal 
of Food Science 71, M245–M251.

Furness, J.B., Kunze, W.A. and Clerc, N. (1999) Nutrient tasting and signaling mechanisms in the gut. 
II. The intestine as a sensory organ: neural, endocrine, and immune responses. American Journal 
of Physiology 277, G922–G928.

Garcia, V., Catala-Gregori, P., Madrid, J., Hernandez, F., Megias, M.D. and Andrade-Montemayor, H.M. 
(2007) Potential of carvacrol to modify in vitro rumen fermentation as compared with monensin. 
Animal 1, 675–680.

Giannenas, I., Triantafillou, E., Stavrakakis, S., Margaroni, M., Mavridis, S., Steiner, T. and Karagouni, E. 
(2012) Assessment of dietary supplementation with carvacrol or thymol containing feed additives 
on  performance,  intestinal  microbiota  and  antioxidant  status  of  rainbow  trout  (Oncorhynchus 
mykiss). Aquaculture 350, 26–32.

Gill, A.O. and Holley, R.A. (2006a) Disruption of Escherichia coli, Listeria monocytogenes and Lacto-
bacillus sakei cellular membranes by plant essential oils aromatics. International Journal of Food 
Microbiology 108, 1–9.

Gill, A.O. and Holley, R.A. (2006b) Inhibition of membrane bound ATPases of Escherichia coli and 
Listeria monocytogenes by plant oil aromatics. International Journal of Food Microbiology 111, 
170–174.

Gönüz, A. and Özgörücü, B. (1999)An investigation on the morphology, anatomy and ecology of Origanum 

onites L. Turkish Journal of Botany 23, 19–32.

Gormez, O. and Diler, O. (2014). In vitro antifungal activity of essential oils from Thymbra, Origanum, 
Satureja species and some pure compounds on the fish pathogenic fungus, Saprolegnia parasitica. 
Aquaculture Research 45, 1196–1201.

Goze, I., Alim, A., Cetinus, S.A., Cetin, A., Durmus, N., Atas, A.T. and Vural, N. (2010). In vitro anti-
microbial, antioxidant, and antispasmodic activities and the composition of the essential oil of 
Origanum acutidens (Hand.-Mazz.) Ietswaart. Journal of Medicinal Food 13, 705–709.

Guilen, F., Zapata, P.J., Martinez-Romero, D., Castillo, S., Serrano, M. and Valero, D. (2007) Improvement 
of the overall quality of table grapes stored under modified atmosphere packaging in combination 
with natural antimicrobial compounds. Journal of Food Science 72, S185–S90.

Guimaraes,  A.G.,  Silva,  F.V.,  Xavier,  M.A.,  Santos,  M.R.V.,  Oliveira,  R.C.M.,  Oliveira,  M.G.B.,  De 
Souza, C.C. and Quintans-Junior, L.J. (2012a) Orofacial analgesic-like activity of carvacrol in 
rodents. Zeitschrift fur Naturforschung C 67, 481–485.

Guimaraes, A.G., Xavier, M.A., de Santana, M.T., Camargo, E.A., Santos, C.A., Brito, F.A., Barreto, E.O., 
Cavalcanti, S.C., Antoniolli, A.R., Oliveira, R.C. and Quintans-Junior, L.J. (2012b) Carvacrol 
attenuates mechanical hypernociception and inflammatory response. Naunyn Schmiedeberg’s 
Archives of Pharmacology 385, 253–263.

Gul, A.S.D., Fadillioglu, E., Karabulut, I., Yesilyurt, A. and Delibasi, T. (2013) The effects of oral carvacrol 

treatment against H2O2 induced injury on isolated pancreas islet cells of rats. Islets 5, 149–155.

Hajializadeh, Z., Nasri, S., Kaeidi, A., Sheibani, V., Rasoulian, B. and Esmaeili-Mahani, S. (2014) 
Inhibitory effect of Thymus caramanicus Jalas on hyperglycemia-induced apoptosis in in vitro 
and in vivo models of diabetic neuropathic pain. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 153, 596–603.

Helander, I.M., Alakomi, H.-L., Latva-Kala, K., Mattila-Sandholm, T., Pol, I. and Smid, E.J. (1998) Char-
acterization of the action of selected essential oil components on Gram-negative bacteria. Journal 
of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 46, 3590–3595.

Horosova, K., Bujnakova, D. and Kmet, V. (2006) Effect of oregano essential oil on chicken lactobacilli 

and E. coli. Folia Microbiology 5, 278–280.

182 

K.H.C. Bas¸er and N. Arslan 

Horvathova, E., Turcaniova, V. and Slamenova, D. (2007) Comparative study of DNA-damaging and 
DNA-protective effects of selected components of essential plant oils in human leukemic cells 
K562. Neoplasma 54, 478–483.

Hudaib, M. and Aburjai, T. (2007) Volatile components of Thymus vulgaris L. from wild-growing and 

cultivated plants in Jordan. Flavour and Fragrance Journal 22, 322–327.

Hussain, A.I., Anwar, F., Rasheed, S., Nigam, P.S., Janneh, O. and Sarker, S.D. (2011) Composition, 
antioxidant  and  chemotherapeutic  properties  of  the  essential  oils  from  two  Origanum  species 
growing in Pakistan. Revista Brasileira de Farmacognosia 21, 943–952.

Hyun, T.K., Kim, H.-C. and Kim, J.-S. (2014) Antioxidant and antidiabetic activity of Thymus quinque-

costatus Celak. Industrial Crops and Products 52, 611–616.

Ietswaart, J.H. (1982) Origanum. In: Davis, P.H. (ed.) Flora of Turkey and the East Aegean Islands, Vol. 7. 

Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh, UK, pp. 297–313.

Inanc, T. and Maskan, M. (2013) Testing the antioxidant effect of essential oils and BHT on corn oil at 
frying temperatures: a response surface methodology. Journal of the American Oil Chemists Soci-
ety 90, 1845–1850.

Ipek, E., Ayaz Tuylu, B. and Zeytinoglu, H. (2003) Effects of carvacrol on sister chromatid exchanges 

in human lymphocyte cultures. Cytotechnology 43, 145–148.

Ipek, E., Zeytinoglu, H., Okay, S., Tuylu, B.A., Kurkcuoglu, M. and Bas¸er, K.H.C. (2005) Genotoxicity 
and antigenotoxicity of Origanum oil and carvacrol evaluated by Ames Salmonella/microsomal 
test. Food Chemistry 93, 551–556.

Jang, I.S., Ko, Y.H., Kang, S.Y. and Lee, C.Y. (2007) Effect of commercial essential oil on growth perform-
ance digestive enzyme activity and intestinal microflora population in broiler chickens. Animal 
Feed Science and Technology Journal 134, 304–315.

Janz, J.A.M., Morel, P.C.H., Wilkinson, B.H.P. and Purchas, R.W. (2007) Preliminary investigation of 
the effects of low-level dietary inclusion of fragrant essential oils and oleoresins on pig perform-
ance and pork quality. Meat Science 75, 350–355.

Joca,  H.C.,  Cruz-Mendes,  Y.,  Oliveira-Abreu,  K.,  Moreno  Maia-Joca,  R.P.,  Barbosa,  R.,  Lemos,  T.L., 
Lacerda Beirao, P.S. and Leal-Cardoso, J.H. (2012) Carvacrol decreases neuronal excitability by 
inhibition of voltage-gated sodium channels. Journal of Natural Products 75, 1511–1517.

Jouki, M., Yazdi, F.T., Mortazavi, S.A., Koocheki, A. and Khazaei, N. (2014) Effect of quince seed muci-
lage edible films incorporated with oregano or thyme essential oil on shelf life extension of re-
frigerated rainbow trout fillets. International Journal of Food Microbiology 174, 88–97.

Kacem R. and Meraihi, Z. (2006) Effects of essential oil extracted from Nigella sativa L. seeds and its 

main components on human neutrophil elastase activity. Yakugaku Zasshi 126, 301–305.

Kamimura, J.A., Santos, E.H., Hill, L.E. and Gomes, C.L. (2014) Antimicrobial and antioxidant activities 
of  carvacrol  microencapsulated  in  hydroxypropyl-beta-cyclodextrin.  LWT  –  Food  Science  and 
Technology 57, 701–709.

Karkabounas, S., Kostoula, O.K., Daskalou, T., Veltsistas, P., Karamousis, M. and Zelovitis, I. (2006) 

Anticarcinogenic and antiplatelet effects of carvacrol. Experimental Oncology 28, 121–125.

Karpouhtsis, I., Pardali, E., Feggou, E., Kokkini, S., Scouras, Z.G. and Mavragani-Tsipidou, P. (1998) 
Insecticidal and genotoxic activities of oregano essential oils. Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry 46, 1111–1115.

Knobloch, K., Weigand, H., Weis, N., Schwarm, H.M. and Vigenschow, H. (1986) Action of terpenoids 
on energy metabolism. In: Brunke, E.J. (ed.) Progress in Essential Oil Research. Walter de Gruyter, 
Berlin, pp. 429–445.

Koc, S., Oz, E., Cinbilgel, I., Aydin, L. and Cetin, H. (2013) Acaricidal activity of Origanum bilgeri PH 
Davis (Lamiaceae) essential oil and its major component, carvacrol against adults Rhipicephalus 
turanicus (Acari: Ixodidae). Veterinary Parasitology 193, 316–319.

Kokkini, S. (1996) Taxonomy, diversity and distribution of Origanum species. In: Padulosi, S. (ed.) 
Proceedings of the IPGRI International Workshop on Oregano, 8–12 May 1996, CIHEAM, Valenzano, 
Bari, Italy. International Plant Genetic Resources Institute, Rome, pp. 2–12.

Koparal, A.T. and Zeytinoglu, M. (2003) Effects of carvacrol on a human non-small cell lung cancer 

(NSCLC) cell line, A549. Cytotechnology 43, 149–154.

Kosar, M., Demirci, B., Demirci, F. and Bas¸er, K.H.C. (2008) Effect of maturation on the composition 
and biological activity of the essential oil of a commercially important Satureja species from 
 Turkey: Satureja cuneifolia Ten. (Lamiaceae). Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 56, 
2260–2265.

 

Oregano 

183

Krimpen, M.V. and Binnendijk, G.P. (2001) Ropadiar® as Alternative for Antimicrobial Growth Promoter 
in Diets of Weanling Pigs. Rapport Praktijkonderzoek Veehouderij, European Food Safety Authority, 
Brussels.

Kristinsson, K.G., Magnusdottir, A.B., Petersen, H. and Hermansson, A. (2005) Effective treatment of 
experimental acute otitis media by application of volatile fluids into the ear canal. The Journal of 
Infectious Diseases 191, 1876–1880.

Lambert, R.J.W., Skandamis, P.N., Coote, P.J. and Nychas, G.-J.E. (2001) A study of the minimum inhibi-
tory concentration and mode of action of oregano essential oil, thymol and carvacrol. Journal of 
Applied Microbiology 91, 453–462.

Landa, P., Kokoska, L., Pribylova, M., Vanek, T. and Marsik, P. (2009) In vitro anti-inflammatory activity 
of  carvacrol:  inhibitory  effect  on  COX-2  catalyzed  prostaglandin  E-2  biosynthesis.  Archives  of 
Pharmacal Research 32, 75–78.

Lei, J., Leser, M. and Enan, E. (2010) Nematicidal activity of two monoterpenoids and SER-2 tyramine 

receptor of Caenorhabditis elegans. Biochemical Pharmacology 79, 1062–1071.

Lima, M.d.S., Quintans-Junior, L.J., de Santana, W.A., Kaneto, C.M., Pereira Soares, M.B. and Villarre-
al, C.F. (2013) Anti-inflammatory effects of carvacrol: evidence for a key role of interleukin-10. 
European Journal of Pharmacology 699, 112–117.

Liu, Y., Song, M., Che, T.M., Bravo, D. and Pettigrew, J.E. (2012) Anti-inflammatory effects of several 
plant extracts on porcine alveolar macrophages in vitro. Journal of Animal Science 90, 2774–2783.
Lopez, P., Sanchez, C., Battle, R. and Nerin, C. (2007) Vapor-phase activities of cinnamon, thyme, and 
oregano essential oils and key constituents against foodborne microorganisms. Journal of Agricultural 
and Food Chemistry 55, 4348–4356.

Losa, R. (2001) The use of essential oils in animal nutrition. In: Brufau, J. (ed.) Feed Manufacturing in 
the Mediterranean Region. Improving Safety: From Feed to Food. CIHEAM-IAMZ, Zaragota, pp. 
39–44 (Cahiers Options Méditerranéennes Volume 54), 3rd Conference of Feed Manufacturers of 
the Mediterranean, 2000/03/2224, Reus, Spain. Centre International de Hautes Etudes Agronom-
iques Méditerranéennes, Paris.

Ma, W.-B., Feng, J.-T., Jiang, Z.-L., Wu, H., Ma, Z.-Q. and Zhang, X. (2014) Fumigant activity of eleven 
essential oil compounds and their selected binary mixtures against Culex pipiens pallens (Dip-
tera: Culicidae). Parasitology Research 113, 3631–3637.

Magyar, J., Szentandrassy, N., Banyasz, T., Fulop, L., Varro, A. and Nanasi, P.P. (2004) Effects of terpen-
oid  phenol  derivatives  on  calcium  current  in  canine  and  human  ventricular  cardiomyocytes. 
European Journal of Pharmacology 487, 29–36.

Marquard, R.A and Malko, A. (2006) Dost. In: Heyland, K.-U., Hanus, H. and Keller, E.R. (eds) Hand-

buch des Pflanzenbaues 4. Ulmer, Stuttgart, pp. 465–468.

Martinez-Romero, D., Guillen, F., Valverde, J.M., Bailen, G., Zapata, P. and Serrano, M. (2007) Influence 
of carvacrol on survival of Botrytis cinerea inoculated in table grapes. International Journal of 
Food Microbiology 115, 144–148.

Martin-Smith, M. and Khatoon, T. (1963) Biological activity of the terpenoids and their derivatives. In: 
Jucker, E. (ed.) Progress in Drug Research, Vol. IV. Birkhauser, Basel/Stuttgart, Germany, pp. 279–346.
Melo, F.H., Moura, B.A., de Sousa, D.P., de Vasconcelos, S.M., Macedo, D.S., Fonteles, M.M., Viana, G.S. 
and de Sousa, F.C. (2011) Antidepressant-like effect of carvacrol (5-isopropyl-2-methylphenol) in 
mice: involvement of dopaminergic system. Fundamental and Clinical Pharmacology 25, 362–367.
Mezzoug, N., Elhadri, A., Dallouh, A., Amkiss, S., Skali, N.S. and Abrini, J. (2007) Investigation of 
the mutagenic and antimutagenic effects of Origanum compactum essential oil and some of its 
constituents. Mutation Research 629, 100–110.

Moller, T. (2001) Studies on the Effect of an Oregano-oil-addition to Feed Towards Nutrient Digestibilities, 
N-balance as Well as Towards the Parameters of Microbial Activity in the Alimentary Tract of 
Weaned Piglets. European Food Safety Authority, Brussels.

Morillas Marquez, F., Navarro Moll, C., Montilla Herrera, P., Perez Galindo, P., Morales Yuste, M. and 
Martin Sanchez, J. (2004) Activity of the monoterpene derivatives carvacrol, linalool and alpha- 
terpineol,  obtained  from  aromatic  plants,  on  Leishmania  infantum.  In:  Santaiago,  M.-C.  (ed.) 
Multidisciplinarity for Parasites, Vectors and Parasitic Diseases. Proceedings of the IX European 
Multicolloquium of Parasitology. Volume 2. Articles of Free Oral Papers and Posters. Valencia, 
Spain, July 18–23, 2004. Medimond, Pianoro (Bologna), Italy, pp. 93–96.

Neri, F., Mari, M. and Brigati, S. (2006) Control of Penicillium expansum by plant volatile compounds. 

Plant Pathology 55, 100–105.

184 

K.H.C. Bas¸er and N. Arslan 

Nostro, A., Blanco, A.R., Cannatelli, M.A., Enea, V., Flamini, G. and Morelli, I. (2006) Susceptibility of 
methicillin-resistant staphylococci to oregano essential oil, carvacrol and thymol. FEMS Micro-
biological Letters 230, 191–195.

Nowotarska, S.W., Nowotarski, K.J., Friedman, M. and Situ, C. (2014) Effect of structure on the interactions 
between  five  natural  antimicrobial  compounds  and  phospholipids  of  bacterial  cell  membrane  on 
model monolayers. Molecules 19, 7497–7515.

Ntalli, N.G., Ferrari, F., Giannakou, I. and Menkissoglu-Spiroudi, U. (2010) Phytochemistry and nem-
aticidal activity of the essential oils from 8 Greek Lamiaceae aromatic plants and 13 terpene com-
ponents. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 58, 7856–7863.

Ntalli, N.G., Ferrari, F., Giannakou, I. and Menkissoglu-Spiroudi, U. (2011) Synergistic and antagonistic 
interactions of terpenes against Meloidogyne incognita and the nematicidal activity of essential 
oils from seven plants indigenous to Greece. Pest Management Science 67, 341–351.

Ocana-Fuentes, A., Arranz-Gutierrez, E., Senorans, F.J. and Reglero, G. (2010) Supercritical fluid 
extraction of oregano (Origanum vulgare) essentials oils: anti-inflammatory properties based on 
cytokine response on THP-1 macrophages. Food and Chemical Toxicology 48, 1568–1575.

Oka, Y., Nacar, S., Putievsky, E., Ravid, U., Yaniv, Z. and Spiegel, Y. (2000) Nematicidal activity of 
essential oils and their components against the root-knot nematode. Phytopathology 90, 710–715.
Oliveira, I.S., da Silva, F.V., Viana, A.F.S.C., dos Santos, M.R.V., Quintans-Junior, L.J., Martins, M.d.C.C., 
Moreira, P.H. and Oliveira, R.d.C.M. (2012) Gastroprotective activity of carvacrol on experimentally 
induced gastric lesions in rodents. Naunyn-Schmiedebergs Archives of Pharmacology 385, 899–908.
Onibala, J.S.I.T., Gunther, K.D. and Meulen, U.T. (2001) Effects of Essential Oil of Spices as Feed Additives 
on the Growth and Carcass Characteristics of Growing-Finishing Pigs. Sustainable Development 
in the Context of Globalization and Locality: Challenges and Options for Networking in Southeast 
Asia. European Food Safety Authority, Brussels.

Otoni, C.G., Pontes, S.F.O., Medeiros, E.A.A. and Soares, N.d.F.F. (2014) Edible films from methylcel-
lulose and nanoemulsions of clove bud (Syzygium aromaticum) and oregano (Origanum vulgare) 
essential oils as shelf life extenders for sliced bread. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 
62, 5214–5219.

Oviedo-Rondon, E.O., Clemente-Hernandez, S., Salvador, F., Williams, R. and Losa, R. (2006) Essential 
oils on mixed coccidia vaccination and infection in broilers. International Journal of Poultry Science 
5, 723–730.

Ozdemir, B., Ekbul, A., Topal, N.B., Sarandol, E., Sag, A., Bas¸er, K.H.C., Cordan, J., Gullulu, S., 
Tuncel, E., Baran, I. and Aydinlar, A. (2008) Effects of Origanum onites on endothelial function 
and serum  biochemical markers in hyperlipidaemic patients. Journal of International Medical 
Research 36, 1326–1334.

Ozkan, A. and Erdogan, A. (2011) A comparative evaluation of antioxidant and anticancer activity of 
essential oil from Origanum onites (Lamiaceae) and its two major phenolic components. Turkish 
Journal of Biology 35, 735–742.

Ozkan, G., Baydar, H. and Erbas, S. (2010) The influence of harvest time on essential oil composition, 
phenolic constituents and antioxidant properties of Turkish oregano (Origanum onites L.). Jour-
nal of the Science of Food and Agriculture 90, 205–209.

Ozkirim A. (2006) The detection of antibiotic resistance in the American and European foulbrood dis-

eases of honey bees (Apis mellifera L.). PhD thesis, Hacettepe University, Ankara.

Ozkirim, A., Keskin, N., Kurkcuoglu, M. and Bas¸er, K.H.C. (2012) Evaluation of some essential oils as 
alternative antibiotics against American foulbrood agent Paenibacillus larvae on honey bees Apis 
mellifera L. Journal of Essential Oil Research 24, 465–470.

Pahlavan,  Y.,  Sepehri,  G.,  Sheibani,  V.,  Khaki,  M.A.,  Gojazadeh,  M.,  Pahlavan,  B.  and  Pahlavan,  F. 
(2013) Study the antinociceptive effect of intracerebroventricular injection of aqueous extract of 
Origanum vulgare leaves in rat: possible involvement of opioid system. Iranian Journal of Basic 
Medical Sciences 16, 1109–1113.

Park, B.-S., Choi, W.-S., Kim, J.-H., Kim, K.-H. and Lee, S.-E. (2005) Monoterpenes from thyme (Thymus vul-
garis) as potential mosquito repellents. Journal of American Mosquito Control Association 21, 80–83.
Pauli, A. (2001) Antimicrobial properties of essential oil constituents. International Journal of Aroma-

therapy 11, 126–133.

Peters, M., Trembovler, V., Alexandrovich, A., Parnas, M., Birnbaumer, L., Minke, B. and Shohami, E. 
(2012) Carvacrol together with TRPC1 elimination improve functional recovery after traumatic 
brain injury in mice. Journal of Neurotrauma 29, 2831–2834.

 

Oregano 

185

Pilau, M.R., Alves, S.H., Weiblen, R., Arenhart, S., Cueto, A.P. and Lovato, L.T. (2011) Antiviral activ-
ity of the Lippia graveolens (Mexican oregano) essential oil and its main compound carvacrol 
against human and animal viruses. Brazilian Journal of Microbiology 42, 1616–1624.

Pirgozliev,  V.,  Bravo,  D.  and  Rose,  S.P.  (2014)  Rearing  conditions  influence  nutrient  availability  of 
plant extracts supplemented diets when fed to broiler chickens. Journal of Animal Physiology 
and Animal Nutrition 98, 667–671.

Prieto, J.M., Jacopini, P., Cioni, P. and Chericoni, S. (2007) In vitro activity of the essential oils of Ori-
ganum vulgare, Satureja montana and their main constituents in peroxynitrite-induced oxidative 
processes. Food Chemistry 104, 889–895.

Quintans-Junior, L.J., Guimaraes, A.G., Araujo, B.E.S., Oliveira, G.F., Santana, M.T., Moreira, F.V., 
Santos, M.R.V., Cavalcanti, S.C.H., Lucca Junior, W.D., Bothelho, M.A. et al. (2010) Carvacrol, 
(−)-borneol and citral reduce convulsant activity in rodents. African Journal of Biotechnology 
9, 6566–6572.

Quintero, R.I., Galotto, M.J., Rodriguez, F. and Guarda, A. (2014). Preparation and characterization of 
cellulose acetate butyrate/organoclay nanocomposites produced by extrusion. Packaging Tech-
nology and Science 27, 495–507.

Ramos, M., Beltran, A., Peltzer, M., Valente, A.J.M. and Garrigos, M.d.C. (2014) Release and antioxi-
dant activity of carvacrol and thymol from polypropylene active packaging films. LWT – Food 
Science and Technology 58, 470–477.

Rideal, E.K., Sciver, A. and Richardson, N.E.G. (1930) An investigation into the germicidal powers and 
capillary activities of certain pure constituents of essential oils. Perfume and Essential Oil Record 
21, 341–344.

Sadıkog˘lu, N. (2005) Türkiye’de ihracatı yapılan kekik türleri üzerinde farmasötik botanik aras¸tırmalar. 

Ph.D. thesis, I˙.Ü.Sag˘lık Bilimleri Enstitüsü, Istanbul, Turkey.

Sampson, B.J., Tabanca, N., Kirimer, N., Demirci, B., Bas¸er, K.H.C. and Khan, I.A. (2005) Insecticidal 
activity of 23 essential oils and their major compounds against adult Lipaphis pseudobrassicae 
(Davis) (Aphididae: Homoptera). Pest Management Science 61, 1122–1128.

Santos,  M.R.V.,  Moreira,  F.V.,  Fraga,  B.P.,  de  Sousa,  D.P.,  Bonjardim,  L.R.  and  Quintans-Junior,  L.J. 
(2011) Cardiovascular effects of monoterpenes: a review. Revista Brasileira de Farmacognosia 21, 
764–771.

Santoyo, S., Jaime, L., Garcia-Risco, M.R., Ruiz-Rodriguez, A. and Reglero, G. (2014) Antiviral proper-
ties of supercritical CO2 extracts from oregano and sage. International Journal of Food Properties 
17, 1150–1161.

Sarı, A.O. and Og˘uz, B. (2002) Kekik. Tarım ve Köyis¸leri Bakanlıg˘ı Ege Tarımsal Aras¸tırma, Enstitüsü 

Yayın No. 82, Izmir, Turkey.

Si, W., Gong, J., Chanas, C., Cui, S., Yu, H., Caballero, C. and Friendship, R.M. (2006) In vitro assess-
ment  of  antimicrobial  activity  of  carvacrol,  thymol  and  cinnamaldehyde  towards  Salmonella 
serotype Typhimurium DT104: effects of pig diets and emulsification in hydrocolloids. Journal of 
Applied Microbiology 101, 1282–1291.

Silva, F.V., Guimaraes, A.G., Silva, E.R.S., Sousa-Neto, B.P., Machado, F.D.F., Quintans-Junior, L.J., 
Arcanjo, D.D.R. and Oliveira, R.C.M. (2012) Anti-inflammatory and anti-ulcer activities of car-
vacrol, a monoterpene present in the essential oil of oregano. Journal of Medicinal Food 15, 
984–991.

Skocibusic, M. and Bezic, N. (2003) Chemical composition and antidiarrhoeal activities of winter 

savory (Satureja montana L.) essential oil. Pharmaceutical Biology 41, 622–626.

Slamenova, D., Horvathova, E., Sramkova, M. and Marsalkova, L. (2007) DNA protective effects of two 
components of essential plant oils carvacrol and thymol on mammalian cells cultured in vitro. 
Neoplasma 54, 108–112.

Slamenova, D., Horvathova, E., Marsalkova, L. and Wsolova, L. (2008) Carvacrol given to rats in drink-
ing water reduces the level of DNA lesions induced in freshly isolated hepatocytes and testicular 
cells by H2O2. Neoplasma 55, 394–399.

Slamenova, D., Horvathova, E., Chalupa, I., Wsolova, L. and Navarova, J. (2011) Ex vivo assessment of 
protective effects of carvacrol against DNA lesions induced in primary rat cells by visible light 
excited methylene blue (VL plus MB). Neoplasma 58, 14–19.

Slamenova, D., Kozics, K., Hunakova, L., Melusova, M., Navarova, J. and Horvathova, E. (2013) Com-
parison of biological processes induced in HepG2 cells by tert-butyl hydroperoxide (t-BHP) and 
hydroperoxide (H2O2): the influence of carvacrol. Mutation Research 757, 15–22.

186 

K.H.C. Bas¸er and N. Arslan 

Son, D.-J., Park, Y.-H., Kim, Y.-M., Chung, N.-H. and Lee, H.-S. (2005) Antiplatelet activity of Thujopsis 
dolabrata var. hondai-derived component against platelet aggregation. Journal of Microbiology 
and Biotechnology 15, 425–427.

Soylu, E.M., Soylu, S. and Kurt, S. (2006) Antimicrobial activities of the essential oils of various plants 

against tomato late blight disease agent Phytophthora infestans. Mycopathologia 161, 119–128.

Spiering, R., van der Zee, R., Wagenaar, J., Kapetis, D., Zolezzi, F., van Eden, W. and Broere, F. (2012) 
Tolerogenic dendritic cells that inhibit autoimmune arthritis can be induced by a combination of 
carvacrol and thermal stress. PLoS ONE 7(9), e46336.

Sticher, O. (1977) Plant mono-, di- and sesquiterpenoids with pharmacological or therapeutical activity. 
In: Wagner, H. and Wollf, P. (eds) New Natural Products and Plant Drugs with Pharmacological, 
Biological or Therapeutical Activity. Springer, Berlin, pp. 137–176.

Subramaniyan, J., Krishnan, G., Balan, R., Divya, M.G.J., Ramasamy, E., Ramalingam, S., Veerabathi-
ran,  R.,  Thandavamoorthy,  P.,  Mani,  G.K.  and  Thiruvengadam,  D.  (2014)  Carvacrol  modulates 
instability of xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes and downregulates the expressions of PCNA, MMP-
2, and MMP-9 during diethylnitrosamine-induced hepatocarcinogenesis in rats. Molecular and Cel-
lular Biochemistry 395, 65–76.

Suntar, I., Kupeli Akyol, E., Keles, H., Oktem, A., Bas¸er, K.H.C. and Yesilada, E. (2011) A novel wound 
healing ointment: a formulation of Hypericum perforatum oil and sage and oregano essential oils 
based on traditional Turkish knowledge. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 134, 89–96.

Taban, A., Saharkhiz, M.J. and Hadian, J. (2013) Allelopathic potential of essential oils from four Sat-

ureja spp. Biological Agriculture and Horticulture 29, 244–257.

Tabanca, N., Bernier, U.R., Ali, A., Wang, M., Demirci, B., Bythe, E.K., Khan, S.I., Bas¸er, K.H.C. and 
Khan, I.A. (2013) Bioassay-guided investigation of two monarda essential oils as repellents 
of  yellow  fever  mosquito  Aedes  aegypti.  Journal  of  Agricultural  of  Food  Chemistry  61, 
8573–8580.

Tabata, M., Honda, G., Sezik, E. and Yesilada, E. (1993) A Report on Traditional Medicine and Medicinal 
Plants in Turkey (1990, 1991). Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan, 
pp. 11–21.

Tampieri, M.P., Galuppi, R., Carelle, M.S., Macchioni, F., Cioni, P.L. and Morelli, I. (2003) Effect of 
selected essential oils and pure compounds on Saprolegnia parasitica. Pharmaceutical Biology 
41, 584–591.

Tasdemir, D., Kaiser, M., Demirci, F. and Bas¸er, K.H.C. (2006) Essential oil of Turkish Origanum onites L. 
and its main components, carvacrol and thymol show potent antiprotozoal activity without cytotox-
icity. Planta Medica 72, 1006.

Tong, F., Gross, A.D., Dolan, M.C. and Coats, J.R. (2013) The phenolic monoterpenoid carvacrol in-
hibits the binding of nicotine to the housefly nicotinic acetylcholine receptor. Pest Management 
Science 69(7), 775–780.

Trabace, L., Zotti, M., Morgese, M.G., Tucci, P., Colaianna, M., Schiavone, S., Avato, P. and Cuomo, V. 
(2011) Estrous cycle affects the neurochemical and neurobehavioral profile of carvacrol-treated 
female rats. Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 255, 169–175.

Tsao, R. and Yu, Q. (2000). Nematicidal activity of monoterpenoid compounds against economically 

important nematodes in agriculture. Journal of Essential Oil Research 12, 350–354.

TUIK (2014) Bitkisel Üretim I˙statistikleri, Türkiye I˙statistik Kurumu [Crop Production Statistics, Turkish 
Statistical  Institute].  Available  at:  https://biruni.tuik.gov.tr/bitkiselapp/bitkisel.zul  (accessed 
25 January 2016).

Tunc, S. and Duman, O. (2011) Preparation of active antimicrobial methyl cellulose/carvacrol/mont-
morillonite nanocomposite films and investigation of carvacrol release. LWT – Food Science and 
Technology 44, 465–472.

Ultee,  A.,  Kets,  E.P.W.  and  Smid,  E.J.  (1999)  Mechanisms  of  action  of  carvacrol  in  the  food-borne 

pathogen Bacillus cereus. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 65, 4606–4610.

Ultee, A., Bennik, M.H.J. and Moezelaar, R. (2002) The phenolic hydroxyl group of carvacrol is essen-
tial  for  action  against  the  food-borne  pathogen  Bacillus  cereus.  Applied  and  Environmental 
Microbiology 68, 1561–1568.

Upadhyay, A., Upadhyaya, I., Mooyottu, S., Kollanoor-Johny, A. and Venkitanarayanan, K. (2014) 
Efficacy of plant-derived compounds combined with hydrogen peroxide as antimicrobial wash 
and coating treatment for reducing Listeria monocytogenes on cantaloupes. Food Microbiology 
44, 47–53.

 

Oregano 

187

Uyanoglu, M., Canbek, M., Aral, E. and Bas¸er, K.H.C. (2008) Effects of carvacrol upon the liver of rats 

undergoing partial hepatectomy. Phytomedicine 15, 226–229.

Uyanoglu, M., Canbek, M., Ceyhan, E., Senturk, H., Bayramoglu, G., Gunduz, O., Ozen, A. and Turgak, O. 
(2011) Preventing organ injury with carvacrol after renal ischemia/reperfusion. Journal of Medicinal 
Plants Research 5, 72–80.

Van Den Broucke, C.O. and Lemli, J.A. (1980) Antispasmodic activity of Origanum compactum. Planta 

Medica 38, 317–331.

Van Den Broucke, C.O. and Lemli, J.A. (1981) Pharmacological and chemical investigation of thyme 

liquid extracts. Planta Medica 41, 129–135.

Van Den Broucke, C.O. and Lemli, J.A. (1982) Antispasmodic activity of Origanum compactum 2. 

Antagonistic effects of thymol and carvacrol. Planta Medica 45, 188–190.

Varel, V.H. (2002) Carvacrol and thymol reduce swine waste odor and pathogens: stability of oils. 

Current Microbiology 44, 38–43.

Varel, V.H. and Miller, D.N. (2001a) Effect of carvacrol and thymol on odor emissions from livestock 

wastes. Water Science and Technology 44, 143–148.

Varel, V.H. and Miller, D.N. (2001b) Plant-derived oils reduce pathogens and gaseous emissions from 

stored cattle waste. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 67, 1366–1370.

Varel, V.H., Miller, D.N. and Lindsay, A.D. (2004). Plant oils thymol and eugenol affect cattle and swine 

waster emissions differently. Water Science and Technology 50, 207–213.

Varel, V.H., Miller, D.N. and Berry, E.D. (2006) Incorporation of thymol into corncob granules for reduction 

of odor and pathogens in feedlot cattle waste. Journal of Animal Science 84, 481–487.

Vasilakoglou,  I.,  Dhima,  K.,  Paschalidis,  K.  and  Ritzoulis,  C.  (2013)  Herbicidal  potential  on  Lolium 
rigidum of nineteen major essential oil components and their synergy. Journal of Essential Oil Research 
25, 1–10.

Veldhuizen,  E.J.A.,  Tjeerdsma-Van  Bokhoven,  J.L.M.,  Zweijtzer,  C.,  Burt,  S.A.  and  Haagsman,  H.P. 
(2006) Structural requirements for the antimicrobial activity of carvacrol. Journal of Agricultural 
and Food Chemistry 54, 1874–1879.

Vucinic,  M.,  Nedeljkovic-Trailovic,  J.,  Trailovic,  S.,  Ivanovic,  S.,  Milovanovic,  M.  and  Krnjaic,  D. 
(2011) Carvacrol importance in veterinary and human medicine as ecologic insecticide and acari-
cide [Karvakrol kao ekoloski insekticid i akaricid od znacaja za humanu i veterinarsku medicinu]. 
Veterinarski Glasnik 65, 433–441.

Wagner, H., Wierer, M. and Bauer, R. (1986) In vitro inhibition of prostaglandin biosynthesis by essential 

oils and phenolic compounds. Planta Medica 52, 184–187.

Wallace, R.J., Oleszek, W., Franz, C., Hahn, I., Bas¸er, K.H.C., Mathe, A. and Teichmann, K. (2010) Diet-

ary plant bioactives for poultry health and productivity. British Poultry Science 51, 461–487.

Xu, H., Delling, M., Jun, J.C. and Clapham, D.E. (2006) Oregano, thyme and clove derived flavors and 

skin sensitizers activate specific TRP channels. Nature Neuroscience 9, 628–635.

Yamada, T., Ueda, T., Ugawa, S., Ishida, Y., Imayasu, M., Koyama, S. and Shimada, S. (2010) Func-
tional expression of transient receptor potential vanilloid 3 (TRPV3) in corneal epithelial cells: 
involvement in thermosensation and wound healing. Experimental Eye Research 90, 121–129.

Yilmaz, Y.B. and Tunaz, H. (2013) Fumigant toxicity of some plant essential oils and their selected 
monoterpenoid components against adult American cockroach, Periplaneta americana (Dictyoptera: 
Blattidae). Turkiye Entomoloji Dergisi 37, 319–328.

Yin, Q.-H., Yan, F.-X., Zu, X.-Y., Wu, Y.-H., Wu, X.-P., Liao, M.-C., Deng, S.W., Yin, L.I. and Zhuang, 
Y.-Z. (2012) Anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic effect of carvacrol on human hepatocellular car-
cinoma cell line HepG-2. Cytotechnology 64, 43–51.

Yousefzadi, M., Riahi-Madvar, A., Hadian, J., Rezaee, F., Rafiee, R. and Biniaz, M. (2014) Toxicity of 
essential oil of Satureja khuzistanica: in vitro cytotoxicity and anti-microbial activity. Journal of 
Immunotoxicology 11, 50–55.

Yu, W., Liu, Q. and Zhu, S. (2013) Carvacrol protects against acute myocardial infarction of rats via 
anti- oxidative and anti-apoptotic pathways. Biological and Pharmaceutical Bulletin 36, 579–584.
Zabka, M., Pavela, R. and Prokinova, E. (2014) Antifungal activity and chemical composition of twenty 
essential  oils  against  significant  indoor  and  outdoor  toxigenic  and  aeroallergenic  fungi. 
Chemosphere 112, 443–448.

Zanini, S.F., Silva-Angulo, A.B., Rosenthal, A., Rodrigo, D. and Martinez, A. (2014) Effect of citral and 
carvacrol on the susceptibility of Listeria monocytogenes and Listeria innocua to antibiotics. 
Letters in Applied Microbiology 58, 486–492.

188 

K.H.C. Bas¸er and N. Arslan 

Zeybek,  N.  and  Zeybek,  U.  (2002)  Farmasötik  Botanik,  Deg˘is¸tirilmis¸  3.  Baskı,  Ege  Üniversitesi 

Eczacılık Fakültesi Yayınları, Bornova, I˙zmir, Turkey.

Zeytinoglu, M., Aydin, S., Ozturk, Y. and Bas¸er, K.H.C. (1998) Inhibitory effects of carvacrol on DMBA 

induced pulmonary tumorigenesis in rats. Acta Pharmaceutica Turcica 40, 93–98.

Zeytinoglu, H., Incesu, Z. and Bas¸er, K.H.C. (2003) Inhibition of DNA synthesis by carvacrol in mouse 

myoblast cells bearing a human N-Ras oncogene. Phytomedicine 10, 292–299.

Zhong, Z., Wang, B., Dai, M., Sun, Y., Sun, Q., Yang, G. and Bian, L. (2013) Carvacrol alleviates cerebral 
edema by modulating AQP4 expression after intracerebral hemorrhage in mice. Neuroscience Letters 
555, 24–29.

Zodrow, K.R., Schiffman, J.D. and Elimelech, M. (2012) Biodegradable polymer (PLGA) coatings featuring 

cinnamaldehyde and carvacrol mitigate biofilm formation. Langmuir 28, 13993–13999.

16  Parsley

Ghazi Daradkeh1,2 and Musthafa Mohamed Essa1*

1Sultan Qaboos University, Muscat, Oman; 2Hamad Medical  

Corporation, Doha, Qatar

16.1  Botany

16.1.1 

Introduction

Parsley (Petroselinum crispum) is a herb belong-
ing to the Apiaceae (formerly Umbelliferae) 
family (Fig. 16.1). It is native to the Mediterra-
nean  region  where  it  is  found  in  the  wild 
form. It is mostly grown outdoors and is sea-
sonally harvested (Navazio, 2012). Parsley is 
a leafy vegetable, rich in many biologically 
active compounds, and its name (Petroselinum) 
is derived from the Greek for ‘rock celery’; it 
can be distinguished from other leafy green 
herbs  by  its  unique  aroma.  In  sunny  areas 
with suitable environmental conditions – in a 
humid soil with a pH of 5.3–7.3 – parsley may 
grow up to 60–120 cm tall (Navazio, 2012).

Parsley is sensitive to water stress, espe-
cially if it is planted in the summer and at the 
end of spring, and to increase production and 
improve quality, a permanent source of water 
should be provided. Both growth stage and 
parsley type determine the susceptibility of 
the plants to water stress (Petropoulos et al., 
2006; Najla et al., 2012).

Fresh parsley has been reported to have 
a storage life of 1–2 months at 0°C and 95–100% 

RH (Cantwell, 2001) and of over 12 days in 
a  cold  store  at  0–2°C  and  RH  95–97% 
(Lisiewska et al., 1997). However, at 18–20°C 
and 85–90% RH, it can only be stored for 
3  days (Lisiewska et al., 1997). As already 
noted, parsley can be cold stored, but it is 
sensitive to chilling injury.

16.1.2  History

The botanical name Petroselinum is derived 
from the Greek words ‘petros’, meaning stone 
(it  grows  on  rocky  hillsides)  and  ‘selinon’ 
(parsley or celery). Parsley is mentioned in 
Greek  historical  records  as  being  used  for 
cheering sportsmen by wearing crowns made 
of parsley; wreaths made from parsley were 
also used to adorn graves. Parsley was also used 
in Roman rituals. There are reports of it being 
sprinkled  over  dead  bodies  to  remove  the 
smell too. Parsley is used in the Jewish cele-
bration  of  the  Passover  as  well.  It  is  men-
tioned as one of the plants in the gardens of 
Charlemagne and Catherine de Medici, and 
there is a rumour that parsley was popular-
ized in France by Catherine de Medici.

*Corresponding author, e-mail: drmdessa@squ.edu.om

© CAB International 2016. Leafy Medicinal Herbs: Botany, Chemistry,  
Postharvest Technology and Uses (eds D.C.P. Ambrose et al.) 

189

190 

G. Daradkeh and M.M. Essa 

Fig. 16.1.  A parsley plant and leaves.

16.1.3  Location

Parsley  is  believed  to  be  native  to  southern 
Europe, but it is now found throughout the 
world. It has been grown in Britain since at 
least the 16th century. Parsley has now become 
naturalized throughout Europe, North Amer-
ica, the West Indies, Algeria and Lebanon.

16.1.4  Morphology

There  are  three  varieties  of  parsley:  curly-
leaved  or  common  parsley,  Italian  or  flat- 
leaved parsley and root (Hamburg) parsley, 
which is grown for its edible root. The leaves 
are  compound,  alternately  arranged,  and 
are divided into two to three leaflets and the 
plant can grow to over 1 m tall, and as an 
annual  (in  tropical  regions)  or  a  biennial 
crop (in temperate areas). The typical flower-
ing period is in the warmer months and the 
ideal  temperature  for  pollination  and  seed 
production is 29–30°C (Teuscher, 2005).

The roots are a faint yellow colour and 
carrot shaped. They can grow up to 20 cm in 
length and 5 cm in width. Hamburg root pars-
ley has larger roots and is commonly used 
in European cuisine (Teuscher, 2005).

16.2  Chemistry

16.2.1  Chemical (nutritional)  

composition

Parsley is a ‘powerhouse’ of nutrition, and 
is rich in B vitamins, vitamin C, β-carotene 

and zinc; it is an important dietary component 
for strengthening bone due to its high con-
tent of boron and fluorine, and also contains 
iron  and  calcium  in  an  absorbable  form 
(Table 16.1).

16.2.2  Phytochemistry

Parsley has anti-inflammatory, antimicrobial, 
diuretic and hypoglycaemic properties due 
to its content of essential oil and phenolic 
compounds (Taiz and Zeiger, 1998). Yoshi-
kawa et al. (2000) reported several flavone 
glycosides  with  oestrogenic  activity  from 
the aerial parts of parsley, along with a new 
monoterpene glucoside, petroside.

The leaves contain 0.04–0.4% of volatile 
oil, and this includes as major constituents 
α-pinene, β-pinene, myrcene, β-phellandrene, 
1,3,8-p-menthatriene and myristicin (Charles, 
2004). The aroma of parsley is due to the pres-
ence  of  terpenes,  which  are  toxic  to  many 
insects. Myristicin (see Fig. 16.2) is a toxic 
phenylpropene/allylbenzene compound (also 
known as 5-methoxysafrole) and has hallu-
cinogenic  properties,  acting  as  a  psycho-
active  at  high  intake  levels  (Hallström  and 
Thuvander, 1997).

The seeds contain 2–8% of volatile oil 
and  13–22%  of  fixed  oil,  and  the  major 
compounds  found  in  the  volatile  oil  are 
α-pinene,  β-pinene,  myristicin,  elemicin, 
2,3,4,5- tetramethoxy-allylbenzene and apiol 
(Charles,  2004).  Apiol,  a  phenylpropene 
(also known as apiole and as dimethoxysaf-
role;  see  Fig.  16.3),  is  responsible  for  the 

 

Parsley 

191

Table 16.1.  Nutritional value of parsley for one serving (60 g). Adapted from SELFNutritionData 
(2016); original source USDA National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference, Release 21 (USDA 
ARS, 2008).

Nutrient

Calories

From carbohydrate
From fat
From protein
From alcohol
Carbohydrates

Total carbohydrate
Dietary fibre
Starch
Sugar

Fats and fatty acids

Total fat
Saturated fat
Monounsaturated fat
Polyunsaturated fat
Omega-3 fatty acids
Omega-6 fatty acids

Protein and amino acids

Protein

Sterols

Cholesterol
Phytosterols

Other constituents

Alcohol
Ash
Caffeine
Theobromine
Water

aSignifies missing or incomplete data.

Amount

21.6
13.3
4.0
4.3
0.0

3.8 g
2.0 g
~a
0.5 g

0.5 g
0.1 g
0.2 g
0.1 g
4.8 mg
69.0 mg

1.8 g

0.0 mg
3.0 mg

0.0 mg
1.3 g
0.0 mg
0.0 mg
52.6 g

H2C

O

O

OCH3

Vitamins

Vitamin A
Vitamin B

Thiamine (B1)
Riboflavin (B2)
Niacin (B3)
Vitamin B6
Pantothenic acid (B5)
Folate (B9)
Vitamin B12

Vitamin C
Vitamin D
Vitamin E (α-tocopherol)
Vitamin K
Choline
Betaine

Minerals

Calcium
Iron
Magnesium
Phosphorus
Potassium
Sodium
Zinc
Copper
Manganese
Selenium
Fluoride

5055 IU

0.1 mg
0.1 mg
0.8 mg
0.1 mg
0.2 mg
91.2 mcg
0.0 mcg
79.8 mg
~
0.4 mg
984 mcg
7.7 mg
~

82.8 mcg
3.7 mg
30.0 mg
34.8 mg
332 mg
33.6 mg
0.1 mg
0.1 mg
0.1 mg
0.1 mcg
~

OCH3

OCH3

O

O

Fig. 16.2.  The chemical structure of myristicin. 
Adapted from Zhang et al., 2006.

Fig. 16.3.  The chemical structure of apiol. Adapted 
from Zhang et al., 2006.

abortifacient properties of parsley, and the 
herb  may  be  used  to  treat  menstrual  dis-
orders (Castleman, 2009).

Parsley roots contain 0.2–0.75% of essen-
tial  oil,  which  has  as  its  main  components 
terpinolene, apiol and myristicin (Orav et al., 

2003), while apiin (apigenin-7-apioglucoside; 
see  Fig.  16.4)  makes  up  to  0.2–1.6%  of  the 
roots (Taiz and Zeiger, 1998).

Table 16.2 compares the constituents of 
commercial samples of parsley leaf oil and 
seed oil.

192 

G. Daradkeh and M.M. Essa 

HO

OH

HO

O

O

C

O

O

OH

OH

O

HO

HO

OH

Fig. 16.4.  The chemical structure of apiin. From Hostetler et al., 2013.

Table 16.2.  Composition of commercial samples of 
parsley essential oil. Adapted from Charles, 2004.

Compounds

Leaf oil (%) Seed oil (%)

Apiol
Elemicin
1,3,8-p-Mentha-triene
Myrcene
Myristicin
α-Phellandrene
β-Phellandrene
α-Pinene
β-Pinene
Sabinene
Terpinolene
2,3,4,5-Tetramethoxy- 

allylbenzene

0.27
2.71
16.41
4.24
11.92
0.51
6.48
26.42
18.04
1.1
2.52
0.72

18.32
4.84
0.12
0.22
39.65
0.12
2.14
15.73
10.01
0.64
0.01
7.82

16.3  Postharvest Technology

16.3.1  Extraction of phenolic compounds

Plant phenolics have several health benefits, 
including:  antioxidant,  anti-inflammatory, 
antimicrobial, antitumour and hepatoprotec-
tive activities (Rice-Evans et al., 1996; Middle-
ton et al., 2000; Hinneburg et al., 2006). They 
vary in structure from monomers to complex 
polymeric tannins, and their isolation from 
plants involves various steps (including sam-
ple grinding, extraction, pre-concentration, 
hydrolysis  and  derivatization)  that  it  is 
important to get right. Luthria and co-workers 
have investigated the process in dried parsley 
flakes.  First  (Luthria  et  al.,  2006),  they 
evaluated  the  influence  of  extraction  solv-
ents  and  techniques,  and  the  number  of 
extraction  cycles  on  the  quantity  of  phen-
olic  compounds  obtained,  and  determined 
that  pressurized  liquid  extraction  (PLE), 

used  with  four  extractions  and  50:50  etha-
nol:water,  was  the  best  method.  Second, 
Luthria (2008) examined the influence of six 
additional PLE parameters (particle size, ex-
traction temperature and pressure, flush vol-
ume,  static  time,  and  solid:solvent  ratio), 
and  showed  that  the  phenolic  compounds 
obtained  were  influenced  by  temperature, 
particle size and solid:solvent ratio, with tem-
perature having the major effect on the phen-
olic profile (Luthria, 2008). When the extrac-
tion temperature was higher, malonyl apiin 
was partially degraded to acetylapiin and apiin, 
while flush volume showed marginal influ-
ence on the extracted yield (Luthria, 2008).

16.3.2  Minimal processing

Fresh  plant  food  can  either  be  minimally 
processed  or  not  further  processed  at  all 
prior to consumption. In a test of the storage 
of fresh parsley, leaves were sealed in poly-
ethylene bags and stored at 4°C for 12 days. 
Quality  characteristics  colour,  appearance 
(succulence  and  firmness)  and  aroma 
(odour, taste) were evaluated on a scale of 1 
to 5 on the 1st, 5th, 8th and 12th days. The 
scores  were  used  to  produce  life  curves, 
from which it was estimated that minimally 
processed  parsley  could  stay  fresh  for  a 
period of 23 days (Ca˘tunescu et al., 2012).

16.4  Uses

16.4.1  Traditional/medicinal benefits

The medicinal benefits of parsley have been 
long known, and Hippocrates classified parsley 

 

Parsley 

193

as a diuretic. Wine boiled with parsley was 
recommended in medieval times as a treat-
ment  for  arthritis  and  chest  pain.  Parsley 
was  recommended  to  alleviate  menstrual 
symptoms in the 17th century (Lis-Balchin, 
2006),  and  was  documented  as  a  laxative, 
diuretic  and  quinine  substitute  by  the  US 
Pharmacopeia  in  1850  (Castleman,  2009). 
Parsley  infusions  were  used  to  treat  and 
regulate menstrual pain by Colombian immi-
grants  in  London  (Ceuterick  et  al.,  2008). 
Parsley has also been reported as beneficial 
for postmenopausal women.

The  use  of  both  parsley  seed  powder 
and  parsley  juice  have  been  reported  for 
the stimulation of hair growth when used 
to massage the scalp, and also for the treat-
ment and prevention of insect bites (Charles, 
2004).

16.4.2  Pharmacological uses

Antioxidant properties

Parsley was reported to protect cells by de-
creasing the ageing process due to its anti-
oxidant properties, with the major contribu-
tors to its antioxidant activity being myristicin 
and apiol (Chevallier, 1996; Taiz and Zeiger 
1998). Parsley essential oil was found to have 
β-carotene bleaching and free radical scav-
enging activities. Apiol contributes more free 
radical scavenging activity than myristicin, 
even though it is present at a lower concen-
tration (contrast Fig. 16.3, which shows the 
methoxy electron donor groups of apiol, with 
the structure of myristicin shown in Fig. 16.2) 
(Zhang et al., 2006).

The high content of flavonoids such as 
apiin, other apigenin glycosides and luteolin, 
tocopherol, ascorbic acid and essential oils 
in parsley could encourage antioxidant activ-
ity and might decrease any harm caused by 
oxidation (Nielsen et al., 1999). Myristicin, 
which is found in parsley oil, activates glu-
tathione-S-transferase,  which  catalyses  the 
action of glutathione in fighting against oxi-
dized molecules (Ozsoy-Sacan et al., 2006; 
Kolarovic et al., 2010).

Wong and Kitts (2006) reported on the 
antioxidant (and antibacterial) activities of 

methanol and water extracts of freeze-dried 
and irradiated parsley leaves and stems.

Anti-inflammatory properties

Parsley  has  been  traditionally  used  for  the 
treatment  of  allergies  and  autoimmune  and 
chronic inflammatory disorders (Yousofi et al., 
2012). Tissue damage, neuropathological dis-
eases and autoimmune disorders may result 
from chronic activation of the immune system, 
and  myristicin  oil  from  parsley  can  reduce 
the immune inflammation by inhibiting nitric 
oxide, cytokine production and the release of 
inflammatory proteins (Lee and Park, 2011). 
Yousofi et al. (2012) investigated the suppres-
sive effects of parsley essential oil on mouse 
splenocytes  and  macrophages,  and  found 
that it could suppress nitric oxide production 
and the immune functions of macrophages.

Antimicrobial effects

Parsley plays an important role in the defence 
mechanisms against microbes such as bac-
teria  and  fungi.  For  example,  Manderfeld 
et al. (1997) reported that photoactive cou-
marins from fresh and freeze-dried parsley 
leaves protected against various human patho-
gens and food spoilage organisms in a photo-
biological assay.

The addition of fresh parsley leaves to 
‘Kareish’ cheese reduced the amount of yeast 
present within 2 h. Additionally parsley ex-
tracts showed a significant inhibitory activity 
against Staphylococcus aureus and antibac-
terial  activity  against  other  microbial  flora 
in the cheese (Wahba et al., 2010).

Wong and Kitts (2006) reported on the 
antibacterial activities of methanol and water 
extracts of freeze-dried and irradiated parsley 
leaves and stems against Bacillus subtilis and 
Escherichia coli.

Diuretic effect

The diuretic effect of parsley has long been 
noticed in traditional medicine. More recently, 
Marczal et al. (1997) studied the phenol ether 
components of the diuretic effect of parsley. 
Also, in rat in vivo and in vitro experiments, 
Kreydiyyeh  and  Usta  (2002)  found  that 
parsley extracts increased the urine output/
day by inhibiting Na+-K+-ATPase, thus leading 

194 

G. Daradkeh and M.M. Essa 

to an increased K+ concentration in the kid-
ney  lumen  that  leads  to  an  osmotic  water 
flow into the lumen and diuresis.

The German Commission E has accepted 
the use of parsley for the treatment of kidney 
stones (Charles, 2004), most likely because 
the consumption of parsley tea can increase 
urine  output,  although  it  is  recommended 
not to exceed three cups of parsley seed tea 
a day (Kreydiyyeh and Usta, 2002).

Hypoglycaemic effect

The hypoglycaemic effect of parsley has been 
reported by various researchers. Studies in 
other plants suggested that terpenoids have 
the ability to enhance insulin for the stimula-
tion of glucose disposal and exert their anti-
diabetic actions via α-glucosidase modulation, 
a typical extra-pancreatic mechanism (Luo 
et al., 1999; Kumar et al., 2011).

It has also been reported that coumarins 
and flavonoid glucosides (as found in pars-
ley)  act  in  the  scavenging  or  quenching  of 
free radicals (Anand et al., 1981), and that 
parsley, also being a good source of vitamin 
C,  would  also  be  effective  in  preventing 
the non-enzymatic glycosylation of proteins 
(Afkhami-Ardekani et al., 2003).

Hepatoprotective effect

Ozsoy-Sacan et al. (2006) showed that pars-
ley has a hepatoprotective effect on the liver 
tissue of streptozotocin (STZ)-induced dia-
betic rats by decreasing blood glucose and 
lipid peroxidation, along with elevating the 
level of liver glutathione.

Anti-platelet aggregating effect

Gadi et al. (2009) reported that parsley ex-
tract inhibited in vitro and ex vivo platelet 
aggregation and prolonged bleeding time in 
rats.  Later,  Chaves  et  al.  (2011)  have  iso-
lated  and  identified  the  flavonoids  api-
genin,  apigenin-7-O-glucoside  (cosmosiin) 
and  apiin,  and  the  coumarin  2″,3″-dihy-
droxyfuranocoumarin  (oxypeucedanin  hy-
drate) from aqueous extracts of the leaves of 
flat-leaved  parsley.  The  extract,  and  api-
genin  and  cosmosiin,  all  interfered  with 

haemostasis-inhibiting platelet aggregation 
in human platelets.

Contraindications

Parsley is best avoided by pregnant women 
because  its  myristicin  and  apiol  content 
may stimulate the uterus. The availability of 
these components in the leaves, stalks and 
roots is lower than in the seed oil, so these 
are safe to consume. Those with allergies to 
plants in the Apiaceae family should avoid 
all  parsley  components  and  constituents 
(Castleman, 2009; Fig. 16.5).

Drug interactions

Parsley  is  rich  in  vitamin  K,  which  inter-
feres with warfarin, so those who are taking 
the blood thinner warfarin should monitor 
parsley intake closely (Heck et al., 2000).

Parsley should also be avoided by those 
on diuretic drugs, because it will exacerbate 
the diuretic action of the drugs, thus increas-
ing  urine  output  and  possibly  causing  too 
much fluid loss, leading to dehydration, diz-
ziness and hypotension.

In  studies  on  mice,  Jakovljvic  et  al. 
(2002) have reported on the effect of parsley 
juice on pharmacodynamic activity of drugs 
involving cytochrome P450 in their metab-
olism  (the  hypnotic  pentobarbital  and  the 
analgesics paracetamol and aminopyrine).

16.5  Summary

Parsley is used as a table garnish worldwide, 
but its heath-promoting uses are often ignored, 
like its valuable medicinal effects. It has great 
demand in the food and cosmetic industries, 
and the expansion of its cultivation is of prime 
importance.

Acknowledgement

The  support  provided  by  Internal  grant 
from CAMS, Sultan Qaboos University (IG/
AGR/FOOD/14/01) is highly acknowledged. 
The authors state that there is no conflict of 
interest in this article.

 

Parsley 

195

Parsley seed oil, myristicin and apiol

Pregnancy

Cooking

Stimulate the uterus

Gastroenteritis, headache, kidney and
liver function

Fig. 16.5.  Contraindications for parsley seed oil and seed oil components. From/after Castleman, 2009.

References

Afkhami-Ardekani, M., Vahidi, A.R., Borjian, L. and Borjian, L. (2003) Effect of vitamin C supplement on 
glycosylated hemoglobin in patients with type 2 diabetes. Journal of Shah Sad University 10, 15–18.
Anand, N.K., Sharma, N.D. and Gupta, S.R. (1981) Coumarins from Apium petroselinum seeds. 

National Academy Science Letters (India) 4, 249–251.

Cantwell, M. (2001) Properties and Recommended Conditions for Storage of Fresh Fruit and Vegetables. 

Available at: http://postharvest.ucdavis.edu/files/109107.pdf (accessed 26 January 2016).

Castleman,  M.  (2009)  Chapter  5:  The  healing  herbs  –  Parsley.  In:  Castleman,  M.  The  New  Healing 
Herbs: The Essential Guide to More Than 125 of Nature’s Most Potent Herbal Remedies. Rodale, 
Emmaus, Pennsylvania, pp. 354–357.

Ca˘tunescu, G.M., Tofana˘, M., Mures¸an, C., David, A. and Sta˘nila˘, S. (2012) Sensory evaluation of minim-
ally processed parsley (Petroselinum crispum), dill (Anethum graveolens) and lovage (Levisticum 
officinale) stored at refrigeration temperatures. Bulletin UASVM Agriculture 69, 205–212.

Ceuterick, M., Vanderbroek, I., Tony, B. and Pieroni, A. (2008) Cross-cultural adaptation in urban ethno-
botany: the Columbian folk pharmacopeia in London. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 120, 342–359.
Charles, D.J. (2004) Parsley. In: Peter, K.V. (ed.) Handbook of Herbs and Spices, Volume 2. Woodhead Pub-

lishing, Abington, Cambridge, UK and CRC Press, Boca Raton Florida, pp. 231–234.

Chaves, D.S., Frattani, F.S., Assafim, M., Almeida, A.P. de, Zingali, R.B. and Costa, S.S. (2011) Phenolic 
chemical  composition  of  Petroselinum  crispum  extract  and  its  effect  on  haemostasis.  Natural 
Product Communications 6, 961–964.

Chevallier, A. (1996) The Encyclopedia of Medicinal Plants. Dorling Kindersley, London.
Gadi, D., Bnouham, M., Aziz, M., Ziyyat, A., Legssyer, A., Legrand, C., Lafeve, F.F. and Mekhfi, H. 
(2009) Parsley extract inhibits in vitro and ex vivo platelet aggregation and prolongs bleeding time 
in rats. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 125, 170–174.

Hallström, H. and Thuvander, A. (1997) Toxicological evaluation of myristicin. Natural Toxins 5, 186–192.
Heck, A., DeWitt, B. and Lukes, A. (2000) Potential interactions between alternative therapies and warfarin. 

American Journal of Health-System Pharmacy 57, 1221–1227.

Hinneburg, I., Dorman, H.J.D. and Hiltunen, R. (2006) Antioxidant activities of extracts from selected 

culinary herbs and spices. Food Chemistry 97, 122–129.

Hostetler, G.L., Riedl, K.M. and Schwartz, S.J. (2013) Effects of food formulation and thermal processing 

on flavones in celery and chamomile. Food Chemistry 141, 1406–1411.

Jakovljvic, V., Raskovic, A., Popovic, M. and Sabo, J. (2002) The effect of celery and parsley juice on 
pharmacodynamic activity of drugs involving cytochrome P450 in their metabolism. European 
Journal of Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics 27, 153–156.

196 

G. Daradkeh and M.M. Essa 

Kolarovic, J., Popovic, M., Zlinská, J., Trivic, S. and Vojnovic, M. (2010) Antioxidant activities of celery 

and parsley juices in rats treated with doxorubicin. Molecules 15, 6193–6204.

Kreydiyyeh, S.I. and Usta, J. (2002) Diuretic effect and mechanism of action of parsley. Journal of 

Ethnopharmacology 79, 353–357.

Kumar, S., Narwal, S., Kumar, V. and Prakash, O. (2011) α-Glucosidase inhibitors from plants: a natural 

approach to treat diabetes. Pharmacological Reviews 5(9), 19–29.

Lee, J. and Park, W. (2011) Anti-inflammatory effect of myristicin on RAW 264.7 macrophages stimulated 

with polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid. Molecules 16, 7132–7142.

Lis-Balchin, M. (2006) Parsley oil. In: Lis-Balchin, M. Aromatherapy Science: A Guide for Healthcare 

Professionals, 1st edn. Pharmaceutical Press, London, pp. 267–269.

Lisiewska, Z., Kmieccik, W. and Budnik, A. (1997) Effect of condition and time of storage on technological 

quality changes of parsley leaves. Folia Horticulturae 9, 21–29.

Luo, J., Cheung, J., Yevich, E.M., Clark, J.P., Tsai, J., Lapresca, P., Ubillas, R.P., Fort, D.M., Carlson, T.J., 
Hector, R.F. et al. (1999) Novel terpenoid-type quinones isolated from Pycnanthus angolensis of 
potential utility in the treatment of type 2 diabetes. The Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental 
Therapeutics 288, 529–534.

Luthria, D.L. (2008) Influence of experimental conditions on the extraction of phenolic compounds from 
parsley (Petroselinum crispum) flakes using a pressurized liquid extractor. Food Chemistry 107, 
745–752.

Luthria,  D.L.,  Mukhopadhyay,  S.  and  Kwansa,  A.L.  (2006)  A  systematic  approach  for  extraction  of 
phenolic compounds using parsley (Petroselinum crispum) flakes as model substrate. Journal of 
Science of Food and Agriculture 86, 1350–1358.

Manderfeld, M.M., Schafer, H.W., Davidson, P.M. and Zottola, E.A. (1997) Isolation and identification 

of antimicrobial furocoumarins from parsley. Journal of Food Protection 60, 72–77.

Marczal, G., Balogh, M. and Verzar-Petri, G. (1997) Phenolether components of diuretic effect in parsley 

I. Acta Agronomica Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae 26, 7–13.

Middleton, E., Kandaswami, C. and Theoharides, T.C. (2000) The effects of plant flavonoids on mam-
malian cells: implications for inflammations, heart disease, and cancer. Pharmacology Reviews 
52, 673–751.

Najla, S., Sanoubar, R. and Murshed, R. (2012) Morphological and biochemical changes in two parsley 

varieties upon water stress. Physiology and Molecular Biology of Plants 18, 133–139.

Navazio, J. (2012) Apiaceae. In: Navazio, J. The Organic Seed Grower: A Farmer’s Guide to Vegetable 

Seed Production. Chelsea Green Publishing, White River Junction, Vermont, pp. 108–111.

Nielsen, S.E., Young, J.F., Daneshvar, B., Lauridsen, S.T., Knuthsen, P., Sandstrom, B. and Dragsted, L.O. 
(1999) Effect of parsley (Petroselinum crispum) intake on urinary apigenin excretion, blood antioxidant 
enzymes and biomarkers for oxidative stress in human subjects. The British Journal of Nutrition 81, 
447–455.

Orav, A., Kailas, T. and Jegorova, A. (2003) Composition of the essential oil of dill, celery, and parsley 

from Estonia. Proceedings of the Estonian Academy of Sciences: Chemistry 52, 147–154.

Ozsoy-Sacan, O., Yanardag, R., Orak, H., Ozgey, Y., Yarat, A. and Tunali, T. (2006) Effects of parsley 
(Petroselinum crispum) extract versus glibornuride on the liver of streptozotocin-induced diabetic 
rats. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 104, 175–181.

Petropoulos,  S.A.,  Akoumianakis,  C.A.  and  Passam,  H.C.  (2006)  Evaluation  of  turnip-rooted  parsley 
(Petroselinum crispum ssp. tuberosum) for root and foliage production under a warm Mediterranean 
climate. Scientia Horticulturae 109, 282–287.

Rice-Evans, C.A., Miller, N.J. and Paganga, G. (1996) Structure–antioxidant activity relationships of flavonoids 

and phenolic acids. Free Radical Biology and Medicine 20, 933–956.

SELFNutritionData (2016) Nutrition Facts and Analysis for Parsley, raw. Available at: http://nutritiondata.

self.com/facts/vegetables-and-vegetable-products/2513/2 (accessed 26 January 2016).

Taiz,  L.  and  Zeiger,  E.  (1998)  Chapter  13.  Secondary  metabolites  and  plant  defense.  In:  Taiz,  L.  and 
Zeiger, E. Plant Physiology, 2nd edn. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, Massachusetts, pp. 320–344.
Teuscher, E. (2005) Medicinal Spices: A Handbook of Culinary Herbs, Spices, Spice Mixtures and their 
Essential Oils. (1st edn). Medpharm Scientific, Stuttgart, Germany and CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida.
USDA ARS (2008) USDA National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference, Release 21. Nutrient 
Data Laboratory, Agricultural Research Service, US Department of Agriculture, Beltsville, Maryland. 
Available  via:  http://www.ars.usda.gov/News/docs.htm?docid=18880  (accessed  26  January 

 

Parsley 

197

2016). Nutrient Data Laboratory home page available at: http://www.ars.usda.gov/ba/bhnrc/ndl 
(accessed 26 January 2016).

Wahba, N.M., Ahmed, A.S. and Ebraheim, Z.Z. (2010) Antimicrobial effects of pepper, parsley, and dill 
and their roles in the microbiological quality enhancement of traditional Egyptian Kareish cheese. 
Foodborne Pathogens and Disease 7, 411–418.

Wong, P. and Kitts, D. (2006) Studies on the dual antioxidant and antibacterial properties of parsley 
(Petroselinum crispum) and cilantro (Coriandrum sativum) extracts. Food Chemistry 97, 505–515.
Yoshikawa, M., Uemura, T., Shimoda, H., Kishi, A., Kawahara, Y. and Matsuda, H. (2000) Medicinal 
foodstuffs. XVIII. Phytoestrogens from the aerial part of Petroselinum crispum Mill (parsley) and 
structures of 6-acetylapiin and a new monoterpene glycoside petroside. Chemical and Pharma-
ceutical Bulletin (Tokyo) 48, 1039–1044.

Yousofi, A., Daneshmandi, S., Soleimani, N., Bagheri, K. and Karimi, M.H. (2012) Immunomodulatory 
effect of parsley (Petroselinum crispum) essential oil on immune cells: mitogen-activated spleno-
cytes and peritoneal macrophages. Immunopharmacology and Immunotoxicology 34, 303–308.

Zhang, H., Chen, F., Xi, W. and Yao, H. (2006). Evaluation of antioxidant capacity of parsley (Petrose-
linum crispum) essential oil and identification of its antioxidant constitutents. Food Research 
International 39, 833–839.

17  Patchouli

 H.G. Ramya*

Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana, India

17.1  Botany

17.1.1 

Introduction

Patchouli (Pogostemon cablin) is a small bushy 
perennial  herb  (see  Fig.  17.1),  which  has 
odorous leaves and has been acclaimed as a 
valuable  aromatic  plant.  The  oil  obtained 
from patchouli is a chief constituent in sev-
eral perfumes as it imparts a rich scent. Raw 
patchouli oil itself can be used as an alter-
native for exotic perfumes. The oil also has 
good properties for use in perfuming soaps 
(Vijaykumar, 2004).

The herb is mainly grown for its essential 
oil, which can be obtained from the leaves, 
and also, in very small quantities, from the 
tender part of its stem. The oil is extracted 
from dried leaves of patchouli by the steam 
distillation  technique.  About  2.5–3.5%  of 
high-quality  oil  with  significant  economic 
value  can  be  obtained  from  shade  dried 
patchouli leaves.

Popular  cultivated  patchouli  varieties 
include cv ‘Java’ and ‘Singapore’ (named after 
their  country  of  origin),  from  which  dis-
tinctive  quality  oil  of  specified  chemical 
composition  and  odorific  value  can  be  ob-
tained. In contrast, the oils from cv ‘Johore’ 

and  ‘Malaysia’  have  a  harsher  odour.  The 
varieties ‘Johore’, ‘Singapore’ and ‘Indonesia’ 
are those that are commonly cultivated; the 
best quality oil can be obtained from ‘Johore’ 
while  a  high  yield  of  oil  can  be  obtained 
from the other two varieties (Sarwar et al., 
1983; TNAU, 2016).

Taxonomically, the plant is classified as 

follows:

  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Kingdom: Plantae
Order: Lamiales
Family: Lamiaceae (Mint family)
Class: Magnoliopsida 
Subclass: Asteridae
Genus: Pogostemon
Species:  Pogostemon  cablin  (Blanco) 
Benth.

The  vernacular  names  of  the  plant  in 

various countries are given in Table 17.1.

In  recent  times,  growing  interest  in 
patchouli fragrance has led to its widespread 
cultivation throughout tropical Asia. The plant 
was introduced to India during 1941 in Madhya 
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Karnataka. 
Field  experiments  have  shown  patchouli 
oil  of  superior  quality  can  be  produced 
from patchouli herbage (leaves and tender 
twigs)  grown  under  the  weather  conditions 

*Corresponding author, e-mail: ramyarinda@gmail.com

198 

© CAB International 2016. Leafy Medicinal Herbs: Botany, Chemistry, 
Postharvest Technology and Uses (eds D.C.P. Ambrose et al.)

 

Patchouli 

199

17.1.2  History/origin

Botanically, patchouli is identified as P. cablin 
(Blanco) Benth., and it belongs to the family 
Lamiaceae.  It  is  indigenous  and  native  to 
the Philippines. The plant was first described 
from the Philippines in 1837 as Mentha cablin 
Blanco by Francisco Manuel Blanco, a Span-
ish priest, in Flora de Filipinas (Flora of the 
Philippines,  published  between  1873  and 
1877). The word cablin is similar to the word 
cablan, the vernacular name of the species 
in Spanish, and indeed also to kabling, the name 
in  the  Philippines.  Soon  after,  in  1848,  it 
was renamed P. cablin by Bentham. In 1845, 
the  botanist  Pelletier-Sautelet  described 
this species grown in a hothouse in France 
as P. patchouli. J.D. Hooker designated the 
Indian patchouli plant, which is indigenous 
to the Western Ghats, as P. heyneanus Benth., 
and that in Sri Lanka as P. patchouli.

17.1.3  Location

Patchouli grows wild in the Philippines, Ma-
laysia, Indonesia and Singapore. In India, it 
is cultivated in the coastal regions of Karna-
taka,  Tamil  Nadu,  Maharashtra,  Madhya 
Pradesh, Gujarat, West Bengal and Assam.

17.1.4  Morphology

Fig. 17.1.  A patchouli plant.

Table 17.1.  Vernacular names of the patchouli in 
various countries.

Country

Vernacular name(s)

China
France
India

Guang huo xiang
Patchouli
Pacha, sugandhi pandi (Gujarati); 

pachapat, patchouli (Bengali); 
pachauli (Hindi); pachetene 
(Kannada); pachi (Sanskrit); 
pachila, kattam (Malayalam); panch 
(Marathi)

Indonesia

Nilam (Aceh); Nilam Wangi (general); 

Singalon (Batak)
Korea
Hyangdulkkaephul
Malaysia
Dhalum wangi, nilam, tilam wangi
Philippines Kabling (Tagalog); kadlum (Bikol, 
Bisaya, Sulu); katluen (Bisaya)

Spanish
Thailand
UK

Cablan, pachuli
Phimsen (Bangkok)
Patchouli

Patchouli  is  a  perennial  bushy  herb  with 
smooth, opposite, ovate to oblong, leathery 
leaves with dentate margins, which are pale 
to purplish green in colour. It has a square 
stem that grows up to 1 m tall. It has a peculiar 
and distinctive aroma when it is rubbed. It 
has whitish flowers tinged with purple that 
grow in axillary as well as terminal spikes 
(Grieve, 2012).

of  Bangalore  (ACHS,  2012).  India  could 
play an important role in the production of 
this  economically  valuable  aromatic  oil,  if 
proper  care  is  taken  in  the  cultivation  of 
patchouli,  and  would  then  have  consider-
able  scope  for  entering  the  world  market 
(NABARD, 2007).

17.2  Chemistry

17.2.1  Chemical composition

The various attributes in patchouli essential oil 
make it unique and able to be advantageously 

200 

H.G. Ramya 

used for a range of purposes from medicinal 
to cosmetic. The main traits of patchouli oil are 
that it is slightly sticky, thick, viscous and 
very slow to volatilize. High quality oil has 
an intangible, wine-like, floral and sweet ‘top 
note’. This top note becomes more obvious 
as the oil ages (about a year on from distillation). 
The  ‘body  note’  is  rich,  intensely  sweet, 
woody, balsamic and earthy (Shankarana-
rayan, 2002). The chemical constituents of 
the oil that are the principal odour-intensive 
components are patchouli alcohol and nor- 
patchoulenol.

Other components of patchouli essential 
oil include α-bulnesene, α-, β- and δ-patchoulene, 
α- and δ-guaiene, β-elemene and seychellene 
(Tierra, 1939). About 92% of patchouli oil is 
composed  of  compounds  that  have  only  a 
meagre  influence  on  its  aroma.  Sesquiter-
penes constitute 40–45% of the oil, of which 
patchouli camphor or patchouli alcohol or 
patchoulol  represent  35–40%.  Patchouli 
alcohol is odourless, although one or more 
compounds  of  patchoulol  are  possibly  re-
sponsible  for  the  unique  odour  of  the  oil. 
Also, a crystalline portion of norsesquiterp-
enic alcohol popularly known as patchoule-
nol has been separated that has been found 
to  be  the  actual  odour  or  aroma  carrier  of 
patchouli oil. The oil obtained from patch-
ouli  leaves  is  difficult  to  synthesize  or  to 
replace  by  an  alternative,  so  the  natural 
oil from patchouli remains the only source 
(NBH, undated).

lavender  and  cedarwood  derivatives,  and 
clove oil, thereby enabling the manufacturing 
of strong perfumes of enduring odour. Patch-
ouli oil is extensively used in the perfumery 
industry, and is exploited in the production 
of scents, cosmetics, body lotions, shaving 
lotions, toiletry products, tobacco products, 
detergents and incense sticks.

The essential oil constituents of P. cablin 
(patchouli)  and  P.  travancoricus  Bedd.  var. 
travancoricus were examined using gas chro-
matography (GC) and GC/mass spectrometry 
(MS).  Eleven  compounds  were  recognized 
from P. cablin oil and 13 from P. travancoricus 
var.  travancoricus  oil.  Both  species  shared 
compounds  such  as  α-  and  β-patchoulene, 
patchouli alcohol (patchoulol), β-caryophyllene, 
α-guaiene, seychellene and selinene, though 
they were quantitatively less in P. travancori-
cus var. travancoricus. The essential oil of 
P. cablin cultivated in Vietnam was investigated 
by capillary GC/MS, and about 32–38% of the 
patchouli oil was accounted for patchouli al-
cohol.  Ten  additional  compounds  were  also 
identified  that  included  α-bulnesene  and 
α-guaiene  as  the  main  components  (Du˜ ng 
et al., 1989).

17.3  Postharvest Technology

17.3.1  Processing

Drying of patchouli herbage

17.2.2  Phytochemistry

A  survey  of  the  literature  has  ascertained 
that patchouli oil contains over 70 chemical 
compounds.  The  prime  components  are 
patchouli  alcohol,  pogostol,  seychellene, 
nor- patchoulinol, patchoulipyridine, ethyl-
chavicol, limonene, pinene and p-methoxy- 
cinnamaldehyde (Guan et al., 1994; Daniel, 
2006; Skaria et al., 2007), and the remaining 
constituents  are  phytochemicals  extracted 
from  patchouli  during  the  oil  distillation 
process (Park et al., 1998; Luo et al., 2002; 
Kiuchi et al., 2004; Sundaresan et al., 2009). 
Patchouli essential oil goes well with other oils, 
for example, vetiver, sandalwood, geranium, 

Drying is possibly the oldest, most widespread 
and  diverse  of  chemical  engineering  unit 
operations.  Over  400  types  of  dryers  have 
been  reported  in  the  literature  while  over 
100 distinct types are commonly available. 
Drying competes with distillation as the most 
energy-intensive  unit  operation  due  to  the 
high latent heat of vaporization and the inher-
ent inefficiency of using hot air as the most 
common drying medium. It is a complex op-
eration  involving  transient  transfer  of  heat 
and mass, along with several other processes, 
such as physical or chemical transformations, 
which may cause changes in product qual-
ity as well as in the mechanisms of heat and 
mass  transfer  (Mujumdar  and  Devahastin, 
2000).

 

Patchouli 

201

Dried herbs have great importance not only 
for  culinary  purposes,  but  also  for  medicinal 
uses. Harvesting and drying of herbs are not 
complicated. The major issue that must be kept 
in mind during the gathering and drying of 
herbs is the presence of volatile oil, and the 
most significant part of the patchouli plant is 
stored in the leafy material, although the tender 
twigs also give the plant its exceptional aroma 
and fragrance. It is the essential oil that is the 
chief element that must be conserved during the 
drying process (Joykumar, 1997; Parziale, 1998).
Shade  drying  of  patchouli  herbage  is 
carried out by spreading the fresh herbage on 
stainless  steel  trays  and  drying  in  a  well- 
ventilated room. The preliminary drying bed 
thickness is kept at 100 mm and the leaves 
should be turned regularly. The weight loss 
of  samples  should  be  recorded  every  hour 
using a sensitive electronic balance and the 
moisture content at any given time estimated 
accurately by the toluene distillation method 
(Farooqui et al., 2001). Shade drying is con-
tinued until there is no more weight loss in 
samples as indicated by constant consecutive 
weight readings. At this point, the herbage 
can be assumed to be dried to its stable equi-
librium moisture content of around 11–12% 
(wet basis, w.b.) from 80% (w.b.) at the be-
ginning of drying. The process is dependent 
upon the incidence of sunshine and atmos-
pheric humidity. Sufficient drying is of great 
importance  for  acquiring  the  highest  yield 
and  superior  quality  of  oil.  Appropriately 
dried  leaves  develop  a  typical  patchouli 
odour that is less obvious in fresh herbage.

At  several  localities,  fermentation  is  a 
common procedure, but it generates an unin-
vited consequence in that the oil develops a 
mouldy odour. Hence, it is advisable to pre-
vent any such fermentation (Anitha, 2008).
Pallavi et al. (2006) investigated the dry-
ing  behaviour  of  patchouli  herbage  under 
several methods: in the shade, in a tray dryer 
and  in  a  trouble-free  batch-type  tray  dryer 
commonly  known  as  the  ASTRA  model 
developed  by  the  Centre  For  Sustainable 
Technologies of the Indian Institute of Sciences 
at  Bangalore,  India.  This  is  an  agricultural 
waste-based crop dryer based on the principle 
of  a  fuel-efficient  wood  stove.  Drying  bed 
thickness  was  maintained  consistently  in 

all  drying methods and the herbage was dried 
from  80%  (w.b.)  initial  to  11–12%  (w.b.) 
final moisture content. Under climatic con-
ditions of Bangalore (21.0–24.4°C; 40–81% 
R.H.), patchouli required 54 h drying time 
in the shade, while in the ASTRA dryer, it re-
quired just 14 h. In a convectional (electrical) 
tray dryer, the drying time at 30, 40, 50, 60 
and 70°C was 13, 12, 11, 7 and 6 h, respect-
ively.  Freshly  harvested  patchouli  herbage 
was dried at a lower temperature by a forced 
flow  dryer  under  shade-drying  conditions 
in well-ventilated room (mean ambient air 
temperature 33°C and 70% RH). Lower tem-
peratures of 40 and 45°C were selected after 
trials that aimed to attain the required mois-
ture content at the lowest possible tempera-
ture  and  in  the  shortest  drying  time.  The 
airflow  maintained  in  the  dryer  was  37.93 
m3/min. The initial moisture content of the 
sample was noted by the toluene distillation 
method.  The  type  of  drying  and  the  tem-
perature  of  the  drying  air  influence  the 
quantity  and  quality  of  the  active  elements 
present  in  aromatic  and  medicinal  plants, 
and in order to attain a better yield of patch-
ouli oil in a shorter drying time, mechanical 
drying of the herbage is an excellent option. 
Accordingly, it was found that drying at 45°C 
temperature  in  a  forced  flow  dryer  would 
be a good method for drying patchouli as it 
is  rapid  and  gives  oil  recovery  of  2.60%, 
which is better than that obtained by shade 
drying (Ambrose et al., 2013).

Processing of patchouli oil by steam 

distillation

Patchouli cultivation is considered to be farmer 
friendly as the plant is easy to handle com-
pared with other aromatic plants. Addition-
ally, once it is dried and properly preserved, 
the herbage can be used for oil extraction at 
leisure.  The  essential  oil  is  found  in  all 
parts of the herbage including the root, but 
the top leaves and tender twigs have the max-
imum quality oil (Vijayakumar, 2004). Gen-
erally,  dry  leaves  stored  for  4–6  months 
produce more oil with a superior aroma.

Steam  distillation  is  the  most  usual 
method  for  the  extraction  of  essential  oils 
from aromatic plants. Even though there are 

202 

H.G. Ramya 

various  extraction  techniques  (hydrodistil-
lation,  microwave  distillation,  supercritical 
fluid extraction, ultrasound extraction), from 
the consumer standpoint, steam distillation 
remains the ideal process for the extraction 
of essential oils. The ease of the technique 
presents a guarantee of purity as the process 
uses  only  water  (Tannous  et  al.,  2012).  At 
present, the extraction efficiency of patchouli 
oil  is  very  low,  about  2.5–3.5%,  probably 
due to improper postharvesting practices at 
various  stages,  such  as  herbage  drying  and 
the distillation method used, so it is hoped 
that  the  use  of  steam  distillation  will  im-
prove this situation.

The  apparatus  for  steam  distillation 
comprises  a  boiler,  distillation  entity,  con-
denser and receiver. The distillation entity is 
usually made up of mild steel with a perfor-
ated  bottom  on  to  which  the  herbage  is 
loaded for distillation. The herbage needs to 
be evenly/tightly packed so that steam chan-
nels  do  not  form  during  distillation  and 
result in a low essential oil yield. The level 
of water in the boiler is inspected regularly 
so that it is kept at the appropriate level. The 
maintenance  of  pressures  approximating  to 
1.4–3.5 kg/m2 produce superior quality oil 
as  more  cell  walls  rupture  at  this  pressure. 
The distillation interval varies from 6 to 8 h. 
The  condenser  of  the  apparatus  cools  the 
vapours received from the distillation entity. 
This  is  made  of  several  tubes  made  up  of 
stainless steel or copper and mounted inside 
a jacket, and it has an inlet and outlet for the 
circulation of cooling water. The hot vapours 
of steam and essential oil are cooled in the 
condensing tubes and the condensate moves 
out into the receiver. The essential oil vapour 
and the spent steam that come out of the dis-
tillation entity will be condensed back to the 
liquid phase in the water-cooled condenser 
and the condensate will be received into the 
receiver tank. The steam distillation process 
results in separate products: the liquid distil-
late that contains the volatile, water-soluble 
parts of the herbage known as the ‘hydrosol’ 
and the volatile water-insoluble material of the 
herbage which is the essential oil (Fig. 17.2) 
(Ramya, 2010; Ramya et al., 2013).

The  condensate  in  the  receiver  tank 
should be allowed to stand for a sufficient 

Fig. 17.2.  Patchouli essential oil.

time  (overnight)  so  that  the  patchouli  oil 
separates  out  as  far  as  possible  from  the 
water layer. After appropriate separation in 
the  receiver,  the  essential  oil  must  be  fur-
ther separated from the water phase using a 
separating funnel. As it is lighter than water 
and insoluble, the oil floats on the apex of 
the receiver and only water is drained off. 
The oil will be still turbid, and all traces of 
moisture  present  should  be  removed  by 
adding anhydrous sodium sulfate at 20–30 g/l 
and  maintaining  the  distillate  blend  for 
4–5  h.  Following  this,  the  oil  should  be 
filtered through a Whatman filter paper to 
obtain  a  clear  essential  oil.  Any  moisture 
present  in  the  essential  oil  can  encourage 
polymerization and lead to loss in quality. 
The  clear  essential  oil  that  is  obtained 
should be stored in a cool dry, dark place in 
air-tight aluminium containers or coloured 
glass bottles filled up to the rim (depending 
on the quantity of oil to be stored). Normally 
60 kg of oil/ha is obtained in a year (Jain, 
1978; Anonymous, 2011; Horticulture Portal, 
2013).

 

Patchouli 

203

Oil recovery

When patchouli herbage is harvested, shade 
dried and steam distilled, an average essen-
tial oil yield of 2.5% may be considered sat-
isfactory in commercial distillation (Leung 
and Foster, 1996). Many studies have been 
conducted to establish the best method for 
essential oil recovery. Factors that can affect 
the quality of essential oil are extraction time, 
pressure,  temperature  and  sample  mass  or 
bed thickness. The quality of the oil produced 
depends on the time of extraction – the longer 
the extraction time, the higher the content 
of patchouli alcohol (Yahya and Yunus, 2013).

Demand for and economics of patchouli oil

The majority of the patchouli oil in the world 
is manufactured in the Philippines, Indonesia, 
Malaysia  and  Singapore,  with  Indonesia 
distributing  most  of  the  world’s  require-
ment, which is around 1500 t a year. India’s 
production  is  about  1  t,  while  its  require-
ment  borders  around  220  t  annually  (Sar-
war et al., 1983). The world’s production of 
patchouli  oil  is  around  800  t/annum.  Java 
produces about two thirds of this, followed 
by  China  and  Malaysia.  Patchouli  farming 
in India is scanty, but it has expanded in the 
last 5 years to cover around 600 ha, account-
ing  for  the  production  of  20  t  of  oil  per 
annum (Kumar et al., 1986). Industrial cul-
tivation  of  the  crop  in  India  was  first  at-
tempted by Tata Oil Mills in 1942, and the 
requirement for patchouli oil is expanding 
more rapidly than that for most of the other 
essential oils.

17.3.2  Value addition

Perfumery

The perfume or fragrance industry is one of 
the  ancient  industries  of  the  world.  In  the 
early days, the perfumer used only natural 
essential oils for perfume production, which 
was viewed as an art. With time, due to the 
scarcity of natural essential oils, the price of 
oils started rising. With the advent of organic 
chemistry,  synthetic  perfumery  materials 
became  affordable.  Meanwhile,  the  use  of 

perfumes  in  household  products  became 
more  widespread  and  the  requirement  for 
industrial perfumes increased significantly. 
This benefited perfumers, as they now had 
more alternatives for ingredients at an eco-
nomic  cost,  and  enforced  progress  on  im-
proving the chemistry of perfumery ingre-
dients, including their quality and profiles 
(Ranade  and  Paranape,  2000;  Singh  et  al., 
2002).

Patchouli  oil  has  an  outstanding  base 
note in the perfumery and fragrance indus-
try, and is highly valued for its exceptional 
fragrance, and the perfume industry has ex-
ploited  patchouli  oil  in  a  number  of  the 
world’s luxury perfumes for its soulful, sen-
sual, woody and voluptuous notes. There is 
no alternative synthetic chemical to substi-
tute for the oil of patchouli, which further 
boosts its value and its eminence in the per-
fumery market. There is a great demand for 
it in soaps, scents, body lotions, detergents, 
tobacco and incense manufacturing. Patch-
ouli oil is also used extensively in perfumed 
and scented industrial commodities such as 
paper  towels,  laundry  detergents  and  air 
fresheners (Tac Ethno, 2012).

Incense

Incense  sticks  are  generally  prepared  from 
aromatic plants and essential oils extracted 
from  plants  or  animal  sources.  When  they 
are burned, they emit a very captivating and 
appealing fragrance (Borah et al., 2003). In 
prehistoric  times,  only  naturally  fragrant 
resins  or  woods  such  as  sandalwood,  and 
patchouli,  were  used  for  incense.  Modern 
fragrance production allows practically any 
fragrance to be duplicated, but patchouli is 
still an important component in East Asian 
incense.  The  incense  is  familiar  for  its 
sturdy  fragrance,  and  incense  sticks  made 
using patchouli essential oils are known to 
have antifungal, anti-inflammatory, antisep-
tic and antidepressant properties. Patchouli 
incense sticks have also been recognized to 
generate  aphrodisiac  effects  when  burned. 
There is a scope for utilizing the patchouli 
herbage left after steam distillation (the spent 
charge)  for  incense  stick  production  after 
drying  and  macerating  it  into  appropriate 

204 

H.G. Ramya 

particle size powder (Ramya, 2010). At pre-
sent, the spent charge is not used except for 
the production of biogas by anaerobic diges-
tion and for manure (Anonis, 2007).

and  sores.  It  also  relieves  constipation  and 
can be used as a fleeting antidote or soothing 
agent against snake and insect bites.

Cosmetics

17.4.2  Pharmacological uses

Patchouli essential oil has been exploited 
in several natural cosmetics products such 
as aromatic bath gel, aromatic soaps, body 
lotions,  cosmetics  fragrances  and  so  forth 
(Grieve, 2012).

Deodorant

The  strong  sweet,  spicy  and  musky  aroma 
of patchouli essential oil masks body odour, 
but it should be used in a diluted form as 
the aroma can be very strong to some peo-
ple’s olfactory senses. Some people find the 
aroma  astonishing,  while  others  are  rather 
irritated by it.

Household uses

The  dried  leaves  and  oil  of  patchouli  are 
used for pot-pourri and to scent fabric prod-
ucts. In Asia and South America, patchouli 
oil is frequently mixed with anise and clove 
as a breath sweetener (Wikipedia, 2009). Be-
sides  its  medicinal  and  perfumery  uses,  it 
can  act  as  an  insect  repellent  (Yoshihiro 
et al., 1992; Organic Facts, 2014). Notably, 
the  patchouli  herbage  is  claimed  to  be  an 
effective  repellent  against  the  Formosan 
subterranean termite (Zhu et al., 2003).

Flavourings

Patchouli oil is widely used as a flavour ingre-
dient in major food products and in alcoholic 
and non-alcoholic beverages. A low concen-
tration (2 mg/kg) of oil is used for flavouring 
beverages, frozen dry desserts, candy, baked 
items, gelatin, meat and meat products.

17.4  Uses

There  are  numerous  benefits  of  patchouli 
oil ranging from skincare, medicinal uses to 
aromatherapy. It performs different pharma-
cological  activities  including  use  as  an 
antidepressant, anti-inflammatory, antifungal, 
antiseptic, astringent, diuretic and sedative. 
The insecticidal and insect repellent prop-
erties  of  the  oil  have  been  well  known  for 
many years, and it has been used to protect 
clothes and fabrics from insects. It is now 
viewed  as  one  of  the  most  adaptable  and 
versatile essential oils in the global market 
(Ichikawa et al. 1989; NABARD, 2007; Karimi 
2014; Organic Facts, 2014). The uses of the 
oil have been summarized and discussed on 
the Organic Facts website, and much of the 
information below (and some of that given 
above)  is  based  on  that  information  (see 
 Organic Facts, 2014).

Antimicrobial activity

Patchouli  essential  oil  is  effective  against 
Gram-positive organisms (acting as an anti-
bacterial)  and  quite  a  few  dermatophytes 
(skin,  hair  and  nail  fungi)  collected  from 
wound  and  skin  infections  (acting  as  an 
antifungal. It can also be used as a substitute 
medication for skin infections that are caused 
by strains of bacteria that have developed re-
sistance to antibiotics (Osawa et al., 1990). 
Patchouli  oil  has  also  shown  antibacterial 
 activity  against  periodontopathic  bacteria, 
including Actinobacillus, Capnocytophaga, 
Fusobacterium and Eikenella (Kongkathip 
et al., 2009). The oil has been found to be quite 
helpful against fungal development and in-
fectivity in infections such as athlete’s foot 
(Organic Facts, 2014).

17.4.1  General medicinal uses

Aromatherapy

Patchouli oil has been identified as helping in 
the treatment of eczema, dermatitis, psoriasis 

Patchouli oil is used for massages and aroma-
therapy. Massaging with the oil can boost the 
mood,  control  the  emotions  and  calm  the 

 

Patchouli 

205

nerves, thus alleviating stress. In circumstances 
of dermatitis and depression, it is the best 
universal remedy (Chakrapani, 2013).

Skin problems, healing activity and  

use as an antiseptic

The oil is being used for healing a variety of 
skin  problems  such  as  psoriasis,  dermatitis 
and eczema. The oil has antiseptic attributes 
that  heals  the  wounds  comparatively  fast, 
and  prevents  the  spread  of  infection.  It 
has anti-ageing properties as well, and so it 
makes  a  good  skincare  product  as  it  keeps 
the skin young. It is also good for acne, scars, 
burns,  cuts,  stretch  marks  and  other  skin- 
related problems. Frequent use of patchouli oil 
can hide scars and lasting marks from mea-
sles and pox, keep a check on dry skin and 
wrinkles,  and  promote  a  soft  facial  appear-
ance (Ichikawa et al., 1989; Karimi, 2014).

Relief of depression

People  experiencing  depression  can  benefit 
from the use of patchouli oil as it is regarded 
as a mood lifter. It relieves the feelings of sad-
ness, so is commonly used in aromatherapy 
(see above). It boosts the mood, alleviates dis-
appointment  and  calms  down  anxiety  and 
anger,  maybe  by  having  an  impact  on  hor-
mones and chemical reactions in the body.

Anti-inflammatory and anti-irritant activity

Patchouli oil soothes inflammation and irri-
tation due to fever and relieves the fever it-
self. It is useful in treating a wide range of 
problems,  including  internal  inflammation 
such as caused by arthritis and gout (Ichikawa 
et al., 1989). The essential oil has long been 
used  in  traditional  Chinese  medicine  to 
treat inflammatory illness.

Antiviral activity

Wu et al. (2011) found that patchouli alcohol 
had an inhibitory action against influenza 
A  (H2N2)  in  in  vitro,  in  vivo  and  in  silico 
studies.  It  was  also  found  to  have  a  direct 
 effect  against  influenza  virus  A/PR/8/34 
(H1N1) in in vitro tests (Kiyohara et al., 2012).

Use as an aphrodisiac

Patchouli oil is also able to cure various sex-
ual problems, such as lack of libido, erectile 
malfunctions  and  frigidity,  and  has  been 
used as an aphrodisiac for centuries (Ichika-
wa et al., 1989).

Constriction activity

In  crude  drug  screening  tests,  patchouli  oil 
was  active  in  promoting  K+  contracture  of 
guinea pig taenia coli (smooth mucle) in vitro, 
and might therefore be useful in averting sag-
ging skin and slackening of muscle tissue in 
old  age,  and  in  helping  to  stop  haemorrha-
ging (Ichikawa et al., 1989).

Diuretic activity

Patchouli oil regulates the frequency of urin-
ation and the quantity of urine, and in doing 
so alleviates weight loss, reduces blood pres-
sure, improves the appetite, lowers choles-
terol,  eliminates  toxins  from  the  body  and 
decreases  the  possibilities  of  development 
of gall stones and kidney stones, and prob-
lems such as gout (Ichikawa et al., 1989).

Insecticidal activity

The  insecticidal  attributes  of  patchouli  oil 
have  been  documented  since  antiquity.  In 
India,  the  oil  has  long  been  used  to  keep 
moths and other insects away from linens, 
woollen shawls and rugs (Chakrapani, 2013). 
It is used in sprays, body lotions, fumigants, 
vaporizers and incense sticks or mixed with 
water to rinse clothes and bed linen to chase 
off  mosquitoes,  ants,  bedbugs,  lice,  fleas, 
flies and moths (only a few drops are neces-
sary). Gokulakrishnan et al. (2013) reported 
the  pupicidal  and  repellent  activities  of 
chemical compounds from patchouli essen-
tial oil against medically important human 
vector mosquitoes.

17.5  Summary

Patchouli  oil  is  familiar  for  its  persistent 
spicy aroma, and is extensively used in oriental 

206 

H.G. Ramya 

perfumes, incense and joss sticks, commonly 
mixed with jasmine and sandalwood. Post-
harvest  management  of  patchouli  herbage 
contributes significantly to obtaining a good 
yield and quality of essential oil. Although 
there are numerous techniques for extraction 

of  the  oil  from  patchouli  herbage,  steam 
 distillation  is  the  ideal  process  from  the 
 consumer standpoint. Patchouli can be con-
structively  exploited  in  aromatherapy,  per-
fumery, cosmetics, incense stick production 
and the food flavouring industries.

References

ACHS (2012) Essential oil of patchouli: Pogostemon cablin (syn. Pogostemon patchouli). American 
College of Healthcare Sciences, Portland, Oregon. Available at: http://www.achs.edu/mediabank/
files/achs_patchouli_monograph.pdf (accessed 17 May 2012).

Ambrose, D.C.P., Annamalai, S.J.K. and Naik, R. (2013) Effect of drying on the volatile oil yield of 

patchouli. Indian Journal of Science and Technology 6, 5559–5562.

Anitha,  M.  (2008)  Agro-processing  of  patchouli  for  efficient  essential  oil  extraction.  M.Tech  thesis, 

University of Agricultural Sciences, Bangalore, India.

Anonis, D.P. (2007) Woody notes in perfumery: patchouli in fragrances, Part II. Perfumer and Flavorist 

31(11), 36.

Anonymous  (2011)  Patchouli  –  Booklet  No.  494.  Medicinal  Plants:  MPS-21.  Formerly  available  at: 

www.inseda.org/Additional%20material/CD%20/Patchouli-494.doc (accessed 2 May 2011).

Borah, R.C., Talukdar, A., Kataky, J.C.S, Unni, B.G., Modi, M.K. and Deka, P.C. (2003) Bio-prospecting 
of commercially important plants. Paper presented at: National Symposium on ‘Biochemical 
Approaches for Utilization and Exploitation of Commercially Important Plants’ Organized at Jorhat, 
Assam, India, 12–14 November 2003, pp. 290–293.

Chakrapani, P., Venkatesh, K., Chandra Sekhar Singh, B., Arun Jyothi, B., Prem Kumar, Amareshwari, P. 
and Roja Rani, A. (2013) Phytochemical, pharmacological importance of patchouli (Pogostemon cablin 
Benth.) an aromatic medicinal plant. International Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences Review and 
Research 2, 7–15.

Daniel, M. (2006) Medicinal Plants: Chemistry and Properties. Science Publishers, Enfield, New Hampshire.
Du˜ng, N.X., Leclercq, P.A., Thai, T.H. and Moi, L.D. (1989) Chemical composition of patchouli oil from 

Vietnam. Journal of Essential Oil Research 1, 99–100.

Farooqui, A., Vasundhara, A.M. and Srinivasappa, K.N. (2001) A Guide to the Cultivation of Commercially 
Important Aromatic Crops. Division of Horticulture, University of Agricultural Sciences and 
Association for Promotion of Medicinal and Aromatic crops, Bangalore, India.

Gokulakrishnan, J., Kuppuswamy, E., Shanmugam, D., Appavu, A. and Kaliyamurthy, K. (2013) Pupicidal 
and repellent activities of Pogostemon cablin essential oil chemical compounds against medically 
important human vector mosquitos. Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Disease 3, 26–31.

Grieve,  M.  (2012)  Patchouli.  Botanical.com:  A  Modern  Herbal.  Available  at:  http://www.botanical.

com/botanical/mgmh/p/patcho15.html (accessed 15 June 2012).

Guan,  L.,  Quan,  L.H.,  Xu,  L.Z.  and  Cong,  P.Z.  (1994)  Chemical  constituents  of  Pogostemon  cablin 

(Blanco) Benth. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi 19, 355–356, 383.

Horticulture Portal (2013) Crop encyclopedia: Patchouli (Pogostemon patchouli). Society for Advancement 
of Horticulture, Indiranagar, Lucknow, India. Available at: http://hortportal.org/crop.php?alpha=P 
(accessed 9 January 2013).

Ichikawa, K., Kinoshita, T. and Sankawa, U. (1989) The screening of Chinese crude drugs for calcium 
antagonist activity: identification of active principles from the aerial part of Pogostemon cablin 
and the fruits of Prunus mume. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin (Tokyo) 37, 345–348.

Jain,  P.C.  (1978)  Potentialities  of  growing  patchouli  (Pogostemon  patchouli).Indian  Perfumer  22(1), 

47–55.

Joykumar, N. (1997) Studies on the drying characteristics of some important flowers. M.Sc. thesis, 

University of Agricultural Sciences, Bangalore, India.

Karimi, A. (2014) Characterization and antimicrobial activity of patchouli essential oil extracted from 
Pogostemon cablin (Blanco) Benth.(Lamiaceae). Advances in Environmental Biology 8, 2301–2309.

 

Patchouli 

207

Kiuchi, F., Matsuo, K., Ito, M., Qui, T.K. and Honda, G. (2004) New sesquiterpene hydroperoxides 
with  trypanocidal  activity  from  Pogostemon  cablin.  Chemical  and  Pharmaceutical  Bulletin 
(Tokyo) 52, 1495–1496.

Kiyohara, H., Ichino, C., Kawamura, Y., Nagai, T., Sato, N. and Yamada, H. (2012) Patchouli alcohol: 
in vitro direct anti-influenza virus sesquiterpene in Pogostemon cablin Benth. Journal of Natural 
Medicines 66, 55–61.

Kongkathip, N., Sam-ang, P., Kongkathip, B., Pankaew, Y., Tanasombat, M. and Udomkusonsri, P. (2009) 
Development of patchouli extraction with quality control and isolation of active compounds with 
antibacterial activity. Kasetsart Journal (Natural Science) 43, 519–525.

Kumar,  A.,  Gauniyal,  A.K.  and  Virmani,  O.P.  (1986)  Cultivation  of  Pogostemon  patchouli  for  its  oil. 

CROMAP (Current Research on Medicinal and Aromatic Plants) 8(2), 79–86.

Leung, A.Y. and Foster, S. (1996) Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used in Food, Drugs 

and Cosmetics., 2nd edn. Wiley, Hoboken, New Jersey.

Luo, J., Guo, X. and Feng, Y. (2002) Constituents analysis on volatile oil of Pogostemon cablin from 

different collection time cultivated in Hainan. Zhong Yao Cai 25(1), 21–23.

Mujumdar, A.S. and Devahastin, S. (2000) Fundamental principles of drying. In: Devahastin, S. (ed.) Mujumdar’s 

Practical Guide to Industrial Drying. Exergex Corporation, Montreal, Canada, pp. 1–22.

NABARD (2007) Model Bankable Projects: Patchouli. National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development, 
Mumbai, India. Available at: http://farmextensionmanager.com/English/Agribusiness%20opper-
tunities/Medicinal%20plant%20sector/patchuoli.htm (accessed 27 January 2016).

NBH (undated) Patchouli. National Horticulture Board, Gurgaon, Haryana, India. Available at: http://

nhb.gov.in/report_files/patchouli/PATCHOULI.htm (accessed 27 January 2016).

Organic Facts (2014) Health Benefits of Patchouli Essential Oil. Organic Information Services, Andheri 
East,  Mumbai,  India.  Available  at:  http://www.organicfacts.net/health-benefits/essential-oils/
health-benefits-of-patchouli-essential-oil.html (accessed 5 May 2014).

Osawa, K., Matsumoto, T., Maruyama, T., Takiguchi, T., Okuda, K. and Takazoe, I. (1990) Studies of the 
antibacterial activity of plant extracts and their constituents against periodontopathic bacteria. 
The Bulletin of Tokyo Dental College 31(1), 17–21.

Pallavi, G.S., Palanimuthu, V., Chandru, R. and Ranganna, B. (2006) Study of tray drying behaviour of 
aromatic patchouli herbage and its effect on essential oil recovery. Paper presented at: National Sem-
inar on ‘40th Annual Convention & Symposium of ISAE’ Organized by TNAU, Coimbatore, India, 
January 19–21.

Park, E.J., Park, H.R., Lee, J.S., Kim, J. and Licochalcone, A (1998) An inducer of cell differentiation 

and cytotoxic agent from Pogostemon cablin. Planta Medica 64, 46.

Parziale, E. (1998) How to Harvest, Dry and Store Herbs. Available at: http://earthnotes.tripod.com/

harvest.htm (accessed 12 January 2011).

Ramya, H.G. (2010) Study on steam distillation of patchouli (Pogostemon cablin Benth.) and utilization 
of the by-product spent leaves. M.Tech. thesis, University of Agricultural Sciences, Bangalore, 
India.

Ramya, H.G., Palanimuthu, V. and Singla Rachna (2013) An introduction to patchouli (Pogostemon 
cablin Benth.) – a medicinal and aromatic plant: its importance to mankind. CIGR Journal 15, 
243–250.

Ranade, G.S. and Paranape, S. (2000) Odour quality and profiles of perfumery ingredients. Indian Perfumer 

44, 183–189.

Sarwar, M., Narayana, M.R. and Virmani, O.P. (1983) Patchouli and Its Cultivation in India. Farm Bulletin 

No. 17, Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants, Lucknow, India.

Shankaranarayan, V. (2002) Patchouli constituents and its usage in perfumery. Indian Perfumer 46, 

313–314.

Singh, M., Sharma, S. and Ramesh, S. (2002) Herbage, oil yield and oil quality of patchouli (Pogostemon 
cablin  (Blanco)  Benth.)  influenced  by  irrigation,  organic  mulch  and  nitrogen  application  in 
semi-arid tropical climate. Industrial Crops and Products 16, 101–107.

Skaria, B.P., Joy, P.P., Mathew, S., Mathew, G., Joseph, A. and Joseph, R. (2007) Aromatic Plants: Horticul-

ture Science Series – 1. New India Publishing Agency, New Delhi.

Sundaresan, V., Singh, S.P. and Mishra A.N. (2009) Composition and comparison of essential oils of 
Pogostemon cablin (Blanco) Benth. (patchouli) and Pogostemon travancoricus Bedd. var. travancoricus. 
Journal of Essential Oil Research 21, 220–222.

208 

H.G. Ramya 

Tac Ethno (2012) Pogostemon patchouli, Patchouli. TAC Ethnobotanical Database. Available at: http://

www.tacethno.com/pogostemon-patchouli-patchouli.html (accessed 7 September 2012).

Tannous,  P.,  Juliani,  R.,  Wang,  M.  and  Simon,  J.  (2004)  Water  Balance  in  Hydrosol  Production  via 
Steam Distillation: Case Study using Lavandin (Lavandula × intermedia). New Use Agriculture and 
Natural Plant Products and ASNAPP Program, Department of Plant Biology and Plant Pathology, 
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey.

Tierra, M. (1939) Planetary Herbology: An Integration of Western Herbs into the Traditional Chinese 
and Ayurvedic Systems. Edited and supplemented by Frawley, D. (1988). Published in 1992 by 
Lotus Press, Twin Lakes, Wisconsin.

TNAU (2016) Horticulture: Aromatic Crops: Patchouli. TNAU Agrictech Portal, Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University, Coimbatore, India. Available at: http://agritech.tnau.ac.in/horticulture/horti_aromatic% 
20crops_patchouli.html (accessed 27 January 2016).

Vijayakumar, K. (2004) Patchouli and India –a great leap forward. In: Proceedings of National Seminar 
of Prospectus and Potentials of Medicinal and Aromatic Crops, Held at Bangalore, 18–19 June 
2004, pp. 106–107.

Wikipedia  (2009)  Patchouli.  Available  at:  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/patchouli  (accessed  25  June 

2009).

Wu, H., Li, B., Wang, X., Jin, M. and Wang, G. (2011) Inhibitory effect and possible mechanism of action 

of patchouli alcohol against influenza A (H2N2) virus. Molecules 16, 489–501.

Yahya, A.O. and Yunus, R.M. (2013) Influence of sample preparation and extraction time on chemical 

composition of steam distillation derived patchouli oil. Procedia Engineering 53, 1–6.

Yoshihiro, H., Katsuhiko, T. and Toi, N. (1992) An additional constituent occurring in the oil from a 

patchouli cultivar. Flavour and Fragrance Journal 7, 333–335.

Zhu, B.C.-R., Henderson, G., Yu, Y. and Laine, R.A. (2003) Toxicity and repellency of patchouli oil and 
patchouli  alcohol  against  Formosan  subterranean  termites  Coptotermes  formosanus  Shiraki 
(Isoptera: Rhinotermitidae). Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 51, 4585–4588.

18  Rosemary

Milda E. Embuscado*

McCormick & Company, Hunt Valley, Maryland, USA

18.1  Botany

18.1.1 

Introduction

Rosemary,  scientific  name  Rosmarinus 
officinalis  L.,  belongs  to  the  mint  family 
(Lamiaceae)  together  with  oregano,  thyme, 
basil and lavender. It is one of the most im-
portant herbs used for culinary purposes, as 
well as being used in alternative and herbal 
medicine. Rosemary is a fragrant woody plant 
that  is  native  to  the  Mediterranean  region 
and is an essential element of the Mediterra-
nean diet, along with many other spices and 
herbs. Rosemary leaves are used as a culinary 
condiment  that  provides  excellent  flavour 
for  meats  such  as  chicken,  beef,  lamb  and 
fish. The leaves are also used as teas and ex-
tracts are used in beverages or as flavourings.
The  name  rosemary  was  derived  from 
the Latin words ros meaning dew and mari-
nus meaning sea, thus ‘dew of the sea’. The 
plant  is  a  perennial  evergreen  shrub  with 
minty needle-like leaves that measure 0.8–1.6 
in (2–3 cm) and it grows well in sandy soil 
or on dry and rocky slopes near the sea in 
full sun – which is probably the reason why 
it  is  called  ‘dew  of  the  sea’.  Rosemary  has 
pretty  pink,  white,  blue  or  purple  flowers 

and the leaves are green on top and whitish 
underneath with short, dense, woolly hairs 
(Fig. 18.1). The shrub can reach 5 ft (1.5 m) in 
height when it grows upright, or it can grow 
sprawling on rocky slopes. The common or 
vernacular names of rosemary are: the com-
pass plant, polar plant, compass weed, Ros-
marinus coronarium, incensier, sea dew, ros 
maris, rosmarine, rosemarie, guardrobe, kelil, 
romanyi,  rosmarin,  rozemarjin,  harilikros-
marin, rohtorosmarini, rozmarin, ramerino, 
mannenrû, rozmaryn, alecrim, romero, dume-
ro and biberiye.

18.1.2  History/origin

Rosemary has been in use for thousands of 
years, starting from ancient times when the 
Greeks and Romans used it for its mystical 
and healing powers. The gardens of the an-
cient  Greeks  and  Romans  contained  rose-
mary plants for protection from evil spirits, 
and  it  is  said  that  rosemary  grows  only  in 
the  gardens  of  the  righteous.  The  Roman 
army brought rosemary with them on their 
travels, and so its influence spread to Britain, 
then  to  the  rest  of  Europe  and,  ultimately, 
reached the New World. The various uses of 

*Corresponding author, e-mail: milda_embuscado@mccormick.com

© CAB International 2016. Leafy Medicinal Herbs: Botany, Chemistry, 
Postharvest Technology and Uses (eds D.C.P. Ambrose et al.) 

209

210 

M.E. Embuscado 

vertues and proprytes of herbes, the whiche 
is called anHerball’.
 4.  In  1652  and  1653,  Nicholas  Culpepper, 
an  English  botanist,  herbalist  and  phys-
ician, wrote The English Physician and the 
Complete Herbal, which contributed to the 
vast knowledge of the pharmacological prop-
erties of herbs. Dr Culpepper spent most of 
his life cataloguing hundreds of medicinal 
herbs and devoted himself to using herbs to 
treat his patients.

There are numerous inclusions or cit-
ations  of  rosemary  in  historical  events,  in 
poems  and  writings,  and  in  practices  and 
traditions through legends and myths. Here 
are a few of these:
 1.  Rosemary is known as the ‘herb of remem-
brance’ and was used by early Europeans in 
the  graves  of  their  loved  ones  so  that  they 
would  not  be  forgotten.  This  was  also  a 
practice of the ancient Egyptians, who placed 
sprigs of rosemary in the tomb to remember 
the dead and used it in bouquets of funeral 
flowers.
 2.  The ancient Greek scholars wore the rose-
mary  sprigs  in  their  hair  while  they  were 
studying because it was believed to enhance 
concentration.  Rosemary  sprigs  were  also 
placed  under  a  student’s  pillow  the  night 
before exams because it was believed to im-
prove memory during sleep.
 3.  Queen Isabella of Hungary used rosemary 
extracted by alcohol to treat gout. In Banckes’ 
book, rosemary leaves that had been extracted 
using boiled water were applied as a poult-
ice  on  the  leg  that  ‘be  blown  with  gout’. 
Rosemary tea was also said to be ‘for much 
worth against allevils of the body’ according 
to  Banckes.  Dr  Culpepper  stated  that  ‘the 
(rosemary)  water  is  an  admirable  cure-all 
remedy of all kinds of cold, loss of memory, 
headache, coma’.
 4.  Rosemary was also used in cosmetics as 
recommended by Banckes in the following 
excerpt  from  his  book:  ‘boyle  the  leves  in 
whytewyne and wasshe thy face therwith … 
thou shalt have a fayre face; make thee a box 
of the wood (rosemary) and smell to it and it 
shall preserve thy youthe’. Gervase Markham 
(1568–1637)  regarded  the  many  excellent 
uses  of  rosemary  water  for  improving  the 

Fig. 18.1.  A rosemary shoot and flowers (Wikimedia 
Commons, 2014a).

rosemary for its healing powers and its ability 
to increase blood circulation and strengthen 
blood  vessels  were  mentioned  in  ancient 
European  history.  Rosemary  has  also  been 
associated with improving memory and the 
heart. Here is a brief summary of its history:
 1.  At around 5000 bc, references to rosemary 
were found in Cuneiform writing on stone 
tablets.  This  form  of  writing  is  one  of  the 
earliest known systems, and employed reed 
or grass as the writing instrument and clay 
or stone tablets as the writing medium.
 2.  In c.40–90, Pedanius Dioscorides, a Greek 
physician, phamacologist and botanist, who 
practised in Rome during the time of Nero, 
wrote De Materia Medica, one of the most 
influential herbal books. This book, which 
was written in five volumes, also contained 
remedies provided by other herbs that were 
used by the ancient Greeks and Romans.
 3.  In c.1525, Rycharde Banckes printed the 
book Banckes’ Herbal in England, in which 
healing and other powers of rosemary were 
discussed.  The  title  page  contained  the 
following passage ‘Here begynneth a newe 
mater, the whichesheweth and treateth of ye 

 

Rosemary 

211

complexion and the heart, the brain and the 
whole  body,  ‘cleansing  away  the  spots  of 
the face’ making ‘a man look young’.

From well-known literary writings, rose-
mary  was  part  of  these  stories,  as  in  the 
Sleeping Beauty, who was said to have been 
awoken from her sleep by Prince Charming 
when a rosemary sprig brushed over her cheek. 
In  Shakespeare’s  Hamlet,  Ophelia  says 
‘There's rosemary, that’s for remembrance’; 
and in Romeo and Juliet, it was quoted that 
Juliet was honoured at her burial with rose-
mary for remembrance. Rosemary has been 
a symbol of loyalty, fidelity, love and remem-
brance, and it is still used in Europe today 
when brides wear a rosemary sprig in their 
hair during their wedding ceremonies.

18.1.3  Location

Rosemary is grown commercially in France, 
Italy, Spain, Morocco and Tunisia. The major 
producers are in France, Spain and Morocco. 
There  are  several  countries  in  Europe  that 
cultivate rosemary on organic farms. It is also 
grown  in  the  USA,  Mexico,  in  almost  all 
regions of South Africa and in some regions 
in  Asia.  In  addition,  the  herb  can  also  be 
found  under  cultivation  in  countries  such 
as Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Denmark, Fin-
land, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, the 
Netherlands, Portugal, Romania, Sweden and 
the UK.

Rosemary  is  drought  tolerant,  easy  to 
grow and relatively pest resistant. It grows 
well  in  sandy  to  clay  loam  soil  with  good 
drainage and in full sun, and best in neutral 
to alkaline conditions. There are a number 
of  cultivars  available  but  for  commercial 
purposes the following are the most import-
ant: ‘Camphor-borneol’ grown in Spain, ‘1,8 
Cineole’ grown in Tunisia and ‘Verbenone’ 
grown in France. Rosemary is a hardy, temper-
ate  plant  that  can  tolerate  frost  and  grows 
well at temperatures of 20–25° C. It is very 
adaptable.

Reliable  production  and  consumption 
figures are not available because, in records, 
rosemary is lumped together with other aro-
matic  herbs  (see  Fig.  18.2)  such  as  basil, 

capers,  horseradish,  hyssop,  juniper  berry, 
marjoram, mint, oregano, parsley, savory, tar-
ragon, tejpath (Cinnamomum tamala), thyme, 
sage and others. The global export of aromatic 
herbs has been steady and slightly increas-
ing since 2003 compared with spices, whose 
export increased dramatically over the same 
time period. The spices include major ones 
such as allspice, annatto seed, aniseed, asa-
foetida, cambodge (Malabar tamarind), cara-
way,  cardamom  (large  and  small),  cassia, 
cinnamon, cloves, coriander, cumin, dill, dried 
chillies, dried ginger, fennel, fenugreek, greater 
galanaga  (or  galangal,  Alpinia  galangal), 
kokam (Garcinia indica), lovage, mace, mus-
tard, nutmeg, paprika, pepper, pepper long, 
pomegranate seeds, poppy, saffron, star anise, 
sweet flag (Acorus calamus), tamarind, tur-
meric, vanilla, etc. As precise data is not avail-
able,  it  was  recommended  by  the  Codex 
Alimentarius Commission (2013) that there 
is a need to collect this type of data because 
rosemary provides functionality in addition 
to providing aroma and taste in foods, and it 
also has a big impact on the identity of any 
food. Hence, impediments to the availability 
of vital statistics on the production, export, 
import  of  and  value  addition  to  rosemary 
need  to  be  overcome  (Codex  Alimentarius 
Commission, 2013).

In addition to fresh and dried rosemary 
leaves,  other  products  such  as  rosemary 
extract and rosemary oil are in demand in the 
international market. The import of rosemary 
oil to the USA (Fig. 18.3) shows an annual 
growth rate of 10%, and if this is assumed to 
be one third of the global demand, the total 
global  demand  is  estimated  at  323  t  p.a. 
(Codex  Alimentarius  Commission,  2013), 
which is a considerable amount.

18.1.4  Morphology

Rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis L.) belongs 
to the Lamiaceae (Labiatae) family under the 
lamids, asterids, monocots, magnolids, and 
finally the angiosperm phylogeny. It is native 
to  the  Mediterranean  region,  and  fresh 
and dried leaves are available commercially, 
with  the  dried  form  in  either  crushed  or 

212 

M.E. Embuscado 

)
t
(
 
e
m
u
o
V

l

14,000,000

12,000,000

10,000,000

8,000,000

6,000,000

4,000,000

2,000,000

0

2003

2007
Year

2010

Spices

Aromatic herbs

Fig. 18.2.  The global export of spices and aromatic herbs based on the data from Codex Alimentarius 
Commission, 2013.

)
t
(
 

e
m
u
o
V

l

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

2000

2001

2002
Year

2003

2004

Fig. 18.3.  Rosemary oil import by USA based on the data from Codex Alimentarius Commission, 2013.

 

Rosemary 

213

powdered form. It is an aromatic herb and has 
a characteristic highly aromatic minty odour 
and slightly bitter, astringent taste.

The plant has straight stems with numer-
ous long greyish or light brownish slender 
branches. It is an erect shrub that grows up 
to 6.6 ft (2 m) and the needle-like leaves are 
0.8–1.6  in  (2–3  cm)  long  and  the  width 
0.05–0.14 in (1.2–3.5 mm). On the branches, 
the leaves are placed opposite to one another 
and are leathery, thick, lustrous, linear and 
dark green, but whitish underneath with short, 
dense, felted masses of woolly hairs. Illustrated 
in  Fig.  18.4  are  a  rosemary  branch  and  its 
different  components  (i.e.  flower,  seeds, 
etc.).  The  flowers  are  small  and  are  white, 
pink, pale blue to deep blue or purple; the 
volatile  essential  oils  are  mostly  found  in 
their  calyces.  The  calyx  is  0.1–0.2  in  (3–4 
mm)  long,  green  or  purplish  and  coated 
with matted, tangled hairs when young, but 
it  later  develops  to  a  0.2–0.3  in  (5–7  mm) 
long smooth structure.

The upper epidermis of the leaf consists 
of  a  layer  of  tabular  polygonal  to  irregular 
cells with no stomata. The hypodermis has 

one to several layers of irregularly rounded 
to  ovoid  cells  with  thickened  walls.  The 
lower epidermis of the leaf has a lot of scat-
tered glandular trichomes.

18.2  Chemistry

18.2.1  Chemical composition

Rosemary  is  one  of  the  most  important  aro-
matic herbs, and its leaves are widely used as 
a flavouring in meats and as a perfume in soaps, 
detergents  and  household  sprays.  It  is  also 
extensively used in the pharmaceutical and 
cosmetic industries. Table 18.1 presents data 
on  the  chemical  composition  of  rosemary. 
Rosemary is a good source of iron, calcium, 
Vitamin  B6  and  carbohydrates,  especially 
dietary fibre. It contains a decent amount of 
lipids and proteins, but as the amount con-
sumed in food as a flavouring or condiment 
is small, rosemary is not a significant source 
of these nutrients. Typical products available 
on the market for culinary use are the fresh, 
dried (whole) and powdered leaves.

18.2.2  Phytochemistry

The aromatic herbs in the mint family contain 
a significant amount of effective antioxidant 
compounds  (see  Table  18.2),  and  they  are 
used as antioxidants in food to prevent the 
development  of  rancidity  and  to  improve 
the  shelf  life  of  oils  and  cosmetics.  Rose-
mary is particularly effective in enhancing 
the stability of omega-3 rich oils.

Table 18.3 summarizes the effectiveness 
of rosemary and of rosemary-derived products 
in preventing oxidation in foods and also in 
preventing  the  production  of  deleterious 
compounds during high-temperature cooking. 
The table also includes mention of some of 
the recent findings on the health benefits of 
consuming  rosemary  and  other  spices  and 
herbs.

As rosemary has been found to be a very 
effective antioxidant, a number of antioxi-
dants derived from it are now available on 
the market (Table 18.4), and it is the main 

Fig. 18.4.  Drawings of a rosemary shoot, flowers 
and seeds. Illustration from Köhler's Medicinal 
Plants (Wikimedia Commons, 2014b).

214 

M.E. Embuscado 

Table 18.1.  Composition of fresh and dried rosemary leaves. Adapted from data in the USDA National 
Nutrient Database for Standard Reference Release 28 (USDA ARS, 2015).

Component

Fresh/100 g

Dried/100 g

Carbohydrate, by difference
Energy
Protein
Total dietary fibre
Total lipid (fat)
Water
Minerals

Calcium, Ca
Iron, Fe
Magnesium, Mg
Phosphorus, P
Potassium, K
Sodium, Na
Zinc, Zn

Vitamins

Vitamin A, (RAE)a
Vitamin A (units)
Thiamine (B1)
Riboflavin (B2)
Niacin (B3)
Vitamin B6
Folate (B9) (DFE)a
Vitamin B12
Vitamin C (total ascorbic acid)
Vitamin D (D2 + D3)
Vitamin D (units)

Lipids

Cholesterol
Fatty acids, total monounsaturated
Fatty acids, total polyunsaturated
Fatty acids, total saturated

aRetinol activity equivalents.
bDietary folate equivalents.

20.70 g
131 kcal
3.31 g
14.1 g
5.86 g
67.77 g

317 mg
6.65 mg
91 mg
66 mg
668 mg
26 mg
0.93 mg

146 μg
2924 IU
0.036 mg
0.152 mg
0.912 mg
0.336 mg
109 g
0.00 μg
21.8 mg
0.0 μg
0 IU

0 mg
1.160 g
0.901 g
2.838 g

64.06 g
331 kcal
4.88 g
42.6 g
15.22 g
9.31 g

1280 mg
29.25 mg
220 mg
70 mg
955 mg
50 mg
3.23 mg

156
3128 IU
0.514 mg
0.428 mg
1.000 mg
1.740 mg
307 g
0.00 μg
61.2 mg
0.0 μg
0 IU

0 mg
3.014 g
2.339 g
7.371 g

and  most  significant  raw  material  for  the 
manufacture of antioxidants that are used in 
food and food products. Added benefits of 
using  rosemary  or  extracts  from  rosemary 
are that: (i) the product is natural or from a 
natural source; (ii) it is ‘clean label’; (iii) it 
has  a  long  history  of  safe  usage;  (iv)  it  is 
non-GMO; and (v) an organic variety is gen-
erally  available.  All  of  these  qualities  are 
added benefits from rosemary in what con-
sumers are looking for in food ingredients.

18.3  Postharvest Technology

Rosemary is harvested once or twice a year, 
typically  18  months  after  sowing,  and  in 

some instances after 24 months, then more 
frequently when the plant matures. Harvest-
ing  is  done  before  the  plant  goes  through 
the flowering stage or phase. The harvested 
leaves are processed by removing the leaves 
from  the  stems  and  removing  the  dirt  and 
sand thoroughly by sieving. The leaves are 
then dried either by spreading out on a tray 
or  hanging  in  bunches  away  from  direct 
sunlight. Better results are typically obtained 
when  artificial  drying  is  used  rather  than 
sun drying, because the drying and heating 
are better controlled when artificial drying 
method  is  used.  Drying  should  be  done  at 
temperatures lower than 40°C to reduce loss 
of  flavour  and  to  maintain  the  dark  green 
colour of the leaves. After drying, the leaves 

 

Rosemary 

215

Table 18.2.  Antioxidant compounds identified in rosemary and other aromatic herbs. Compiled from 
various sources.

Aromatic herbs in the 
mint family Lamiaceae

Rosemary

Basil

Lavender

Marjoram

Oregano

Sage

Thyme

Scientific name

Antioxidant compounds

Rosmarinus  

officinalis

Ocimum  

basilicum

Lavandula  

angustifolia

Origanum  
marjorana

Origanum  

vulgare

Salvia  

officinalis

Thymus  
vulgaris

Caffeic acid, caffeoyl derivatives (rosmarinic acid), phenolic 

diterpenes (carnosic acid, carnosal, carnosol, epirosmanol, 
12-O-methylcarnosic acid, rosmanol), flavonoids, camphor, 
caffeic acid, ursolic acid, betulinic acid, 1,8-cineole

Eugenol, citral, citronellol, linalool, myrcene, pinene, ocimene, 

terpineol, linalyl acetate, trans-ocimene, 1,8-cineole, 
camphor octanane, methyl eugenol, methyl chavicol, 
β-caryophyllene

Linalyl acetate, linalool, camphor, β-ocimene, 1,8-cineole, 

borneol, hotrienol, hexyl butyrate, α-bisabolol, caryophyllene 
oxide

β-Carotene, β-sitosterol, caffeic acid, carvacrol, eugenol, 

hydroquinone, linalyl-acetate, myrcene, rosmarinic acid, 
terpinen-4-ol

Caffeic acid, p-coumaric acid, rosmarinic acid, caffeoyl 

derivatives, carvacrol, flavonoids

Rosmanol, epirosmanol, phenolic acids (rosmarinic acid), 

phenolic diterpenes (carnosic acid), flavonoids

Phenolic acids (gallic acid, caffeic acid, rosmarinic acid), 

thymol, phenolic diterpenes, flavonoids

are  cleaned  further  (to  remove  any  stems, 
foreign  material,  etc.),  sieved  and  graded. 
The dried product is packaged and stored in 
tightly sealed containers. Dried rosemary is 
packaged  and  sold  either  in  cartons  or  in 
glass or plastic containers, tightly sealed and 
stored at low temperatures to keep moisture, 
heat, oxygen and light out because these will 
destroy the quality of the dried herb. Dried 
whole  rosemary  leaves  of  good  quality 
should contain at least 1.2% volatile oil and 
a maximum of 2% woody stems and a max-
imum of 7% ash.

Fresh clean rosemary leaves devoid of 
dirt  and  twigs  and  extraneous  materials 
should have a fresh and crisp appearance, a 
dark green colour and a good flavour. Typically, 
young,  fresh  shoots  are  used  for  culinary 
purposes. These are typically marketed and 
sold in bunches of two or three measuring 
10–12 inches or in clear cellophane sachets. 
They are packaged in crates when marketed 
in bulk. Packaged fresh rosemary leaves are 
stored  at  cool  refrigerated  temperatures 
(~5°C),  when  they  can  remain  fresh  for  at 
least 2–3 weeks.

18.3.1  Processing

Drying of rosemary has been discussed above. 
The main thing to bear in mind is that heat, 
air/oxygen and light will have a deleterious 
effect on the quality of the dried herb and 
thus  the  choice  of  packaging  material  or 
packaging  container  is  also  critical.  In  a 
commercial setting, sterilization of the spice 
and herb is necessary to destroy pathogenic 
microorganisms,  yeasts  and  moulds  and 
other pests. There are a number of choices 
that  can  be  employed  for  the  sterilization 
of  herbs  like  rosemary:  irradiation,  micro-
wave  sterilization  and  steam  sterilization. 
The use of ethylene oxide was once popular 
but  has  now  been  banned  in  Europe  and 
other  countries.  Irradiation,  although  not 
popular  to  consumers,  can  effectively  kill 
bacteria,  mould  and  insects  while  main-
taining the flavour of the spice or herb. This 
is  achieved  by  using  γ-rays  emitted  from 
cobalt-60  or  by  an  accelerated  electron 
beam. A dosage of 4 to 12–15 kGy can elim-
inate  coliforms  or  reduce  the  total  plate 
count to below detectable levels. Microwave 

216 

M.E. Embuscado 

Table 18.3.  Selected publications on the antioxidant and antimicrobial effects of rosemary and its health 
benefits. Adapted from Embuscado (2015).

Spice

Summary

Reference

Rosemary and sage

Bland natural antioxidants were obtained using an 

Chang et al., 1977

Rosemary

Antioxidant properties of rosemary oleoresin in turkey 

Barbut et al., 1985

extraction process and these extracts improved the 
flavour stability of soybean oil and potato chips.

Rosemary extracts

sausage – rosemary oleoresin (20 ppm) was comparable 
with a commercial blend of butylated hydroxyanisole/
butylated hydroxytoluene (BHA/BHT, 200 ppm) in 
preventing lipid autoxidation in turkey sausage stored at 
4°C as indicated by measurement of 2-thiobarbituric 
acid-reactive substances.

Water-soluble rosemary extracts showed reduction of lipid 
oxidation and colour change in cooked turkey products 
during storage as measured by monitoring changes in 
thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances, hexanal 
production and colour of the cooked turkey samples.

Rosemary extracts, VivOX 20 and VivOX 4 had antioxidant 
and antimicrobial properties in vacuum-packed chicken 
frankfurters based on the Rancimat test and total plate 
count, and compared with a commercially available 
preservative Robid LI LS and a control sample without 
test additives.

Rosemary extracts were able to inhibit heterocyclic 

amines (HCAs) formation during cooking of beef patties 
at high temperature.

Yu et al., 2002

Rižnar et al., 2006

Puangsombat and 

Smith, 2010

Oregano and  

rosemary extracts

Marinade  

seasoning blends

Methanol extracts from oregano and rosemary were able 

Bhale et al., 2007

to retard oxidation of docosahexaenoic acid C22:6 
(DHA) and eicosapentaenoic acid C20:5 (EPA) in 
menhaden oil. The antioxidant activity of the rosemary 
extract was greater than that of the oregano extract but 
it was sensitive to heat.

Commercial marinades (Caribbean, Southwest and Herb) 

Smith et al., 2008

inhibited formation of heterocyclic amines (HCAs) in 
beef round steaks cooked at 204°C (400°F). HCAs are 
suspected human carcinogens formed in meats during 
grilling or cooking.

Several spices

Rosemary, oregano and borage reduced formation of 

Sánchez-Escalante 

TBARS (thiobarbituric acid reactive substances), 
myoglobin oxidation, colour fading and extended shelf 
life in beef patties.

et al., 2003

Spice blend containing 

When added to hamburger meat before cooking, the spice 

Li et al., 2010

ground rosemary

mixture resulted in a reduction in malondialdehyde, 
suggesting potential health benefits for atherogenesis 
and carcinogenesis.

sterilization is a newer milder method that 
is  also  effective  and  at  the  same  time  can 
preserve the colour and flavour of the spice 
or  herb.  There  are  a  number  of  pieces  of 
microwave sterilization equipment that are 
being advertised on the Internet that promote 

effective sterilization while maintaining high 
quality of the herb or spice.

In addition to drying and sterilization, 
rosemary is processed using a variety of ex-
traction methods to produce rosemary oil, a 
very important product in the aromatic herb 

 

Rosemary 

217

Table 18.4.  Commercial antioxidants from rosemary.a Adapted from Embuscado (2015).

Products

Applications/usage

StabilEnhance rosemary extracts  

(powder or liquid forms):

Manufacturer/
website

Naturex
(http://www.naturex.

StabilEnhance OSR – carnosic acid 

Foods with high fat content and/or sensitive 

com)

up to 50%

to oxidation; prevent colour fading in 
paprika oleoresins, meat products, 
seasonings

StabilEnhance WSR – rosmarinic 

Beverages, emulsions, foods with low fat 

acid up to 40%

OxyBlock and XtraBlend antioxidant  

content

blends:

OxyBlock – optimized synergistic 
combinations rosemary extracts 
and natural tocopherols, citric acid 
and ascorbic acid

Paprika oleoresins, seasonings, animal fats, 

dehydrated meats

XtraBlend – optimized combinations 

Cooked meat products, raw ground meats

of botanical extracts

Fortium® – derived from mixed 

Food products with high fat oil content such 

tocopherols and Kemin’s proprietary 
rosemary extracts with minimal 
impact on flavour, colour and odour 
profiles

Fortium® TR30 liquid (sunflower oil, 

rosemary extract, mixed tocopherols)
Herbalox® seasoning - derived from 
natural rosemary extract, available 
in oil dispersible, water dispersible 
and water soluble forms

Duralox® oxidation management 
systems – include spice extrac-
tives, organic acids, antioxidants 
and vitamins

CO2-extracts
Rosemary antioxidant extract (14% 

or 25% diterpene phenols), 
powder (25% diterpene phenols)

as; meat and poultry products, nuts, 
spices, salad dressings, mayonnaise, 
marine oils, lard vegetable oils, instant 
noodles and cereals

Kemin
(http://www.kemin.

com/)

Beverage and energy drinks, meat and 

meat products, mayonnaise, sauces and 
dressings, breakfast cereals and energy 
bars

Food colour stabilization and as oil-soluble 

Kalsec
(http://www.kalsec.

com/products/
antioxidants/)

antioxidants

Flavex
(http://www.flavex.

com/en/ 
naturextrakte/
home/)

0.05–0.4% depending on application: 

stabilization of fatty and essential oils, 
carotenoids, etc. against oxidation; in the 
food industry (dressings, meat, sausages, 
snacks, etc.); food supplements; in 
cosmetic and pharmaceutical prepar-
ations; antioxidative, antimicrobial and 
anti-inflammatory properties; 0.05–0.1% 
in case of saturated fats, 0.2–0.4% in 
case of polyunsaturated oils

Rosemary antioxidant extract, water 

Extract is water dispersible with antioxidative 

dispersible (14% diterpene 
phenols) – >9% carnosic acid 
(calculated as diacetyl carnosic 
acid, 7–10% carnosic and carnosol 
(calculated as carnosic acid)

and antimicrobial properties; used in 
water-based systems, in meat and food 
industry and in cosmetic products for 
retarding oxidation of fats, oils and 
carotenes and contributes to microbial 
stability

Continued

218 

M.E. Embuscado 

Table 18.4.  Continued

Products

Applications/usage

AquaROX® – water soluble natural 

Beverages and energy drinks, meat and 

rosemary extract; rosmarinic range 
1–40%

meat products, mayonnaise, sauces and 
salad dressings, breakfast cereals, 
energy bars

INOLENS® – reduced odour and 

Chocolate and confectionery, special meat 

bitterness of oil soluble rosemary 
extracts with standardized 
carnosic acid; carnosic acid 
1–40%

products, mayonnaise and salad 
dressings, bakery products, polyunsatur-
ated oils (PUFA, fish oil), dry pet food, 
high-end oils, essential oils, edible oils, 
flavours, seafood, etc.

VivOX® – carnosic acid concentration 

Fresh and processed meats, oils, fats and 

1–100%; available in powder form 
and in liquid form (in oils, 
propylene glycol or ethanol)

shortenings (vegetable and animal), 
snacks, mayonnaise, sauces and salad 
dressings, dry pet foods, carotenoids, 
cookies, fillings for cookies, flavours, 
seafood products, cereals, energy bars, 
nuts, milk and dairy products, fried and 
processed foods, pastas

aListing these rosemary products is not a sign of endorsement from the author.

Manufacturer/
website

Vitiva
(http://www.vitiva.eu/

VITIVA_EN, 
product_portfolio/
rosemary_ 
extracts/)

market. The parts used for extraction are the 
stems, leaves and flowers, but rosemary oil 
extracted from the flowering tops produces 
superior  oil  compared  with  that  obtained 
from the stems and leaves.

The chart in Fig. 18.5 shows the diagram 
of the processes used for extraction and the 
products  obtained  from  the  different  pro-
cesses. This covers all the extraction methods 
employed,  not  only  for  aromatic  herbs  or 
spices,  but  also  other  sources  of  aromatic 
compounds (e.g. citrus).

The processes are summarized as follows:

 1.  Maceration using a solvent– the raw ma-
terial is crushed in the presence of a solvent 
(e.g.  alcohol).  The  product  derived  from 
this process is known as the tincture.
 2.  Enfleurage  method  –  the  raw  material 
(leaves or flower petals) is laid on a thin layer 
of  fat.  The  essential  oil  from  the  leaves  or 
flower petals transfers to the layer of fat. The 
leaves or petals are replaced with new ones 
and  the  process  is  repeated  until  the  fat  is 
saturated  with  the  essential  oils  from  the 
leaves or flower petals. The final product is 
known as the pomade.
 3.  Solvent extraction – solvents typically used 
are  non-aqueous  solvents  such  as  hexane, 

acetone or alcohols. The resulting product is 
typically viscous, semi-solid or solid.
 4.  Expression – the material is pressed manu-
ally or by employing a machine. The pressure 
exerted on the raw material forces the oils to 
be released from the material via puncture, 
rasting (a process wherein the raw material 
is under pressure using an implement that 
moves  back  and  forth  to  express  the  fluid 
from the material) or cutting.
 5.  Distillation  –  this  is  accomplished  by 
using steam or saturated steam. It can also 
be accomplished using hydro-diffusion.

 a.  Simple steam distillation – the material is 
immersed directly in water and this is boiled. 
The vapours containing the oil are condensed 
and  the  essential  oil  is  separated  based  on 
density and immiscibility in water.
 b.  Saturated steam distillation – the raw ma-
terial is not in direct contact with the water. 
Steam is generated by boiling water and this 
steam is injected through the plant material 
placed on perforated trays. This process has 
several advantages over simple steam distil-
lation. The quality of the oil constituents is 
preserved, the process of extraction is shorter, 
thus conserving energy, and pressure can be 
applied making the extraction process more 

 

Rosemary 

219

Aromatic raw

material

Distillation

Expression

Solvent
extraction

Enfleurage

Maceration

using a solvent

Essential oil

Citrus oil

Concretes

Resinoids

Pomades

Tinctures

Absolutes

Enfleurage
absolutes

Fig. 18.5.  Flow chart for the manufacture of different forms of extracts from aromatic plants such as 
rosemary.

efficient. This process can also be automated 
and controlled.
 c.  Hydro-diffusion – pulses of steam are sent 
through the plant material at a very low pres-
sure. This is also an energy-efficient process 
that produces a high-quality product.

For  rosemary,  the  highest  quality  of 
essential oils is obtained through distillation 
using only the flowering tops gathered when 
the plant is in bloom. The oil produced from 
this process is clear to slightly yellow thin oil 
with a powerful minty smell. The essential oil 
derived  from  the  whole  plant  will  have  a 
higher  camphor  content  and  lower  quality 
than  that  distilled  from  the  flowering  tops. 
The rosemary essential oil is stored in cool, 
dry area, tightly capped, and kept in the 
refrigerator  once  the  container  has  been 
opened. The oil is stored in glass bottles that 
are preferably amber coloured. The product 
should  not  be  exposed  to  light  or  heat,  or 
come into contact with any metals.

18.3.2  Value addition

Rosemary essential oil is one of the value- 
added products from rosemary, and is pro-
duced through the distillation process as a 
clear to slightly yellow thin fluid. The essen-
tial  oil  is  used  by  the  food,  flavouring, 
chemical and pharmaceutical industries in 
products such as flavours for foods, and fla-
vour and perfumery in cosmetics, personal 
health care and for aromatherapy. The major 

market for rosemary oils is the USA, followed 
by Japan and Europe. The seven large major 
processing plants of rosemary essential oil 
are in Europe and these make up the seven 
largest essential oil processing companies.

In addition to essential oil, other extracts 
can  also  be  derived  from  rosemary  (i.e. 
extracted by alcohol such as ethanol, or water 
extracts).  Another  product  is  from  super-
critical  extraction,  which  is  typically  used 
in  dietary  supplements.  Rosemary  leaf  in 
powdered form is also used in dietary sup-
plements. So depending on the end product 
desired, a specific type of extraction or dis-
tillation can be used to obtain a specific type 
of product, for example, for use as a flavouring, 
or for use in perfumes, in pharmaceuticals 
or as a dietary supplement. It is also under-
stood  that  targeting  a  specific  end  product 
with required composition will require usage 
of a specific part of the plant (including spe-
cifying its age, i.e. mature versus young leaves) 
or harvesting the leaves or the flowers at a 
specific stage of its life/maturity.

18.4  Uses

18.4.1  General uses

Rosemary  leaves  in  fresh  or  dry  forms  are 
used  in  food  preparation  to  flavour  meats 
and vegetables. The dry leaves are also used 
in crushed or powder form, primarily in food 
preparations.  Figure  18.6  shows  fresh,  dry 

220 

M.E. Embuscado 

 2.  Consumer  products  –  rosemary  extracts 
or essential oils are used in soaps, creams, 
deodorants,  hair  tonics/shampoos,  house-
hold cleaners and air fresheners.
 3.  Cosmetics – rosemary is used in creams 
for acne and dermatitis and also in prepar-
ations to stimulate hair growth and to pre-
vent dandruff. It is also used for its fragrance 
in the preparation of eau de cologne.
 4.  Pharmaceutical  uses  –  there  are  many 
useful properties of rosemary and thus it is 
considered as a very important plant in the 
field  of  herbal  or  alternative/complemen-
tary medicine. It is employed because of its 
anti-inflammatory properties and is used as 
an astringent, expectorant, tonic and stimu-
lant. It has been known to enhance circula-
tion  and  improve  food  absorption  through 
the stimulation of digestion. It is also used 
in  oral  preparations  for  antiseptic  gargles 
for  sore  throat,  inflammation  of  the  gums 
and canker sores.

Rosemary is also used as a relaxant and 
to  diminish  mental  fatigue  and  nervous  ex-
haustion. It is also been found to be effective 
for asthma, bronchitis and whooping cough, 
as well as appropriate cure for intestinal in-
fections and diarrhoea. It has been used since 
ancient  times  for  its  medicinal  properties, 
and was traditionally used to alleviate muscle 
pain and spasm, improve the immune system 
and support the circulatory and nervous sys-
tems. Rosemary is also known to treat indi-
gestion and improve memory, and has been 
recognized to have anticancer properties.
 5.  Other uses – rosemary is a nice decora-
tive plant or for use as a hedge in gardens. 
It is also used as a good ground cover to pre-
vent  soil  erosion.  It  is  a  good  source  of 
food for bees and has also used as an insect 
repellent.

18.4.2  Pharmacological uses

The use of rosemary is as old as humankind. 
A record of its usage has been traced back as 
early as 5000 bc. Based on historical accounts, 
rosemary and its constituents have a number 
of therapeutic properties. A number of stud-
ies  have  been  carried  out  to  determine  the 
potential therapeutic effects of rosemary and 

Fig. 18.6.  The different forms of rosemary leaves 
in the market from left to right: fresh, dried, and 
crushed dried leaves.

and crushed forms of rosemary leaves. Drying 
typically results in at least 50% loss in weight. 
As  mentioned  earlier,  rosemary  acts  as  a 
powerful  antioxidant  to  preserve  oils  and 
minimize  the  production  of  harmful  sub-
stances  during  grilling  or  pan  frying.  The 
products from rosemary that are so used are 
fresh rosemary leaves, leaf powder, rosemary 
essential  oil,  oil  soluble  rosemary  extracts 
and water-soluble rosemary extracts.

Other  uses  of  rosemary  powder  are  in 
dietary  supplements,  either  by  itself  or  in 
combination with other spices and herbs. It 
is used as a source of powerful antioxidants, 
for an uplifting effect on mood, for the im-
provement  of  health  and  for  longevity,  for 
assisting memory and clarity of thought, and 
for the alleviation of muscle pain. Rosemary 
leaf extract is also touted as promoting optimal 
cognitive function and aiding in keeping a 
clear head for improved concentration and 
improved short-term memory. Rosemary has 
been the subject of numerous research and 
clinical tests that have probed into its many 
health benefits.

To summarize, the general uses of rose-
mary and rosemary products can be classified 
into the following categories:

 1.  Culinary  preparations  for  flavour  and 
aroma – rosemary is used in food products 
(meat, poultry, fish, soups, stews, vegetables) 
in fresh or dry forms and in non-alcoholic 
beverages. Fresh and dried rosemary leaves, 
whole or ground, are used as seasonings for 
soups, stews, sausages, meat, fish and poultry. 
Rosemary leaves are also used to extend the 
shelf  life  of  oils/fats  and  meats  because  of 
their antioxidant and antibacterial activity.

 

Rosemary 

221

products  derived  from  the  rosemary  plant. 
Here is a list of some selected scientific pub-
lications:
 1.  A short-term study on the effects of rose-
mary  on  cognitive  function  in  an  elderly 
population was conducted and showed posi-
tive effect of the dose on cognitive perform-
ance (Pengelly et al., 2012).
 2.  Essential oils of lavender (Lavandula an-
gustifolia)  and  rosemary  were  found  to  have 
an effect on cognitive performance and sub-
jective effects on mood (Moss et al., 2003).
 3.  Carnosic acid from rosemary showed an-
timutagenic properties in bacteria and anti-
carcinogenic  activity  in  various  cell  and 
animal models (Steiner et al., 2001).
 4.  Carnosol,  which  is  found  in  rosemary, 
exhibits  antioxidant  and  anticarcinogenic 
properties (Lo et al., 2002).

Although  several  scientific  research 
works have been conducted on the therapeutic 
and medicinal effects of rosemary, work in 
this important area continues to proliferate, 
primarily due to the increasing demand for 
more natural solutions to counteract illnesses 
and diseases.

18.5  Summary

Rosemary is an evergreen, sun-loving peren-
nial plant that is native to south of France 
and the Mediterranean regions. It is cultivated 
because of its aromatic and medicinal prop-
erties. Rosemary and products derived from 
rosemary are a very important group of prod-
ucts  because  of  the  many  benefits  derived 
from using this natural ingredient in food or 
due to their health benefits. Published scien-
tific research works support the effectiveness 
of  rosemary  as  an  antioxidant  in  foods. 
Numerous research findings also substanti-
ate the pharmacological benefits of rosemary 
and  rosemary  products.  Rosemary  extracts 
are widely used in the food, pharmaceutical 
and  cosmetic  industries.  It  is  a  very  vital 
herb from the point of view of both human 
health and food safety, as it can be used as 
an effective food preservative.

According  to  the  Codex  Alimentarius 
Commission (2013), even if rosemary is a very 

small  crop  that  is  clubbed  together  with 
other aromatic herbs, it is important that the 
statistics on production, export, import and 
value  addition  are  available  for  the  herb 
because of the numerous benefits and func-
tionality derived from it. Due to the import-
ance of this herb, a proposal on the develop-
ment of a Codex Standard for rosemary has 
been submitted (Codex Alimentarius Com-
mission, 2013). According to this report:

The objective is to develop a world-wide 
standard based on basic characteristics. 
The need to have a harmonized standard for 
Rosemary stems from the fact the crop is 
grown in developing countries in fragmented 
areas by marginal farmers. The marginal 
farmers do not have the capability to 
collectively organize to manage the factors 
which influence their output and therefore 
the whole food chain will be put to risk by 
these external factors if these risks are not 
recognized or mitigated by an international 
committee under the aegis of Codex.

The main aspects to be covered according 
to this proposal (Codex Alimentarius Com-
mission, 2013), as quoted verbatim are:

The standard entails aspects related to the 
properties of Rosemary in dehydrated and 
extract form incorporating physical 
parameters, presence of extraneous matters, 
oil content, safety and labeling in order to 
provide adequate product characteristics 
and to protect consumer's health. To supply 
high quality safe products, the objective of 
the standards are to:

• 

• 

• 

• 

 Compile production, export and 
import figures for Rosemary and its 
products to overcome the current 
impediment in sourcing data for 
standardization and harmonization.
 Establish the minimum requirements 
for Rosemary in its dehydrated and 
extract from [form] including and in 
additions to the quality parameters like 
the physical appearance, uniformity of 
the product, free from pest and other 
extraneous matter etc.
 Define the categories to classify 
Rosemary in accordance with the 
characteristics of the herb; such as cut 
herbs, essential oil, fixed oil, extracts etc.
 To monitor and strengthen the cross 
border phytosanitary regulations so 

222 

M.E. Embuscado 

• 

• 

• 

• 

that the pests/microbes do not travel to 
other countries and cross contaminate 
the delicate ecosystem of marginal 
growers of spices and herbs.
 Include the provisions to be considered 
related to the uniformity of the packaged 
product and the packaging used.
 Include provisions for the labeling and 
marking of the product in accordance 
with the general standard for the 
labeling of prepackaged foods.
 Establish tolerances regarding quality 
and size permitted in packaged Rosemary.
 Include provisions for hygiene with 
reference to the recommended 
international Code of Practice for 
hygiene and general principles of food 
hygiene.

Consumers have increasingly favoured 
food products which contain natural ingre-
dients  due  to  concerns  over  the  adverse 
health  effects  of  synthetic  raw  materials, 
particularly  some  synthetic  antioxidants 
and food additives. Rosemary and rosemary 
products are classified as all natural, ‘clean 
label’  and  non-GMO,  attractive  qualities 
sought by consumers. As consumers’ demand 
for  natural  ingredients  in  their  food  prod-
ucts  increases,  the  utilization  of  rosemary 
and  rosemary  products  will  continue  to 
expand,  and  scientific  research  works  on 
rosemary  will  continue  to  increase.  Rose-
mary will remain an important aromatic herb 
throughout the world for years to come.

References

Barbut, S., Josephson, D.B. and Maurer, A.J. (1985) Antioxidant properties of rosemary oleoresin in turkey 

sausage. Journal of Food Science 50, 1356–1359.

Bhale, S.D., Xu, Z., Prinyawiwatkul, W., King, J.M. and Godber, J.S. (2007) Oregano and rosemary 
extracts inhibit oxidation of long-chain n-3 fatty acids in menhaden oil. Journal of Food Science 
72, C504–C508.

Chang, S.C., Ostric-Matijasevic, B., Hsieh, O.L. and Huang, C.L. (1977) Natural antioxidants from rosemary 

and sage. Journal of Food Science 42, 1102–1106.

Codex Alimentarius Commission (2013) Discussion Paper for the Establishment of Codex Committee on 
Spices,  Aromatic  Herbs  and  Their  Formulations.  Joint  FAO/WHO  Food  Standards  Programme, 
Codex  Alimentarius  Commission,  36th  Session,  FAO  Headquarters,  Rome,  Italy,  1–5  July  2013. 
Document No. CX/CAC 13/36/10-Add.2, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 
Rome.  Available  at:  ftp://ftp.fao.org/codex/Meetings/cac/cac36/cac36_10_add2e.pdf  (accessed  28 
January 2016).

Embuscado,  M.E.  (2015)  Herbs  and  spices  as  antioxidants  for  food  preservation.  In:  Shahidi,  F.  (ed.) 
Handbook of Antioxidants for Food Preservation. Woodhead Publishing (Elsevier), Sawston, 
Cambridge, UK, pp. 251–284.

Li, Z., Henning, S.M., Zhang, Y., Zerlin, A., Li, L., Gao, K., Lee, R., Karp, H., Thames, G., Bowerman, 
S. and Heber, D. (2010) Antioxidant-rich spice added to hamburger meat during cooking results 
in reduced meat, plasma, and urine malondialdehyde concentrations. The American Journal of 
Clinical Nutrition 91, 1180–1184.

Lo, A.H., Liang, Y.C., Lin-Shiau, S.Y., Ho, C.T. and Lin, J.K. (2002) Carnosol, an antioxidant in rosemary, 
suppresses inducible nitric oxide synthase through down-regulating nuclear factor-κB in mouse 
macrophages. Carcinogenesis 23, 983–991.

Moss, M., Cook, J., Wesnes, K. and Duckett, P. (2003) Aromas of rosemary and lavender essential oils dif-
ferentially affect cognition and mood in healthy adults. International Journal of Neuroscience 113, 15–38.
Pengelly, A., Snow, J., Mills, S.Y., Scholey, A., Wesnes, K. and Butler, L.R. (2012) Short-term study on the 
effects of rosemary on cognitive function in an elderly population. Journal of Medicinal Food 15, 10–17.
Puangsombat, K. and Smith, J.S. (2010) Inhibition of heterocyclic amine formation in beef patties by 

ethanolic extracts of rosemary. Journal of Food Science 75, T40–T47.

Rižnar, K., Cˇ elan, S.T., Knez, Z., Škerget, M., Bauman, D. and Glaser, R. (2006) Antioxidant and antimicrobial 

activity of rosemary extract in chicken frankfurters. Journal of Food Science 71, C425–C429.

Sánchez-Escalante, A., Djenane, D., Torrescano, G., Beltrán, J.A. and Roncales, P. (2003) Antioxidant 
action of borage, rosemary, oregano and ascorbic acid in beef patties packaged in modified atmosphere. 
Journal of Food Science 68, 339–344.

 

Rosemary 

223

Smith, J.S., Ameri, F. and Gadgil, P. (2008) Effect of marinades on the formation of heterocyclic amines 

in grilled beef steaks. Journal of Food Science 73, T100–T195.

Steiner, M., Priel, I., Giat, J., Levy, J., Sharoni, Y. and Danilenko, M. (2001) Carnosic acid inhibits pro-
liferation and augments differentiation of human leukemic cells induced by 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin 
D3 and retinoic acid. Nutrition and Cancer 41, 135–144.

USDA  ARS  (2015)  USDA  National  Nutrient  Database  for  Standard  Reference,  Release  28.  Nutrient 
Data Laboratory, Agricultural Research Service, US Department of Agriculture, Beltsville, Maryland. 
Available at: http://www.ars.usda.gov/Services/docs.htm?docid=8964 (accessed 28 January 2016). 
Nutrient Data Laboratory home page available at: http://www.ars.usda.gov/ba/bhnrc/ndl (accessed 
28 January 2016).

Wikimedia Commons (2014a) THOR (Flowering Rosemary). Available at: https://commons.wikimedia.
org/wiki/File:Rosmarinus_officinalis133095382.jpg (accessed 28 January 2016). Public domain, 
via Wikimedia Commons.

Wikimedia Commons (2014b) Franz Eugen Köhler’s Medizinal-Pflanzen (List of Koehler Images). Available 
at:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rosemary#/media/File:Rosmarinus_officinalis_-_K%C3%B6hler% 
E2%80%93s_Medizinal-Pflanzen-258.jpg (accessed 28 January 2016). Public domain, via Wikimedia 
Commons.

Yu, L., Scanlin, L., Wilson, J. and Schmidt, G. (2002) Rosemary extracts as inhibitors of lipid oxidation 
and color change in cooked turkey products during refrigerated storage. Journal of Food Science 
67, 682–685.

19  Sage

Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran

 Ahmad Ghorbani*

19.1  Botany

19.1.1 

Introduction

Sage is a shrubby perennial herb native to 
the Mediterranean and Balkans regions. It is 
an evergreen plant in the family Lamiaceae 
and belongs to the genus Salvia, which is one 
of the widely spread members of the family. 
Its botanical name is Salvia officinalis. Ver-
nacular  names  used  in  different  languages 
are shown in Table 19.1.

Sage is a popular kitchen plant in many 
countries and has been long used in a var-
iety  of  culinary  preparations.  It  also  has  a 
long history of traditional use as a medicinal 
plant and as a beauty aid (Zargari, 1990; Bis-
set and Wichtl, 2001; Miura et al., 2001).

19.1.2  History/origin

The words Salvia and sage are said to come 
from the Latin word salvere which means ‘to 
heal’  and  ‘to  save’.  This  plant  was  called 
elifagus by the Greeks; this became spahkos, 
and later, in old English, the plant came to 
be known as sawge. The word officinalis re-
fers to the therapeutic use of the plant – the 

*Corresponding author, e-mail: ghorbania@mums.ac.ir

officina was the traditional place in a mon-
astery  where  plants  and  medicines  were 
stored  (Baricevic  and  Bartol,  2000;  Stearn, 
2004;  Harrison,  2012;  Russo  et  al.,  2013; 
HerbNet, 2014). Sage has been used in food 
and  traditional  medicine  for  centuries.  In 
the  Medieval  period,  the  production  of  es-
sential  oil  from  sage  was  common  and 
people believed that the herb could cure all 
ailments.  In  that  period,  Arab  physicians 
thought  that  the  plant  extended  life.  Folk 
healers  in  America  used  sage  to  treat  epi-
lepsy,  insomnia,  seasickness,  measles  and 
intestinal worms, and in the 1920s, US med-
ical texts recommended sage leaf poultices 
for  swellings  and  sprains,  and  sage  tea  for 
sore  throats.  In  Asia,  traditional  healers 
 believed  that  sage  had  useful  effects  on 
gout, rheumatism, headache, oedema, night 
sweats,  dizziness,  tremors,  fatigue,  paraly-
sis,  chronic  coughs,  tonsillitis  and  ulcers 
(Zargari, 1990; HerbNet, 2014).

19.1.3  Location

Salvia is the largest genus of the family La-
miaceae  and  has  about  900  species  that  are 
spread throughout the world (Delamare et al., 

224 

© CAB International 2016. Leafy Medicinal Herbs: Botany, Chemistry,  
Postharvest Technology and Uses (eds D.C.P. Ambrose et al.)

 

Sage 

225

Table 19.1.  Vernacular names of sage in different 
languages.

Country

Vernacular names

Arabic
English

Shalbiyah, asfaqs
Garden sage, common sage, red 

sage, great sage

French

Feuillos de sauge commune, sague 

officinale, herbe sacrée, grande 
sauge, sauge

German

Salbei, grosse salbei, gebräuchliche, 

Hindi
Italian

Persian

salbeiblätter, edelsalbei, gartensalbei

Salvia, sefakus
Salvia, salvia domestica, salvia 

maggiore
Maryam goli

2007). The species S. officinalis is native to 
the western and southern Balkans, the Medi-
terranean  and  Middle  Eastern  regions.  The 
plant has been naturalized and is cultivated 
in several regions of the world, particularly 
European countries (Bisset and Wichtl, 2001; 
PDR,  2004).  It  is  also  cultivated  in  North 
America  and  North  Africa  (Zargari,  1990; 
PDR, 2004).

19.1.4  Morphology

Sage is a perennial round-shaped shrub with 
a strongly based root system. It grows up to 
60–70 cm high and wide (Fig. 19.1). The base 
of the stem is woody and has leafy quadran-
gular  branches  (Bisset  and  Wichtl,  2001; 
PDR, 2004). The leaves are simple, textured, 
evergreen,  oblong  or  oblong–lanceolate  and 
range  in  size  up  to  6.4  cm  long  by  2.5  cm 
wide. They are narrowed at the base, rugose 
on  the  upper  side  and  nearly  white  under-
neath because of the presence of many short 
soft  hairs  (Clebsch  and  Barner,  2003;  Herb-
Net,  2014).  The  leaves  are  also  petiolate, 
crenate,  ribbed–wrinkled,  tough,  tangy  and 
aromatic  (PDR,  2004).  In  modern  cultivars, 
the leaves may be purple, cream, rose and yellow 
in the many variegated forms that are grown 
(Clebsch and Barner, 2003; HerbNet, 2014).

The flowers of sage are small and bloom 
in the summer. They are pale violet, white 
or  pink  and  have  6–12-blossomed  false 

whorls  which  are  organized  in  4–8  rows. 
The calyx is funnel shaped, bilabiate, glan-
dular  punctuate  and  10–14  mm  long.  The 
lower lip has three segments and two thorny 
awned teeth, and upper lip is straight and 
has three thorny awned teeth. The flowers 
have  two  stamens  with  semicircular  bent 
filaments (PDR, 2004).

19.2  Chemistry

19.2.1  Chemical composition

A wide range of chemical constituents with 
different functional groups and polarities is 
found in sage. In the last few decades, dif-
ferent solvents have been used to extract the 
active  chemical  constituents,  and  some  of 
the  best  studied  sage  preparations  include 
essential oil, alcoholic and aqueous extracts, 
and a butanol fraction.

More than 120 components have been 
identified  in  sage  essential  oil.  Cineole,  bor-
neol,  thujone,  camphor,  elemene,  ledene, 
 pinene, humulene and caryophyllene are of 
the major components of the oil (Langer et al., 
1996;  Hayouni  et  al.,  2008;  Badiee  et  al., 
2012). Alcoholic and aqueous extracts of sage 
contain phenolic compounds such as phen-
olic acids (e.g. rosmarinic acid) and flavon-
oids  (e.g.  luteolin-7-glucoside).  Compared 
with the aqueous extract, the alcoholic ex-
tract has a higher content of rosmarinic acid, 
while the aqueous extract has a higher con-
tent  of  luteolin-7-glucoside  (Lima  et  al., 
2007b).  A  number  of  water-soluble  carbohy-
drates  have  been  characterized,  the  most 
abundant of which are arabinose, galactose, 
glucose,  mannose,  rhamnose,  xylose  and 
uronic  acids  (Capek  and  Hríbalová,  2004). 
Although the chemical components of sage 
tea have not been well studied, rosmarinic 
acid, luteolin-7-glucoside, and volatile con-
stituents  such  as  1,8-cineole,  cis- thujone, 
trans- thujone,  camphor  and  borneol  have 
been  identified  so  far.  The  percentages  of 
these components differ depending on envir-
onmental parameters such as soil and climatic 
conditions,  water  availability  and  altitude 
(Russo et al., 2013).

Table 19.2.  Chemical compounds present in sage essential oil, tea and different extracts.

Type of sage 
extract

Compounds

References

Essential oil

Allo-aromadendren; a-amorphene; aromadendrene; (Z)-a-trans-bergamatolcetate; b-bisabolene; borneol; 

Länger et al., 1996; Venskutonis, 

bornyl acetate; b-burbonene; 1-butyl acetate; cadina-1,4-diene; a-cadinene; d-cadinene; g-cadinene; 
a-cadinol; t-cadinol; a-calacorene; b-calacorene; calarene; cis-calamenene; camphene; camphor; 
d-3-carene; carveol; trans-carvyl acetate; caryophyllene; b-caryophyllene; (E)-caryophyllene; 
 caryophyllene oxide; b-caryophyllene oxide; a-cedrene; b-cedrene; cermacrene B; cineole; 1,8-cineole; 
a-copaene; a-cubebene; b-cubebene; cyclohexadiene; cyclohexene; H-cycloprop; p-cymene; p-cymene-
8-ol; n-decane; cis-dihydrocarvone; 2,5-dimethylstyrene; b-elemene; d-elemene; g-elemene; elemol; 
a-fenchene; fenchyl acetate; germacrene D; a-gurjenene; b-gurjenene; n-hexacosane; a-humulene; 
 humulene epoxside; isoaromadendrene epoxide; isoborneol; a-kubeben; ledene; limonene; linalool; 
cis-linalool oxide; linalyl acetate; longifolene; manool; menthone; methyl chavicol; cis-2-methyl-3- 
methylene-hep-5-ene; trans-2-methyl-3-methylene-hep-5-ene; a-muurolene; g-muurolene; a-muurolol; 
t-muurolol; myrcene; b-myrcene; myrtenal; myrtenol; naphthalene; naphthalene methanol; nerol; neryl 
acetate; b-ocimene; cis-ocimene; cis-b-ocimene; (E)-b-ocimene; trans-b-ocimene; (Z)-b-ocimene; 
n- octacosane; a-phellandrene; b-phellandrene; phenanthrene; a-pinene; b-pinene; pinocamphon; 
trans-pinocamphon; sabinene; cis-sabinene hydrate; trans-sabinene-hydrate; cis-sabinyl acetate; 
trans-sabinyl acetate; cis-salven; sclareol; b-selinene; g-selinene; terpinen-4-ol; a-terpinene;  
g-terpinene; a-terpinol; terpinolene; a-terpinolene; a-terpenyl acetate; a-thujone; b-thujone; tricyclene; 
n-undecane; viridiflorol; a-ylangene

Borneol; camphor; 1,8-cineole; luteolin-7-glucoside; rosmarinic acid; cis-thujone; trans-thujone
Allo-aromadendrene; aromadendrene; (E)-g-bisabolene; borneol; bornyl acetate; b-bourbonene;  
d-cadinene; g-cadinene; a-calacorene; b-calacorene; trans-calamenene; camphene; camphor; 
(E)-caryophyllene; caryophyllene oxide; carvacrol; 1,8-cineole; a-copaene; a-cubebene; b-cubebene; 
p-cymene; n-decanol; 3-decanone; dibutyl phthalate; n-dodecane; n-eicosane; ethyl hexadecanoate; 
eugenol; cis-ferruginol; trans-ferruginol; furfural; n-hexadecane; n-hexadecanol; isobornyl acetate; 
limonene; linalool; trans-linalool oxide; manool; methyl octadecanoate; a-muurolene; g-muurolene; 
epi-a-muurolol; myrcene; (E)-b-ocimene; (Z)-b-ocimene; n-octadecanol; 3-octanol; 3-octanone; 
n-pentacosane; a-pinene; b-pinene; a-phellandrene; sabinene; terpinen-4-ol; a-terpinene; g-terpinene; 
a-terpineol; terpinolene; cis-thujone; trans-thujone; trans-totarol; tricyclene; n-tridecane; viridiflorol; 
a-ylangene

1997; Lima et al., 2004; 
Mitic-Culafic et al., 2005; 
Hayouni et al., 2008; El Hadri 
et al., 2010; Badiee et al., 
2012; Russo et al., 2013

Lima et al., 2005
Velicˇkovic´ et al., 2003;  

Lima et al., 2007a

Tea
Alcoholic extract 

of flowers, 
leaves and 
stems

2
2
6

 

A

.
 

G
h
o
r
b
a
n

i
 

Aqueous acetone 

extract

Cis-p-coumaric acid 4-O-(2¢-O-b-d-apiofuranosyl)-b-d-glucopyranoside; trans-p-coumaric acid 
4-O-(2¢-O-b-d-apiofuranosyl)-b-d-glucopyranoside 6,8-di-C-b-d-glucosylapigenin (vicenin-2); 
3¢-O-b-d-glucuronide; 7-O-glucuronide; 7-O-b-d-glucuronide; 4-hydroxyacetophenone 4-O- 
(6¢-O- b-d-apiofuranosyl)-b-d-glucopyranoside; 6-hydroxyluteolin-7-O-b-d-glucoside; luteolin 7-O-b-d-
glucoside

Lu and Foo, 2000

 

Butanol fraction of 

Caffeic acid; 2,3-dihydro-2-(4¢-hydroxy-3¢-methoxyphenyl)-3-(hydroxymethyl)-7-methoxy- 

Wang et al., 1998, 2000

leaf

Water-soluble 

carbohydrates

5-benzofuranpropanol 4¢-O-b-glucopyranoside; ethyl b-d-glucopyranosyltuberonate; 6-O-(E)-feruloyl-(a 
and b)-glucopyranoside; 4-O-b-d-glucopyranosylacetophenone; homoplantaginin;  
4-hydroxyacetophenone-4-O-b-d-apiofuranosyl-(1®6)-O-b-d-glucopyranoside; 4-hydroxyacetophenone 
4-O-[5-O-(3,5-dimethoxy-4-hydroxybenzoyl)-b-d-apiofrunosyl]-(1®2)-b-d-glucopyranoside;  
p-hydroxybenzoic acid; (−)-hydroxyjasmonic acid; (+)-1-hydroxypinoresinol-1-b-d-glucoside; icariside 
F2; (−)-isolariciresinol-3a-O-b-d-glucopyranoside; luteolin-7-O-b-glucopyranoside; rosmarinic acid; 
1-O-(2,3,4-trihydroxy-3-methyl)-butyl-6-O-feruloyl-b-d-glucopyranoside

Arabinose; fucose; galactose; glucose; mannose; 3-O-methyl-galactose; rhamnose; uronic acids; xylose

Capek and Hríbalová, 2004

S
a
g
e

 

2
2
7

228 

A. Ghorbani 

19.2.2  Phytochemistry

A  comparison  of  the  constituents  of  the 
flowers, leaves and stems of sage shows that 
the flowers contain the highest amounts of 
1,8-cineole  and  a-pinene.  Linalool  is  the 
most abundant component in the stem ex-
tract.  In  the  leaves,  camphene,  limonene, 
cis-thujone, trans-thujone, camphor, bornyl 
acetate, and a-humulene are the most abun-
dant chemical constituents (Velicˇkovic´ et al., 
2003).

Table  19.2  lists  the  chemical  com-
pounds present in sage tea, essential oil and 
various extracts.

19.3  Postharvest Technology

19.3.1  Processing

Drying and grinding

The  harvested  plant  material  is  washed  to 
clean off soil and debris. The material is then 
sliced into small pieces and stored in a room 
with adequate ventilation at ambient tempera-
ture. It should be protected from microbial fer-
mentation, which causes the degradation of 
metabolites, and should also be stored in the 
shade to reduce ultraviolet ray-induced chem-
ical reactions (Seidel, 2006).

The  dried  plant  material  can  be  pow-
dered  using  a  hammer  mill  or  blender. 
Grinding  improves  subsequent  extraction 
because it increases the surface area and in-
creases  the  penetration  of  solvent  into  the 
cells. The powdered sample should be stored 
in  a  cool  (4°C)  and  dry  place;  storage  for 
long  time  may  decompose  some  of  the  ac-
tive compounds (Seidel, 2006).

Extraction

macerated  extract.  Maceration  is  a  simple, 
but still widely used, method for initial and 
bulk  extraction.  The  sage  leaf  powder  is 
suspended in a suitable volume of solvent 
(3–5 ml/g powder) and incubated for 48–72 h 
at 22–37°C. The solvent is chosen based on its 
selectivity for the compounds to be extracted. 
Non- polar  solvents  such  as  n-hexane  and 

dichloromethane  are  used  to  extract  the 
lipophilic  constituents  of  sage  (e.g.  fatty 
acids and some terpenoids). Solvents with 
medium polarity, such as acetone and ethyl 
acetate, can be used to extract constituents 
with intermediate polarity (e.g. flavonoids). 
To  extract  more  polar  constituents  (e.g. 
glycosides and tannins), a more polar solv-
ent  such  as  ethanol  (50–70%  diluted  with 
water) is used. After the extraction, the solv-
ent is passed through a filter to separate the 
residual sage material from the solvent. The 
resulting extract can be dried over a water 
bath; the resulting extract is kept at −20°C 
until use (Miura et al., 2001; Seidel, 2006; 
Ghorbani et al., 2014).

soxhlet  extract. 
In  the  Soxhlet  extraction 
method, the sage leaf powder is placed in a 
cellulose covering and inserted into the ex-
traction  chamber  of  the  Soxhlet  apparatus. 
A  suitable  solvent  (as  described  above)  is 
then added to the collecting flask of the ap-
paratus  and  heat  is  applied  for  approxi-
mately 48 h. This procedure is less solvent- 
and time-consuming than maceration and is 
suitable  for  extracting  a  small  amount  of 
plant material. However, because the extract 
is constantly heated, this method may lead 
to  the  degradation  of  thermolabile  ingredi-
ents (Seidel, 2006; Mortazavian et al., 2012).

percolated  extract.  A  percolator  is  a  con-
ical or cylindrical container that has a lid at 
the top and a perforated plate at the bottom. 
The fragmented sage leaves are soaked in a 
solvent  in  the  container  and  the  percolate 
(extract) is allowed to slowly flow out of the 
bottom.  This  technique  is  suitable  for 
large-scale extraction, although it does needs 
large  volumes  of  solvent  and  may  damage 
thermolabile metabolites (Seidel, 2006).

Essential oil

Volatile constituents from sage (e.g. phenyl-
propanoids and some terpenoids) can be ex-
tracted using the steam distillation method. 
The fresh or dried leaves are covered with 
the solvent in a round-bottomed flask con-
nected  to  a  condenser.  Upon  heating,  the 
vapours (essential oil and water) condense 

 

Sage 

229

and the distillate is collected. The aqueous 
phase of the collected liquid is recirculated 
into  the  flask  and  the  volatile  oil  is  separ-
ated into a container. The white–yellow oil 
can be dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate 
and kept at 4°C. Optimal conditions for es-
sential  oil  extraction  are  a  solvent-to-sage 
ratio of 6:1, leaf particle size of 1 mm, tem-
perature  40°C,  and  55–75%  ethanol  (by 
weight)  (Ahmadi  and  Mirza,  1999;  Seidel, 
2006;  Durling  et  al.,  2007;  El  Hadri  et  al., 
2010). The main components of sage essen-
tial oil are listed in Table 19.2.

Tablets/capsules

Homogenous crude powder of the leaves or 
prepared extract can be encapsulated or com-
pressed into a tablet of the desired dosage.

19.3.2  Value addition

Sage can be used to prepare a variety of cos-
metic products. Suggested uses include as a 
deep cleansing mask or a facial steam for oily 
skin,  and  for  enhancing  the  colour  of  dark 
and grey hair, increasing hair shine, cleaning 
teeth and treating dandruff, as well as using 
as refreshing and deodorizing footbath. Com-
mercially, the leaves of sage can be used to 
flavour  vinegar,  meat,  soups,  cheeses  and 
sauces (Zargari, 1990; HerbNet, 2014).

19.4  Uses

19.4.1  General uses

Historically, sage has been used in the prep-
aration of many foods because of its flavour-
ing and seasoning properties. In Italy, sage 
leaves  are  fried  and  eaten  with  potatoes, 
gnocchi and veal dishes. In the UK, cottage 
cheese is mixed with chopped fresh sage to 
spread on bread, and sage honey is used on 
bread  and  muffins.  Sage  tea  is  made  from 
dried or fresh leaves and it is suggested that 
it  improves  the  digestion  (Zargari,  1990; 
Bisset and Wichtl, 2001; Miura et al., 2001; 
HerbNet, 2014).

19.4.2  Pharmacological uses

Sage has been long used in traditional medi-
cine  to  treat  different  illnesses  (Zargari, 
1990). In recent decades, the plant has been 
a subject of intensive study for its pharma-
cological  effects,  and  experimental  and 
clinical  studies  have  revealed  several  bio-
logical activities, including hypoglycaemic, 
hypolipidaemic,  anti-inflammatory,  anti-
microbial,  antioxidant,  antitumor  and  im-
munomodulatory effects.

Hypoglycaemic and hypolipidaemic effects

Recent studies have confirmed the beneficial 
effects  of  natural  compounds  on  glycaemic 
status and serum lipids in diabetes (Ghorba-
ni, 2013a,b). Different types of sage extracts 
are able to decrease the blood glucose of nor-
mal  and  diabetic  animals.  The  plant  de-
creases the levels of triglyceride, cholesterol, 
urea, uric acid, creatinine and the liver en-
zymes  alanine  aminotransferase  (ALT)  and 
aspartate aminotransferase (AST) in diabetic 
animals. The mechanisms proposed for the 
antidiabetic  actions  of  sage  involve:  (i)  in-
creased plasma insulin; (ii) decreased insu-
lin  resistance  through  the  stimulation  of 
 peroxisome  proliferator-activated  receptor 
gamma (PPAR-g); and (iii) increased hepato-
cyte responses to insulin and the inhibition 
of  gluconeogenesis  (Baricevic  and  Bartol, 
2000; Alarcon-Aguilar et al., 2002; Eidi et al., 
2005; Lima et al., 2006; Eidi and Eidi, 2009; 
Mueller  and  Jungbauer,  2009;  Shafiee-Nick 
et al., 2012; Ghorbani et al., 2013). In a ran-
domized  controlled  clinical  trial  on  67 
hyperlipidaemic  patients,  sage  leaf  extract 
lowered the blood levels of triglyceride, total 
cholesterol,  low-density  lipoprotein  (LDL, 
bad cholesterol) and low-density lipoprotein 
(VLDL, also bad cholesterol) without any ad-
verse effects on the blood levels of AST, ALT 
and creatinine. Therefore, sage may be effect-
ive and safe in the management of hyperlip-
idaemia (Kianbakht et al., 2011).

Anti-inflammatory effects

Experimental studies have suggested that the 
extract of sage leaf has an anti-inflammatory 

230 

A. Ghorbani 

effect, which confirms the traditional use of 
this plant for the alleviation of wounds and 
pain (Qnais et al., 2010; Pra et al., 2011; Rod-
rigues  et  al.,  2012).  Between  different  ex-
tracts,  the  chloroform  extract  has  more 
anti-inflammatory  effect  than  the  methanol 
extract, which has low anti-inflammatory ac-
tivity,  while  the  essential  oil  is  inactive 
(Baricevic et al., 2001). The carnosol and ur-
solic  acid/oleanolic  acid  contained  in  sage 
extract  contribute  to  its  anti-inflammatory 
and antinociceptive effects (Rodrigues et al., 
2012), and it has been demonstrated that the 
anti-inflammatory  effect  of  ursolic  acid  is 
twofold greater than that of the non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory  (NSAID)  drug  indometh-
acin (Baricevic et al., 2001). The results of a 
clinical  trial  showed  that  the  risk  of 
post-operative infection in patients undergo-
ing  tonsillectomy  and  adenoidectomy  was 
similar between the group receiving sage and 
the group treated with benzydamine hydro-
chloride,  another  NSAID  (Lalic´evic´  and 
Djordjevic´, 2004).

Antimicrobial effects

The antimicrobial effect of sage was demon-
strated decades ago. In recent years, medi-
cinal plants with antimicrobial effects have 
gained  special  attention  as  some  microbes 
have acquired resistance to antibiotics. The 
antimicrobial  activities  of  various  sage  ex-
tracts are summarized in Table 19.3.

Sage  essential  oil  demonstrates  potent 
bactericidal and bacteriostatic effects against 
Gram-positive  bacteria  (Carta  et  al.,  1996; 
Mitic-Culafic et al., 2005; Bozin et al., 2007; 
Delamare  et  al.,  2007;  Badiee  et  al.,  2012). 
This antimicrobial effect is attributed to sev-
eral active ingredients in the plant oil. For 
example  thujone,  camphor  and  1,8-cineole 
inhibit the growth of Aeromonas hydrophi-
la, A. sobria, Bacillus megatherium, B. subti-
lis, B. cereus and Klebsiella oxytoca (Delam-
are  et  al.,  2007).  Also,  oleanolic  acid  and 
ursolic  acid  have  antimicrobial  activity 
against multidrug-resistant bacteria such as 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, 
penicillin-resistant  Streptococcus  pneumo-
nia  and  vancomycin-resistant  enterococci. 
Ursolic  acid  has  a  stronger  activity  than 

ampicillin  on  Enterococcus  faecium  and 
multidrug-resistant bacteria (Horiuchi et al., 
2007b). Carnosol and carnosic acid are two 
other  antimicrobial  compounds  isolated 
from sage leaves; these compounds potenti-
ate  the  antimicrobial  effect  of  aminoglyco-
sides against methicillin-resistant S. aureus.
It seems that Gram-positive bacteria are 
more sensitive than the Gram-negative bac-
teria to the antimicrobial action of sage es-
sential  oil.  The  transport  of  sage  constitu-
ents through the cell wall may be the major 
process that limits their antibacterial action 
on  Gram-negative  bacteria  (Mitic-Culafic  
et  al.,  2005).  The  essential  oil  of  sage  also 
shows  good  antifungal  activity  against  Bo-
trytis cinerea (a chrysanthemum pathogen) 
and against Candida species such as C. albi-
cans, C. parapsilosis, C. krusei and C. gla-
brata (Carta et al., 1996; Badiee et al., 2012). 
An  ethanol  extract  of  sage  may  show  a 
higher antibacterial effect than its essential 
oil  (Velickovic  et  al.,  2003).  Also,  leaf  ex-
tract  has  a  stronger  antimicrobial  activity 
than  extracts  from  the  flower  and  stem 
(Velickovic  et  al.,  2003).  Safficinolide  and 
sageone are two diterpenoids isolated from 
sage that have antiviral activity against ves-
icular  stomatitis  virus  (Tada  et  al.,  1994). 
The  hydroalcoholic  extract  of  sage  is  also 
reported  as  a  potential  antimalarial  agent 
(Akkawi et al., 2012).

Antioxidant effects

Evidence  from  several  studies  has  con-
firmed  that  sage  has  potent  antioxidant 
properties. Evaluation of antioxidant activ-
ity of phenolic compounds from sage shows 
that  rosmarinic  acid  and  luteolin-7-O-b- 
glucopyranoside  are  potent  antioxidant 
agents. The superoxide scavenging effect of 
rosmarinic  acid  derivatives  is  15–20  times 
stronger  than  that  of  Trolox,  a  synthetic 
water-soluble  vitamin  E  that  is  used  as  a 
standard in antioxidant assays. The antioxi-
dative  activity  of  phenolic  compounds  is 
related to their conjugated rings and hydroxyl 
groups  (Wang  et  al.,  1998;  Lu  and  Foo, 
2001). Sage also contains 12-O-methyl car-
nosol  and  a  large  number  of  diverse  cat-
echol  compounds  that  are  very  effective 

 

Sage 

231

Table 19.3.  Antimicrobial effects of different extracts of sage: (+) good antimicrobial effect; (×) weak 
antimicrobial effect; (−) no antimicrobial effect; (*) controversy about antimicrobial effect.

Sage extract

Type of organism (bacterium, virus, fungus)

Reference

Essential oil

Ethanolic extract

Gram-positive bacteria:
Bacillus cereus (+), B. megatherium (+), B. subtilis 

(+), Enterococcus faecalis (+), Listeria  
monocytogenes (+), Staphylococcus aureus (−), 
S. epidermidis (+), S. faecalis (×)

Gram-negative bacteria:
Aeromonas hydrophila (+), A. sobria (+), Escherichia 

coli (+), Klebsiella oxytoca (+), K. pneumonia (+), 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (*), P. morgani (+), 
Salmonella anatum (+), S. enteritidis (+), S. typhi 
(+), Shigella sonei (+)

Fungi:
Botrytis cinerea (+), Candida albicans (+),  

C. glabrata (+), C. krusei (+), C. parapsilosis (+)

Gram-positive bacteria:
Bacillus subtilis (+), Sarcina lutea (+), S. aureus (+)
Gram-negative bacteria:
E. coli (×), P, aeruginosa (×); S. enteritidis (×)
Fungi:
Aspergillus niger (+), C. albicans (×), Saccharomyces 

Carnosol and 

carnosic acid 
isolated from 
sage

Oleanolic acid and 

ursolic acid 
isolated from 
sage

cerevisiae (×)

Gram-positive bacteria:
E. faecalis (+), E. faecium (+), S. aureus (+)
Gram-negative bacteria:
P. aeruginosa (−), Serratia marcescens (−)
Gram-positive bacteria:
E. faecalis (+), E. faecium (+), S. aureus (+),  

S. pneumoniae (+)

Gram-negative bacteria:
E. coli (−), P. aeruginosa (−), Serratia  

marcescens (−)

Carta et al., 1996; 

Mitic-Culafic et al., 
2005; Bozin et al., 2007; 
Delamare et al., 2007; 
Hayouni et al., 2008; 
Badiee et al., 2012

Velicˇkovic´ et al., 2003

Horiuchi et al., 2007a

Horiuchi et al., 2007b

Safficinolide and 

Vesicular stomatitis virus (+)

Tada et al., 1994

sageone isolated 
from sage

scavengers  of  superoxide  anions.  The  rad-
ical scavenging effect of carnosol is compar-
able with that of a-tocopherol (Miura et al., 
2002; Bors et al., 2004). According to the re-
sults of a study by Cuvelier et al. (1996), the 
most active antioxidant constituents of sage 
are  carnosol,  rosmarinic  acid  and  carnosic 
acid, followed by caffeic acid, rosmanol, ros-
madial, genkwanin and cirsimaritin.

Antitumour effects

Both sage essential oil and the aqueous ex-
tract  of  sage  show  growth-inhibitory  and 
pro-apoptotic  effects  on  cell  lines  derived 

from  colorectal  cancer  (HCT-116,  HCT15, 
CO115),  breast  cancer  (MCF-7),  melanoma 
(A375, M14, A2058) and squamous human 
cell carcinoma of the oral cavity (UMSCC1) 
(Xavier  et  al.,  2009;  El  Hadri  et  al.,  2010; 
Sertel et al., 2011; Russo et al., 2013). The 
potential antitumor activity of sage is due to 
its anti-angiogenic, anti-migratory and anti-
proliferative effects (Keshavarz et al., 2010, 
2011). These effects may be related to the pres-
ence  of  trans-caryophyllene,  a-humulene, 
thujone, camphor, rosmarinic acid and urso-
lic acid in sage (Jedinak et al., 2006; Xavier 
et al., 2009; El Hadri  et al., 2010; Russo 
et al., 2013). In vitro studies have reported 

232 

A. Ghorbani 

that ursolic acid inhibits angiogenesis, prote-
ases and invasion by tumour cells (Jedinak 
et al., 2006).

Immunomodulatory effects

Some studies have reported that the water- 
soluble polysaccharides of sage have immu-
nomodulatory  activity  (Capek  et  al.,  2003; 
Capek  and  Hríbalová  et  al.,  2004;  Capek, 
2009).  However,  it  seems  that  this  effect  is 
mediated  only  by  the  aqueous  extract,  be-
cause other work has demonstrated that sage 
essential  oil  does  not  show  any  immuno-
modulatory activity (Carrasco et al., 2009).

Effects on the nervous system

The ethanolic extract of sage interacts with 
the  muscarinic  and  nicotinic  cholinergic 
systems  and  potentiates  memory  retention 
(Eidi et al., 2006). Also, some constituents 
of  sage  function  as  benzodiazepine  recep-
tor-active  components  (Kavvadias  et  al., 
2003). Clinical studies have shown that the 
cholinesterase-inhibiting  property  of  sage 
improves mood and cognitive performance 
in  healthy  young  participants  (Kennedy 
et  al.,  2006).  Furthermore,  the  administra-
tion of a sage hydroalcoholic extract (60 drops/ 
day)  to  patients  with  Alzheimer’s  disease 
improves  cognitive  functions  (Akhondza-
deh et al., 2003). The hydroalcoholic extract 
of sage may also have beneficial effects on 
vincristine-induced peripheral neuropathic 
pain (Abad et al., 2011).

These proposed doses and mode of admin-
istrations are yet to be approved in clinical 
studies.

Allergic reactions, tachycardia, vertigo, 
hot  flushes  and  convulsions  may  occur  on 
prolonged use or following overdose of the 
ethanolic extract and volatile oil of sage (this 
corresponds to more than 15 g of the leaves). 
After taking high dose of sage, patients may 
experience  vomiting,  salivation,  epileptic 
spasms,  cyanosis  and  tongue  swallowing 
(Bisset  and  Wichtl,  2001;  PDR,  2004;  Mills 
and Bone, 2005). The convulsive effect of sage 
oil is because of its direct effect on the cen-
tral nervous system at doses above 0.5 g/kg. 
Thujone, camphor and terpene ketones are 
the  most  toxic  compounds  of  sage.  When 
consumed orally, the LD50 of sage oil is 2.6 g/kg 
in rats (Mill and Bone, 2005), and data from 
animal studies have also demonstrated that 
sage enhances CCl4-induced hepatotoxicity. 
Therefore, sage preparations may have a nega-
tive effect on the safety of drugs metabolized 
by  the  phase  I  drug-detoxifying  enzymes 
(Lima et al., 2007a).

Because of the potential toxicity of thu-
jone, the consumption of sage may be asso-
ciated  with  the  risk  of  inducing  harmful 
effects  on  the  fetus.  Therefore,  the  use  of 
essential oil and other types of sage extracts 
is contraindicated in pregnancy and lactation 
(Bisset and Wichtl, 2001; PDR, 2004; Mills 
and Bone, 2005).

19.5  Summary

Dosage and side effects

Different types of sage preparations (e.g. es-
sential  oil,  alcoholic  extract  and  distillate) 
are  used  in  traditional  medicine  to  treat 
various  diseases.  The  recommended  doses 
for  adults  are  shown  below  (PDR,  2004; 
Mills and Bone, 2005).

 •  0.1–0.3 g of the essential oil;
 •  2.5–7.5 g of the tincture;
 •  3–12  g/day  of  dried  leaf  or  by  infu-

sion;

 •  3–12 ml/day of a 1:1 liquid extract; and
 •  2–4.5 ml/day of a 1:2 liquid extract.

Sage  is  a  perennial  evergreen  shrub  in  the 
 Lamiaceae family and now grows in several 
regions of the world, but especially in Medi-
terranean countries and Europe. For centuries, 
the plant has been used in the preparation of 
many  foods  because  of  its  flavouring  and 
seasoning properties. Sage leaves also have a 
long  history  of  use  in  traditional  medicine 
and cosmetic products. In experimental stud-
ies, extracts of sage have shown a number of 
pharmacological  activities,  such  as  hypogly-
caemic, hypolipidaemic, anti-inflammatory, 
antimicrobial,  antioxidant,  antitumor  and 
immunomodulatory   effects.  Several  chem-
ical compounds are found in sage, including 

 

Sage 

233

fatty acids, steroids, waxes, alkaloids, pheno-
lics,  terpenoids,  glycoside  derivatives  and 
polyacetylenes.  Cineole,  borneol,  thujone, 
camphor,  elemene,  ledene,  pinene,  humu-
lene and caryophyllene are some of the major 
ingredients  present  in  its  essential  oil.  Des-
pite the promising results that have been ob-
tained  from  experimental  studies,  there  are 
not enough well-designed clinical trials that 
have investigated the healing effects of sage. 
Also, although this plant is commonly used 
as a traditional medicinal plant, it should not 
be  consumed  in  large  amounts  or  over  pro-
longed periods.

Fig. 19.1.  Cultivated sage.

References

Abad, A.N.A., Nouri, M.H.K. and Tavakkoli, F. (2011) Effect of Salvia officinalis hydroalcoholic extract 

on vincristine-induced neuropathy in mice. Chinese Journal of Natural Medicines 9, 354-358.

Ahmadi, L. and Mirza, M. (1999) A study of chemical composition of essential oil from Salvia officinalis L. 
during different growth stages. Journal of Water and Soil Science – Isfahan University of Technology 
3, 93–100.

Akhondzadeh, S., Noroozian, M., Mohammadi, M., Ohadinia, S., Jamshidi, A.H. and Khani, M. (2003) 
Salvia officinalis extract in the treatment of patients with mild to moderate Alzheimer’s disease: 
a  double  blind,  randomized  and  placebo-controlled  trial.  Journal  of  Clinical  Pharmacy  and 
Therapeutics 28, 53–59.

Akkawi, M., Sharif, A.A., Salem, K., Saleh, A. and Aburemeleh, Q. (2012) Wild sage (Salvia officinalis 

L.) as a potential anti-malarial drug. Malaria Journal 11, P3.

Alarcon-Aguilar, F.J., Roman-Ramos, R., Flores-Saenz, J.L. and Aguirre-Garcia, F. (2002) Investigation 
on the hypoglycaemic effects of extracts of four Mexican medicinal plants in normal and alloxan- 
diabetic mice. Phytotherapy Research 16, 383–386.

Badiee, P., Nasirzadeh, A.R. and Motaffaf, M. (2012) Comparison of Salvia officinalis L. essential oil 
and antifungal agents against Candida species. Journal of Pharmaceutical Technology and Drug 
Research 1, 7.

Baricevic, D. and Bartol, T. (2000) The biological/pharmacological activity of the Salvia genus. 
In: Kintzios, S.E. (ed.) Sage – the genus Salvia.  Harwood Academic Publishers, Amsterdam, 
pp. 143–184.

Baricevic, D., Sosa, S., Della Loggia, R., Tubaro, A., Simonovska, B., Krasna, A. and Zupancic, A. (2001) 
Topical anti-inflammatory activity of Salvia officinalis L. leaves: the relevance of ursolic acid. 
Journal of Ethnopharmacology 75, 125–132.

Bisset, N.G. and Wichtl, M. (2001) Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals: A Handbook for Practice 
on a Scientific Basis with Reference to German Commission E Monographs, 2nd edn. CRC Press, 
Boca Raton, Florida, pp. 440–443.

Bors, W., Michel, C., Stettmaier, K., Lu, Y. and Foo, L.Y. (2004) Antioxidant mechanisms of polyphenolic 

caffeic acid oligomers, constituents of Salvia officinalis. Biological Research 37, 301–311.

Bozin, B., Mimica-Dukic, N., Samojlik, I. and Jovin, E. (2007) Antimicrobial and antioxidant properties 
of rosemary and sage (Rosmarinus officinalis L. and Salvia officinalis L., Lamiaceae) essential 
oils. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 55, 7879–7885.

Capek, P. (2009) A water soluble glucomannan isolated from an immunomodulatory active polysac-

charide of Salvia officinalis L. Carbohydrate Polymers 75, 356–359.

Capek, P. and Hríbalová, V. (2004) Water-soluble polysaccharides from Salvia officinalis L. possessing 

immunomodulatory activity. Phytochemistry 65, 1983–1992.

234 

A. Ghorbani 

Capek, P., Hríbalová, V., Švandová, E., Ebringerová, A., Sasinková, V. and Masarová, J. (2003) Charac-
terization of immunomodulatory polysaccharides from Salvia officinalis L. International Journal 
of Biological Macromolecules 33, 113–119.

Carrasco, F.R., Schmidt, G., Romero, A.L., Sartoretto, J.L., Caparroz-Assef, S.M., Bersani-Amado, C.A. 
and Cuman, R.K. (2009) Immunomodulatory activity of Zingiber officinale Roscoe, Salvia officinalis L. 
and Syzygium aromaticum L. essential oils: evidence for humor- and cell-mediated responses. Journal 
of Pharmacy and Pharmacology 61, 961–967.

Carta, C., Moretti, M.D.L. and Peana, A.T. (1996) Activity of the oil of Salvia officinalis L. against Botrytis 

cinerea. Journal of Essential Oil Research 8, 399–404.

Clebsch, B. and Barner, C.D. (2003) The New Book of Salvias: Sages for Every Garden. Timber Press, 

Portland, Oregon.

Cuvelier, M.E., Richard, H. and Berset, C. (1996) Antioxidative activity and phenolic composition of 
pilot-plant and commercial extracts of sage and rosemary. Journal of the American Oil Chemists’ 
Society 73, 645–652.

Delamare, A.P.L., Moschen-Pistorello, I.T., Artico, L., Atti-Serafini, L. and Echeverrigaray, S. (2007) 
Antibacterial activity of the essential oils of Salvia officinalis L. and Salvia triloba L. cultivated 
in south Brazil. Food Chemistry 100, 603–608.

Durling, N.E., Catchpole, O.J., Grey, J.B., Webby, R.F., Mitchell, K.A. and Yeap Fu, L. (2007) Extraction 
of phenolics and essential oil from dried sage (Salvia officinalis L.) using ethanol–water mixtures. 
Food Chemistry 101, 1417–1424.

Eidi, A. and Eidi, M. (2009) Antidiabetic effects of sage (Salvia officinalis L.) leaves in normal and 
streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Diabetes Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research and Reviews 
3, 40–44.

Eidi, M., Eidi, A. and Zamanizadeh, H. (2005) Effect of Salvia officinalis L. leaves on serum glucose and 
insulin in healthy and streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 100, 
310–333.

Eidi, M., Eidi, A. and Bahar, M. (2006) Effects of Salvia officinalis L. (sage) leaves on memory retention 

and its interaction with the cholinergic system in rats. Nutrition 22, 321–326.

El  Hadri,  A.,  Goméz  del  Río,  M.Á.,  Sanz,  J.,  González  Coloma,  A.,  Idaomar,  M.,  Ribas  Ozonas,  B., 
Benedí González, J. and Sánchez Reus, M.I. (2010) Cytotoxic activity of a-humulene and trans- 
caryophyllene from Salvia officinalis in animal and human tumor cells. Anales de la Real Academia 
Nacional de Farmacia 76, 343–356.

Ghorbani, A. (2013a) Phytotherapy for diabetic dyslipidemia: evidence from clinical trials. Clinical 

Lipidology 8, 311–319.

Ghorbani, A. (2013b) Best herbs for managing diabetes: a review of clinical studies. Brazilian Journal 

of Pharmaceutical Sciences 49, 413–422.

Ghorbani, A., Shafiee-Nick, R., Rakhshandeh, H. and Borji, A. (2013) Antihyperlipidemic effect of a poly-

herbal mixture in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Journal of Lipids 2013, Article ID 67579.

Ghorbani, A., Hadjzadeh, M.R., Rajaei, Z. and Zendehbad, S.B. (2014) Effects of fenugreek seeds on 
adipogenesis and lipolysis in normal and diabetic rat. Pakistan Journal of Biological Sciences 17, 
523–528.

Harrison, L. (2012) RHS Latin for Gardeners. Mitchell Beazley (Octopus Publising Group), London.
Hayouni, E.A., Chraief, I., Abedrabba, M., Bouix, M., Leveau, J.Y., Mohammed, H. and Hamdi, M. (2008) 
Tunisian Salvia officinalis L. and Schinus molle L. essential oils: their chemical compositions and 
their preservative effects against Salmonella inoculated in minced beef meat. International Journal 
of Food Microbiology 125, 242–251.

HerbNet (2014) Sage. From HerbNet, The Herb Growing & Marketing Network, Silver Spring, Pennsylvania 

Available at: http://www.herbnet.com/sage.pdf (accessed 2 July 2014).

Horiuchi, K., Shiota, S., Kuroda, T., Hatano, T., Yoshida, T. and Tsuchiya, T. (2007a) Potentiation of 
antimicrobial  activity  of  aminoglycosides  by  carnosol  from  Salvia  officinalis.  Biological  and 
Pharmaceutical Bulletin (Tokyo) 30, 287–290.

Horiuchi, K., Shiota, S., Hatano, T., Yoshida, T., Kuroda, T. and Tsuchiya, T. (2007b) Antimicrobial 
activity of oleanolic acid from Salvia officinalis and related compounds on vancomycin-resistant 
enterococci. Biological and Pharmaceutical Bulletin (Tokyo) 30, 1147–1149.

Jedinak, A., Muckova, M., Kostalova, D., Maliar, T. and Masterova, I. (2006) Antiprotease and antimeta-
static activity of ursolic acid isolated from Salvia officinalis. Zeitschrift fur Naturforschung C 61, 
777–782.

 

Sage 

235

Kavvadias, D., Monschein, V., Sand, P., Riederer, P. and Schreier, P. (2003) Constituents of sage (Salvia 
officinalis) with in vitro affinity to human brain benzodiazepine receptor. Planta Medica 69, 113–117.
Kennedy, D.O., Pace, S., Haskell, C., Okello, E.J., Milne, A. and Scholey, A.B. (2006) Effects of cholin-
esterase inhibiting sage (Salvia officinalis) on mood, anxiety and performance on a psychological 
stressor battery. Neuropsychopharmacology 31, 845–852.

Keshavarz,  M.,  Mostafaie,  A.,  Mansouri,  K.,  Bidmeshkipour,  A.,  Motlagh,  H.R.M.  and  Parvaneh,  S. 
(2010) In vitro and ex vivo antiangiogenic activity of Salvia officinalis. Phytotherapy Research 24, 
1526–1531.

Keshavarz,  M.,  Bidmeshkipour,  A.,  Mostafaie,  A.,  Mansouri,  K.  and  Mohammadi-Motlagh,  H.R. 
(2011) Antitumor activity of Salvia officinalis is due to its anti-angiogenic, anti-migratory and 
anti-proliferative effects. Cell Journal 12, 477–482.

Kianbakht, S., Abasi, B., Perham, M. and Dabaghian, H.F. (2011) Antihyperlipidemic effects of Salvia 
officinalis L. leaf extract in patients with hyperlipidemia: a randomized double-blind placebo- 
controlled clinical trial. Phytotherapy Research 25, 1849–1853.

Lalic´evic´, S. and Djordjevic´, I. (2004) Comparison of benzydamine hydrochloride and Salvia officinalis 
as  an  adjuvant  local  treatment  to  systemic  nonsteroidal  anti-inflammatory  drug  in  controlling 
pain after tonsillectomy, adenoidectomy, or both: an open-label, single-blind, randomized clinical 
trial. Current Therapeutic Research 65, 360–372.

Länger, R., Mechtler, C. and Jurenitsch, J. (1996) Composition of the essential oils of commercial samples 
of Salvia officinalis L. and S. fruticosa Miller: a comparison of oils obtained by extraction and 
steam distillation. Phytochemical Analysis 7, 289–293.

Lima, C.F., Carvalho, F., Fernandes, E., Bastos, M.L., Santos-Gomes, P.C., Fernandes-Ferreira, M. and 
Pereira-Wilson, C. (2004) Evaluation of toxic/protective effects of the essential oil of Salvia officinalis 
on freshly isolated rat hepatocytes. Toxicology in Vitro 18, 457–465.

Lima,  C.F.,  Andrade,  P.B.,  Seabra,  R.M.,  Fernandes-Ferreira,  M.  and  Pereira-Wilson,  C.  (2005)  The 
drinking of a Salvia officinalis infusion improves liver antioxidant status in mice and rats. Journal 
of Ethnopharmacology 97, 383–389.

Lima, C.F., Azevedo, M.F., Araujo, R., Fernandes-Ferreira, M. and Pereira-Wilson, C. (2006) Metformin- 
like effect of Salvia officinalis (common sage): is it useful in diabetes prevention? British Journal 
of Nutrition 96, 326–333.

Lima, C.F., Fernandes-Ferreira, M. and Pereira-Wilson, C. (2007a) Drinking of Salvia officinalis tea 

increases CCl4-induced hepatotoxicity in mice. Food and Chemical Toxicology 45, 456–464.

Lima, C.F., Valentao, P.C.R., Andrade, P.B., Seabra, R.M., Fernandes-Ferreira, M. and Pereira-Wilson, 
C. (2007b) Water and methanolic extracts of Salvia officinalis protect HepG2 cells from t-BHP 
induced oxidative damage. Chemico-Biological Interactions 167, 107–115.

Lu, Y. and Foo, L.Y. (2000) Flavonoid and phenolic glycosides from Salvia officinalis. Phytochemistry 

55, 263–267.

Lu, Y. and Foo, L.Y. (2001) Antioxidant activities of polyphenols from sage (Salvia officinalis). Food 

Chemistry 75, 197–202.

Mills, S. and Bone, K. (2005) The Essential Guide to Herbal Safety. Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri, pp. 558–559.
Mitic-Culafic,  D.,  Vukovic-Gacic,  B.,  Knezevic-Vukcevic,  J.,  Stankovic,  S.  and  Simic,  D.  (2005) 
Comparative study on the antibacterial activity of volatiles from sage (Salvia officinalis L.). Archives 
of Biological Sciences 57, 173–178.

Miura, K., Kikuzaki, H. and Nakatani, N. (2001) Apiananeterpenoids from Salvia officinalis. Phyto-

chemistry 58, 1171–1175.

Miura, K., Kikuzaki, H. and Nakatani, N. (2002) Antioxidant activity of chemical components from 
sage  (Salvia  officinalis  L.)  and  thyme  (Thymus  vulgaris  L.)  measured  by  the  oil  stability  index 
method. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 50, 1845–1851.

Mortazavian, S.M., Ghorbani, A. and Hesari, T.G. (2012) Effect of hydro-alcoholic extract of Viola 
tricolor and its fractions on proliferation of uterine cervix carcinoma cells. Iranian Journal of 
Obstetrics, Gynecology and Infertility 15, 9–16.

Mueller, M. and Jungbauer, A. (2009) Culinary plants, herbs and spices – a rich source of PPARc ligands. 

Food Chemistry 117, 660–667.

PDR (2004) PDR [Physicians Desk Reference] for Herbal Medicines, 3rd edn. Thomson PDR, Montvale, 

New Jersey.

Pra, V.D., Bisol, L.B., Detoni, S., Denti, M. and Grando, J. (2011) Anti-inflammatory activity of fraction-

ated extracts of Salvia officinalis. Journal of Applied Pharmaceutical Science 1, 67–71.

236 

A. Ghorbani 

Qnais, E.Y., Abu-Dieyeh, M., Abdulla, F.A. and Abdalla, S.S. (2010) The antinociceptive and anti- 
inflammatory effects of Salvia officinalis leaf aqueous and butanol extracts. Pharmaceutical Biol-
ogy 48, 1149–1156.

Rodrigues, M.R., Kanazawa, L.K., das Neves, T.L., da Silva, C.F., Horst, H., Pizzolatti, M.G., Santos, 
A.R., Baggio, C.H. and Werner, M.F. (2012) Antinociceptive and anti-inflammatory potential of 
extract and isolated compounds from the leaves of Salvia officinalis in mice. Journal of Ethnop-
harmacology 139, 519–526.

Russo, A., Formisano, C., Rigano, D., Senatore, F., Delfine, S., Cardile, V., Rosselli, S. and Bruno, M. 
(2013)  Chemical  composition  and  anticancer  activity  of  essential  oils  of  Mediterranean  sage 
(Salvia officinalis L.) grown in different environmental conditions. Food and Chemical Toxicology 
55, 42–47.

Seidel, V. (2006) Initial and bulk extraction. In: Sarker, S.D., Latif, Z. and Gray, A.I. (eds) Natural Product 

Isolation, 2nd edn. Humana Press, Totowa, New Jersey, pp. 27–46.

Sertel, S., Eichhorn, T., Plinkert, P.K. and Efferth, T. (2011) Anticancer activity of Salvia officinalis 

essential oil against HNSCC cell line (UMSCC1). HNO 59, 1203–1208.

Shafiee-Nick,  R.,  Ghorbani,  A.,  Vafaee,  F.  and  Rakhshandeh,  H.  (2012)  Chronic  administration  of  a 
combination of six herbs inhibits the progression of hyperglycemia and decreases serum lipids and 
aspartate amino transferase activity in diabetic rats. Advances in Pharmacological Sciences 2012, 
789–796.

Stearn, W.T. (2004) Botanical Latin. Timber Press, Bath, UK.
Tada, M., Okuno, K., Chiba, K., Ohnishi, E. and Yoshii, T. (1994) Antiviral diterpenes from Salvia 

officinalis. Phytochemistry 35, 539–541.

Velicˇkovic´, D.T., Rand¯elovic´, N.V., Ristic´, M.S., Velicˇkovic´, A.S. and Šmelcerovic´, A.A. (2003) Chemical 
constituents and antimicrobial activity of the ethanol extracts obtained from the flower, leaf and 
stem of Salvia officinalis L. Journal of the Serbian Chemical Society 68, 17–24.

Venskutonis, P.R. (1997) Effect of drying on the volatile constituents of thyme (Thymus vulgaris L.) and 

sage (Salvia officinalis L.). Food Chemistry 59, 219–227.

Wang, M., Li, J., Rangarajan, M., Shao, Y., LaVoie, E.J., Huang, T.-C. and Ho, C.-T. (1998) Antioxidative 
phenolic compounds from sage (Salvia officinalis). Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 
46, 4869–4873.

Wang, M., Kikuzaki, H., Zhu, N., Sang, S., Nakatani, N. and Ho, C.-T. (2000) Isolation and structural 
elucidation of two new glycosides from sage (Salvia officinalis L.). Journal of Agricultural and 
Food Chemistry 48, 235–238.

Xavier, C.R.R., Lima, C.F., Fernandes-Ferreira, M. and Pereira-Wilson, C. (2009) Salvia fruticosa, Salvia 
officinalis, and rosmarinic acid induce apoptosis and inhibit proliferation of human colorectal 
cell lines: the role in MAPK/ERK pathway. Nutrition and Cancer 61, 564–571.

Zargari, A. (1990) Medicinal Plants, Vol. 4, 4th edn,. Tehran University Press, Tehran, pp. 59–64.

20  Senna

Krupanidhi College of Pharmacy, Bangalore, India

Kuntal Das*

20.1  Botany

20.1.1 

Introduction

Senna belongs to the genus Senna, a large 
group  of  around  350  species  of  trees, 
shrubs,  vines  and  herbs  with  numerous 
species  growing  in  the  South  American 
rainforests  and  tropics  formerly  included 
in  the  genus Cassia,  and  belonging  to  the 
family Fabaceae. Many of the species have 
been  used  medicinally  and  these  tropical 
plants  have  a  range  of  therapeutic  activ-
ities.  Various  cassias  have  been  known 
since  the  9th  or  10th  centuries  as  purga-
tives  and  laxatives.  One  of  the  most  im-
portant species of Senna is S. alexandrina 
Mill.  (syn.  C.  acutifolia  Delile,  the  name 
formerly used for Alexandrian or Egyptian 
senna,  C.  angustifolia  Vahl,  the  name  for-
merly  used  for  Indian  senna,  C.  senna  L. 
and C. alexandrina (Garsault) Thell.). This 
is  a  shrubby  species  (Fig.  20.1),  which 
grows abundantly in many countries. It is a 
traditional  medicinal  plant  used  in  the 
Ayurvedic system of medicine and was do-
mesticated  in  India  from  the  Arabian  re-
gion  (Yemen).  Senna  was  introduced  into 
European medicine by the Arabs in the 9th 

*Corresponding author, e-mail: drkkdsd@gmail.com

century.  The  Arabian  physicians  Serapion 
and Mesue were the first to utilize the thera-
peutic properties of senna for the treatment 
of  constipation.  Thereafter,  it  became  a 
well- known  drug  in  the  Unani  system  of 
medicine, and eventually, it was listed as a 
drug by the various Pharmacopoeias of the 
world (Arya, 2003). Senna has been used as 
a laxative since ancient times in Asia, espe-
cially by the South- east Asians.

Indian senna is collected as the dried 
leaf and leaflets of what is now known as 
S. alexandrina, and is also known as Tin-
nevelly  (or  Tinnervelly)  senna  (derived 
from  the  name  of  the  city  Tinnevelly  in 
Tamil  Nadu).  The  pods  and  leaves  are 
the  main useful parts of the senna plant, 
and both are used as over-the-counter phar-
maceutical  preparations  (Chaubey  and 
 Kapoor,  2001).  The  plant  is  cultivated  in 
dry  lands,  especially  in  southern  and 
western India. There is some controversy 
about the origin of senna and its cultiva-
tion, with reports in the literature indicat-
ing  that  there  are  two  varieties  of  senna: 
the first found in Egypt and Sudan (in the 
Nile  river  basin),  and  the  second  widely 
cultivated  in  India  (Balasanka  et  al., 
2013).  Although these are now treated as a 

© CAB International 2016. Leafy Medicinal Herbs: Botany, Chemistry, 
Postharvest Technology and Uses (eds D.C.P. Ambrose et al.) 

237

238 

K. Das 

Table 20.1  Vernacular names of senna.

Language

Name

Indian languages
Bengali
Gujarati
Hindi
Kannada
Malayalam

Marathi
Oriya
Sanskrit

Sanna-makki, sonpat
Mindhiaval, sonamukhi
Hindisana, sanaya
Nelavarike
Adapatiyan, chinnukki, 

nilavaka
Sonamukhi
Sunamukhi
Markandika, swarnpatri, 

bhumiari

Nilavirai
Nela tangedu

Tamil
Telegu
Other languages
Chinese
French
Latin (medicinal name) Folium Cassiae
Spanish
Sen de España
Ma kham khaek
Thai

Fan-hsieh-yeh
Casse

the cultivation of senna started in different 
countries, and Indian senna is now cultivated 
commercially in several Indian states and in 
China (where it is cultivated on a mass scale 
in  Guangdong,  Guangxi  and  Yunnan)  and 
Pakistan (Hoffmann, 1990; Lust, 1990; Bala-
sanka  et  al.,  2013).  When  the  leaves  have 
reached  maturity,  they  are  sun  dried  and 
used without further processing.

20.1.3  Location

Senna is native to Yemen and is widely culti-
vated in different parts of India, especially in 
the dry areas of Haryana, Rajasthan, Gujarat, 
Maharashtra,  Madhya  Pradesh,  Andhra 
Pradesh  and  Tamil  Nadu,  with  commercial 
plantations in certain coastal parts of Gujarat, 
especially in the Bhuj region, in Rajasthan, 
in  southern  regions  such  as  Tamil  Nadu 
(Tinnevelly  and  Ramnathpuram),  western 
regions  such  as  Karnataka  (Mysore)  and 
northern India (Jammu) (Gupta et al., 1977). 
Senna germinates easily from seed and grows 
well on light well-drained sandy loam and 
lateritic soil of pH 7–8.5, when it produces 
high  biomass  yields.  Bright  sunlight  gives 
optimum growth.

Fig. 20.1.  Senna plants in field.

single  species,  S.  alexandrina,  they  differ 
greatly in their morphological and anatom-
ical characteristics.

The medicinal importance of the senna 
is largely due to its sennoside content, which 
is used to cure intestinal disorders, jaundice, 
anaemia, typhoid and dermal diseases, and 
stimulates intestinal peristalsis (Majid, 2010). 
Depending  on  the  dosage  used,  senna  has 
two type of effects: (i) as a laxative, which 
acts  by  loosening  the  bowel  contents  and 
enhancing evacuation; and (ii) as a purgative, 
which acts to cause the evacuation of liquid 
diarrhoeic  matter.  Hence,  senna  should  be 
recommended  only  for  use  in  the  short 
term, and its use depends on the condition 
of the patient; it can be given in a large dose, 
but only as per the physician’s direction.

Senna has a number of vernacular names 
in India, and these are listed in Table 20.1, 
along with some of the names by which it is 
known in the rest of the world.

20.1.2  History/origin

Traditionally, senna was used in ‘love sachets’ 
in the Middle East. In China, it is known as 
fan-hsieh-yeh, which means ‘foreign country 
laxative  herb’.  Among  the  different  senna 
varieties, C. acutifolia (now S. alexandrina) is 
one of the oldest varieties of herbal medicines. 
By 1640, senna was cultivated and utilized 
in England for its cathartic activity and in-
cluded officially in the British Pharmacopoeia. 
After this, and due to commercial demand, 

 

Senna 

239

20.1.4  Morphology

Senna is a shrub of less than 1 m in height. 
It has many ascending branches. The leaves 
are compound pinnate, petiolate, about 10 cm 
long and bear 5–8 pairs of leaflets each on a 
small stalk. The stem is erect, smooth, and 
pale  green,  with  long,  spreading  branches. 
The asymmetric flowers are small and yel-
low in colour without nectar. They have five 
uniform  and  similar  petals.  The  pods  are 
oblong, about 2 inches long and contain 6–7 
seeds. (Kirtikar and Basu, 1999) (Fig. 20.2). 
The  leaflets  are  pale  yellowish  green  and 
have  a  slight  odour  and  a  mucilaginous 
taste; they are about 2.5–6 cm long and 7–15 
mm wide, lanceolate, slightly asymmetric at 
the base and acute at the apex with a sharp 
spine. Both of the leaf surfaces are smooth.

20.2  Chemistry

20.2.1  Chemical composition/ 

phytochemistry

The leaves of Indian senna contain anthra-
noid compounds, of which dianthrones make 
up 75–80% and anthrones 20–25% (Werner 
and Merz, 2007). The leaves also contain fla-
vonol and anthraquinone glycosides (1–3%). 
Among the flavonols, kaempferol, kaempferin 
and isorhamnetin are important compounds 
(Srivastava  et  al.,  1983).  Of  the  anthraqui-
nones, senna contains rhein (cassic acid or 

1,8-dihydroxyanthraquinone-3-carboxylic 
acid) and emodin (also called aloe-emodin, 
as it is found in the latex of the aloe plant). 
These two anthraquinones are components 
of the glycosides sennoside A and B (rhein 
dianthrones), which play a major role in the 
laxative activity of senna (Bala et al., 2001), 
and  also  of  sennoside  C  and  D;  all  four  of 
these  compounds  are  described  as  rhein 
aloe- emodin heterodianthrones (WHO, 1999) 
(Fig. 20.3).

The  leaves,  pods  and  roots  of  Indian 
senna  contain  chrysophenol,  imodin  and 
aloe- imodin (Srivastava et al., 1983). Apart 
from these compounds, the leaves also con-
tain β-sitosterol (0.33%) (Rastogi and Mehro-
tra, 1993), 10–12% mineral matter, 7–10% 
mucilage, about 8% polyol, mannitol, sodium 
potassium tartrate, salicylic acid and a small 
amount of resinous compounds. Other com-
pounds that have been found in the leaves 
include  a  new  anthraquinone  glycoside, 
emodin-8-O- sophoroside  and  the  known 
glycosides kaempferol 3-O-β-glucoside and 
isorhamnetin-3-O-β-glucoside, 
tinnevellin 
glycoside, isorhamnetin-3-O-β-gentiobioside, 
apigenin-6,8-di-C-glycoside, emodin-8-O-β-
d-glucopyranoside, 
d-3-O-methylinositol 
and sucrose ((Kinjo et al., 1994; Singh et al., 
1995; Wu et al., 2007). The flowers contain 
crisofenic acid. Two new naphthalene glyco-
sides  have  been  isolated  from  the  seeds 
(Wang et al., 2007), as well as an oleanen-type 
triterpenoid  glycoside  from  butanolic  ex-
tracts  of  the  seeds  (Khan  and  Srivastava, 
2009).

Lanceolate apex

Margin

Veins

Base

Seeds

Senna leaf

Senna pods

Fig. 20.2.  Senna leaf morphology and senna pod.

240 

K. Das 

Sennosides

A

B

meso

trans

Aloe-emodin/rhein

Interrelationship between sennosides with rhein component

glucose

O

OH

O

glucose

O

OH

O

H
H

Aloe-emodin

CH2OH

COOH

Rhein

glucose

O

O

OH

glucose

O

H

CH2OH

COOH

H

O

OH

Sennoside-A (meso form)

Sennoside-B (trans form)

glucose

O

OH

O

glucose

O

OH

O

H

H

Aloe-emodin

COOH

COOH

Rhein

glucose

O

O

OH

glucose

O

COOH

COOH

H

H

O

OH

Sennoside-C (meso form)

Sennoside-D (trans form)

Fig. 20.3.  Chemical structure of the sennosides of senna.

20.3  Postharvest Technology

The plants produce foliage containing high 
amounts  of  sennosides  50–90  days  from 
sowing  (Upadhyay  et  al.,  2011).  A  good 
crop of senna can give 15 q/ha of dry leaves 
and 7 q/ha of pods under irrigated and good 

horticultural management conditions (Farooqi 
and Sreeramu, 2010). The plant is harvested 
three  times  over  the  cultivation  period  in 
the season, with the first picking in March 
and the others before May; there are further 
pickings in October and December (Pareek 
et  al.,  1983).  The  flowers  contain  2.6%  of 

 

Senna 

241

sennosides, whereas the pods (shells) con-
tain 3–5% and the foliage 2.5–4% (Srivastava 
et al., 1980; Atal and Kapoor, 1982; Pareek 
et al., 1983).

20.3.1  Processing

The  harvested  leaf  material  is  spread  in  a 
thin layer in an open field to reduce the mois-
ture content and then dried in well-ventilated 
sheds for a week until the colour of the dried 
leaves is a yellowish green. If the leaves turn 
black or brown that indicates deterioration 
of their quality. Generally, senna leaves are 
dried under sunlight or in shade at a normal 
room temperature.

Studies on drying senna were carried out 
in a forced flow type mechanical dryer at dif-
ferent air temperatures. Based on the senno-
side concentration, it was shown that 45°C was 
the optimum temperature for drying (Ambrose 
and  Naik,  2013).  The  dried  leaves  retained 
their greenish colour (Fig. 20.4).

The dried leaves are stored in light-proof 
containers at room temperature to minimize 
the  degradation  of  active  constituents  (i.e. 
sennosides) and protect them from moisture. 
It has been reported that black polyethylene 
bags,  aluminium  foil  bags  and  transparent 
polyethylene bags are suitable for the stor-
age of dried senna leaves (European Pharma-
copoeia, 2005; Upadhyay et al., 2011).

There  are  various  extraction  methods 
described  to  isolate  different  constituents 
from senna leaves. Generally, alcoholic and 

Fig. 20.4.  Senna leaves dried in forced flow dryer.

aqueous  solutions  are  used  for  the  basic 
extraction of Indian senna leaves using the 
Soxhlet,  reflux  and  maceration  methods. 
Traditionally, the sennosides are extracted in 
the form of calcium sennosides by using an 
organic  solvent  such  as  benzene  and  with 
methanol (4–6 h), acidification with hydro-
chloric acid (pH 3.2), and the addition of 
anhydrous  calcium  chloride  (dissolved  in 
denatured spirit), which precipitates calcium 
sennosides in the presence of ammonia so-
lution (pH 8) (Kokate, 2005). Mehta and Lad-
dha  (2009)  described  an  efficient  method 
for the isolation of rhein from senna leaves 
using mixed water and alcohol solvents in 
which the hydrolysis of the sennosides and 
extraction  of  the  hydrolysis  products  (free 
anthraquinones) is carried out. A microwave- 
assisted extraction technique has been devel-
oped for the extraction of calcium sennosides 
from senna leaflets using benzene and metha-
nol  as  solvents;  this  method  reduced  the 
amount of solvent consumed by the extraction 
process and the time needed for the extraction 
(Srikanth et al., 2011; Shukla et al., 2013).

20.3.2  Value addition

The form of senna that is available in the mar-
ket is calcium sennoside. Senna products are 
commonly used in different kinds of herbal 
formulations  that  are  available  in  various 
pharmaceutical dosage forms, such as tablets, 
capsules, powder, granules, liquid, paste and 
suppositories:

 •  Tablets  or  capsules:  enteric  coated  or 
uncoated tablets are available that con-
tain  40–90  mg  of  calcium  sennosides 
equivalent to 7.5–18 mg of hydroxyan-
thracene  glycosides  as  sennosides  B 
per tablet.

 •  Powders: senna leaf powder is available 
either alone prepared directly from the 
raw dried leaves or admixed with some 
other powder, such as isabgol (from seed 
husks  of  psyllium,  Plantago  ovata)  or 
cascara (bark from Rhamnus purshiana), 
to give a synergistic laxative effect. Senna 
leaf powder contains calcium sennosides 

242 

K. Das 

equivalent to 5–30 mg hydroxyanthracene 
glycosides as sennosides B per dose.

 •  Liquids and granules: senna is also avail-
able in the form of syrup or fluid with or 
without alcohol and containing 5–30 mg 
of hydroxyl anthracene glycosides as sen-
nosides B per dose.

 •  Pastes: another form of senna is as the 
thick  paste  form  of  the  crude  extract, 
which is used for curing different skin 
ailments.

 •  Suppositories: the crude extract of senna 
residue is used in the form of supposi-
tories, which are packed in aluminium 
wrappers.

Senna  is  also  available  in  the  form  of 

herbal teas and chocolate.

20.4  Uses

20.4.1  General uses

Home-made preparations of senna, such as 
decoctions, powders, syrups, infusions and 
confections  are  prepared  from  senna  leaf 
powder.  In  cosmetic  preparations,  senna 
leaves are blended with henna leaf and are 
used as black hair dye (Chopra et al., 1958). 
Powdered  leaves  are  mixed  with  vinegar 
and made into a plaster that is applied locally 
in certain skin diseases. The sennosides that 
are present in the senna leaves are available 
when they are used as health teas (Kojima 
et al., 2001). The paste of the ground, dried 
root  is  used  in  Ayurvedic  medicine  as  a 
treatment for ringworm and snakebites. Senna 
leaves  are  also  used  as  one  of  the  ingredi-
ents of Nilaavarai churnam, a product used 
for  treating  stomach  distention,  hiccups, 
vomiting and biliousness (Atal and Kapoor, 
1982).

Apart  from  its  laxative  action,  several 
other therapeutic applications of senna have 
been  reported,  such  as  in  the  treatment  of 
liver disease, splenetic extension, hepatitis, 
anaemia, abdominal pain, leprosy, foul-smelling 
breath, bronchitis and tumours, etc. (Kirti-
kar and Basu, 1999). Senna leaf when com-
bined with other aromatic herbs is useful in 
the treatment of flatulence or colic. Senna also 

helps in weight loss and is used as a blood 
purifier.  The  infusion  of  the  leaf  extract  is 
used as an anti-anaemic and for the treatment 
of dysentery and fevers.

20.4.2  Pharmacological uses

Senna  helps  to  loosen  the  bowels  and  in-
creases the peristaltic movement of the intes-
tine. This happens via several mechanisms. 
Sennosides, the active constituents, are con-
verted by bacteria in the colon into another 
substance, i.e. the anthrone rhein, which has 
two beneficial effects, stimulation of colon 
activity  and  increased  fluid  secretion.  The 
laxative effect is further promoted by the in-
hibition of water and electrolyte absorption 
from the large intestine, which increases the 
volume and pressure of the intestinal contents. 
As a result, the stimulation of colon motility 
increases, so producing propulsive contrac-
tions. The action on the colon is mediated by 
the stimulation of endogenous prostaglandin 
formation and secretion (de Witte, 1993).

Indian senna purifies the blood and re-
stores the metabolic imbalance that occurs as 
a result of indigestion. The herb has purga-
tive and cathartic (Grieve, 1931), antipyretic, 
laxative,  vermifuge  and  diuretic  properties. 
Indian  senna  also  has  a  marked  hepatopro-
tective activity (Ilavarasan et al., 2001). It has 
further been reported that due to the presence 
of sennosides in the leaf, senna inhibits  bovine 
serum  monoamine  oxidase  enzyme  activity 
and  acts  against  skin  diseases  like  scabies 
and itching (Al-Masry, 1975).

The powder made from crushing leaves 
and fruit is helpful in treating constipation 
and indigestion (Lust, 1990). Other pharma-
cological uses of senna have also been con-
sidered: as an astringent, cathartic, depurative, 
anthelmintic,  cholagogue,  expectorant  and 
febrifuge; and for leucoderma, jaundice and 
typhoid fever (Varier et al., 1994). A clinical 
study showed that Indian senna extract can be 
used as an enema after abdominal operations, 
and regulates the disordered function of the 
gastrointestinal  tract  after  abdominal  oper-
ations (Wang et al., 1998). The early literature 
gave  the  standard  dose  of  Indian  senna 

 

Senna 

243

 powder  as  1–2  g  before  bedtime,  with  the 
onset of bowel movement about 8–10 h later 
(Agra et al., 1998).

Senna  is  also  used  as  an  anthelmintic 
treatment and a mild liver stimulant. Other 
uses include the treatment of tumours, foul 
breath, bronchitis and leprosy (Pullaiah, 2002). 
Due  to  the  presence  of  rhein  glycoside  in 
the leaf, it shows antiviral, antioxidant and 
anti-inflammatory activities and marked re-
duction of osteoarthritis, gout and rheuma-
toid  arthritis  (Mehta  and  Laddha,  2009). 
A  recent  study  demonstrated  that  the  ad-
ministration an aqueous Soxhlet extract of 
Indian senna leaf arrests spermatogenesis in 
male rats (Dhanapal et al., 2012).

Sennosides  are  strong  purgatives  and 
they  should  be  taken  with  care  and  in  the 
proper dosage, especially in pregnant, men-
struating or post-partum women. It cannot 
be used to treat inflammation of the gastro-
intestinal  tract  because  it  causes  irritation 
(Mengs, 1986). The irritant effect upon the 
intestinal  membrane  may  cause  griping, 
pain or nausea, along with liquid stools or 

diarrhoea in the case of an overdose (Gruen-
wald et al., 1998).

20.5  Summary

Senna is a well-known traditional drug in the 
Unani,  Ayurvedic  and  allopathic  (homeo-
pathic)  systems  of  medicine  and  also  as  a 
home remedy. The plant was introduced into 
Tamil  Nadu  in  the  18th  century,  and  it  is 
grown there as an annual crop; hence, it has 
the  alternative  name  of  Tinnevelly  senna. 
The versatile medicinal properties of senna 
have increased demand so that it is now a 
commercial crop. The dried leaves and pods 
contain sennosides, which are used for their 
laxative  properties,  so  a  major  part  of  the 
crop is exported in the form of leaves, pods 
and sennoside concentrates. The pharmaceut-
ical  industries  in  India  use  senna  for  the 
manufacture of various herbal formulations, 
and Indian senna is an important medicinal 
and economic crop for use in novel herbal 
formulations.

References

Agra, Y., Sacristan, A. and Gonzalez, M. (1998) Efficacy of senna versus lactulose in terminal cancer patients 

treated with opioids. Journal of Pain Symptom Management 15, 1–7.

Al-Masry, H. (1975) Al Aqrabazin wa Almostahdarat Alsaydalaniah (Pharmacology and Pharmacetics 

Preparations), 1st edn. Dar Al-Qualm, Kuwait.

Ambrose, D.C.P. and Naik, R. (2013) Mechanical drying of senna leaves (Cassia angustifolia). Current 

Agriculture Research Journal 1, 65–68.

Arya, R. (2003) Yield of Cassia angustifolia in combination with different tree species in a silvi herbal 

trial under hot arid conditions in India. Bioresource Technology 86, 165–169.

Atal, C.K. and Kapoor, B.M. (eds) (1982) Cultivation and Utilization of Medicinal Plants. Regional 

Research Laboratory, Jammu Tawi, India.

Bala, S., Uniyal, G.C., Dubey, T. and Singh, S.P. (2001) Improved method for analysis of sennosides in 

Cassia angustifolia by HPLC. Phytochemical Analysis 12, 277–280.

Balasankar, D., Vanilarasu, K., Selva Preetha, P., Rajeswari, S., Umadevi, M. and Bhowmik, D. (2013) 

Senna – a medical miracle plant. Journal of Medicinal Plants Studies 1(3), 41–47.

Chaubey, M. and Kapoor, V.P. (2001) Structure of a galactomannan from the seeds of Cassia angustifolia 

Vahl. Carbohydrate Research 332, 439–444.

Chopra, R.N., Chopra, I.C., Handa, K.L. and Kapur, D. (1958) Chopra’s Indigenous Drugs of India. U.N. 

Dhur, Calcutta [Kolkata], India.

de Witte, P. (1993) Metabolism and pharmacokinetics of anthranoids. Pharmacology 47(Suppl. 1), 

86–97.

Dhanapal, R., Babitha, J., Kandeepan, S. and Murugaian, P. (2012) Testicular antifertility action of 
Cassia angustifolia in male albino rats. Presented to: Proceedings of the National Seminar on 
Current Perspectives in Biological Sciences (NSOCPIBS – 2012) 11 and 12 October. Advanced 
BioTech 12(07, Supplement), 59–62.

244 

K. Das 

European Pharmacopoeia (2005) Senna leaf. Sennae folium. In: European Pharmacopoeia 5.0, 5th edn. 
EDQM (European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines and HealthCare), Council of Europe, 
Strasbourg, France, pp. 2402–2403.

Farooqi, A.A. and Sreeramu, B.S. (2010) Senna. In: Farooqi, A.A. and Sreeramu, B.S. Cultivation of 

Medicinal and Aromatic plants, rev. edn. Universities Press, Hyderabad, India, pp. 294–301.

Grieve, M. (1931) A Modern Herbal, Volume II. Originally published by Harcourt, Brace & Company, 
New York, in 1931 and edited by C.F. Leyel. Republished in 1971 by Dover Publications, New York 
and indexed by M. Marshall in 1981–1982. Also available at: https://www.botanical.com/botanical/
mgmh/s/senna-42.html (accessed 1 February 2016).

Gruenwald, J., Brendler, T. and Jaenicke, C. (1998) Senna. In: Gruenwald, J. et al. (eds) PDR [Physician’s 
Desk Reference] for Herbal Medicines, 1st edn. Medical Economics Company, Montvale, New Jersey, 
pp. 722–724.

Gupta, R., Modi, J.N. and Mehta, K.G. (1977) Studies on cultivation of senna (Cassia angustifolia Vahl.) 

in north Gujarat. South Indian Horticulture 25, 26–29.

Hoffmann, D. (1990) The New Holistic Herbal, 2nd edn. Element Books, Shaftesbury, UK.
Ilavarasan, R., Mohideen, S., Vijay, L.M. and Manonmani, G. (2001) Hepatoprotective effect of Cassia 

angustifolia Vahl. Indian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 63, 504–507.

Khan, N.A. and Srivastava, A. (2009) Antifungal activity of bioactive triterpenoid saponin from the 

seeds of Cassia angustifolia. Natural Product Research 23, 1128–1133.

Kinjo, J., Ikeda, T., Watanabe, K. and Nohara, T. (1994) An anthraquinone glycoside from Cassia angustifo-

lia leaves. Phytochemistry 37, 1685–1687.

Kirtikar, K.R. and Basu, B.D. (eds) (1999) Senna. In: Kirtikar, K.R. and Basu, B.D. (eds) Indian Medicinal 

Plants, Volume II. International Book Distributors, Dehra Dun, India, pp. 876–877.

Kojima, T., Kishi, M., Sekita, S. and Satake, M. (2001) Origin of sennosides in health teas including 

malva leaves. Shokuhin Eiseigaku Zasshi (Food Hygiene and Safety Science) 42, 202–205.

Kokate, C.K. (2005) Practical Pharmacognosy, 14th edn. Nirali Prakashan, Pune, India.
Lust, J. (1990) The Herb Book. Bantam, London.
Majid, U. (2010) Effects of agrochemical pollution on growth, structure and some physiochemical aspects 

of Cassia angustifolia Vahl. PhD thesis, Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi.

Mehta, N. and Laddha, K.S. (2009) A modified method of isolation of rhein from senna. Indian Journal 

of Pharmaceutical Sciences 71, 128–129.

Mengs, U. (1986) Reproductive toxicological investigations with sennosides. Arzneimittelforschung 

36, 1355–1358.

Pareek, S.K., Srivastava, V.K., Maheswari, M.L., Mandal, S. and Gupta, R. (1983) Investigation in 
agronomic parameters of senna (Cassia angustifolia Vahl) as grown in north-western India. International 
Journal of Tropical Agriculture 1, 139–144.

Pullaiah, T. (2002) Senna. In: Pullaiah, T. Medicinal Plants in India. Regency Publications, New Delhi, 

pp.137–139.

Rastogi, R.P. and Mehrotra, B.N. (1993) Compendium of Indian Medicinal Plants, Vol. 2. Publications 

and Information Directorate, New Delhi.

Shukla, A., Gupta, R., Sharma, P. and Jain, A.P. (2013) Comparative study of microwave assisted with 
conventional extraction of calcium sennosides from senna leaf. Research Journal of Pharmaceut-
ical, Biological and Chemical Sciences 4, 103–109.

Singh, M., Chaudhuri, P.K. and Sharma, R.P. (1995) Constituents of the leaves of Cassia angustifolia. 

Fitoterapia 66, 284–286.

Srikanth,  S.,  Sandeep  Kumar,  V.,  Shireesh  Kiran,  R.,  Prasad,  M.V.V.  and  Krishna  Mohan,  G.  (2011) 
Microwave  assisted  extraction  of  calcium  sennosides  from  senna  leaflets.  Research  Journal  of 
Pharmaceutical, Biological and Chemical Sciences 2, 137–145.

Srivastava, V.K., Gupta, R. and Maheshwari, M.L. (1980) Photocontrol of anthracene compounds formation 

in senna (Cassia acutifolia Vahl) leaves. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology 18, 1318–1319.

Srivastava, V.K., Maheshwari, M.L. and Mandal, S. (1983) A rapid high performance liquid chroma-
tography method for analysis of sennoside in senna. Indian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 
45, 230–233.

Upadhyay, A., Chandel, Y., Nayak, P.S. and Khan, N.A. (2011) Sennoside contents in senna (Cassia 
angustifolia Vahl) as influenced by date of leaf picking, packaging material and storage period. 
Journal of Stored Products and Postharvest Research 2, 97–103.

 

Senna 

245

Varier,  P.S.,  Warrier,  P.K.,  Nambiar,  V.P.K.  and  Ramankutty,  C.  (1994)  Senna.  In:  Varier  et  al.  Indian 
 Medicinal Plants – A Compendium, Volume 2. Orient Longman Publication, Hyderabad, India, p. 31.

Wallis, T.E. (2004) Textbook of Pharmacognosy, 5th edn. CBS Publishers, New Delhi.
Wang, M., Yan, S. and Wang, J. (1998) Clinical and experimental study on using Cassia angustifolia 
extract as enema after abdominal operation. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi (Chinese Journal 
of Integrated Traditional and Western Medicine) 18, 540–542.

Wang, Z.J., Wu, Q.P., Tang, L.Y., Fu, M.H., He, Y., Gong, Q.F. and Huang, L.Q. (2007) Two new glycosides 

from the genus of Cassia. Chinese Chemical Letters 18, 1218–1220.

Werner, C. and Merz, B. (2007) Assessment Report on Cassia senna L. and Cassia angustifolia Vahl, Folium. 
European  Medicines  Agency  (EMEA),  London.  Available  at:  http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_
GB/document_library/Herbal_-_HMPC_assessment_report/2009/12/WC500018219.pdf  (accessed 
1 February 2016).

WHO (1999) WHO Monographs on Selected Medicinal Plants – Volume 1. World Health Organization, 

Geneva, Switzerland.

Wu, Q.P., Wang, Z.J., Fu, M.H., Tang, L.Y., He, Y. and Fang, J. (2007) Chemical constituents from the leaves 

of Cassia angustifolia. Zhong Yao Cai (Journal of Chinese Medicinal Materials) 30, 1250–1252.

21  Spinach

Periyasamy Suganya1* and A. Sangamithra2

1Avinashilingam Institute for Home Science and Higher Education for  
Women, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India; 2Kongu Engineering College,  

Perundurai, Erode, Tamil Nadu, India

21.1  Botany

21.1.1 

Introduction

Spinach  (Spinacia  oleracea  L.),  an  annual 
plant,  was  originally  placed  in  the  family 
Chenopodiaceae, but this family was com-
bined with the family Amaranthaceae in 2003, 
within the order Caryophyllales. The plant 
has a significant role as herb, although it is 
often consumed as a leafy vegetable. The leaves 
and stems are tender and delicate (Fig. 21.1), 
and can be eaten either fresh or cooked, or 
processed  into  different  forms  (Rubatzky 
et  al.,  1997).  Spinach  is  abundant  in  core 
nutrients and many phytochemicals. It is an 
excellent source of vitamins A, C and K, and 
of minerals such as calcium, potassium, mag-
nesium, manganese and iron. It is also high 
in oxalates (Kawazu et al., 2003), which have 
been reported to affect iron metabolism and 
kidney health (see Section 21.2.2). Spinach 
contains an ample amount of fibre and is low 
in calories. Carotenoids, including β-carotene, 
zeaxanthin  and  lutein,  and  phenolic  com-
pounds are the most important phytochem-
icals  present  in  spinach.  It  is  thought  that 
cancer, heart disease and problems related 
to ageing can be prevented by these phyto-

chemicals. The crop also has a hypoglycaemic 
effect, which has been used in the treatment 
of  urinary  calculi  and  lung  inflammation. 
The seeds of spinach are used as a laxative 
and  for  treating  breathing  difficulties  and 
liver inflammation. Canning, modified atmos-
pheric packaging, freezing, drying and min-
imal processing are important processing 
and preservation techniques for spinach.

21.1.2  History

Spinach is sometimes known as the ‘Queen 
of the garden patch’ and can be available all 
year round when the climate is suitable. The 
origin of the crop is believed to have been 
from Persia, but spinach is also a native herb 
of  south-west  Asia.  It  had  spread  into  the 
Mediterranean by the 5th century and there-
after  to  India  and  China.  The  diffusion  of 
spinach into the Mediterranean area was al-
most certainly the result of Arab ingenuity, 
as it was they who introduced it into culti-
vation in Europe in the 12th century, where 
it was greatly appreciated for its medicinal 
properties.  The  Italians  promoted  spinach 
as a leafy vegetable that was used in many 
dishes. Spinach was originally cultivated as a 

*Corresponding author, e-mail: suganya.abe@gmail.com

246 

© CAB International 2016. Leafy Medicinal Herbs: Botany, Chemistry, 
Postharvest Technology and Uses (eds D.C.P. Ambrose et al.)

 

Spinach 

247

medicinal  plant  some  2000  years  ago  in 
Iran, where the ancient Iranians appreciated 
its properties (Splittstoesser, 1990). The crop 
is now widely grown in regions with a rela-
tively  moderate  temperature  and  is  con-
sidered to be a ‘super food’.

Vernacular names of spinach in various 
countries/languages are listed in Table 21.1.

21.1.3  Location

Spinach is produced worldwide for its edible 
leaves.  The  global  commercial  production 

of spinach was 21,662,608 million t in the 
year 2012. China stands first in spinach pro-
duction,  accounting  for  about  19,500,000 
million t p.a. The next second largest pro-
ducer is the USA, with production at around 
354,050 million t, followed by Japan, Turkey 
and  Indonesia.  The  USA  is  the  world’s 
largest  exporter  of  spinach,  followed  by 
Spain and Italy. Fig. 21.2 depicts the global 
production  of  spinach  from  1961  to  2012 
(FAOSTAT, 2014).

Spinach is a cold hardy plant and is es-
pecially  popular  in  the  autumn  season, 
when the days are short and cool. It grows in 

Table 21.1.  Vernacular names of spinach by 
country or language. From SciNameFinder, 2013.

Country/
language

Vernacular 
name

Country/
language

Vernacular 
name

Sigeumchi

Pinni, palak
India
Italian
Spinacio
Japanese Horenso
Korean
Norwegian Spinat
Polish
Portuguese Espinafre
Espinaca
Spanish
Swedish
Spenat

Szpinak

Bulgarian
Chinese
Danish
Dutch
English
French
German
Greek
Icelandic

Spanak
Bocai
Spinat
Spinazie
Spinach
Épinard
Spinat
Spanaci
Spínat

Fig. 21.1.  Fresh spinach.

25,000,000

20,000,000

t
 
n
o

i
l
l
i

M

15,000,000

10,000,000

5,000,000

0
1961

1966

1971

1976

1981

1991

1996

2001

2006

2012

1986
Year

Fig. 21.2.  Global production of spinach from 1961 to 2012.

248 

P. Suganya and A. Sangamithra 

well-drained, fertile soil rich in organic mat-
ter. It can tolerate slightly alkaline soils but is 
highly sensitive to acid soils. The preferred pH 
is in the range of 6.5–7.5. Young plants can 
tolerate temperatures as low as −9°C.

21.1.4  Morphology/types

Spinach  is  a  dioecious,  annual  herb  with  a 
height  of  up  to  150  cm  and  a  long  taproot. 
The leaves are simple, ovate to triangular at 
the base, crinkled or fat, and are arranged on 
stems in a spiral manner. The leaf size varies 
from 2 to 30 cm long and 1 to 15 cm wide. 
The base of the plant holds the larger leaves 
and  the  flowering  stem  the  smaller  leaves. 
The  petiole  has  round  to  sharply  pointed 
basal lobes and is around 6–12 cm long. In 
male  plants,  the  inflorescence  is  spike-like 
and extends up to 10 cm in length. The yel-
low–green flowers are small, with a diameter 
of  3–4  mm;  they  are  usually  unisexual  and 
rarely bisexual, and they produce small, dry, 
lumpy fruit clusters that contain the seeds.

Spinach grows well in the cool temper-
atures  of  the  spring  and  autumn  seasons. 
Curly (or savoy), semi-curly and flat leaf spin-
ach are the main varieties that are cultivated 
all over the world. Sometimes, the use of curly 
and flat leaf spinach can extend the growing 
season into summer and winter. Curly leaf 
spinach is more cold resistant than the other 
varieties. It has deeply wrinkled leaves that 
make  the  cleaning  process  difficult,  and 
provide a characteristic crisp texture when 
they are eaten raw. The dark fresh green col-
our makes curly leaf spinach best for fresh 
salads and sandwiches. Semi-curly spinach 
varieties have straighter leaves that are not 
wrinkled. The disease and bolt resistance of 
semi-curly spinach makes it a good choice 
for home growing. Semi-curly spinach can 
also  be  cooked  for  longer  periods  without 
changes  to  its  texture  and  shape,  but  it  is 
also tasty, crisp and delicate enough to be a 
salad  green.  The  smooth  leaves  of  flat  leaf 
spinach  make  the  cleaning  process  easier 
and make it suitable for further processing. 
Baby  spinach  is  a  type  of  flat  leaf  spinach 
that has been picked in the early stages of 

growth, when the leaves are particularly small, 
tender and sweet.

Several  different  varieties  of  spinach 
were formerly classified on the basis of the 
characteristics of the fruit and leaf, leading 
to the definition of S. oleracea var. oleracea 
(also given as S. oleracea var. spinosa (Mo-
ench) Celak and S. spinosa Moench) as the 
major variety, which had prickly fruits, and 
S. inermis (Moench) and S. glabra (Mill) as 
varieties  with  non-prickly,  round  fruits. 
However, these former varieties are all now 
regarded as one species, Spinacia oleracea. 
Other cultivars are grouped according to the 
colour and texture of the leaf, i.e. pale or dark 
green, and leaf texture, i.e. smooth, semi-
smooth  or  crumpled.  Asian  type  cultivars 
have thin and smooth leaves, long and pur-
ple red base petioles, and often bear prickly 
fruits, are fast growing and have quick bolt-
ing characteristics. American and European 
cultivars have thin, dark green and smooth 
to  crumpled  leaves,  and  the  slow-bolting 
summer type has a green or pink petiole. In 
general, the Japanese prefer dark green leaves 
whereas the Chinese prefer pale green leaves.

21.2  Chemistry

Spinach is known for its rich nutritive value 
(it has abundant macronutrients and micro-
nutrients) and for its medicinal properties, 
which include its abilities to increase vitality, 
restore  energy  and  improve  blood  quality. 
The plant is plentiful in phytochemicals that 
decrease cholesterol levels, prevent cell dam-
age and also play a vital role with the preven-
tion cancer, diabetes, cardiovascular disease 
and hypertension.

21.2.1  Chemical (nutritional)  

composition

Data on the nutritional composition of fresh 
spinach  are  given  in  Table  21.2,  based  on 
measurements made on 15 cultivars grown in 
different areas of Iran. These data indicate that 
spinach contains high amounts of vitamin A, 
vitamin  E  and  several  vital  antioxidants, 

 

Spinach 

249

Table. 21.2.  Nutritional content of fresh spinach from 15 cultivars grown in Iran. From Barzegar  
et al., 2007.

Component

Major components

Ash
Crude fibre
Moisture
Oxalate
Protein
Total fat
Total phenolics

Minerals

Copper
Iron
Magnesium
Phosphorus
Potassium
Sodium
Zinc

aTannic acid equivalents

Content/100 g  
fresh weight

1.63–2.46 g
1.80–2.22 g
88.2–91.1 g
0.53–1.17 g
1.62–3.19 g
0.14–0.36 g
55.2–103.9 mg TAEa

0.074–0.443 mg
2.61–8.01 mg
67.4–108.3 mg
40.4–90.9 mg
595.8–1106.6 mg
34.0–117.7 mg
0.963–2.606 mg

Component

Vitamins

Content/100 g 
fresh weight

Vitamin A
Thiamine (B1)
Riboflavin (B2)
Niacin (B3)
Pantothenic acid (B5)
Pyridoxine (B6)
Folate (B9)
Vitamin E

9377 IU
0.078 mg
0.189 mg
0.724 mg
0.065 mg
0.195 mg
194 μg
2.03 mg

Fatty acids

Erucic
Hexadecatrienoic
Linoleic
Linolenic
Oleic
Palmitic
Palmitoleic
Stearic

0.55–5.43%
1.85–6.10%
13.59–22.50%
31.60–44.04%
6.68–16.51%
17.27–24.58%
0.85–11.00%
0.81–3.17%

and also of several minerals, other vitamins 
and unsaturated fatty acids. Spinach contains 
omega-3 fatty acids, which prevent inflam-
matory reactions. It is also rich in vitamin C 
(ascorbic acid), which is a strong biological 
antioxidant and is involved in the synthesis 
of neurotransmitters, steroid hormones and 
collagen, the absorption of iron and calcium, 
and  the  conversion  of  cholesterol  to  bile 
acids. Vitamin C also assists in the healing of 
wounds and burns, the prevention of blood 
clotting and strengthening the walls of the 
capillaries (Combs, 1998). Spinach contains 
a  considerable  quantity  of  soluble  dietary 
fibre, which is recommended for cholesterol 
control and weight reduction programmes – 
and a cup of raw spinach contains only around 
7 kcal of energy.

Figure 21.3 depicts the amino acid con-

tent of spinach.

21.2.2  Phytochemistry

Spinach is rich in powerful antioxidant and 
health-promoting  phytochemicals,  includ-
ing  carotenoids  such  as  lutein,  β-carotene 

and zeaxanthin, and secondary metabolites 
such as phenolic/polyphenolic compounds, 
which include the flavonoids and compounds 
such as chlorogenic acid.

Carotenoids  are  fat-soluble  vitamins, 
they have a high absorption capacity by the 
human body. Carotenoids are released from 
foods  during  cutting,  chopping,  blanching 
and cooking, which increases their bioavail-
ability.  Zeaxanthin  and  lutein  are  xantho-
phylls, which are yellow pigments, although 
at  high  concentrations  they  may  appear 
 orange  or  red.  These  two  compounds  are 
important for vision, and lutein protects against 
atherosclerosis (a build-up of fatty deposits 
in the arteries), which leads to heart attacks. 
Fresh spinach contains 5626 μg β-carotene/100 g 
and 12,198 μg/100 g lutein plus zeaxanthin 
(USDA, 2015).

Fresh spinach has a total phenolic con-
tent of about 1629–4835 mg of chlorogenic 
acid equivalents/kg of fresh weight (Gil et al., 
1999).  Spring-grown  spinach  contains  a 
greater amount of total phenols than autumn- 
grown spinach (Howard et al., 2002). Spin-
ach  contains  large  amounts  of  flavonoids, 
807–2241 mg/kg in freshly cut leaves. The 

250 

P. Suganya and A. Sangamithra 

g
0
0
1
/
g
m

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

n
a
h
p
o
p
y
r
T

t

i

e
n
n
o
e
r
h
T

i

e
n
c
u
e
L

i

e
n
s
y
L

i

e
n
c
u
e
o
s
I

l

e
n

i
t
s
y
C

i

e
n
n
o
h

i

t

e
M

e
n

i
l

a
V

i

e
n
s
o
r
y
T

l

i

e
n
n
a
a
y
n
e
h
P

l

i

e
n
n
g
r
A

i

e
n
d

i

i
t
s
H

i

i

e
n
n
a
A

l

i

e
n
c
y
G

l

e
n

i
l

o
r
P

e
n
i
r
e
S

i

d
c
a

 
c
i
t
r
a
p
s
A

i

d
c
a

i

 
c
m
a

t

l

u
G

Amino acid

Fig. 21.3.  Amino acid content in raw spinach.

flavonoids exhibit antioxidant, antimutagenic, 
anti-inflammatory, and anticarcinogenic prop-
erties (Lomnitski et al., 2000a,b, Edenharder 
et al., 2001, Nyska et al., 2001). According to 
the USDA flavonoid database, the main flavon-
oids in spinach are kaempferol (6.38 mg/100 g 
fresh weight, FW), quercetin (3.97 mg/100 g 
FW), luteolin (0.74 mg/100 g FW) and myrice-
tin (0.35 mg/100 g FW) (USDA, 2013). Quer-
cetin has anti-inflammatory properties and 
plays a vital role in reducing the risk of cancer 
and heart diseases. Glucuronides and acylated 
diglycosides  and  triglycosides  of  methy-
lated  and  methylene-dioxy  derivatives  of 
6-oxygenated flavonols are some of the unusual 
flavonoid  compounds  reported  in  spinach 
(Pandjaitan et al., 2005), which include the 
following (Shahidi and Naczk, 2003):

 • 

 •  patuletin (quercetagetin 6-methyl ether);
spinacetin  (quercetagetin  6,3′-dimethyl 
 • 
ether);
spinatoside (3,6-dimethylquercetagetin 
4′-O-glucuronide);
jaceidin 4′-glucuronide;
 • 
 •  patuletin 3-gentobioside;
 •  patuletin 3-glycosyl(1→6)-[apiosyl)(1→2)]- 

glucoside;
spinacetin 3-glycosyl(1→6)-[apiosyl(1→2)]- 
glucoside;

 • 

 • 

 •  patuletin  3-(2′′-feruloylglycosyl)(1→6)- 

[apiosyl(1→2)]-glucoside;
spinacetin  3-(2″-feruloylglycosyl)(1→6)- 
[apiosyl(1→2)]-glucoside;

 • 

 • 

spinacetin  3-(2′′-p-coumaroylglycosyl) 
(1→6)-[apiosyl(1→2)]-glucoside; and
spinacetin 3-gentiobioside.

Figure 21.4 shows the structures of some 

of these spinach flavonoids.

Anti-nutritional factors

Anti-nutritional  factors  are  natural  com-
pounds that interfere with the absorption of 
nutrients. They benefit plants by helping to 
prevent pests from eating them. They include 
phytate, oxalate and trypsin inhibitor. Oxal-
ates occur naturally in plants and animals, 
mostly  as  calcium  salts,  and  consequently 
they are also consumed in a variety of differ-
ent foods. They are controversial compounds 
among nutritionists and health experts. Fresh 
spinach contains high amounts of oxalates, 
on average around 645 mg/100 g. The oxalates 
help to prevent the absorption of calcium and 
other minerals. They form insoluble salts with 
calcium, and the calcium in spinach is one 
of the least bioavailable of calcium sources. 
Oxalate binds to both iron and calcium, and 
also magnesium, to form oxalate salts, such 
as calcium oxalate and magnesium oxalate, 
thus  preventing  these  minerals  from  being 
absorbed from the small intestine. Calcium 
oxalate is less soluble than the other oxalate 
salts and so tends to form crystals instead of 
dissolving and staying in the intestine; fur-
thermore, it can form kidney stones.

H3C

O

HO

O

OH

HO

O

O

CH3

O

H3C

O

CH3

O

OH

OH

O

Jaceidin

OH

HO

H3C

O

HO

HO

H

OH

H

H
OH

H

O

O

HO

OH

H

O

CH3

O

Spinatoside

OH

O

CH3

HO

O

O

Patuletin

OH

O

OH

HO

CH3

O

O

OH

Spinacetin

 

i

S
p
n
a
c
h

 

Fig. 21.4.  Chemical structures of some flavonoids found in spinach.

2
5
1

252 

P. Suganya and A. Sangamithra 

Spinach also contains purines, organic 
compounds  which  on  breakdown  are  con-
verted into uric acid. High levels of uric acid 
in the body increases the risk of developing 
kidney stones. Hence, patients with or prone 
to kidney stones are recommended to avoid 
spinach  and  other  high  oxalate  foods.  The 
cooking of spinach reduces oxalate content 
from  5–15%.  Moreover,  during  blanching, 
spinach  takes  up  calcium  from  water,  and 
the consequent increase in calcium content 
has a direct influence on the ratio between 
the  soluble  and  insoluble  forms  of  oxalate 
(Bengtsson, 1969).

21.3  Postharvest Processing

Spinach leaves are harvested after the plants 
attain maturity, which requires 37–45 days. 
The  leaves  are  detached  from  the  plant  at 
the base of their petioles simply by cutting. 
They should be removed when green in col-
our  within  a  week  of  the  formation  of  the 
full  leaves,  and  it  is  advised  that  yellow 
leaves are avoided during harvesting. A sin-
gle  plant  should  have  a  minimum  of  six 
leaves of 5–7 inches (12–15 cm) long. The 
outer leaves are cut at 5–10 day intervals.

21.3.1  Preharvest and postharvest 

factors affecting quality

Preharvest factors such as climate and light 
conditions affect the quality of the leaves, but 
photosynthesis  may  be  supported  in  light-
stored leaves, and light storage may also in-
crease ascorbic acid synthesis (Toledo et al., 
2003). Postharvest management for spinach 
focuses mainly on temperature control and 
water loss. Leafy vegetables generally have 
relatively high respiration rates and a large 
surface to volume ratio, resulting in a rela-
tively short storage time. Temperature, both 
in terms of total and average temperature and 
the extremes that occurred during the growth 
period,  may  influence  leaf  chemical  com-
position (Lefsrud et al., 2005). Because of the 
high respiration rate (40–70 ml CO2/kg/h at 
10°C),  and  sensitivity  to  ethylene  and 

elevated CO2 concentrations, spinach leaves 
need to be cooled immediately or very soon 
after harvest. Table 21.3 shows effect of dif-
ferent temperatures on leaf respiration rate. 
Storability can be improved by lowering the 
temperature, increasing humidity and modi-
fying the surrounding atmosphere. A lower 
temperature decreases metabolic rates, and 
thereby slows down deterioration. However, 
a very low temperature may cause chilling 
or freezing injury to the produce (Wills et al., 
1981). Storage also has an impact on the bio-
active components of spinach, with ascorbic 
acid  quickly  decreasing,  whereas  caroten-
oids and flavonoids appear to be more stable 
(Kalt, 2005).

21.3.2  Preprocessing steps

The preprocessing steps for spinach include 
cleaning, pre-cooling, pretreatment and stor-
age. The harvested spinach leaves are placed 
on a perforated shaking platform to facilitate 
the removal of soil and debris. The leaves are 
then dipped into cold water at about 10°C, 
to  lower  field  heat,  remove  impurities  left 
on the leaves and also to inhibit microbial 
activity. A manual inspection is then carried 
out to remove any unwanted materials. The 
leaves are packed into nylon mesh bags and 
dipped into another container of circulating 
water at 10°C for a final rinse. The bags are 
then spun to remove water. Following this, the 
spinach  is  mechanically  packed  into  bags 
and stored at 2°C; it is now ready for ship-
ment to retail outlets (Hodges et al., 2000).

Fresh  spinach  can  be  stored  for  about 
10–14  days  under  refrigerated  conditions. 

Table 21.3.  Variation in respiration rate of 
harvested spinach leaves with temperature. 
Adapted from Suslow and Cantwell, 2013.

Temperature (°C)

Respiration rate  
(ml CO2/kg/h)

0
5
10
15
20

9–11
17–29
41–69
67–111
86–143

 

Spinach 

253

The most suitable temperature for storage is 
5–10°C. Spinach loses up to 80% of its ascor-
bic acid in 50 h at room temperature, probably 
due  to  wilting.  Treatment  with  0.1  or  1.0 
μl/l 1-MCP (1-methylcyclopropene) inhibits 
ethylene sensitivity, and can be successfully 
used  to  retain  the  quality  and  chlorophyll 
content of leaves at 23°C for 6 days (Grozeff 
et al., 2010). Maintenance of the appropriate 
relative  humidity  and  atmosphere  during 
storage improves shelf life and reduces the 
losses of bioactive compounds.

21.3.3  Processing

Implementation of an appropriate postharvest 
technology can reduce postharvest losses and 
enhance quality of the product. Postharvest 
losses  of  fresh  vegetables  are  estimated  at 
20–50% in tropical countries. Thus, process-
ing is an essential step in reducing posthar-
vest losses and improving the eating quality 
of spinach; this can include the use of tech-
niques such as freezing, canning, dehydration 
and minimal processing.

Blanching

Catalase and peroxidase enzymes are a major 
cause of the deterioration of spinach. Perox-
idase,  for  example,  reacts  with  hydrogen 
peroxide,  to  form  phototoxic  free  radicals 
which  cause  the  breakdown  and  loss  of 
vitamins. These enzymes are inactivated by 
blanching,  but  the  process  must  be  done 
properly so as to preserve chlorophyll, which 
otherwise  is  broken  down  to  pheophytin, 
and imparts a brown colour to over-blanched 
spinach.  Olayinka  et  al.  (2012)  found  that 
blanching  samples  of  Nigerian  spinach  (or 
tete,  Celosia  argentea)  for  10  min  leached 
out 49–51% of its antioxidant contents into 
the boiling water used, and that only around 
36%  remained  after  20  min.  Other  reports 
have indicated that blanching for up to 20 min 
seriously  affects  the  antioxidant  content 
of  vegetables  (Hunter  and  Fletcher,  2002). 
At above 95°C, the blanching process would 
decompose  the  antioxidants  altogether. 
The optimum period for blanching spinach 

leaves in boiling water is 2 min, and micro-
wave blanching reduces the loss of vitamin 
C by 18%.

Freezing

Freezing  is  one  the  most  commonly  used 
methods to maintain the high quality of fresh 
produce. In this method, the temperature is 
lowered  to  freezing  point  in  order  to  retain 
nutrients and to increase the shelf life of pro-
duce  by  preventing  (or  slowing)  microbial 
growth.  The  fresh  spinach  is  washed  thor-
oughly and woody stems are cut off. It is then 
blanched in boiling water for 2 min and im-
mediately cooled down using cold water. The 
excess moisture is drained off and the spin-
ach is packed into airtight freezer containers 
or bags, labelled and placed in a freezer.

The freezing-point of spinach is about 
−0.7°C,  and  spinach  stored  at  a  controlled 
freezing point had superior quality to that 
of  cold  stored  spinach  (Shen  et  al.,  2012). 
Glutamic acid is the dominant amino acid 
in  fresh  spinach,  but  this  is  reduced  in 
frozen spinach. The main folate (vitamin B9) 
derivative  in  spinach  is  5-methyltetrahy-
drofolate.  Folate  content  decreased  signifi-
cantly (by 25%) during the washing of spin-
ach due to leaching (Delchier et al., 2013).

Minimal processing

Minimally  processed  products  have  been 
defined as ‘any fruit or vegetable, or any com-
bination thereof, which has been physically 
altered from its original form, but has remained 
in its fresh condition’ (IFPA, 1999). Minimal 
processing  can  provide  fresh  and  quality 
products via a hurdle approach. It provides 
consumer with a new class of products for 
which convenience, quality and a relatively 
long  shelf  life  are  desirable  (Siriphanich, 
1993). In order to minimally process freshly 
cut spinach, the leaves are initially sorted and, 
after removal of the leaf stalks, are washed 
in cold running water. After draining, they 
are immersed in a mixture of ascorbic acid 
(0.5%) and citric acid (0.5%) at a tempera-
ture of 6°C for 10 min. The leaves are then 
chopped into fragments, packaged and stored 
for around 12 days while maintained at 4°C.

254 

P. Suganya and A. Sangamithra 

The  shelf  life  of  minimally  processed 
baby spinach can be extended by up to 7 days 
when it is stored at 7°C. However, the com-
plications associated with baby spinach are 
the  development  of  strong  off-odours  and 
decay associated with softening of the tissue 
(Medina et al., 2012). The fresh cut spinach 
is packed in mono-oriented polypropylene 
(PP)  or  low-density  polyethylene  (LDPE) 
bags. The type and permeability of the film 
affected off-odour development but did not 
influence visual sensory attributes or chloro-
phyll retention of the spinach (Piagentini 
et al., 2002).

Drying

The consumption period for spinach can be 
extended by drying. The high moisture con-
tent  of  spinach  is  similar  to  that  of  other 
green leafy vegetables. Apart from improv-
ing the storability of the product at ambient 
temperatures,  drying  also  considerably  re-
duces  weight  and  volume,  and  minimizes 
the cost of packaging, storage and transpor-
tation  (Baysal  et  al.,  2003).  After  thorough 
washing and trimming, the spinach is loaded 
on to trays and subsequently on to carts for 
dehydration. The drying temperature should 
be maintained at 80°C. The dehydration time 
is about 4 h. After dehydration, the moisture 
content  of  the  dehydrated  spinach  should 
be below 6.5%.

microwave  drying. 
In microwave drying, the 
power  and  temperature  used  are  the  most 
important  factors.  Microwave  drying  of 

Fig. 21.5.  Freeze-dried spinach.

spinach in a 750 W oven requires only 350 s 
to produce the best quality dried spinach with 
respect to colour and vitamin C content. The 
energy  requirement  for  this  is  0.12  kWh 
(Ozkan  et  al.,  2007).  A  higher  microwave 
power and temperature gives a shorter dry-
ing time, and the drying rate increases remark-
ably with power output and temperature of 
the oven. The microwave drying process may 
induce  a  colour  shift  towards  the  darker 
region. Dadali et al. (2007) observed a decreas-
ing trend in the values of the parameters 
L (lightness) and b (yellow/blue), and an in-
creasing trend in a (red/green) and the total 
colour change (ΔE) during microwave drying. 
Microwave drying of spinach using 430 kV/m 
for 7 h removed 80.1% of the total moisture. 
The total chlorophyll content of microwave- 
dried spinach is noticeably higher than that 
of oven-dried spinach. Similarly, the ascorbic 
acid content is almost three times higher than 
that from oven drying after 6 weeks of storage 
(Bajgai and Hashinaga, 2001).

other  drying  methods.  Spinach can also be 
dried using freeze-drying (Fig. 21.5), but the 
drying time (45 h) is much longer than that 
for  controlled  low-temperature  vacuum 
dehydration  (6  h).  However,  in  controlled 
low- temperature 
vacuum  dehydration, 
product  collapse  is  observed  as  a  result  of 
the  evaporation  of  moisture  (King  et  al., 
2001).  The  activation  energy  for  thin-layer 
convective drying of spinach was found to 
be 34.35 kJ/mol (Doymaz, 2009).

Modified atmosphere packaging

Modified atmosphere packaging (MAP) has 
been developed to ensure that packaged food 
products stay fresh and attractive for a longer 
period  by  using  defined  gas  mixtures.  The 
objective  is  to  create  inside  the  packaging 
an appropriately balanced gas composition 
that will allow a decline in the physiological 
activity of the product that will delay deteri-
oration. The effectiveness of MAP depends 
on factors such as freshness, degree of prod-
uct processing, appropriate composition of 
the gas mixture used, general product prop-
erties, microbiological quality, barrier poten-
tial  of  the  packaging  material  used  and  its 

 

Spinach 

255

dependence on the temperature and on the 
intensity  of  product  respiration  (Hertog 
et al., 2004; Fonseca et al., 2006).

Young, tender spinach leaves 8–10 cm 
long stored in an atmosphere of 5% O2 + 10% 
CO2 maintained their initial appearance for 
up  to  12  days  at  7.5°C,  but  the  carotenoid 
concentration was lower than that in leaves 
that had been stored in air. The chlorophyll 
content was highest after storage in 5% O2 + 
20% CO2, but the leaves showed rapid de-
terioration in visual quality. Storage at 10°C 
in 2% O2 + 3% or 10% CO2 controlled the en-
zyme activity of the leaves and contributed 
to the preservation of ascorbic acid and the 
activity  of  l-ascorbate  peroxidase  activity. 
Storage at 2°C prevented a reduction in as-
corbic acid content and l-ascorbate peroxid-
ase activity. Ascorbic acid content, l-ascorbate 
peroxidase activity and yellowing decreased 
rapidly when storage was at 25°C (Mizukami 
et al., 2003). There was an increase in leaf 
pH after 1 day of storage in 20% O2, and a 
reduction of pH with high contents of CO2 
which may be due to the dissolution of CO2 
and  the  formation  of  carbonic  acid  (Babic 
and Watada, 1996; Bieganska-Marecik et al., 
2007).  High  concentrations  of  CO2  could 
damage  the  tips  of  leaves,  but  it  was  later 
reported that storage in 10–40% CO2 + 10% 
O2 retarded yellowing (Gross et al., 2004).

The development of off-odour in baby 
spinach  stored  by  MAP  was  due  to  the 
build-up of volatiles in the headspace, which, 
in  turn,  lead  to  changes  in  volatile  gener-
ation. It is thought that the accumulation of 
non-respiratory volatiles may have negative 
effects in MAP (Toivonen and Deell, 2001). 
The  occurrence  of  off-odours  was  signifi-
cantly  increased  by  the  headspace  compos-
ition in terms of low O2 combined with CO2, 
and their development can be controlled by 
moderate O2 and CO2 levels. However, these 
conditions may reduce shelf life by accelerat-
ing senescence (Tudela et al., 2013). The shelf 
life of spinach can be prolonged by more than 
7 days at 7°C by the using micro-perforated 
films of high CO2 permeability.

sealed in an airtight container. The spinach 
leaves are first thoroughly washed and then 
visually sorted to remove defective leaves, 
weeds and rubbish. They are then blanched 
in water at 77°C for about 6 min. While still 
hot, the blanched leaves are loosely packed 
into cans and hot 2% brine is added at an 
initial  temperature  of  60°C.  The  tempera-
ture is then raised; the process takes about 
95 min at 116°C.

21.3.4  Value addition

Extraction of alkaloids

The medicinal properties of spinach flavon-
oids  are  remarkable  enough  to  have  urged 
researchers  to  create  specialized  spinach 
extracts. Spinach leaves contain chlorophyll 
‘a’, chlorophyll ‘b’ and β-carotene as the major 
pigments, and also smaller amounts of other 
pigments  such  as  xanthophylls,  which  are 
oxidized versions of carotenes and pheophyt-
ins. The presence of flavonols (as exempli-
fied by quercetin, kaempferol and myricetin), 
and  flavones  (as  exemplified  by  apigenin 
and luteolin) were investigated in raw spin-
ach extract.

Fresh spinach contains total polyphenols 
of about 270 and 390 mg/kg as tannic acid 
and catechin equivalents, respectively. Fla-
vonoids  were  effectively  extracted  in  the 
temperature range 50–130°C with water as 
solvent  and  in  the  range  50–150°C  with 
ethanol  as  solvent  (Howard  et  al.,  2002). 
Under  aqueous  extraction,  the  highest  ex-
traction efficiency (19.7%) was obtained for 
β- carotene. By electroplasmolysis treatment 
at 60 V/cm for 8 s, the extraction efficiencies 
for chlorophyll ‘a’, chlorophyll ‘b’ and total 
chlorophyll were 14.9, 12.6 and 13.7%, respect-
ively (Toprak et al., 2011).

21.4  Uses

21.4.1  General uses

Canning

Canning is a method of preserving food in 
which the food contents are processed and 

Spinach can be eaten raw in form of salad or 
cooked  with  other  ingredients.  It  may  be 
cooked by boiling, sautéing or creaming, or 

256 

P. Suganya and A. Sangamithra 

with  a  brine  solution.  To  achieve  the  best 
flavour, sautéing and creaming require add-
itional ingredients. Spinach provides more 
nutrients than any other food and is distin-
guished by its high iron content and that of 
other phytonutrients. It is an excellent source 
of vitamins A, B2, B6, B9 (folate), C, E, K, potas-
sium, magnesium, manganese and calcium. 
Dietary  magnesium  is  required  for  energy 
metabolism, maintaining muscle, nerve and 
heart  function,  a  healthy  immune  system 
and blood pressure. Spinach is also a good 
source of protein, dietary fibre and omega-3 
fatty acids. It has several bioactive compo-
nents, e.g. flavonoids, which act as antioxidants 
and  so  protect  the  body  from  free  radicals 
and other oxidants. It also exhibits antipro-
liferative,  anti-inflammatory,  anticancer  and 
anti-ageing properties (Lomnitski et al., 2003).

21.4.2  Medicinal uses

Antioxidant benefits

Most of the spinach flavonoid and caroten-
oid  nutrients  act  as  anti-inflammatory  and 
anticancer agents. A study in mice showed 
that  oral  administration  of  glyconutrients 
from  spinach  hindered  the  destruction  of 
DNA  and  growth  of  cancer  and  tumour 
cells. A decrease in 56.1% in solid tumour 
volume was observed in mice after feeding 
these nutrients for a period of 2 weeks. The 
spinach  nutrients  decreased  the  power  of 
tumours  to  supply  themselves  with  blood, 
apparently without any side effects. Mark-
ers of cell proliferation were drastically re-
duced  (Maeda  et  al.,  2008).  Neoxanthin,  a 
carotenoid  from  spinach,  inhibited  the 
multiplication of prostate cancer cells (Asai 
et al., 2004). From the studies on laboratory 
animals, it was found that spinach extracts 
have the ability to slow down the growth of 
stomach cancer and skin cancer cells.

Thirteen  compounds  were  separated 
from spinach that had antioxidant and anti-
mutagenic  properties  against  the  dietary 
carcinogen 2-amino-3-methylimidazo[4,5-f]
quinoline. Glutathione, an extremely import-
ant spinach antioxidant, protects DNA from 
oxidation,  enhances  the  immune  system, 

detoxifies  carcinogens,  assists  liver  health 
and  decreases  inflammation. α-Lipoic  acid 
is also an essential antioxidant synthesized 
by both plants and animals. It is necessary 
for cellular energy production, helps to neu-
tralize the damage caused by free radicals, 
lowers blood cholesterol and helps to pre-
vent chronic diseases. Another endogenous 
antioxidant rich in spinach is coenzyme Q10 
or ubiquinone, a crucial component in en-
ergy metabolism which helps in protecting 
the heart and skeletal muscles (Edenharder 
et al., 2001; Joseph et al., 2002).

Other medicinal uses

The  consumption  of  spinach  reduces  the 
risk of atherosclerosis and high blood pres-
sure. The vitamin K in spinach prevents the 
activation of osteoclasts, the cells that break 
down bones, and thereby helps in maintaining 
bone  health.  Spinach  also  contains  other 
bone-supportive nutrients such as calcium 
and  magnesium.  A  regular  intake  of  carot-
enoids  like  lutein  and  zeaxanthin  protects 
against age-related vision problems, such as 
macular  degeneration  and  cataract  forma-
tion,  and  high  serum  levels  of  lutein  and 
zeaxanthin reduce the risk of coronary heart 
disease.  Similarly,  high  plasma  levels  of 
carotenoids  were  associated  with  better 
vascular  health  and  lower  cardiovascular 
disease risk (Liao et al., 1999). Betaine (tri-
methylglycine),  a  lesser  known  compound 
found  in  spinach,  prevents  cardiovascular 
disease by lowering the levels of homocyst-
eine, a non-protein amino acid that is associ-
ated with the development of heart disease 
(Joseph et al., 2002).

21.5  Summary

Spinach, from the Amaranthaceae family, is 
an edible flowering plant native to west and 
south-western Asia. It is considered to be one 
of the world’s healthiest vegetables because 
of  its  nutrient  richness.  Spinach  contains 
numerous health-promoting phytonutrients 
such  as  the  carotenoids  β-carotene,  lutein 
and zeaxanthin, and flavonoids, which pro-
vide  powerful  antioxidant  protection,  as 

 

Spinach 

257

well as many vitamins and minerals. A low 
concentration  of  ethylene  accelerates  the 
yellowing of leaves during storage, as spin-
ach  is  highly  sensitive  to  ethylene;  this 
yellowness can be delayed by exposing the 
leaves to atmospheres containing 7–10% O2 
and 5–10% CO2. Blanching is the principal 

process used to process spinach, and acts by 
inactivating  its  enzymes.  Freezing,  dehy-
dration and minimal processing of spinach 
are also practised. Research interest has also 
been  diverted  to  the  extraction  of  phyto-
chemicals  from  spinach  because  of  their 
great medicinal and nutritional value.

References

Aktas, E.T. and Yildiz, H. (2011) Effects of electroplasmolysis treatment on chlorophyll and carotenoid 

extraction yield from spinach and tomato. Journal of Food Engineering 106, 339–346.

Asai, A., Terasaki, M. and Nagao, A. (2004) An epoxide–furanoid rearrangement of spinach neoxanthin 
occurs in the gastrointestinal tract of mice and in vitro: formation and cytostatic activity of neochrome 
stereoisomers. The Journal of Nutrition 134, 2237–2243.

Babic, I. and Watada, A. (1996) Microbial populations of fresh-cut spinach leaves affected by con-

trolled atmospheres. Postharvest Biology and Technology 9, 187–193.

Bajgai, T.R. and Hashinaga, F. (2001) Drying of spinach with a high electric field. Drying Technology 

19, 2331–2341.

Barzegar, M., Erfani, F., Jabbari, A. and Hassandokht, M.R. (2007) Chemical composition of 15 spinach 
(Spinacea [sic] oleracea L.) cultivars grown in Iran. Italian Journal of Food Science 19, 309–318.
Baysal, T., Icier, F., Ersus, S. and Yıldız, H. (2003) Effects of microwave and infrared drying on the 

quality of carrot and garlic. European Food Research and Technology 218, 68–73.

Bengtsson, B.L. (1969) Effect of blanching on mineral and oxalate content of spinach. International 

Journal of Food Science and Technology 4, 141–145.

Bieganska-Marecik, R., Radziejewska-Kubzdela, E. and Czapski, J. (2007) Application of modified 
atmosphere  packaging  to  extend  shelf-life  of  minimally  processed  spinach.  Polish  Journal  of 
Food and Nutrition Sciences 57, 13–17.

Combs, C. (1998) The Vitamins: Fundamental Aspects in Nutrition and Health. Academic Press, San 

Diego, California.

Dadali, G., Demirhan, E. and Özbek, B. (2007) Color change kinetics of spinach undergoing microwave 

drying. Drying Technology 25, 1713–1723.

Delchier, N., Ringling, C., Le Grandois, J., Aoudé-Werner, D., Galland, R., Georgé, S., Rychlik, M. and 
Renard, C.M. (2013) Effects of industrial processing on folate content in green vegetables. Food 
Chemistry 139, 815–824.

Doymaz, I. (2009) Thin-layer drying of spinach leaves in a convective dryer. Journal of Food Process 

Engineering 32, 112–125.

Edenharder, R., Keller, G., Platt, K.L. and Unger, K.K. (2001) Isolation and characterization of structurally 
novel antimutagenic flavonoids from spinach (Spinacia oleracea). Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry 49, 2767–2773.

FAOSTAT (2014) Food and, Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Rome, Rome. Available 

at: http://faostat.fao.org/ (accessed 2 February 2016).

Fonseca, M.D.O., Leal, N., Cenci, S., Cecon, P. and Smith, R. (2006) Postharvest controlled atmosphere 
storage of ‘Sunrise Solo’ and ‘Golden’ pawpaws. Revista Brasileira de Armazenamento 31, 154–161.
Gil, M.I., Ferreres, F. and Tomas-Barberan, F.A. (1999) Effect of postharvest storage and processing on 
the antioxidant constituents (flavonoids and vitamin C) of fresh-cut spinach. Journal of Agricultural 
and Food Chemistry 47, 2213–2217.

Gross, K.C., Wang, C.Y. and Saltveit, M. (2004) The Commercial Storage of Fruits, Vegetables, and 
Florist and Nursery Stocks. Agriculture Handbook 66, Agricultural Research Service, US Department 
of Agriculture, Beltsville, Maryland.

Grozeff,  G.G.,  Micieli,  M.E.,  Gómez,  F.,  Fernández,  L.,  Guiamet,  J.J.,  Chaves,  A.R.  and  Bartoli,  C.G. 
(2010) 1-Methyl cyclopropene extends postharvest life of spinach leaves. Postharvest Biology and 
Technology 55, 182–185.

258 

P. Suganya and A. Sangamithra 

Hertog, M.L., Nicholson, S.E. and Jeffery, P.B. (2004) The effect of modified atmospheres on the rate of 

firmness change of ‘Hayward’ kiwifruit. Postharvest Biology and Technology 31, 251–261.

Hodges, D.M., Forney, C.F. and Wismer, W. (2000) Processing line effects on storage attributes of fresh-cut 

spinach leaves. HortScience 35, 1308–1311.

Howard, L., Pandjaitan, N., Morelock, T. and Gil, M. (2002) Antioxidant capacity and phenolic content 
of spinach as affected by genetics and growing season. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 
50, 5891–5896.

Hunter, K.J. and Fletcher, J.M. (2002) The antioxidant activity and composition of fresh, frozen, jarred 

and canned vegetables. Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies 3, 399–406.

IFPA (1999) Fresh-Cut Produce Handling Guidelines, 3rd edn. International Fresh-Cut Produce 

Association, Alexandria, Virginia.

Joseph, J.A., Nadeau, D. and Underwood, A. (2002). The Color Code: A Revolutionary Eating Plan for 

Optimum Health. Hyperion Books, New York.

Kalt, W. (2005) Effects of production and processing factors on major fruit and vegetable antioxidants. 

Journal of Food Science 70, R11–R19.

Kawazu, Y., Okimura, M., Ishii, T. and Yui, S. (2003) Varietal and seasonal differences in oxalate content 

of spinach. Scientia Horticulturae 97, 203–210.

King, V.A.E., Liu, C.-F. and Liu, Y.-J. (2001) Chlorophyll stability in spinach dehydrated by freeze-drying 
and controlled low-temperature vacuum dehydration. Food Research International 34, 167–175.
Lefsrud, M.G., Kopsell, D.A., Kopsell, D.E. and Curran-Celentano, J. (2005) Air temperature affects 
biomass and carotenoid pigment accumulation in kale and spinach grown in a controlled envir-
onment. HortScience 40, 2026–2030.

Liao, Y., Mcgee, D.L., Cooper, R.S. and Sutkowski, M.B.E. (1999) How generalizable are coronary risk 
prediction models? Comparison of Framingham and two national cohorts. American Heart Journal 
137, 837–845.

Lomnitski, L., Foley, J.F., Grossman, S., Shaul, V.B., Maronpot, R.R., Moomaw, C.R., Carbonatto, M. and 
Nyska, A. (2000a) Effects of apocynin and natural antioxidant from spinach on inducible nitric oxide 
synthase  and  cyclooxygenase-2  induction  in  lipopolysaccharide-induced  hepatic  injury  in  rat. 
Pharmacology and Toxicology 87, 18–25.

Lomnitski, L., Nyska, A., Ben-Shaul, V., Maronpot, R.R., Haseman, J.K., Harrus, T.L., Bergman, M. and 
Grossman, S. (2000b) Effects of antioxidants apocynin and the natural water-soluble antioxidant 
from spinach on cellular damage induced by lipopolysaccaride in the rat. Toxicologic Pathology 
28, 580–587.

Lomnitski, L., Bergman, M., Nyska, A., Ben-Shaul, V. and Grossman, S. (2003) Composition, efficacy, 

and safety of spinach extracts. Nutrition and Cancer 46, 222–231.

Maeda, N., Kokai, Y., Ohtani, S., Sahara, H., Kumamoto-Yonezawa, Y., Kuriyama, I., Hada, T., Sato, N., 
Yoshida, H. and Mizushina, Y. (2008) Anti-tumor effect of orally administered spinach glycolipid 
fraction on implanted cancer cells colon-26 in mice. Lipids 43, 741–748.

Medina, M.S., Tudela, J.A., Marín, A., Allende, A. and Gil, M.I. (2012) Short postharvest storage under 
low  relative  humidity  improves  quality  and  shelf  life  of  minimally  processed  baby  spinach 
(Spinacia oleracea L.). Postharvest Biology and Technology 67, 1–9.

Mizukami, Y., Saito, T. and Shiga, T. (2003) Enzyme activities related to ascorbic acid in spinach leaves 

during storage. Japanese Society of Food Science and Technology 50, 1–6.

Nyska, A., Lomnitski, L., Spalding, J., Dunson, D.B., Goldsworthy, T.L., Grossman, S., Bergman, M. 
and Boorman, G. (2001) Topical and oral administration of the natural water-soluble antioxidant 
from spinach reduces the multiplicity of papillomas in the Tg.AC mouse model. Toxicology 
Letters 122, 33–44.

Olayinka, O.O., Kareem, A.M., Aryo, I.B., Omotugba, S.K. and Oyebanji, A.O. (2012) Antioxidant contents 
(vitamin C) of raw and blanched different fresh vegetable samples. Food and Nutrition Sciences 3, 
18–21.

Ozkan, I.A., Akbudak, B. and Akbudak, N. (2007) Microwave drying characteristics of spinach. Journal 

of Food Engineering, 78, 577–583.

Pandjaitan, N., Howard, L., Morelock, T. and Gil, M. (2005) Antioxidant capacity and phenolic content of 
spinach  as  affected  by  genetics  and  maturation.  Journal  of  Agricultural  and  Food  Chemistry  53, 
8618–8623.

Piagentini, A., Güemes, D. and Pirovani, M. (2002) Sensory characteristics of fresh-cut spinach preserved 

by combined factors methodology. Journal of Food Science 67, 1544–1549.

 

Spinach 

259

Rubatzky, V.E., Yamaguchi, M., Rubatzky, V. and Yamaguchi, M. (1997) World Vegetables: Principles, 

Production and Nutritive Values. Chapman & Hall, New York.

SciNameFinder (2013) SciNameFinder™, compiled by A. Møller, Danish Food Informatics, Roskilde, 

Denmark. Available at: http://sciname.info/ (accessed 2 February 2016).

Shahidi, F. and Naczk, M. (2003) Phenolics in Food and Nutraceuticals. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida.
Shen, J., Hu, K.-Y., Liu, X.-H. and Wang, R.-L. (2012) Quality of spinach during controlled freezing 
point storage. Food Science and Technology 2012(9). Abstract available at: http://en.cnki.com.cn/
Article_en/CJFDTOTAL-SSPJ201209020.htm (accessed 2 February 2016).

Siriphanich, J. (1993) Minimal processing of tropical fruits. In: Champ, B.R., Highley, E. and Johnson, 
G.I.  (eds)  Proceedings  of  International  Conference  on  Postharvest  Handling  of  Tropical  Fruits, 
July  19–23,  Chiangmai, Thailand. ACIAR Proceedings No. 50, Australian Centre for International 
Agricultural Research, Canberra, pp. 127–137.

Splittstoesser, W.E. (1990) Vegetable Growing Handbook – Organic and Traditional Methods, 3rd edn. 

Chapman & Hall, New York.

Suslow, T.V. and Cantwell, M. (2013) Spinach: Recommendations for Maintaining Postharvest Quality. 
Produce Facts, University of California, Davis, California. Available at: http://postharvest.ucdavis.
edu/pfvegetable/Spinach/ (accessed 2 February 2016).

Toivonen, P. and Deell, J.R. (2001). Chlorophyll fluorescence, fermentation product accumulation, and 
quality of stored broccoli in modified atmosphere packages and subsequent air storage. Postharvest 
Biology and Technology 23, 61–69.

Toledo, M.E.A., Ueda, Y., Imahori, Y. and Ayaki, M. (2003)  l-ascorbic acid metabolism in spinach 
(Spinacia  oleracea  L.)  during  postharvest  storage  in  light  and  dark.  Postharvest  Biology  and 
Technology 28, 47–57.

Tudela, J.A., Marín, A., Garrido, Y., Cantwell, M., Medina-Martínez, M.S. and Gil, M.I. (2013) 
Off-odour development in modified atmosphere packaged baby spinach is an unresolved problem. 
Postharvest Biology and Technology 75, 75–85.

USDA (2013) USDA Database for the Flavonoid Content of Selected Foods, Release 3.1. Agricultural Research 
Service, US Department of Agriculture, Beltsville, Maryland. Available at: http://www.ars.usda.
gov/News/docs.htm?docid=6231 (accessed 2 February 2016).

USDA  (2015)  USDA  National  Nutrient  Database  for  Standard  Reference  Release  28,  Agricultural 
Research Service, US Department of Agriculture, Beltsville, Maryland. Available at: http://ndb.
nal.usda.gov/ (accessed 4 February 2016).

Wills, R.H., Lee, T., Graham, D., Mcglasson, W. and Hall, E. (1981). Postharvest. An Introduction to 
the Physiology and Handling of Fruit and Vegetables, 2nd edn. New South Wales University 
Press, Kensington, New South Wales, Australia.

22  Stevia

Ramanathan Parimalavalli1* and S. Radhai Sri2

1Periyar University, Salem, Tamil Nadu, India; 2PSG College of Arts and Science, 

Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India

22.1  Botany

22.1.1 

Introduction

Stevia rebaudiana (Bertoni) is a herb belong-
ing to the Asteraceae family. It is known by 
different names, which include sweet herb, 
sweet leaf, honey leaf, candy leaf and honey 
yerba (Carakostas et al., 2008), the sweet herb 
of Paraguay (Kennelley, 2002), or just plain 
stevia.  Among  the  150  species  of  Stevia, 
S. rebaudiana is the sweetest, and has been 
described as a ‘wonder plant’ or the ‘sweetness 
of  the  future’  owing  to  its  calorie-free  nat-
ural sweetness (Senthil, 2002). Stevia leaves 
have been used as a sweetener for many hun-
dreds of years by indigenous South American 
peoples, who use it in the local green tea as 
well as in other drinks. Stevia is a tropical 
herb – a tender perennial shrubby plant, which 
lives for 3 to 5 years. The leaves of stevia are 
in growing demand as a natural sweetener, 
and the health benefits of the herb have cre-
ated  an  interest  among  researchers.  It  has 
been  reported  to  have  various  nutritional 
and medicinal properties, such as antimicro-
bial, antiviral, antifungal, antihypertensive, 
anti-hyperglycaemic and antitumour effects 
(Gupta et al., 2013).

22.1.2  History/origin

Stevia  is  native  to  north-eastern  Paraguay 
and grows in sandy soil near streams (Lewis, 
2003).  It  was  first  established  in  Japan  in 
1968 (Sumida, 1968).

22.1.3  Location

The native occurrence of stevia is reported to 
be between 22–24° S and 53–56° W in Para-
guay  and  Brazil  (Robinson,  1980;  Sumida, 
1980). The crop has also been introduced to 
other countries, including Korea, Mexico, the 
USA, Indonesia, Tanzania and Canada (Fors, 
1995), and it is cultivated as a cash crop in 
number  of  countries.  The  seeds  are  highly 
heterogeneous  and  vary  in  their  content  of 
stevioside (the main component responsible 
for the sweetness of the plant), so it is better 
to start commercial cultures using rooted cut-
tings from selected plants that contain high 
level  of  associated  bitterness,  indicating  a 
high stevioside content (Shu and Wang, 1988; 
Xie and Ouyang, 1998). There is no intensive 
mechanized production of stevia due to diffi-
culties in the propagation of the crop by seed 
(Savitha et al., 2004).

*Corresponding author, e-mail: parimala1996@gmail.com

260 

© CAB International 2016. Leafy Medicinal Herbs: Botany, Chemistry, 
Postharvest Technology and Uses (eds D.C.P. Ambrose et al.)

 

Stevia 

261

22.1.4  Morphology

Stevia grows to a height of 65 cm, and up to 
180 cm in fertile soil. The leaves are sessile 
and  alternate,  lanceolate  to  oblanceolate, 
and  serrated  above  the  middle  (Fig.  22.1). 
The trichome structures on the leaf surface 
are of two distinct sizes, one large (4–5 μm) 
and one small (2.5 μm) (Shaffert and Cheto-
bar, 1994).

22.2  Chemistry

22.2.1  Chemical composition/ 

phytochemistry

The main natural component of stevia leaves 
that is responsible for their sweetness is the 
glycoside known as stevioside. Stevioside is 
intensely  sweet  and  is  present  in  amounts 
constituting up to 13% of the leaves (Bran-
dle et al., 2002).

The  phytochemicals  present  in  stevia 
have been analysed by techniques including 
various  types  of  chromatography,  electro-
phoresis, magnetic resonance spectrometry, 
spectroscopy and enzymatic determination. 
As many as 100 phytochemicals from stevia 
have been explored, and the plant is rich in 
terpenes and flavonoids. Among the glyco-
sides that have been identified, stevioside is 
considered  the  sweetest,  comprising  some 
6–18% of leaf weight. Tests have found it 
to be up to 300 times sweeter than ordinary 
sugar  (sucrose).  The  other  main  chemical 

compounds  in  stevia  include:  apigenin, 
β-sitosterol, caffeic acid, campesterol, diter-
pene glycosides, gibberellic acid and steviol 
(Taylor, 2005).

Oddone (1999) reported that stevioside 
(St) traditionally makes up the majority of 
the sweetener as used. Stevioside is also re-
sponsible for the somewhat bitter aftertaste 
which is sometimes described as a liquor-
ice taste. Rebaudioside A is usually present 
as 30–40% of the total sweetener and this 
compound  has  the  sweetest  taste;  it  has 
been  assessed  as  180–400  times  sweeter 
than sugar, but has no aftertaste. The ratio 
of  rebaudioside  A  to  stevioside  is  the  ac-
cepted measure of sweetness quality – and 
the more rebaudioside A, the better. If the 
two compounds are present in equal quan-
tities, or there is more rebaudioside A than 
stevioside,  it  appears  that  the  aftertaste  is 
eliminated.

The minor glycosides present are 30–
80 times sweeter than sugar, with the sweet 
principles  present  in  stevia  being  dulco-
side  A  (50–120×  sweeter  than  sugar),  re-
baudioside  A  (250–450×),  rebaudioside  B 
(300–350×), rebaudioside C (50–120×), re-
baudioside  D  (250–450×),  rebaudioside  E 
(150–300×)  and  steviolbioside  (100–125×) 
(Ikan et al., 1997).

22.3  Postharvest Technology

Harvesting should be carried out at the flower 
bud appearance stage as the stevioside con-
tent of the leaves falls when flowering com-
mences. The first harvest of the crop can be 
done 4–5 months after planting, and subse-
quent harvests once every 3 months for up 
to 3 years after planting (Kalpana and Khan, 
2008).

22.3.1  Processing

Drying

Fig. 22.1.  A stevia shoot.

Drying is an important aspect in the process-
ing  of  stevia  leaves,  and  if  it  is  not  done 

262 

R. Parimalavalli and S.R. Sri 

properly,  there  can  be  deterioration  of  the 
leaves as a result of their high initial mois-
ture content. It is advised that harvested leaves 
are  completely  dried  at  the  earliest  oppor-
tunity  as  fresh  leaves  have  a  limited  shelf 
life. Samsudin and Ab. Aziz (2013) conducted 
drying studies in a pilot scale dryer at dif-
ferent temperatures. With respect to the col-
our of the leaves, and their nutrient content, 
drying  at  50°C  was  found  to  be  the  best. 
Nutrient analysis of the dried leaves gave 
16  g  protein,  65  g  carbohydrate,  2805  mg 
potassium,  620  mg  calcium,  268  mg  phos-
phorus and 16 mg vitamin C per 100 g.

In another experiment, stevia leaves were 
dried  at  temperatures  ranging  from  30  to 
80°C. The drying process was found to take 
place only in the falling rate period, and the 
Midilli–Kucuk  model  was  found  to  give  the 
best fit to the drying curve (Lemus-Mondaca 
et al., 2014).

Extraction

Extracting the sweeteners from green or dried 
leaves can readily be done using boiling water, 
with  extraction  efficiencies  of  up  to  98% 
achievable  (Strauss,  1995).  In  contrast,  the 
extraction  procedure  for  steviol  glycosides 
is a tedious process involving conventional 
and purification techniques. It involves dis-
solving the glycosides by soaking the leaves 
in  warm  water,  precipitating  and  dissolv-
ing,  evaporating  the  solution  to  obtain  a 
concentrated solution, purification followed 
by drying in a spray dryer and crystallizing 
to produce white sugar (Rank and Midmore, 
2006).

Megeji et al. (2005), as part of a study 
designed to assess the economics of growing 
S. rebaudiana as a crop for the extraction of 
stevioside, developed a laboratory-scale pro-
cess that was able to produce 63% pure ste-
vioside.  This  involved  aqueous  extraction 
of dried and powdered leaves, followed by 
filtration and crystallization. The stevioside 
content of the crop (leaves and stems) was 
monitored  at  two  harvesting  dates  a  year 
over 2 years by analysing a methanolic extract 
prepared  as  follows:  dried  and  powdered 
material was cold extracted with methanol, 

and after 24 h, the solvent was decanted and 
the process repeated four times. Megeji et al. 
(2005)  concluded  that  the  crop  could  be 
economic  as  grown  under  the  conditions 
prevailing at Palampur in Himachal Pradesh, 
India.

In another experiment, an aqueous ste-
via extract was prepared by mixing 25 g of 
dried leaves with 500 ml of water at room 
temperature and heating at 100°C until the 
volume was reduced to a quarter of the ori-
ginal.  The  resulting  mixture  was  filtered 
through double lined muslin cloth.

A solid–liquid extraction for the deter-
mination  of  rebaudioside  A  in  stevia  was 
carried out by Asrul et al. (2013). The separ-
ation of rebaudioside A was achieved by ex-
tracting the leaf powder with solvents such 
as  petroleum  ether,  methanol  or  diethyl 
ether, followed by purification to obtain the 
bioactive  compound.  Based  on  the  extrac-
tion studies, methanol was found to be the 
best solvent.

The conventional methods of isolation 
of  steviosides  involve  long  extraction  and 
purification procedures, so the optimization 
of product yields is challenging. Rao et al. 
(2012) improvised a new process of stevio-
side extraction in which the air-dried leaves 
were defatted, powdered and extracted using 
a  pressurized  hot  water  extractor  (PHWE), 
followed by purification and concentration 
of  the  sweet  glycosides  through  ultra-  and 
nano-membrane  filtration.  This  procedure 
gave  high  (98.2%)  purity  steviosides.  This 
process established a ‘green’ method for the 
isolation of high-quality steviol glycosides, 
with  an  improved  final  yield  of  10.1–11% 
from the crude leaf extract and with improved 
organoleptic  and  biological  (antioxidant) 
activity.

22.3.2  Value addition

Both untreated stevia leaves and the herbal 
green  powder  prepared  from  them  taste 
sweet. The quality of the leaf is evaluated by 
its sweetness. Although stevia preparations 
are sweeter than sugar, they have a slightly 
bitter  aftertaste  (Savitha  et  al.,  2004).  One 

 

Stevia 

263

teaspoonful of stevia powder, is claimed to 
have a sweetening value equal to that of one 
cup of sugar (Fors 1995), and it has been re-
ported that stevia leaf extracts are 152 times 
sweeter than 3% sucrose and 97 times sweeter 
than 10% sucrose (Cardello et al., 1999). It 
has also been said that 50 g of stevia leaf can 
replace 1 kg of cane sugar (Barathi, 2003). 
A  tasty  flavour  remains  in  the  mouth  for 
½–1 h after the use of stevia as a sweetener 
(Ramana Rao, 2004).

The  functional  and  sensory  properties 
of  stevia  are  due  to  the  presence  of  glyco-
sides,  and  because  these  are  natural  prod-
ucts,  stevia  can  be  viewed  as  superior  to 
other high- potency sweeteners (Starratt and 
Gijzen, 2004). The palatability of both foods 
and drinks can be enhanced by using stevia 
as a sweetener (Ikan et al., 1997). Unlike as-
partame, a synthetic product, stevia sweet-
eners are heat stable to 200°C, are acid stable 
and do not ferment, so they can be used in 
the preparation of baked/cooked foods. There 
are no calories present in stevia and hence 
stevia products can be used as a ‘healthy’ re-
placement  for  sugar;  for  the  same  reason, 
they can also be used as a natural sweetener 
by diabetic and obese persons.

Stevia leaves can be used as flavour en-
hancers or sweeteners in a wide variety of 
foods  and  beverages,  such  as  vegetables, 
coffee, apple sauce and hot cereal (Bonvie 
et al., 1998). The leaf extract can be used to 
sweeten fruit juices, beverages, baked prod-
ucts, chocolates, Indian sweets, delicacies, 
etc. (Lewis, 2003). Stevia blends well with 
citrus fruit flavours such as lemon and cran-
berry.  Stevioside,  in  the  form  of  the  pure 
compound  or  as  stevia  leaf  extracts,  has 
been  widely  used  as  food  additive  (King-
horn, 1991). Leaf powder made from stevia 
can be used in most typical Indian dishes, 
such  as  chakkara  pongal,  payasam,  ravaa 
ladoo, sauces, jams, juices, pickles, tea, cof-
fee  and  even  herbal  tea  (Barathi,  2003).  In 
addition,  stevia  products  can  be  used  as 
tabletop sweeteners for tea and coffee, and 
in weight-watchers diets, pastries, pies, ice 
cream,  yoghurts,  sherbets,  jellies  and  des-
serts, chewing gum, candies and other con-
fectionery, diabetic diets, etc.

22.4  Uses

22.4.1  General uses

Natural plant origin intense sweeteners such 
as  stevioside,  glycyrrhizin  and  thaumatin 
used at very low levels in foods are gener-
ally not metabolized by the body and are ex-
creted unchanged (George et al., 2006). Sa-
wate  et  al.  (2007)  noted  that  the  level  of 
incorporation  of  stevioside  increased  in  a 
naturally  carbonated  cocoa  beverage,  the 
carbohydrate content decreased to an energy 
value of 7.04 kcal as a result of the replace-
ment  of  sugar  by  stevioside.  When  stevio-
side is used to replace 40–50% of the sucrose 
in beverage production, it can improve the 
taste  of  beverages,  making  their  sweetness 
cooling and refreshing in comparison with 
the thick and oily sweetness of sugar. For-
mulations  of  coffee-flavoured  jelly  can  be 
made  that  contain  a  simple  stevia  extract 
that substitutes for 20% of the sugar that is 
commonly used in this food. Counties such 
as  Japan  use  stevia  both  as  a  sweetener  in 
soft drinks and for table use.

Geuns (1998) stated that the claimed in-
take per person per day in Europe of fresh 
powdered leaves is 2.4 g dry powder, which 
is equivalent to 400 mg stevioside. The ac-
ceptable daily intake of powdered stevia is 
5 g. Among other countries, stevia and ste-
vioside  are  permitted  as  food  additives  in 
Brazil,  Korea  and  Japan,  and  stevia  is  al-
lowed as a dietary supplement in the USA.

22.4.2  Pharmacological uses

The fresh stevia leaf is delicious and nutri-
tious,  a  fantastic  no  calorie  sweetener  and 
an external and internal medicine. Many re-
ports  have  stated  that  the  products  made 
from whole leaf concentrate have extraordin-
ary  health  benefits  (see  http://www.stevia.
com/Stevia_Article_List.aspx  for  some  ex-
amples).  Stevia  is  perhaps  the  only  sweet-
ener  in  the  world  that  does  not  have  any 
negative  effects  on  health.  This  fact  now 
seems to have been proven by the 150 odd 

264 

R. Parimalavalli and S.R. Sri 

scientific studies done on it that have gone 
on to validate the remarkable impact of ste-
via on health and its therapeutic effects on 
the body – any past controversy over its use 
seems now to have abated.

The  beneficial  effects  of  stevia  extract 
include its activities as an antioxidant, and 
in the treatment of high blood pressure and 
hypertension.  The  leaf  extract  has  antihy-
pertensive effects and increases the level of 
insulin. Recent studies have indicated that 
stevioside and rebaudioside A can boost in-
sulin production by the pancreatic cells and 
increase glucose tolerance as well (Alexan-
der,  2007).  Research  conducted  by  Dutch 
and Japanese scientists in 2003 has shown 
that continuous intake of stevia induces the 
β-cells of the pancreas to produce more in-
sulin. This, in turn, reduces dependence on 
oral  as  well  as  injectable  insulin  and  con-
trols diabetes. The use of stevia as sugar is 
an  ideal  substitution  for  people  suffering 
from  diabetes  and  or  obesity  linked  to  the 
overuse of cane sugar.

A number of other studies have come to 
similar conclusions to those outlined above, 
and some of these are mentioned here. Stevia 
leaf  extract  has  therapeutic  effects  because 
of its ready absorption in the body (Selzer 
et  al.,  2005).  Melis  and  Salnatl  (1991)  and 
Melis (1995) reported that stevia decreased 
blood pressure, and increased diuretic and 
natriuretic effects in rats, and Melis (1996) 
noted that oral stevioside could be effective 
for treating hypertension. Maitree et al. (1993) 
suggested  that  the  leaf  of  stevia  could  be 
used as a sweetener by diabetic and overweight 
people in their diets. Jeppesen et al. (2000) 
reported that stevioside aids in the secretion 
of insulin in the pancreas, and that it could 
play a potential role as an anti-hyperglycae-
mic agent in the treatment of type II diabetes. 
Stevia is the best non-calorie-containing alter-
native sweetener to cane sugar for obese and 
diabetic people and for those having dental 
problems as a result of over-consumption of 
ordinary sugar (Barathi, 2003; Geuns et al., 
2003).

Yet other studies have suggested hypo-
tensive and hypoglycaemic effects of ste-
vioside when administered in high dosage, 

and stevia effectively regulates blood sugar 
in people with diabetes and hypoglycaemia 
by bringing it towards more normal levels. 
In  normal  adult  humans,  stevia  increases 
glucose  tolerance  (www.denutrtion.com). 
Savitha et al. (2004) reported on the effect of 
consumption  of  stevia  incorporated  in  se-
lected  recipes  as  a  substitute  for  sugar  on 
the blood sugar and blood pressure levels in 
selected  patients;  they  showed  that  stevia 
products  influenced  blood  sugar,  insulin, 
blood  pressure,  sodium  excretion  in  the 
urine,  and  the  lipid  profile  and  weight  of 
the subject and concluded that stevia poses 
a potential hypoglycaemic and anti-hyper-
tensive effect. Ferri et al. (2006) described 
a double-blind study of 25 hospitalized pa-
tients,  whose  mean  blood  sugar  dropped 
35.2%  some  6–8  h  after  ingesting  stevia. 
Hsieh  et  al.  (2003)  reported  that  oral  ste-
vioside  significantly  decreased  systolic 
blood  pressure  and  diastolic  blood  pres-
sure of patients compared with placebo in 
a  2  year  randomized  study.  In  a  similar 
study,  Chan  et  al.  (2000)  demonstrated 
that the systolic and diastolic blood pres-
sure of the group taking oral stevioside de-
creased  significantly,  and  that  the  effect 
persisted over the whole year of the trial, 
while  blood  biochemistry  parameters,  in-
cluding lipid and glucose, showed no sig-
nificant changes.

Sugar-rich products have become a way 
of life and over the years have permeated all 
levels of the food processing industry. How-
ever,  sugar  is  responsible  for  tooth  decay 
and  in  highly  concentrated  forms  reduces 
the  effects  of  other  herbal  elements.  The 
naturally occurring stevia plant is 250–300 
times  sweeter  than  sugar  and  possesses 
antibacterial properties that remove plaque 
from and improve the overall condition of 
the teeth. The remarkable characteristics of 
stevia  make  it  ideal  for  use  in  toothpastes 
and dental powders – in addition to its use 
as  alternative  substitute  for  sugar  in  food 
products.

Stevia is considered to be a safe natural 
food product and has been used for centur-
ies by the natives of South America. There 
has never been a report of an adverse reaction 

 

Stevia 

265

linked to its use (Bonni et al., 1996). Neither 
have any ill effects on the body been  reported 
from the use of stevia, including side effects 
of any kind (Krishnamurthy, 2001). Accord-
ing  to  the  Herb  Research  Foundation,  nu-
merous  scientists  and  millions  of  con-
sumers throughout the world, especially in 
Japan, regard stevia as a safe and intensely 
sweet  natural  product  that  could  make  it 
popular for use as a non-calorific sweetener 
(Nithyadevi 2003). Neither does stevioside 
appear  to  present  a  toxicity  risk  when 
consumed  in  low  amounts  (Lewis,  2003). 
Extensive  research  on  stevia  seems,  there-
fore,  to  have  proven  that  its  leaves  and 
extracts are safe.

22.5  Summary

Stevia is a ‘friendly’ plant which is benefi-
cial  as  a  natural  sweetener.  The  soft  green 
leaves  and  its  woody  stems  are  the  useful 
parts of this herb. A moderate intake of ste-
via is not believed to be harmful, and exten-
sive reviews of human and animal data in-
dicate that it is safe, and that it tastes 20–30 
times sweeter than ordinary dry sugar. Ste-
via is valuable for both its sweetening and 
its medicinal properties, and is extensively 
used in different parts of the world as a sub-
stitute for cane sugar. The clinical evidence 
for  the  medicinal  properties  of  this  plant 
need to be further explored in the future.

References

Alexander, C. (2007) Stevia hits the sweet spot, naturally. Food Engineering and Ingredients 32(3), 632–633.
Asrul, A., Shazani, S. and Shaha, R.K. (2013) Optimization of Rebaudioside A extraction from Stevia 
rebaudiana (Bertoni) and quantification by high performance liquid chromatography analysis. Journal 
of Tropical Resources and Sustainable Science 1(1), 62–70.

Barathi, N. (2003) Stevia – the calorie free natural sweetener. Natural Product Radiance 2(3), 120–122.
Bonvie, L., Bonvie, B. and Gates, D. (1996) The Stevia Story: A Tale of Incredible Sweetness. B.E.D. Publications, 

Atlanta, Georgia.

Bonvie, L., Bonvie, B. and Gates, D. (1998) Stevia: the natural sweetener that frightens NutraSweet. 

Earth Island Journal 13(1), 26–27.

Brandle, J.E., Starratt, A.N. and Gijzen, M. (2002) Stevia rebaudiana: its biological, chemical and agricul-

tural properties. Canadian Journal of Plant Science 78, 527–536.

Carakostas,  M.C.,  Curry,  L.L.,  Boileau,  A.C.  and  Brusick,  D.J.  (2008)  Overview:  the  history,  technical 
function and safety of rebaudioside A, a naturally occurring steviol glycoside, for use in food and 
beverages. Food Chemistry and Toxicology 46, S1–S10.

Cardello, H.M.A.B., Silva, M.A.P.A. and Damasio, M.H. (1999) Measurement of the relative sweetness 
of stevia extract, aspartame and cyclamate/saccharin blend as compared to sucrose at different 
concentrations. Plant Foods for Human Nutrition 54, 119–130.

Chan, P., Tomlinson, B. and Chen, Y.J. (2000) A double-blind placebo controlled study of the effective-
ness and tolerability of oral stevioside in human hypertension. British Journal of Clinical Pharma-
cology 50, 215–220.

Ferri, L.A., Alves-Do-Prado, W., Yamada, S.S., Gazola, S., Batista, M.R. and Bazotte, R.B. (2006) Inves-
tigation  of  the  antihypertensive  effect  of  oral  crude  stevioside  in  patients  with  mild  essential 
hypertension. Phytotherapy Research 20, 732–736.

Fors, A. (1995) A new character in the sweetener scenario. Sugar Journal 58(2), 30.
Geuns,  J.M.C.  (1998)  Stevia  rebaudiana  Bertoni  plants  and  dried  leaves  as  novel  food.  Final  version 
21.9.1998 with addendum. Cited in Scientific Committee on Food (1999) Opinion on Stevia rebau-
diana Bertoni Plants and Leaves (expressed on 17 June 1999). Document No. CS/NF/STEV/3 Final 
17 June 1999, European Commission, Brussels; available at: http://www.food.gov.uk/sites/default/
files/multimedia/pdfs/stevioside.pdf (accessed 3 February 2016).

Geuns, J.M.C., Augustijns, P., Mols, R., Buyse, J.G. and Driessen, B. (2003) Metabolism of stevioside in 
pigs and intestinal absorption characteristics of stevioside, rebaudioside A and steviol. Food and 
Chemistry Toxicology 41, 1599–1607.

George,  V.,  Arora,  S.,  Sharma,  V.,  Wadhwa,  B.K.,  Sharma,  G.S.  and  Singh,  A.K.  (2006)  Sweetener 

blends and their applications: a review. Indian Journal of Dairy Science 59, 131–134.

266 

R. Parimalavalli and S.R. Sri 

Gupta, E., Purwar, S., Sundaram, S. and Rai, G.K. (2013) Nutritional and therapeutic values of Stevia 

rebaudiana: a review. Journal of Medicinal Plants Research 7(46), 3343–3353.

Hsieh, M.-H., Chan, P., Sue, Y.-M., Liu, J.-C., Liang, T.H., Huang, T.-Y., Tomlinson, B., Chow, M.S., Kao, 
P.-F. and Chen, Y.-J. (2003) Efficacy and tolerability of oral stevioside in patients with mild essen-
tial hypertension: a two-year, randomized, placebo-controlled study. Clinical Therapeutics 25, 
2797–808.

Ikan, R., Weinstein, V., Milner, Y., Bravdo, B., Shoseyov, O., Segal, D., Altman, A. and Chet, I. (1997) 

Natural glycosides as potential odorants and flavorants. Acta Horticulturae 344, 17–28.

Jeppesen, P.B., Gregersen, S., Poulsen, C.R. and Herma, K. (2000) Stevioside acts directly on pancreatic 
beta cells to secrete insulin actions independent of cyclic adenosine monophosphate and adeno-
sine triphosphate-sensitive K+-channel activity. Metabolism 49, 208–214.

Kalpana, R. and Khan, M.D.K. (2008) Post harvest management of stevia leaves: a review. Journal of 

Food Science and Technology 45, 391–397.

Katayama, O., Sumida, T., Hayashi, H. and Mitsuhashi, H. (1976) The practical application of Stevia 
and research and development data. ISU Company, Japan. [English translation]. Cited by Brandle et al. 
(2002).

Kennelley, E.J. (2002) Sweet and non-sweet constituents of Stevia rebaudiana (Bertoni) Bertoni. In: 
Kinghorn, A.D. (ed.) Stevia: The Genus Stevia. Medicinal and Aromatic Plants – Industrial Profiles 
19, Taylor & Francis, London and New York, pp. 68–85.

Kinghorn, A.D. (1991) Less common high potency sweeteners. Journal of Natural Products 53, 190–195.
Krishnamurthy, K. (2001) Stevia – the herb sweeter than sugar. Kissan World 28(10), 31–37.
Lemus-Mondaca, R., Vega-Gálvez, A., Moraga, N.O. and Astudillo, S. (2014) Dehydration of Stevia re-
baudiana Bertoni leaves: kinetics, modeling and energy features. Journal of Food Processing and 
Preservation 39, 508–520.

Lewis,  W.H.  (2003)  Medical  Botany:  Plants  Affecting  Human  Health,  2nd  edn.  Wiley,  Hoboken, 

New Jersey.

Maitree, S., Usanee, V., Umnat, M. and Duang, B. (1993) Mutagenicity and human chromosomal effect of 
stevioside, a sweetener from Stevia rebaudiana Bertoni. Environmental Health Perspectives 101, 
53–56.

Megeji, N.W., Kumar, J.K., Virendra Singh, Kaul, V.K. and Ahuja, P.K. (2005) Introducing Stevia rebau-

diana, a natural zero-calorie sweetener. Current Science 88, 801–804.

Melis, M.S. (1995) Chronic administration of aqueous extract of Stevia rebaudiana in rats, renal ef-

fects. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 47, 129–134.

Melis, M.S. (1996) A crude extract of Stevia rebaudiana increases the renal plasma flow of normal and 

hypertensive rats. Brazilian Journal of Medical Biological Research 29, 669–675.

Melis, M.S. and Salnatl, A.R. (1991) Effect of calcium and verapamil on renal function of rats during 

treatment with stevioside. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 33, 257–262.

Nithyadevi, A. (2003) Stevia – the natural sweetener. Kissan World 30(1), 58–59.
Oddone, B. (1999) How to Grow Stevia. Guarani Botanicals, Inc., Pawcatuck, Connecticut.
Ramana Rao, K.V.A. (2004) Sweetener that lowers blood sugar – Stevia. Sanjivani Medical Times (2004), 

6–8.

Rank, A.H. and Midmore, J.D. (2006). An intense natural sweetener – laying the ground work for a new 
rural industry; May 2006. RIRDC Publication No 06/020, RIRDC Project No UCQ-17A, Rural Indus-
tries Research and Development Corporation, Barton and Kingston, Australian Capital Territory, 
Australia.

Rao, A.B., Prasad, E., Roopa, G., Sridhar, S. and Ravikumar, Y.V.L. (2012) Simple extraction and mem-
brane purification process in isolation of steviosides with improved organoleptic activity. Advances 
in Bioscience and Biotechnology 3, 327–335.

Samsudin, A. and Ab. Aziz, I. (2013) Drying of stevia leaves using laboratory and pilot scale dryers. 

Journal of Tropical Agricultural and Food Science 41(1), 137–147.

Savitha, S.M., Sheela, K., Saran, S., Shanker, A.G. and Parama, R. (2004) Stevia rebaudiana – a functional 

component for food industry. Journal of Human Ecology 15, 261–264.

Sawate, A.R., Abdulraheem, Kshirsagar, R.B. and Patil, B.M. (2007) Effect of hydrocolloids and stevio-
side on the quality attributes of ready to serve natural carbonated cocoa beverage. Indian Journal 
of Nutrition and Dietetics 44, 324–331.

Selzer, J., Vasile, A. and Cornelia, D. (2005) All natural flavor enhancers for green tea beverages 
and  dental  hygiene  product.  United  States  Patent  Application.  Publication  (10)  Pub.  No.:  US 

 

Stevia 

267

2005/0152997 A1, Jul. 14, 2005. Available at: http://patentimages.storage.googleapis.com/pdfs/
US20050152997.pdf (accessed 3 February 2016).

Senthil, S. (2002) Stevia a natural sweetening plant. Kissan World 29(11), 60.
Shaffert,  E.E.  and  Chetobar,  A.A.  (1994)  Structure,  topography  and  ontogeny  of  Stevia  rebaudiana. 

Botanicheskii Zhurnal 79, 38–48.

Shu, S. and Wang, W. (1988) Variation in quantitative characters in Stevia. Acta Agronomica Sinica 

14(2), 167–173.

Starratt, A.N. and Gijzen, M. (2004) Stevia rebaudiana – Its Biological, Chemical and Agricultural Properties. 
Southern  Crop  Protection  and  Food  Research  Centre,  Agriculture  and  Agri-Food  Canada,  London, 
 Ontario, Canada. Agriculture and Agri-food Canada. Southern Crop Protection and Food Research 
Centre, London.

Strauss, S. (1995) The perfect sweetener. MIT Technology Review 98(8), 18–20.
Sumida, T. (1968) Reports on Stevia rebaudiana Bertoni M, introduced from Brazil as a new sweetness 
resource in Japan. Miscellaneous Publication, Hokkaido National Agricultural Experiment Station 
2, 69–83.

Sumida, T. (1980) Studies on Stevia rebaudiana Bertoni M, introduced from Brazil as a new possible 
crop for sweetness resources in Japan. Journal of the Central Agricultural Experiment Station 31, 
1–71.

Taylor, L. (2005) Stevia rebaudiana: introduction. In: Taylor, L. The Healing Power of Rainforest Herbs:  
A Guide to Understanding and Using Herbal Medicinals. Square One Publishers, New York, pp. 1–4.
Xie, S. and Ouyang, X. (1998) The growth and differentiation of callus cultures of Stevia rebaudiana in 

relation to the stevioside accumulation. Journal of Tropical and Subtropical Botany 6, 8–14.

23  Thyme

Rashid Abdullah Al-Yahyai1* and Darach Lupton2

1Sultan Qaboos University, Muscat, Oman;  

2Oman Botanic Garden, Muscat, Oman

23.1  Botany

23.1.1 

Introduction

Thymus  vulgaris  (L.),  popularly  known  as 
‘common thyme’, is a popular culinary and 
medicinal member of the Lamiaceae family 
(Fig. 23.1). Its main centre of natural distri-
bution  is  the  Mediterranean  (Spain,  Italy, 
France, Greece, Egypt, Lebanon and Turkey) 
(Gonçalves et al., 2011). The herb is grown 
throughout many parts of the world and has 
naturalized across many regions (Ozcan and 
Chalchat, 2004). The common English name 
for T. vulgaris is thyme, which refers to both 
the plant and the dried leaves. In Spanish, it 
is called tomillo, in Portuguese tomilho, in 
French thym, in Hindi Ajava¯ yana ke¯ phu¯la 
(अजवायनके फ� ल), in simplified Chinese Shèxia¯ ng 
caˇo  (麝香草),  in  German  Thymian,  in  Rus-
sian  tim'yan  (тимьян)  and  in  Arabic  Zatar 
(رتعز)  –  in  Arabic  Thymus  and  Zataria  (a 
thyme-like plant also in the Lamiaceae fam-
ily) are given the same name.

Three varieties are typically grown for 
use, broad leaved, narrow leaved and varie-
gated. The narrow-leaved variety, which has 
smaller, greyer leaves, is more fragrant than 
the broad-leaved variety, and is commonly 

*Corresponding author, e-mail: alyahyai@squ.edu.om

called winter or German thyme. The fragrant 
lemon thyme is lemon scented, and its leaves 
are  broader  than  those  of  ordinary  garden 
(or  common)  thyme,  and  are  not  folded  at 
the  margins;  it  is  classified  as  a  variety  of 
T. serpyllum (or as the species T. citrodorus). 
Its habit is trailing and it is typically smaller 
than garden thyme, and it is evergreen, al-
though is considered to be not as tough as 
common  thyme.  Silver  thyme  is  another 
variety and is thought to be the hardiest of 
all; it is also considered by some to have the 
best flavour (Grieve, 1971).

The vernacular word ‘thyme’ has been 
used as both the scientific and the commer-
cially used name for T. vulgaris, which has 
led to misunderstanding and abuse. For ex-
ample, more than 50 plants are named and 
used as ‘thyme’ in Turkey, and though most 
of them belong to the genus Thymus, many 
belong to other plant genera, e.g. Origanum 
and  Thymbra  (Özgüven  and  Tansi,  1998). 
Adding  to  this  confusion  are  the  large 
number of vernacular names for T. vulgaris; 
black thyme, common thyme, English thyme, 
French thyme, garden thyme, German thyme 
and  winter  thyme,  to  name  but  a  few.  In 
addition,  there  are  also  large  numbers  of 
T. vulgaris cultivars available commercially. 

268 

© CAB International 2016. Leafy Medicinal Herbs: Botany, Chemistry, 
Postharvest Technology and Uses (eds D.C.P. Ambrose et al.)

 

Thyme 

269

Herb  Garden)  says  that  among  the  Greeks, 
thyme denoted graceful elegance, and that ‘to 
smell of Thyme’ was an expression of honour, 
bestowed  upon  those  of  venerable  character. 
To the ancient Greeks, thyme came to denote 
elegance  and  style;  their  use  of  thyme  was 
 frequent  –  medicinally,  in  massage  and  bath 
oils, as incense in the temples and as an aphro-
disiac.  The  Romans  associated  thyme  with 
courage  and  bathed  in  water  prepared  with 
thyme  to  ready  themselves  for  battle;  thyme 
was also used by the ancient Romans for fla-
vouring cheese and liqueurs (Grieve, 1971).

Thyme was a symbol of action, courage 
and power, and in the days of chivalry, la-
dies embroidered a bee flying over a stem of 
thyme on the scarves they presented to their 
knights (Stahl-Biskup and Saez, 2002). Dur-
ing  the  Middle  Ages,  thyme  was  grown  in 
monasteries in southern France, Spain and 
Italy  and  was  used  as  a  cough  remedy,  for 
digestive relief and for the treatment for in-
testinal  parasites.  Nicholas  Culpeper,  the 
famous English botanist and herbalist, wrote 
of thyme in 1653:

It is a noble strengthener of the lungs, as 
notable a one as grows; neither is there 
scarce a better remedy growing for that 
disease in children which they commonly 
call the chin-cough, than it is. It purges the 
body of phlegm, and is an excellent remedy 
for shortness of breath. It kills worms in the 
belly, and being a notable herb of Venus, 
provokes the terms, gives safe and speedy 
delivery to women in travail, and brings 
away the after birth. It is so harmless you 
need not fear the use of it.

23.1.3  Location

Fig. 23.1.  Upper portion of thyme plant showing 
typical whorled flowers, square stems and opposite 
leaves.

For  example,  in  2014,  the  Royal  Horticul-
tural Society in the UK listed 31 T. vulgaris 
cultivars  available  for  purchase  in  Britain 
alone (RHS, 2014).

23.1.2  History/origin

The  word  Thymus  may  originate  from  the 
Greek word ‘thyo’, meaning perfume (Stahl-
Biskup and Saez, 2002). Alternatively, it may 
have  come  from  the  Greek  word  ‘thumus’, 
meaning  strength,  as  in  ancient  and  medi-
eval  times  the  plant  was  thought  to  be  a 
great source of strength and bravery.

The cleansing properties of thyme were 
known to the ancient Greeks, and Pliny tells 
us that, when burnt, ‘it puts to flight all ven-
omous  creatures’.  Lady  Northcote  (in  The 

Thyme  is  commercially  grown  in  Austria, 
England,  France,  Germany,  Greece,  Italy, 
Poland, the Balkans, Hungary, Portugal and 
Spain, as well as in Morocco and the USA 
(Lueng and Foster, 1996). Large amounts of 
thyme are collected from the wild in a num-
ber of European countries, including Albania, 
Bulgaria,  and  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina, 
some of which is wild harvested under or-
ganic  certification.  Spanish  thyme  (T.  zygis), 
a  native  of  the  Iberian  Peninsula,  is 
often  used  with  T.  vulgaris  for  medicinal 

270 

R.A. Al-Yahyai and D. Lupton 

purposes  (Blumenthal  et  al.,  2000).  Intro-
duced populations of T. vulgaris have spread 
themselves across distant regions from Can-
ada and the USA, to Chile and New Zealand 
(Stahl-Biskup and Saez, 2002).

23.1.4  Morphology

Thyme is a perennial subshrub with much 
branched,  square,  ascending  stems  with 
woody bases. The small, opposite, linear to 
elliptic,  almost  sessile  evergreen  leaves 
have reflexed margins. The leaves are green 
to grey in colour and, typically, the under-
side of the leaf is covered with a fine indu-
mentum (a covering of hairs) (Panda, 2006).
The flowers grow in whorls at the tips 
of the branches. The calyx is tubular and is 
closed at the mouth by small hairs, the lip is 
bifurcate, and the upper lip is cut into three 
teeth  and  the  lower  into  two.  The  corolla 
consists of a cylinder about the length of the 
calyx, dividing at the top into two lips of a 
pale purple colour; the upper lip is upright 
or turned back and serrated at the end, the 
under  lip  is  longer  and  divided  into  three 
segments. The seeds are round to oval and 
very small.

Thyme reproduces by seed and vegeta-
tively. Pollination is generally by bees though 
there can be high levels of self-pollination 
(up to 80%); this appears to be dependent on 
the genotype and the local environment. The 
dispersal  of  pollen  and  seeds  occurs  over 
short distances and therefore there is a high 
chance of population differentiation or sep-
aration  in  the  wild  (Özgüven  and  Tansi, 
1998).

Thyme plants are generally heliophylous, 
i.e. they like the sun. They are often found 
on rocks or stones and prefer a well-drained 
substrate.  Different  thyme  species  require 
very different soil types; however, T. vulgaris 
usually lives on alkaline soils. Thyme plants 
are very hardy, which allows them to grow 
under often extreme climatic environments 
(Stahl-Biskup and Saez, 2002). Dense hairs 
and small, often narrow, leaves allow some 
species to tolerate very arid conditions. The 
high production of essential oils by thyme 
can  also  be  an  adaptive  characteristic  for 

arid climates, because the volatile substances 
evaporate and produce a moist atmosphere 
surrounding  the  plant,  which  helps  to  re-
duce water loss through evaporation (Stahl-
Biskup and Saez, 2002).

The  productive  parts  of  the  plants  in 
terms  of  essential  oil  production  are  the 
leaves and the stems. Many members of the 
Lamiaceae family secrete volatile oils manu-
factured  by  glandular  hairs  located  on  the 
surface  of  the  leaves  and  stems;  these  hairs 
are  usually  peltate  (rounded  with  the  hair 
stem beneath) or capitate (swollen at the top) 
in shape. The glandular hairs start to produce 
essential oils as soon as they are completely 
formed, and the oil passes through the glan-
dular walls to the cuticle covering the hairs, 
where the oil is eventually released. The oil- 
producing glandular hairs are numerous on 
both young and mature leaves; the hairs are 
also abundant at the top of the plant but be-
come less frequent towards the base (Boz 
et al., 2009).

23.2  Chemistry

Thyme has many industrial, medicinal and 
economic applications that are attributed to 
its  chemical  composition.  The  continuous 
development of new techniques capable of 
identifying  the  plant  constituents  to  their 
smallest quantities has contributed to new 
interest in thyme chemistry. The two main 
secondary  chemical  products  that  charac-
terize  the  pharmacological  activities  of 
thyme  are  the  volatile  essential  oils  and 
polyphenols,  mainly  flavonoids  (Van  den 
Broucke and Lemli, 1981; Van den Broucke 
and Lemli, 1983).

23.2.1  Chemical composition/ 

phytochemistry

Like the rest of the Lamiaceae, thyme is rich 
in essential oil that has been known for its 
medicinal properties since early civilization. 
Some  360  volatile  components  have  been 
 reported  in  162  taxa  of  Thymus.  The  most 
abundant type of compound are the terpenes, 

 

Thyme 

271

comprising  75%,  of  which  43%  are  mono-
terpenes and 32% are sesquiterpenes (Stahl-
Biskup,  2002).  The  remaining  components 
of thyme essential oil are 17% non-terpenoid 
aliphatic compounds (aliphates), 6% benzene 
derivatives and 2% phenylpropanoids.

The  chemical  profile  of  thyme  shows 
the  presence  of  many  constituents  (see 
Table 23.1). The most abundant essential oil 
constituent  is  thymol  (2-isopropyl-5-meth-
ylphenol, C10H14O), the structure of which is 
shown in Fig. 23.2. Thymol makes up 20–
54% of the essential oil of thyme, and is an 
antiseptic and antispasmodic compound that 
is used in traditional and modern medicinal 
remedies. Other compounds present in signifi-
cant quantities include γ-terpinene, carvacrol, 
p-cymene, myrcene, limonene and borneol. 
These compounds exhibit antioxidant, anti- 

Table 23.1.  Characteristic chemical composition of 
essential oils of thyme leaves. From Porte and 
Godoy, 2008.

Compound

Content (%)

Borneol
δ-Cadinene
Calamenene
Camphene
Carvacrol
Carvacrol acetate
β-Caryophyllene
ρ-Cimenene
ρ-Cymene
trans-Dihydrocarvone
2,4-Dimethyl-2,4-heptadiene
Limonene
Mentha-3,8-diene
p-Menthene-1
p-Menthene-3
Myrcene
(E)-β-Ocimene
(Z)-β-Ocimene
1,3-Octadiene
1,7-Octadiene
α-Phellandrene
α-Pinene
Sabinene
α-Terpinene
γ-Terpinene
α-Terpinolene
Thymol
Thymol methyl ether
Total

0.5
0.1
<0.1
0.3
2.4
<0.1
0.8
0.1
18.6
0.2
1.5
0.8
0.4
1.8
0.1
2.4
0.1
0.1
0.3
0.1
0.3
0.8
0.1
1.8
16.5
0.2
44.7
0.1
95.1

inflammatory, immunomodulatory, antibacterial 
and antifungal properties (Stahl- Biskup, 2002; 
Braga et al., 2006; Porte and Godoy, 2008).

Synthesis of Thymus essential oils

Research  on  the  essential  oils  of  Thymus 
also focused on the synthesis of the aromatic 
and  aliphatic  compounds  that  it  contains. 
Thyme oil contains volatile terpenoids that 
are aliphatic except for a few major aromatic 
monoterpenes,  such  as  thymol,  p-cymene 
and carvacrol. Little and Croteau (1999) re-
viewed two pathways. The first is the clas-
sical (acetate/mevalonate) pathway, whereby 
three molecules of acetyl-Coenzyme A (acetyl- 
CoA) are fused by the action of acetyl-CoA 
acyltransferase and hydroxymethylglutaryl- 
CoA (HMG-CoA) synthase to produce HMG-
CoA. Mevalonic acid is then produced by the 
reduction of HMG-CoA, which is converted 
to form a C5 compound, isopentenyl diphosphate 
(IPP), as the terpenoid precursor. The second 
pathway  is  the  pyruvate/glyceraldehyde-3- 
phosphate  pathway.  In  this  pathway,  a 
transketolase  reaction  of  glyceraldehyde-3- 
phosphate with carbons 2 and 3 of pyruvate 
produces  the  C5  intermediate,  1-deoxy- 
d-xylulose, followed by a series of reduction 
and dehydration steps and a phosphorylation, 
resulting in IPP or dimethylallyl diphosphate 
(DMAPP)  as  end  products  (Rohmer  et  al., 
1996). The acetate/mevalonate pathway dom-
inates in the cytosol to form sesquiterpenes 
and triterpenes, whereas the pyruvate/glyc-
eraldehyde-3-phosphate pathway (also known 
as the deoxyxylulose pathway) occurs in the 
plastids  to  form  monoterpenes,  diterpenes 
and  tetraterpenes.  Stahl-Biskup  (2002)  has 
provided in-depth discussion of the biosyn-
thesis of thymus terpenoids.

CH3

OH

H3C

CH3

Fig. 23.2.  The structure of thymol (2-isopropyl-5- 
methylphenol).

272 

R.A. Al-Yahyai and D. Lupton 

The biosynthesis and chemical structure 
of flavonoids in the genus Thymus, focusing 
primarily on flavonoid aglycones, have been 
described  in  detail  by  Vila  (2002).  Among 
the aglycones that were reported to occur in 
thyme  were  32  flavones,  four  flavanones, 
two  flavonols  and  two  dihydroflavonols. 
The  most  frequently  found  compounds  are 
the flavones luteolin, apigenin and scutella-
rein. No isoflavonoids have been reported in 
Thymus taxa (Vila, 2002).

The  composition  of  the  volatile  com-
pounds of Thymus varies greatly depending 
on several factors, including variations among 
Thymus  species,  sexual  variations  among 
female and hermaphrodite plants, seasonal, 
climatic,  geographical  and  other  environ-
mental factors, growing conditions, and the 
extraction  and  analytical  techniques  used 
(Stahl-Biskup, 2002).

Freshly harvested thyme

Visual inspection and 

cleaning

Cold-water spray wash

Acid solution steeping

Draining

Fluidized bed drying

23.3  Postharvest Technology

Heating in humectant

T. vulgaris is the most cultivated commercial 
species  of  thyme,  while  many  of  the  other 
species  are  harvested  manually  from  the 
wild. Naturally occurring thyme is processed 
minimally, and this typically includes thyme 
for fresh use, for storage in olive oil and for 
drying  of  the  leaves  and  flowers.  However, 
the  commercial  production  of  thyme  in-
volves  mechanical  harvesting  and  process-
ing,  oil  extraction  and  the  production  of 
by-products 
that  have  many  cosmetic, 
pharmaceutical and food applications.

23.3.1  Processing

Harvesting  date  and  time  is  critical  for  the 
maximum  retention  of  thyme  essential  oil 
and aroma. The maximum aroma is obtained 
just before or at full bloom, thus harvest-
ing  at  this  growth  stage  is  recommended 
(Venskutonis,  2002a).  Fresh  processing  re-
quires  cleaning,  sorting  and  storage  of  the 
freshly harvested leaves at freezing temper-
atures.  Venskutonis  (2002b)  outlined  the 
process used for the production of freshly 
harvested herbs, including thyme (Fig. 23.3), 

Draining humectant

Cooling

Destemming

Chopping

Packaging 

Fresh-like herb chopped

Whole-leaf fresh-like 

packaging

Vacuum packaging or 
controlled atmosphere 

packaging

Whole-plant fresh-like 

herb

Fig. 23.3.  Postharvest processing of fresh thyme. 
Adapted from Hsieh and Albrecht, 1988.

 

Thyme 

273

method even in larger production facilities, 
mainly because of its low cost and minimal 
effects on the quantity of final product. How-
ever,  it  needs  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  the 
drying method used directly influences the 
quality  of  aroma  and  essential  oil  content 
(Calín-Sánchez et al., 2013).

Dried thyme (Fig. 23.5) can be stored for 
extended periods depending on the storage 
temperature. Freezing temperatures (around 
−18°C) offer multiple years of storage, whereas 
at higher temperatures (5–7°C), dried thyme 
can last for a year. At room temperature, the 
shelf life of thyme drops drastically (Vensku-
tonis, 2002a). Shelf life is highly dependent 
on  product  moisture  content,  the  quantity 
stored, the permeability of the packaging ma-
terial  and  storage  conditions  (i.e.  tempera-
ture, humidity and light).

23.3.2  Value addition

Extracted thyme essential oil is a product of 
significant importance in the herbal indus-
tries. The essential oil is generally extracted 
from fresh or dried leaves using a variety 
of  methods,  such  as  hydrodistillation  and 
steam distillation, or cold-press expression 
using a series of extraction solvents. Solvent 
extraction is commonly used for the manu-
facture of oleoresin (Venskutonis, 2002b).

More recently, CO2 has been used under 
high-pressure extraction to obtain oleoresin, 

and highlighted the processes that were first 
patented by Hsieh and Albrecht (1988).

Thyme  destined  for  production  in  dry 
form  is  mechanically  harvested  and  then 
transported to a cooled or shaded sorting fa-
cility. Cleaning and sorting is done, followed 
by  drying  and  packing  of  the  product  as 
whole or ground leaves (Fig. 23.4). Posthar-
vest processing includes physical and chem-
ical  treatment  to  control  insect  infestation 
and fungal or other pathogenic infection of 
the processed thyme. Treatments may include 
one or more of the following, depending on 
the scale of production: heat and steam ster-
ilization,  ultraviolet  radiation,  ionization 
treatment, infrared irradiation and chemical 
fumigation (Tainter and Grenis, 1993).

Drying is carried out by thermal energy 
methods, such as solar, vacuum oven, micro-
wave  oven  and  hot  air  drying,  or  by  non- 
thermal  methods  using  moisture-absorbing 
agents such as silicon and electrolytes, and 
freeze- drying. Sun drying, despite being time- 
consuming  and  subject  to  contamination, 
continues  to  be  the  most  commonly  used 

Mechanically

harvested fresh 

thyme

Cleaning and 

sorting

Solar or 
heat/oven 

drying

Postharvest 

treatment

Packaging 

(ground leaves)

Packaging 
(whole plant)

Fig. 23.4.  Postharvest processing of dried thyme.

Fig. 23.5.  Dried thyme leaves.

274 

R.A. Al-Yahyai and D. Lupton 

which  is  later  separated  into  essential  oil 
and resin, and methods such as pressurized 
liquid  extraction  (PLE)  have  been  devel-
oped. Villanueva Bermejo et al. (2014) used 
PLE with three green solvents (ethanol, lim-
onene and ethyl lactate) at different extrac-
tion temperatures (60, 130 and 200ºC) to ex-
tract thymol. They found PLE to yield more 
and with a lower solvent consumption than 
steam distillation.

The development of gas chromatography/
mass spectrometry (GC/MS) analytical tech-
niques has also provided additional details 
on the composition of thymus essential oils, 
and Stahl-Biskup (2002) has reviewed these 
techniques  in  relation  to  the  essential  oil 
composition of thyme.

Thyme  essential  oils,  mainly  thymol 
and  carvacrol  have  antiseptic,  insecticidal 
and antimicrobial properties that have made 
them  suitable  alternatives  to  traditional 
pesticides for crop pest and disease control 
(Clemente  et  al.,  2003;  Hama-salih  et  al., 
2014;  Nikolic´  et  al.,  2014).  They  have  also 
been used in aromatherapy and homeopathy, 
and  against  oxidative  stress  because  of  the 
antioxidant  contents  of  thyme  essential  oil 
and  flavonoids  (Dorman  et  al.,  1995;  Roby 
et al., 2013).

Thyme has been used as a food preserva-
tive as well owing to its antimicrobial and in-
secticidal properties. In addition, it has been 
extensively used by the cosmetic industry as 
an ingredient in ‘natural’ cosmetics, deodor-
ants, soaps, perfumes, lotions, toothpaste and 
mouthwash (Zarzuelo and Crespo, 2002).

23.4  Uses

23.4.1  General uses

Thyme  has  been  used  throughout  history, 
and its chemical variability is well known 
(Zarzuelo and Crespo, 2002). In traditional 
medicine, some thyme species are used for 
their  antiviral,  soothing,  and  diaphoretic 
properties,  and  are  typically  consumed  as 
an infusion. The treatment of rheumatic and 
skin  disorders  is  usually  undertaken  by 
bathing  in  thyme-infused  water  (Soliman 

and Badeaa, 2002). The volatile oils of thyme 
are used as preservatives in cosmetics and 
as antioxidants (Zarzuelo and Crespo, 2002). 
Essential  oils  extracted  from  the  plant  are 
used to add fragrance to food and pharma-
ceuticals (Senatore, 1996).

23.4.2  Pharmacological uses

Thyme has a wide range of effects as an anti-
septic,  carminative,  antimicrobial  and  anti-
oxidant  (Baranauskiene  et  al.,  2003).  Warm 
infusions of thyme (teas) have a relieving ef-
fect  on  intestinal  gas  and  parasites.  Thyme 
also  relieves  coughs  and  has  antimicrobial 
and astringent qualities, and it has been used 
to relieve heartburn, pertussis, asthma, bron-
chitis,  chest  congestion,  laryngitis,  gastritis 
and  to  encourage  the  production  of  saliva 
(Lueng and Foster, 1996; Blumenthal et al., 
2000, Bown, 2001; Barnes et al., 2002). It is 
also known to promote menstrual flow and 
to aid occasional childhood diarrhoea and bed- 
wetting (Blumenthal et al., 2000, Bown, 2001).
Cough drops, liniments, mouthwashes, 
detergents,  toothpastes  and  perfumes  con-
tain essential oils extracted from T. vulgaris 
and T. zygis (Lueng and Foster, 1996). Red 
thyme oil is preferred, as white thyme oil is 
distilled from the red oil. Thymol and car-
vacrol are the two main ingredients in thyme 
oil,  although  thymol  is  considered  to  have 
the  greater  therapeutic  properties  (Lueng 
and  Foster,  1996).  Coughs,  bronchitis  and 
indigestion are typically treated with thyme 
oil (Grieve, 1971; Blumenthal et al., 2000). 
The whole plant and the oil are used to treat 
arthritis, gum disease and tonsillitis (Bown, 
2001).

Thyme has a wide range of uses in the 
cosmetics and food industries, and in mod-
ern and traditional medicine. The medicinal 
effects and benefits of thyme have been rec-
ognized  in  the  last  20–30  years  and  thyme 
has  been  awarded  government  certification 
in a number of countries. These permissions 
have been summarized by Engels (2008), as 
follows.  In  1984,  the  German  Commission 
approved thyme for oral use (as a tea infusion 
or  fluid  extract)  or  topical  use  (as  a  tea 
infusion  for  compresses)  for  bronchitis  and 

 

Thyme 

275

whooping  cough  and  for  mucus- producing 
problems  (catarrhs)  of  the  upper  respiratory 
tracts.  The  European  Medicines  Evaluation 
Agency (EMEA) published a final monograph 
on thyme in 2007, and approved thyme (as a 
dry extract, fluid extract, tea and tincture) as 
an  expectorant  in  coughs  associated  with 
colds.  Health  Canada  published  its  final 
monograph for thyme natural health products 
in 1988; this permitted the traditional uses of 
thyme for rinsing the throat to help alleviate 
laryngitis,  tonsillitis  and  mucous  membrane 
inflammations  of  the  mouth  and/or  throat, 
and also its topical use as an antiseptic and/or 
antimicrobial to help manage minor wounds 
and sores. Thyme can also be used as an ex-
pectorant to ease the signs of bronchitis and 
mucous  build-up  of  the  upper  respiratory 
tract, to relieve coughs and to help alleviate 
flatulent dyspepsia and indigestion.

23.5  Summary

Thyme is a very important herb that has been 
cultivated  and  used  in  food  and  medicine 
since  the  ancient  Egyptian  and  the  Greek 
periods. Numerous nutritional and pharma-
ceutical benefits are being explored today as 
extraction methods improve. New chemical 
ingredients are being unearthed, and some of 
the  more  recent  include  antioxidants,  anti-
cancer and immunity- enhancing compounds. 
Thyme is also used in numerous industrial 
applications,  from  hygiene  products  and 
natural cosmetics to food preservatives and 
biopesticides,  and  its  multiple  uses  and 
benefits continue to be highly valued across 
the  world.  The  potential  for  the  discovery 
and development of new and exciting thyme 
extracts  is  very  positive  and  will  no  doubt 
continue to be, long into the future.

References

Baranauskiene, R., Venskutonis, P.R., Viskelis, P. and Dambrauskiene, E. (2003) Influence of nitrogen 
fertilizers on the yield and composition of thyme (Thymus vulgaris). Journal of Agricultural and 
Food Chemistry 5, 7751–7758.

Barnes, J., Anderson, L.A. and Phillipson, J.D. (2002) Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Healthcare, 2nd 

edn. Pharmaceutical Press, London.

Blumenthal, M., Goldberg, A. and Brinckmann, J. (2000) Herbal Medicine. Expanded Commission E 
Monographs, American Botanical Council, Austin, Texas. Published by Integrative Medicine Com-
munications, Newton, Massachusetts.

Bown,  D.  (2001)  The  Herb  Society  of  America:  New  Encyclopedia  of  Herbs  and  Their  Uses.  Dorling 

Kindersley, New York.

Boz, I., Navarro, L., Galesm, R. and Padurariu, C. (2009) Morphological and structure of glandular 
hairs in development of Thymus vulgaris (L.). Scientific Annals of Alexandru Ioan Cuza University 
of Iasi, New Series, Section 2. Vegetal Biology 55, 81–86.

Braga, P.C., Dal Sasso, M., Culici, M., Bianchi, T., Bordoni, L. and Marabini, L. (2006) Anti-inflammatory ac-
tivity of thymol: inhibitory effect on the release of human neutrophil elastase. Pharmacology 77, 130–136.
Calín-Sánchez,  Á.,  Figiel,  A.,  Lech,  K.,  Szumny,  A.  and  Carbonell-Barrachina,  Á.  (2013)  Effects  of  drying 
methods on the composition of thyme (Thymus vulgaris L.) essential oil. Drying Technology 31, 224–235.
Clemente, S., Mareggiani, G., Broussalis, A., Martino, V. and Ferraro, G. (2003) Insecticidal effects of 
 Lamiaceae species against stored products insects. Boletín de Sanidad Vegetal Plagas 29, 421–426.
Culpeper, N. (1653) Culpeper’s Complete Herbal: A Book of Natural Remedies of Ancient Ills. Pub-

lished in 1995 in the Wordsworth Reference Series, Wordsworth Editions, Ware, UK.

Dorman, H.J., Deans, S.G., Noble, R.C. and Sera, H. (1995) Evaluation in vitro of plant essential oils as 

natural antioxidants. Journal of Essential Oil Research 7, 645–650.

Engels, G. (2008) Herb profile: thyme. HerbalGram 80, 1–2.
Gonçalves, G.M.S., Botaro, M. and Nilson, A.C. (2011) Effect of the Thymus vulgaris essential oil on the 
growth of Streptococcus mutans. Journal of Basic and Applied Pharmaceutical Sciences 32, 375–380.

Grieve, M.A. (1971) Modern Herbal, Vol. 2. Dover Books, New York.
Hama-salih, F.M., Raoof, A.M., Rashed, R.J., Hamid, J.S. and Qdir, A.F. (2014) Effect of foliar spray with 
thyme extract on codling moth (Cydia pomonella) control and some fruit quality of pear (Pyrus 
communis L) Al-zafaraniyah selectee. Journal of Zankoy Sulaimani, Part A 16, 125–129.

276 

R.A. Al-Yahyai and D. Lupton 

Hsieh,  R.C.  and  Albrecht,  J.J.  (1988)  Method  and  apparatus  for  treating  fresh  vegetable  products. 
European  Patent  Application  EP  0285235  A1.  Available  at:  http://www.google.co.uk/patents/
EP0285235A1?cl=en (accessed 4 February 2016).

Little, D.B. and Croteau, R.B. (1999) Biochemistry of essential oil terpenes – a thirty-year overview. In: 
Teranishi, R., Wick, E.L. and Hornstein, I. (eds) Flavor Chemistry: 30 Years of Progress. Kluwer/
Plenum, New York, pp. 239–253.

Lueng, A.Y. and Foster, S. (1996) Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used in Food, Drugs, 

and Cosmetics, 2nd edn. Wiley, New York.

Nikolic´, M., Glamocˇlija, J., Ferreira, I.C.F.R., Calhelha, R.C., Fernandes, Â., Markovic´, T., Markovic´, D., 
 Giweli, A. and Sokovic´, M. (2014) Chemical composition, antimicrobial, antioxidant and antitu-
mor activity of Thymus serpyllum L., Thymus algeriensis Boiss. and Reut and Thymus vulgaris L. 
essential oils. Industrial Crops and Products 52, 183–190.

Ozcan,  M.  and  Chalchat,  J.C.  (2004)  Aroma  profile  of  Thymus  vulgaris  L.  growing  wild  in  Turkey. 

 Bulgarian Journal of Plant Physiology 30, 68–73.

Özgüven, M. and Tansi, S. (1998) Drug yield and essential oil of Thymus vulgaris L. as in [sic] influenced 
by ecological and ontogenetical variation. Turkish Journal of Agriculture and Forestry 22, 537–542.

Panda, H. (2006) Compendium of Herbal Plants. Asia Pacific Business Inc., New Delhi.
Porte, A. and Ronoel Godoy, L.O. (2008) Chemical composition of Thymus vulgaris L. (thyme) essen-
tial oil from the Rio de Janeiro State, Brazil. Journal of the Serbian Chemical Society 73, 307–310.
Roby, M.H.H., Sarhan, M.A., Selim, K.A.H. and Khalel, K.I. (2013) Evaluation of antioxidant activity, 
total phenols and phenolic compounds in thyme (Thymus vulgaris L.), sage (Salvia officinalis L.), and 
marjoram (Origanum majorana L.) extracts. Industrial Crops Products 43, 827–831.

Rohmer, M., Seemann, M., Horbach, S., Bringer-Meyer and Sahm, H. (1996) Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate 
and pyruvate as precursors of isoprenic units in an alternative non-mevalonate pathway for terpenoid 
biosynthesis. Journal of the American Chemistry Society 118, 2564–2566.

Royal  Horticultural  Society  (2014)  RHS-Plant  Finder.  Available  at:  http://www.rhs.org.uk/plants/

search-form (accessed 16 July 2014).

Senatore, F. (1996) Influence of harvesting time on yield and composition of the essential oil of thyme (Thymus 

pulegioides L) growing wild in Campania. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 44, 1327–1332.

Soliman, K.M. and Badeaa, R.I. (2002) Effect of oil extracted from some medicinal plants on different 

 mycotoxigenic fungi. Food and Chemical Toxicology 40, 1669–1675.

Stahl-Biskup, E. (2002) Essential oil chemistry of the genus Thymus – a global view. In: Stahl-Biskup, E. 
and Sáez, F. (eds) Thyme: The Genus Thymus. Medicinal and Aromatic Plants – Industrial Profiles, 
Taylor & Francis. New York, pp. 75–124.

Stahl-Biskup, E. and Saez, F. (2002) The Genus Thymus. Medicinal and Aromatic Plants – Industrial 

Profiles, Taylor & Francis, New York.

Tainter, D.R. and Grenis, A.T. (1993) Spices and Seasonings: Food Technology Handbook (Food Science 

and Technology). VCH Publishers, New York.

Van den Broucke, C.O. and Lemli, J.A. (1981) Pharmacological and chemical investigation of thyme 

liquid extract. Planta Medica 41, 129–135.

Van den Broucke, C.O. and Lemli, J.A. (1983) Spasmolytic activity of the flavonoids from Thymus vul-

garis. Pharmaceutisch Weekblad 5, 9–14.

Venskutonis, P.R. (2002a) Harvesting and post-harvest handling in the genus Thymus. In: Stahl-Biskup, E. 
and Sáez, F. Thyme: The Genus Thymus. Medicinal and Aromatic Plants – Industrial Profiles, 
Taylor & Francis, New York, pp. 197–223.

Venskutonis, P.R. (2002b) Thyme – processing of raw plant material. In: Stahl-Biskup, E. and Sáez, F. 
(eds) Thyme: The Genus Thymus. Medicinal and Aromatic Plants – Industrial Profiles, Taylor & Fran-
cis, New York, pp. 224–251.

Vila, R. (2002) Flavonoids and further polyphenols in the genus thymus. In: Stahl-Biskup, E. and Sáez, F. 
(eds) Thyme: The Genus Thymus. Medicinal and Aromatic Plants – Industrial Profiles, Taylor & 
Francis, New York, pp. 142–176.

Villanueva Bermejo, D., Angelov, I., Vicente, G., Stateva, R.P., Rodriguez García-Risco, M., Reglero, G., 
Ibañez, E. and Fornari, T. (2014) Extraction of thymol from different varieties of thyme plants 
using green solvents. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture 95, 2901–2907.

Zarzuelo, A. and Crespo, E. (2002) The medicinal and non-medicinal uses of thyme. In: Stahl-Biskup, E. 
and Sáez, F. (eds) Thyme: The Genus Thymus. Medicinal and Aromatic Plants – Industrial Pro-
files, Taylor & Francis, New York, pp. 263–292.

Index

Note: Page numbers in bold type refer to figures; page numbers in italic type refer to tables.

aloe vera  1–18, 2

chemical composition  3, 3
extraction methods  5–7, 6
leaves  8–10, 11, 11, 12–13

structural composition  2–3

location and origin  1–2
morphology  2–3
pasteurization  7
phytochemistry  3–4, 3
processing techniques  4–13, 5, 6, 10, 16
uses

general  13–14
pharmacological  14–16

Alzheimer’s disease  232
animal testing 

Centella  98, 99, 100
fenugreek  136–137
lemongrass  144
parsley  193
spinach  256

anthraquinones  15, 239
antibacterial properties  144
antibiotics  176
anti-inflammatory effects 

aloe vera  14, 14
ashwagandha  24
basil  36–37
Centella  98
lemongrass  145
moringa  168
oregano  175
parsley  193

patchouli  205
sage  229–230

antimicrobial activity 

aloe vera  7, 15
basil  36
bay  50–51
betel vine  70
Centella  99–100
oregano  175
parsley  193
patchouli  204
sage  230

antimutagenic properties 

lemongrass  145

antinutritional factors  250
antioxidants 

aloe vera  14–15
ashwagandha  24
basil  34, 35, 38
bay  48–49
betel vine  70
celery  76, 79
Centella  93, 98
fenugreek  137
lemongrass  145
parsley  193
rosemary  213–214, 217–218
sage  230–231, 231
spinach  256

antipyretic activity  37
anxiety  99, 145, 158
aphrodisiacs  19, 205

 

277

278 

Index 

aromatherapy  204–205
arteriosclerosis  100
arthritis  37–38
ashwagandha  19–26, 20, 20

chemical composition  21
extraction methods  22–23
leaves  21
location and origin  19, 20
morphology  20–21
processing techniques  21–23
side effects  22
uses  21, 22

general  23–24
pharmacological  24

value addition  23

asthma  24
Ayurvedic medicine  19, 20, 23, 24

betel vine  69, 71
Centella  85, 86, 101
senna  242, 243

Bacillus subtilis  193
bakery products  23
basil  27–41, 28

chemical composition  28, 30
harvest  31
location and origin  28, 29
morphology  29–30
oils  29, 30
phytochemistry  30–31, 31
processing techniques  31–32
production statistics  29
research on  35
species  27, 30
storage  31
uses

by country  33–34
culinary  33
insecticidal  33
pharmacological  34–38
ritualistic  32–33
traditional medicine  33–34

value addition  32

bay  42–62

chemical composition  45–48, 45, 45, 48
extraction methods  53–54
location and origin  43–44, 47
morphology  44–45
phytochemistry  48–51
processing techniques  51–53
toxicity  57
uses

culinary  42
general  54–55
pharmacological  55–57

value addition  53–55

betel vine  63–73, 64

chemical composition  65, 65, 65
harvesting  66
location and origin  63, 64
morphology  64–65
nutritional composition  65, 65, 65
phytochemistry  65–66
processing techniques  66–67
uses 

chewing  63, 64, 71
culinary  69
general  68–69
pharmacological  69–71

value addition  67–68

blood pressure see hypertension
boils  70, 86
bone strengthening  190, 256
breastfeeding  70, 167, 232

cancer 

aloe vera  15
ashwaganda  21, 24
basil  35–36
bay  56
betel vine  63
Centella  98
moringa  167, 168
oregano  175
sage  231–232
spinach  256

canning  255
carcinogenic effects  34
cardiovascular disease  38, 256
carvacrol  174, 175
celery  74–84, 75, 78

chemical composition  76
location and origin  74–75
morphology  75–76
phytochemistry  77
processing techniques  77–79
uses 

culinary  77–78, 79–80, 81
general  79–80
pharmacological  80–81
traditional  80–81

value addition  79
Centella  85–106, 86, 87

chemical composition  88, 89
location and origin  85–87
morphology  87–88, 87
nutritional composition  88
phytochemistry  88, 90
processing techniques  90–91
uses

culinary  85, 91
general  85, 86–87, 92, 101

 

Index  

279

pharmacological  87, 91–93, 94–97, 

98–101

value addition  91–92

chester  106, 107–115

chemical composition  108–109, 109, 110
location and origin  107
morphology  107–108
phytochemistry  109
processing techniques  109–113, 109, 112
uses 

culinary  109–110, 113, 114
general  113
pharmacological  113–114

value addition  113, 114

chewing 

betel vine  63, 64, 71

Chinese celery  75
cholesterol  137, 168
citric acid  12
constipation  70, 242
coriander  116–124, 117

chemical composition  117
location and origin  116–117
morphology  117
nutritional composition  117, 118
phytochemistry  117–118
processing techniques  118–122

drying  118–119
extraction methods  122
packaging  119–122
preservation  121–122

uses 

culinary  122–123
pharmacological  123

value addition  122

cosmetics 

aloe vera  14, 15–16
bay  55
Centella  100
lemongrass  144
mint  158
patchouli  204
rosemary  220
sage  229
senna  242

coughs  70
culinary uses 

basil  33, 38
bay  42, 53, 55, 57
betel vine  69
celery  77, 79–80, 81
Centella  85, 91
chester  109–110, 113, 114
coriander  122–123
curry leaf plant  125, 130, 131
fenugreek  136, 137

lemongrass  144
mint  152, 153, 157, 158
moringa  167
oregano  175
rosemary  220
sage  229
spinach  256

curry leaf plant  125–132, 126, 126

chemical composition  126–127, 127
location and origin  125–126
morphology  126
phytochemistry  127
processing techniques  127–130, 129
uses 

culinary  125, 130, 131
general  130
pharmacological  131

value addition  130

decolorization  7–8
dehydration technology 

aloe vera  13
celery  78–79
coriander  118–119
curry leaf plant  129, 129
mint  154
spinach  254
see also drying processes

deodorants  204
depression  99, 158, 205
desiccant dehydration process  13
diabetes 

aloe vera  14
basil  37
bay  56
betel vine  71
Centella  100
curry leaf plant  131
fenugreek  136–137
oregano  175
parsley  194
sage  229
stevia  264

diarrhoea  144, 158
dietary supplements  219, 220
digestion disorders  242
diuretics  193–194, 205
dosages  232
drug interactions  194
drying processes  174, 200–201,  

228, 254

artificial  214–215
microwave  254
sun  166–167, 241
thermal energy  273

280 

Index 

enfleurage  218
environmental pollution  63
Esherichia coli  193
essential oils  30, 201–202

basil  29, 30, 36
bay  46, 47, 48, 55
celery  76, 79, 81
coriander  122
curry leaf plant  130
lemongrass  140, 142, 143
mint  152–153, 157–158
oregano  174, 175
patchouli  198, 201–203, 202
rosemary  219
sage  228–229
thyme  271–272, 271

extraction methods  79

aloe vera gel  5–12, 6
enfleurage  218
hand-filleting  5, 8–9
hydrodistillation  122, 157
maceration  142–143, 142, 157, 218, 228
microwave assisted (MAE)  22–23, 142, 157
microwave-assisted hydro-distillation 

(MAHD)  142–143

percolated  228
pressurized liquid (PLE)  192
solvent-free microwave (SFME)  54, 

142–143
solvents  122, 130
Soxhlet  22, 91, 122, 157, 228
steam distillation  130, 201–202, 218–219

extrusion cooking  23

fenugreek  133–138, 134

chemical composition  134
location and origin  133–134
morphology  134, 135
phytochemistry  134–135
processing technique  135–136, 135
uses 

culinary  136, 137
general  133
pharmaceutical  136–137

value addition  136

fever  37
filariasis  145
flatulence  158, 159
folk medicine see traditional medicine
freezing process  78, 253, 254
fungi  144

gastrointestinal system disorders  174, 175
ginseng  19
gotu kola see Centella

hand-filleting  5, 8–9
headaches  69, 158
hepatic damage  15
hepatic toxicity  24, 145
hepatoprotection  99, 194
high performance liquid chromatography 

(HPLC)  154

hydrodistillation  122, 157
hyperglycaemia  24
hypertension  80, 98, 100, 144, 256, 264
hypoglycaemia  144, 194, 229, 264

immunomodulatory activity  14, 24, 37, 100, 

174, 193, 232

incense sticks  203–204
indigestion  242
influenza virus  205
insecticides  33, 136, 204, 205
irritable bowel syndrome  159

kekik see oregano
kidney stones  252

laxatives  242
lemongrass  139–148

chemical composition  140
location and origin  139–140
morphology  140, 140
phytochemistry  141
processing technique  141–143, 141, 142, 143
uses 

culinary  144
general  144
pharmacological  144–145

value addition  143

liver damage  99, 168, 242, 243

maceration  142–143, 142, 157, 218, 228
malaria  144
malnutrition  163, 167, 168
memory-enhancing tonics  98, 220
methylcyclopropene (MCP)  121–122
microbial activity  36
microwave assisted extraction (MAE)  22–23, 

142, 157

gas chromatographic (GC) techniques  153
gastric ulcers  15, 24, 70, 99

microwave-assisted hydro-distillation 

(MAHD)  142–143

 

Index  

281

mint  149–162

chemical composition  152–154, 153,  

153, 155

location and origin  149–151
morphology  151–152, 151
phytochemistry  154
processing techniques  154–157
uses 

culinary  152, 153, 157, 158
general  158
pharmacological  158–159

value addition  157–158

miracle tree see moringa
modified atmosphere packaging  

(MAP)  119–121

moringa  163–169

chemical composition  164, 164
location and origin  163–164, 164
morphology  164
phytochemistry  164–165
processing techniques  165–167, 165
uses 

culinary  167
pharmacological  167–168

value addition  167

mouth ulcers  136
myocardial damage  99

nervous disorders  69, 98, 99, 168, 220, 232

obesity  144
oral hygiene  71, 175, 264
oregano  170–188, 216

location and origin  170–172, 171, 172
morphology  172
processing techniques  174
uses 

culinary  175
pharmacological  175–176

value addition  174

oxalate content  252
oxygen transmission rates (OTRs)  120

packaging  119–122, 128, 136, 143, 165–166
modified atmosphere (MAP)  119–121, 

254–255

and quality standards  53
see also storage

pan chewing  63, 64, 71
parsley  189–197, 190

chemical composition  190, 191
location and origin  189–190
morphology  190

phytochemistry  190–191, 191, 192, 192
processing techniques  192
uses 

general  190
pharmacological  193–195, 195
traditional  192–193

pasteurization, high-temperature/short-time 

(HTST)  7

patchouli  198–208, 199, 202

chemical composition  199–200
location and origin  198–199, 199
morphology  199
phytochemistry  200
processing technique  200–203
uses 

general  204
pharmacological  204–205

value addition  203–204

pectolytic enzymes  12
peppermint see mint
perfume industry  203
phenolic compounds  192
platelet aggregation  194
poisonous herbs see toxicity
pregnancy  101, 167, 194, 195, 232, 243
preservation methods see packaging
pressurized liquid extraction (PLE)  192
prophylactic agent  35
protozoal activity  144
psychological health  25, 28, 69, 99, 175

anxiety  99, 145, 158
depression  99, 158, 205
nervous disorders  69, 98, 99, 168,  

220, 232

Qmatrix process (Aloecorp)

aloe vera  13

radiation processing  36, 129–130
respiratory disorders  24, 69, 174, 220

asthma  24
rheumatism  80
rituals  32–33, 189
rosemary  209–223, 210, 212

chemical composition  213, 214
location and origin  209–211, 221
morphology  211, 213, 213
phytochemistry  213–214, 214, 215, 216, 

217–218

processing techniques  214–219
uses  220

general  219–220
pharmacological  220–221

value addition  219

282 

Index 

sage  224–236, 225

chemical composition  225
morphology  225
origin and location  224–225
phytochemistry  226–227, 228
processing technique  228–229
uses 

storage  12, 31, 77, 143, 154–155
stress  24, 99
sweeteners  263, 264, 265
symbols 

herbs as  43

general  229
pharmacological  229–232, 231

tea  23, 24
thyme  268–276, 269

value addition  229
scorpions and basil  28
senna  237–245

chemical and phytochemistry  composition   

239, 240

location and origin  237–238,  

238, 238

morphology  239, 239
processing techniques  240–241, 241
uses 

pharmacological  238, 241–243

value addition  241–242

side effects  15, 22, 100–101, 232, 233, 243
skin problems  14, 14, 100, 158, 159, 204, 205
solvent-free microwave extraction (SFME)  54, 

142–143

Soxhlet extraction method  22, 91, 122,  

157, 228

spearmint see mint
spinach  246–259

chemical and nutritional composition  248–249, 

249, 250

location and origin  246–248, 247, 247
morphology  248
phytochemistry  249–250, 251
processing technique  252–255, 252, 254
uses 

culinary  255–256
medicinal  256
value addition  255

Staphylococcus aureus  193
steam distillation  130, 201–202, 218–219
sterilization of herbs  215–216
stevia  260–267

chemical and phytochemistry  

composition  261

location and origin  260
morphology  261, 261
processing techniques  261–262
uses

general  263
pharmacological  263–265

chemical and phytochemistry  composition   

270–272, 271, 271

location and origin  268–270
morphology  270
processing techniques  272–273, 272, 273
uses 

general  274
pharmacological  274–275

value addition  273–274

time, temperature and sanitation (TTS) 

 process  12–13

tonics 

memory-enhancing  98, 220

toxicity  57, 232, 233
hepatic  24, 145
see also side effects

traditional medicine 

aloe vera  1
basil  33–34
bay  55–56
betel vine  64
celery  80
Centella  85
lemongrass  144
mint  158
parsley  192–193

traditions  63

ulcers  168

gastric  15, 24, 70, 99
mouth  136

ultraviolet (UV) light processing  121
urination  69

vitamin C  12

winter cherry see ashwagandha
worms  144
wound-healing  15, 24, 70, 86, 87, 93

