JOCHEN GARTZ

MAGIC MUSHROOMS

Around the World

A Scientific Journey Across Cultures and

Time

The Case for Challenging Research

and Value Systems

* LIS PUBLICATIONS * LOS ANGELES, CA*

                                           

                               Figure 1  - Water Color Painting of  Psilocybe semilanceata
                                                               (Germany, 1927)

TABLE OF CONTENT (With Active Links' Just Click On A Subject To Go To The Page)

1.
2.
3.

4.
5.
6.
7.

"Who Was the First Magician?" - Foreword by Christian Ratsch 
Introduction
Reflections on the History and Scientific Study of Magic Mushrooms
The Current State of Knowledge About European Species

3.1 Psilocybe semilanceata: The Classic Species Among European Psychotropic Mushrooms 
3.2 Psilocybe cyanescens: Potent Mushrooms Growing on Wood Debris
3.3 Panaeolus subbalteatus: Mycology and Myths about the Panaeolus Species
3.4 Inocybe aeruginascens: Fast-Spreading New Arrivals
3.5 Gymnopilus purpuratus: Magnificent Mushrooms from South America
3.6 Conocybe cyanopus: Tiny Mushrooms of Remarkable Potency
3.7 Pluteus salicinus: A Little-known Wood-Inhabiting Species

7
9
10
14
16
29
37
44
51
55
58
61
63
66
77
79
82
84
87
93
95
98
8.
102
9.
108
10.       Outlook                                                                                                                                                             114
11.
120
129

Mushroom Identification: Taxonomic Confusion and the Potential for Deadly Mistakes
The Bluing Phenomenon and Metol Testing: Reality vs. Wishful Thinking
Mushroom Cultivation: Classic Findings and New Techniques
Psychotropic Mushroom Species Around the World
7.1 Spotlight on North America and Hawaii
7.2 Mycophilia in Central and South America
7.3 Australia's Mycoflora Attracts Attention
7.4 European Customs and Conventions
7.5 Japanese Experimentation
7.6 Intoxications and the Oldest Known Mushroom Cult in Africa
7.7 Usage in Southeast Asia and the South Pacific Islands

Some Comments on Effects of Mushrooms from the Category Phantastika
Psychotherapy

Bibliography
Index

Figure 2 - Psilocybe cubensis from Australia

Figure 3 - Water color painting of Panaeolus subbalteatus (Germany, 1927) .

Figure 4 - Fresh Panaeolus subbalteatus mushrooms.

FOREWORD

W H O   W A S   T H E   F I R S T   M A G I C I A N ?

Nobody knows precisely when the first magic
mushroom emerged from the shadows of
prehistory to enter the light of consciousness.
Nobody knows when the first magic mushroom
was eaten by a human being. Nobody knows
just who the first magic mushroom eater was. In
seeking answers to these questions, we can only
speculate. Mycophobes, however, are quick to
voice their conviction that only a fool would be
reckless enough to want to attain a higher state
of consciousness beyond the boundaries of
everyday reality. And only a fool would attempt
to do this by ingesting those odd little things that
mysteriously thrive on decaying, humid soil,
rotten wood and malodorous mounds of cow
manure.
Historically, magic, mushrooms have
been feared and hated` since antiquity: magic
mushrooms were thought  to be made from
poisons that had dripped from serpents' fangs;
they were considered to be unclean emissions of
evil spirits; moreover, mushrooms were a known
cause of death and disease, bloated stomachs and
insanity. Beliefs such as these have survived to
the present day. They persist, for example,,, as
figures of speech, s u c h   as the slick Austrian
description of a societal misfit as someone "who
ate those madness-inducing mushrooms."
             But, there is another, very different,
magic mushroom legacy as well.

Flesh of the Gods for Devil Worshippers

The Old World. Mycenaean civilization
began with a mushroom trip -Mushrooms were
an ingredient in the ambrosia of Dionysus.
Porphyrius,  the  fourth  century  Latin  poet  and
contemporary  of  Emperor  Konstantin,  knew
that magic mushrooms were the children of the
gods.

the 

A quasi-cannibalistic ritual, the act of eating the
children  of  the  gods  unlocked  one's  power  to
experience 
truly  divine.  But  not  all
mushrooms  enable  human  beings  to  enter  the
realm of divine consciousness. This magic power
resides  in  only  those  fungi  known  as  "fool's
mushrooms",  which  were  considered  poisonous
and  believed  to  be  the  spawn  of  the  Devil
throughout  the  late  Middle  Ages  and  well  into
modern times.

spooked 

thoroughly 

The New World: The Aztecs in Mexico
referred  to  a  number  of  small,  inconspicuous
mushrooms  as  teonartacatl,  or  "flesh  of  the
Gods."  These  sacred  mushrooms  were  eaten
during  the  course  of  rituals  intended  to  contact
the Gods in order to learn about the world and the
realm  of  the  divine.  These  magic  mushroom
rituals 
the  Catholic
Spaniards.  The  mushroom  eaters,  commonly
thought  of  as  Devil  worshippers,  were  hounded
by  the  Inquisition.  Still,  all  good  things  survive
the tests of time, so the cult of magic mushroom
eaters  did  not  become  extinct.  Like  mycelia
underground,  the  cult  continued  to  flourish,  and
at  the  proper  time  in  recorded  history,  in  1957,
the fruit of the fully grown mushroom re-surfaced
to  draw  widespread  public  attention.  Valentine
and  Gordon  Wasson  became  the  heroes  of  the
modern neo-mycophilic movement.

              Back to the Old World: The revelations
and insights gained from the use of psychoactive
mushrooms were so magically wonderful, that
our native European "fool's mushrooms" - which
were gene ; considered inedible - had to be
recognized as closely related to the magic
mushrooms of Mexico, the flesh of the Aztec
Gods. The souls of magic mushrooms in Mexico
and Germany are essentially made from the same
substance: psilocybin.

Jochen  Gartz  has  made  an  extraordinary
contribution to the field of mycology by embracing
Germany's  magic  mushrooms  and  the  scientific
study and testing of these fungi. The 
research
efforts  upon  which  this  book  is  based  require
nothing less than a fearless, brave and courageous
consciousness, free of prejudice and mycophobia. I
am  convinced  that  a  researcher's  consciousness
infused  by  the  spirit  of  the  magic  mushroom  is
capable  of  far  deeper  scientific  insights  than  we
can  ever  expect  from  the  usual  ivory  tower
academics,  isolated  from  reality,  and  who  gorge
themselves on our tax dollars.

I met Jochen Gartz shortly after the fall of
the  Berlin  Wall  at  the  third  symposium  of  the
European College for the Study of Consciousness
(ECSC) in Freiburg, Germany. Our encounter was
my first contact with a researcher from the former
East Germany. Jochen Gartz's enthusiastic lecture
was  a  truly  consciousnessexpanding  event,  his
words  breaking  down  traditional  borders  and
crossing  over  into  new  territory.  The  magic
mushrooms spoke through him - with no trace of
dogma or ideology - in

the tradition of true anarchy that is the hallmark of
mushroom magic. What I heard was unbelievable.
Jochen  spoke  of  a  "new"  psychedelic  mushroom
and  its  migration.  The  mycelia  had  spread  in
concentric circles outward from Leipzig, jumping
all  political  borders.  Finally,  when  the  mycelia
reached West German soil, the hated Berlin Wall
crumbled.  Could  there  possibly  be  a  connection
between the evolution of the magic mushroom and
the  evolution  of  our  consciousness?  Could  a
mushroom  have  contributed  to  the  resolution  of
our political conflicts?

In  the  past,  politicians,  even  popes,  had
their own jesters and magicians, who functioned as
pressure  release  valves  in  the  machinations  of
political  power  struggles.  It  is  obvious  that  a
country  whose  chancellor  is  being  pelted  with
eggs, urgently needs a new breed of magician who
are able to readjust reality. But today, no aspiring
magician  should  go  about  this  task  without  this
book as a guide for the wondrous journey into the
realm of magic mushrooms.

Christian Rdtsch

Figure 5  - "Anthropomorphic Beings Engaged in Mushroom Dance"

10,000-year-old rock drawing in Tassili, Sahara (Algeria)

CHAPTER 1

I BELIEVE THE TIME HAS COME FOR A COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW OF NEW
FINDINGS FROM THE FIELDS OF MYCOLOGY, TAXONOMY AND NATURAL

PRODUCTS CHEMISTRY

to  study 

When  R.G.  Wasson,  R.  Heim  and  A.
Hofmann  began  their  interdisciplinary  research
the  Mexican  species  of
program 
mushrooms 
their  usage 
in  Mexican
mushroom  cults,  their  efforts  culminated  in  a
1958 landmark report that described the isolation,
molecular 
the
mushrooms'  active  ingredients:  psilocybin  and
psilocin.  Several  years  later,  these  substances
were also identified in a species of mushroom in
Europe,  Psilocybe  semilanceata,  which  became  the
first in a series of newly discovered species. Since
then, psychoactive mushrooms from other genera
have been reported with increasing frequency.

structure  and 

synthesis  of 

and 

the 

As  part  of  my  analytical  work  dedicated
identification  of  naturally  occurring
to 
chemicals, I had the good fortune to be part of a
research  team  that  studied  alkaloids  found  in  a
variety  of  mushroom  species.  Now  I  believe  the
time has come for a comprehensive review of

new findings from the fields of mycology,
taxonomy and natural products chemistry.
Wasson and his successors have already provided
detailed accounts pertaining to the history and
study of the Mexican mushroom species, so that
these materials need not be repeated in this
context. However, certain aspects concerning the
more recent uses of these mushrooms as well as
their conditions of growth will receive more
detailed attention in later chapters.

The  main  purpose  of  this  book  is  to
further  study  of 
these  mushrooms,
inspire 
particularly  basic  research  efforts  and  medical
applications of magic mushroom ingredients.

The  extensive  bibliography  will  help
scientists  and  other  interested  mycophiles  to
further immerse themselves in this complex area
of study.

Jochen Gartz

Figure 6  - Bronze doors with mushroom motif entitled "Trial and

Judgment" at Hildesheim Cathedral, Germany (ca. 1020).

CHAPTER 2

REFLECTIONS ON THE HISTORY

AND SCIENTIFIC STUDY OF MAGIC MUSHROOMS

that 

the 

It is remarkable that cultures native to the
American continent knew about a relatively  large
number  of  natural  mind-altering 
substances
compared to early cultures that evolved in Europe
or  Asia.  Botanical  evidence  does  not  support  the
notion that Europe is home to fewer hallucinogenic
plants 
the
growing  number  of  recently  discovered  European
mushroom species containing psilocybin indicate a
flourishing  psychotropic  mycoflora  in  Europe
similar to those found in other countries.

regions.  Furthermore, 

than  other 

It is unlikely that early European cultures
learned  less  about  local  plants  and  mushrooms
through  usage  and  experience 
than  cultures
elsewhere in the world. Most likely, early cultural
knowledge  of  European  psychoactive  plants  and
mushrooms was lost or destroyed at some time in
history, probably as early as several hundred years
ago.

The  discovery 

fly  agaric
mushroom (Amanita muscaria) was known for its
psychoactive  properties  in  Siberia  invited  the
conclusion  that  this  mushroom  was  used  as  a
psychotropic agent in medieval Europe as well. In
fact, there is very little evidence from the Middle
Ages  to  indicate  widespread  knowledge  of  the
effects  of 
specific  mushrooms  on  human
consciousness. However, I believe that past reports
on  psychoactive  mushrooms  were  causally  linked
to Amanita muscaria simply because this was the
only known psychotropic mushroom in Europe at
that time.

While  the  usage  of  Amanita  muscaria
among  Siberian  tribes  has  generated  reports  of
spectacular  hallucinations,  European  accounts  of
fly  agaric  intoxications  do  not  generally  include
descriptions  of 
intensely  hallucinatory
effects.

Accordingly,  the  potent  hallucinogenic
effects  of  specific  Psilocybes  and  related  species
are  likely  to  have  had  a  much  more  significant
influence  on  early  European  cultures  than  the
delirium-like  visions 
induced  by  Amanita
muscaria, a species that is also known to induce

such 

unconsciousness  and  severe  somatic  side  effects.
This  hypothesis  is  corroborated  by  data  from
comprehensive field studies conducted in Mexico.
I  believe  that  historic  accounts    including  those
described  below  -  indicate  a  knowledge  of  and
familiarity  with  psychotropic  mushrooms 
in
Europe  that  is  most  likely  derived  from  usage  of
Psilocybes  and 
than
experience with Amanita muscaria. However, it is
extremely  difficult 
this
hypothesis,  due  to  the  lack  of  conclusive  data
available for analysis today.

to  reject  or  confirm 

related  species, 

rather 

Bwyd Ellylon: A Feast of Fairies in

Celebration of the Spirit World

Tales  of  ritualistic  mushroom  usage  have
found  their  way  into  the  realm  of  myths  and
legends.  For  instance,  one  legend  describes  a
peculiar  poisonous  mushroom  in  Wales  (British
Isles)  with  the  strange  name  of  Bwyd  Ellylon,
which was considered a delicacy by fairies feasting
in  celebration  of  the  spirit  world.  Psilocybe
semilanceata  is  the  most  important  psilocybin-
containing  mushroom  in  Europe  and  it  thrives  in
parts of Great Britain, where the mushroom grows
abundantly all across the Welsh countryside during
fall season.

I  would  like  to  thank  G.  Samorini  for
pointing  out  that  the  Inquisition  was  unusually
cruel  and  vicious 
the  Alpine  valleys  of
Valcamonica,  Valtrompia  and  Valtellina  (located
in  the  provinces  of  Brescia  and  Sandrio  in
Northern  Italy).  Many  books  chronicle  countless
witch  burnings  in  that  region,  with  particular
emphasis  on  the  witches'  meetings  at  the  "Monte
del Tonale", located at an altitude of 2000 m (ca.
6,000 ft). Field  research  has  shown  that  plants  of
the  nightshade  family  ("witching  herbs")  do  not
grow at this altitude; even the fly agaric mushroom
is  rarely  found  there.  By  contrast,  pastures  in  the
area  abound  with  Psilocybe  semilanceata  during
the  fall.  Given  this  historical  context,  it  would
seem likely that Psilocybe

in 

semilanceata  played  an 
important  role  as  a
psychotropic  agent  in  the  region  (see  Figure  58,
Chapter 7.4).

In light of medieval accounts describing
the practice of witchcraft, it is interesting to note
that a subjective sensation of flying or levitation is
among the commonly reported effects of
psilocybin intoxication.

Berserk Rage of Nordic Warriors

for 

In  the  course  of  the  ideological  power
struggle between Christianity and the remnants of
pagan  religions  that  worshipped  Nature,  many
sources  of  knowledge  were  lost.  The  aggressive
repression  and  eradication  of  pre-Christian
customs  all  but  destroyed 
the  continuity  of
Europe's  original  cultural  heritage,  along  with
much historic evidence documenting early cultural
practices,  including  the  usage  of  plants  and
mushrooms 
temporary
alterations of consciousness.

the  purpose  of 

Some authors went so far as to blame the
fly agaric mushroom for proverbial fits of "berserk
rage" attributed to Nordic warriors. Many accounts
detailing  this  phenomenon  allude  to  a  "deception
of  the  eyes"  (i.e.  visual  hallucinations).  After  the
Nordic  legal  system  banished  the  practice  of
"going  berserk",  it  disappeared  quite  suddenly
during  the  12th  century.  At  about  the  same  time,
Saxo  Grammaticus  speculated  that  the  Berserkers
may have used magical potions.

It is just as plausible, however, to suggest
that  the  hallucinogen  of  choice  among  early
Nordic  cultures  was  Psilocybe  semilanceata,  a
mushroom  species  quite  common  in  Norway.
Neither  Amanita  muscaria 
nor  Psilocybe
semilanceata  are  generally  known  to  cause  states
of  intense  rage.  However,  given  the  historic
context, it is possible that, at the time, people had
already  begun  to  internalize  negatively  biased
distortions  and  the  demonization  of  psychoactive
mushrooms and their effects, in order to justify the
creation of new laws intended to destroy repulsive
pagan  customs  such  as  the  ritual  use  of  mind-
altering plants.

It is important to note the existence of
ancient Northern European rock drawings that
depict various mushroom themes, along with the
discovery of bronze-age vessels decorated with

mushroom-related  artwork.  The  drawings  often
include  renditions  of  zoomorphic  entities  as  well
as  mushrooms.  Significantly,  they  predate  any
reports  and  speculations  about  the  Berserkers  by
over 2,000 years.

These 

images 

ancient 

suggest 

the
evolution  of  early  European  mushroom  cults  -  a
cultural  practice  that  most  likely  vanished  during
the early Iron Age, as did many other customs and
social practices  from  that  era.  Still,  the  discovery
of ancient Northern European mushroom cults is a
powerful  piece  of  evidence  supporting  the  notion
that  psychoactive  mushroom  usage  has  been
continuous throughout history.

solstice 

celebrations, 

In  addition,  a  traditional  Swedish  custom
has survived to the present day, revealing an early
knowledge  of  a  certain  mushroom  believed  to
evoke  "visions  of  spirit  entities".  As  part  of
summer 
a  poisonous
mushroom  species  ("Baran")  was  cast  into  the
bonfires. Even though nothing is known about this
fungus  today,  the  ritual  burning  of  a  poisonous
mushroom was intended to weaken the powers of
goblins  and  other  evil  spirits.  The  mushrooms
were viewed as  symbolic  incarnations  of  noxious
spirits.  The  mushrooms'  ritualistic  destruction  by
fire 
the  powers  of  evil  and
mischievous  spirits.  The  assumption  that  some
mushrooms  are  physical  links  to  the  intangible
powers of the spirit world may have evolved from
ancient 
the
fragments  of  knowledge  about 
psychoactivity of specific types of mushrooms.

thus  destroyed 

There  are  a  number  of  written  reports
about  psychotropic  mushrooms  that  date  back  to
the  late  Middle  Ages.  While  this  collection  of
documents  includes  a  variety  of  different  sources
from  several  countries,  they  provide  remarkably
similar  descriptions  of  psychoactive  mushrooms
and the general nature of their effects.

Love Potions Brewed from Bolond Gomba

Clusius  (1525-1609),  for  example,  the
great  physician  and  botanist,  discovered  "bolond
gomba"  in  Hungary.  This  mushroom  was  known
under 
the  German  name  "Narrenschwamm"
("fool's  mushrooms").  It  was  used  in  rural  areas,
where it was processed into love potions by wise
men or "javas asszony". At about the same

time,  this  "fool's  mushroom"  was  documented  in
Slovakia as well. In addition, the mushroom found
its  way  into  the  verses  of  Polish  poet  Vaclav
Potocki (1625-1699), who refers to its potential of
"causing foolishness much like opium does ".

Similarly,  in  England,  John  Parkinson's
"Theatricum  Botanicum"  (1640)  includes  details
about a 'foolish mushroom ".

The  Austrian  colloquial  expression  "He
ate  those  madness-inducing  mushrooms"  refers  to
states of mental confusion.

to  psychotropic  mushrooms,  but 

Historic  source  materials  such  as  these
are scarce and widely scattered. Undoubtedly, they
refer 
lack
sufficient information to permit clear identification
of  a  specific  species.  However,  considering  the
habitats and occurrence of Psilocybe semilanceata
and  Psilocybe  bohemica,  these  two  species  are
among the most likely candidates (see page 16 ff.).
It  is  remarkable  that  these  historic  portrayals
revolve  around  just  one  aspect  of  the  mushrooms'
overall  effects:  the  occasional  semi-schizophrenic
reaction  which  can  at  times  be  quite  dramatic.
None  of 
reflect  a  distinct
appreciation  of  mushrooms  in  the  tradition  of  the
Mexican  Indians  ("teonanacatl"  =  flesh  of  the
Gods).

these  accounts 

Between Reverence and Fear

in 

terms  of 

By  contrast,  in  Europe  we  find  that  the
symptoms  of  mushroom  intoxication  have  always
been  compared  to  symptoms  of  mental  illness.
Such cross-cultural differences in value judgments
can  be  explained 
two  concepts
introduced  by  R.G.  Wasson  and  his  wife:
mycophilia  and  mycophobia.  This  distinction  sub-
divides  cultures  with  different  traditional  attitudes
towards mushrooms into two groups. For instance,
an entrenched dislike for mushrooms (mycophobia)
in  Britain 
traditional  beliefs  vastly
different  from  those  found  in  Slavic  countries,
where  mushrooms 
cherished
(mycophilia).  The  origins  and  evolution  of  such
diverging  attitudes  remain  lost  in  the  shadows  of
history.

are  generally 

indicates 

The development of early cultural taboos
and prohibitions against psychotropic mushrooms
may be the root cause of enduring mycophobic
behavior. On the other hand, it is possible that,

thousands  of  years  ago,  the  process  of  harvesting
mushrooms  as  a  food  source  caused  alarming
clusters  of  regionally 
isolated  cases  of  fatal
mushroom poisonings. Such experiences may well
have seeded a potent and lasting aversion towards
an entire country's mycoflora.

Similarly, 

the  mycophilia 

typical  of
ancient Mexican cultures goes hand in hand with a
general  social  acceptance  of 
the  effects  of
Psilocybe  mushrooms  and  their  established  ritual
usages.  Among  Mexican  Indian  tribes,  the  effects
of  psilocybin  have  never  been  causally  linked  to
any type of known mental illness. It is interesting
to  note  that  the  Indians  of  Mexico  were  the  only
Indians in the Americas who also harvested a large
number of mushroom species for food.

Unfortunately,  our  current  socio-political
climate 
is 
-  strongly  biased  against  newly
discovered hallucinogens, which are often defined
in  terms  of  negatively  loaded  labels.  Even  worse,
such  prejudicial  thinking  distorts  an  objective,
scientifically neutral approach to the study of these
substances.  The  label  "fool's  mushroom"  first
appeared  during  the  1930s,  along  with  "Mexican
mushroom  of  insanity".  In  the  1950s,  the  Central
American mushroom cults were discovered and the
mushrooms  themselves  were  renamed  "Mexican
their
magic  mushrooms", 
psychotropic  effects  and 
the
significance  of  the  mushrooms'  early  integration
into the social fabric of the cultures that cherished
them.

recognition  of 
to  emphasize 

Later  on, 

the  relatively  neutral 

label
"hallucinogenic  mushroom"  came  into  use  in  the
mycological  literature.  Other  designations  that
gained  and  lost  popularity  over  time  include  the
somewhat 
"intoxicating
mushrooms" and the essentially meaningless "drug
mushrooms".

derogatory 

term 

in 

Scientifically Unbiased Hallucinations?

Following  his  experiments  with  magic
mushrooms in Mexico during the summer of 1960,
T. Leary returned to Harvard University and began
the
to  study  psilocybin  as  a  variable 
in 
administration  of  standard  psychological 
test
batteries.  His  initial  focus  was  diluted  when  he
continued  to  expand  his  experiments  to  include
increasingly broader settings and applications. In

that 

to  Leary's  markedly 

reaction 
unorthodox
approach,  the  American  press  began  to  portray
psilocybin  mushrooms  in  terms  of  slanderous
terminology 
the  negative
connotations of labels such as "fool's mushrooms".
Descriptions  of  the  mushrooms'  effects  included
claims that users experienced "death-like states".

far  exceeded 

Proponents  of  psilocybin  research  were
accused of denying that the alkaloid caused "semi-
permanent  brain  damage".  This  pseudo-scientific
jumble of meaningless jargon was symptomatic of
the  sharply  escalating  controversy  surrounding
hallucinogenic  substances. 
Increasingly,  news
reports  on  psilocybin  were  eclipsed  by  massive
amounts of publicity about LSD - the most potent
hallucinogen  ever  discovered.  The  subsequent
frenzy  of  legislative  attempts  to  control  LSD
resulted in ever tighter restrictions on the scientific
study  of  not  only  LSD,  but  psilocybin  as  well.
Mind-altering  substances  were  no  longer  thought
of in terms of their specific effects and properties,
but  rather  were  lumped  together  into  a  single
group  of  dangerous  chemicals.  As  antidrug
hysteria  continued  to  intensify,  scientific  and
pharmacological  distinctions  became  all  but
irrelevant: hallucinogens were no longer viewed as
different  from  other  classes  of  dangerous  and
physically  addictive  drugs,  such  as  heroin  or  the
opiates.  This  demonization  of  hallucinogens  was
successful in spite of massive research efforts that
began  when  Sandoz  Pharmaceuticals  decided  to
distribute  psilocybin  to  qualified  scientists  for
experimental  and  psychotherapeutic  purposes.  By
employing the method for synthesis of psilocybin
developed  by  A.  Hofmann,  Sandoz  Pharma-
ceuticals  manufactured  about  2  kg  (ca.  4.4lbs)  of
pure psilocybin for scientific research purposes.

The  results  of  pharmacological  testing
soon  revealed  psilocybin  as  an  alkaloid  that  was
perfectly safe for human subjects under controlled
experimental conditions. Despite this evidence, the
anti-drug  legislative  framework  of  the  mid1960s
firmly  established  an  "official  mycophobia",  a
misguided, yet entrenched policy that still prevails
today  and  effectively  prevents 
the  scientific
investigation  of  promising  potential  applications
for  psilocybin  and  other  alkaloids.  At  the  same
time, mycological and biochemical

tend 

for 

I 

research  studies  have  shown  that  psilocybin-
containing  mushrooms  thrive  all  over  the  world
and  can  be  found  on  all  continents.  These
mushrooms  are  no  different  from  any  other
mycoflora  and  must  not  be  excluded  from
scientific  investigation  because  of  their  alkaloid
content.

individuals 

In  addition  to  overall  variations  in  value
systems  across  cultures, 
to
develop  their  own  personal  attitudes  towards
mushrooms  in  general.  Oftentimes,  the  evolution
of  specific  opinions  about  mushrooms  can  be
traced back to childhood events, even though such
early  experiences 
the
development  of  prevailing  biases  and  value
systems later in life.

seldom  account 

incident 

recall  an 

from  my  own
childhood, which occurred when I was about five
years old. I was playing in a grassy meadow, when
a girl pointed to a brown mushroom and earnestly
explained  that  it  was  inedible  and  poisonous.
While I have never forgotten this encounter, I did
grow  up 
to  become  a  devoted  mushroom
enthusiast.  On 
the  other  hand,  a  different
childhood event has left me with the vivid memory
of  discovering  a  landfill  virtually  covered  with
vast numbers of gilled bluing mushrooms and the
sense  of  awe  I  experienced  contemplating  this
sight.  In  general,  the  unusual  characteristics  of
these  mushrooms  are  most  likely  responsible  for
strong impressions formed early in life, which then
may develop into various attitudes or beliefs later
on.

interest 

personal 

enduring 

in
psychotropic  mushroom  species  can  serve  to
amplify  or  diminish  mycophobic  as  well  as
mycophilic  dispositions,  depending  on 
the
influence  of  other  factors.  After  all,  judgments
about  the  benefit  or  folly  of  deliberately  altering
one's  state  of  consciousness  are  also  colored  by
individual preferences, biases and opinions.

this  diversity  of  attitudes 

The  following  chapters  are  meant  to
illustrate 
towards
psychotropic mushrooms. Descriptions of planned
and 
specific
mushroom species offer convincing evidence that
the effects of psychoactive mushrooms are open to
many possible interpretations.

experiments  with 

involuntary 

An 

CHAPTER 3

THE CURRENT STATE OF KNOWLEDGE ABOUT

EUROPEAN SPECIES

Figure 7  - Distribution pattern of  Psilocybe cyanescens  across Europe and North Africa
(according to Krieglsteiner). Black dots indicate approximate locations where Psilocybe

cyanescens  was found.

Mr. E Branl, on a poisonous Species of Agaric

To the Editors of,,t h e   M e d i c a l   a n d   P h y s i c a l   J o u r n a l .

Ge n t l e m e n ,

IF  the  following  account  of  the  deleterious  effects  of  a  very
common  species  of  agaric,  not  hitherto  generally  suspected  to  be
poisonous, appears to you likely to prove useful or interesting to the
public, you will oblige me by its insertion; should its length be any
obstacle  to  this,  I  beg  you  will  omit  whatever  you  may  think
superfluous.                           I remain,

G e n t l e m e n ,

N o . 1 0 , Arlington -Street,

Yours, most obediently,

EVERARD BRANDE.

Nov. 16th, 1799.
J.  S.  gathered  early  in  the  morning  of.  the  third  of  October,  in
the Green Park, what he Supposed to be small mushrooms; there he
stewed with the common additions in a tinned iron saucepan.* The
whole  did  not  exceed  a  tea  saucerful,  which  he  and  four  of  his
children  ate  the  first  thing,  about  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning,  as
they  frequently  had  done  without  any  bad  consequence;  they
afterwards took their usual breakfast of tea, &c. which was finished
about  nine,  when  Edward,  one  of  the  children,  (eight  years  old,)
who  had  eaten  a  large  proportion  of  the  mushrooms,  as  they
thought  them,  was  attacked  with  fits  of  immoderate  laughter,  nor
could  the  threats  of  his  father-or  mother  restrain  him.  To  this
succeeded vertigo, and a great 'degree of stupor, from which he was
roused  by  being  called  or  shaken,  but  immediately  relapsed.  The
the
pupils  of  his  eyes  were,  at 
circumference  of  the  cornea,  a n d   scarcely  contracted  at  the
approach of a strong light ; his breathing was quick, his pulse very
variable, at times imperceptible, at others too frequent and small to
be  counted;  latterly,  very  languid;  his  feet  were  cold,  livid,  and
contracted, he sometimes pressed his hands on different parts of his
abdomen, as if in pain, but when roused and interrogated as to it, he
answered  indifferently.  yes,  or  no,  as  he  did  to  every  other
question, evidently without any relation to what was asked. About
the same time the father, aged forty, was attacked with vertigo, and
complained that every thing appeared black, then wholly

times,  dilated 

to  nearly, 

* This accuracy may seem trivial, but I have met with people who
supported the following symptoms might have arisen from the use of
a copper vessel.

Figure 8 - Reproduction of a report from the mycological literature (1799)

describing a case of Psilocybe semilanceata  intoxication.

CHAPTER 3.1

PSILOCYBE SEMILANCEATA: THE CLASSIC SPECIES AMONG

EUROPEAN PSYCHOTROPIC MUSHROOMS

Listen Well to this Frightful Story from St.

James's Green Park....

About 200 years ago, E. Brande published
an  account  about  a  remarkable  case  of  mushroom
intoxication  in  London.  On  October  3,  1799  an
impoverished family picked some mushrooms in St.
James's  Green  Park  and  prepared  them  for  a  meal
(see Figure 8, p. 15).

Shortly  after  eating  the  mushrooms,  the
father and his four children developed symptoms of
intoxication,  such  as  markedly  dilated  pupils,
spontaneous laughter and delirium. The progression
of  symptoms  was  experienced  as  wave-like,  with
cycles  of 
intensity.  In
addition, the father's visual perception was affected
so that everything around him appeared to be black
- a frightening experience he believed to presage his
impending death.

increasing  and  fading 

Even though two family members (ages 12
and  18)  consumed  only  small  amounts  of  the
cooked  mushrooms,  the  ensuing  symptoms  of
intoxication were no different from those observed
in  family  members  who  had  eaten  comparatively
larger portions. After several hours, the psychic and
perceptual  disturbances 
finally
disappeared,  without  any  lingering  side  effects.
Attempts 
included
administration  of  emetics  and  fortifying  tonics.  In
the end, these potions were heralded as the crucial
treatment that "cured" the family.

treat  acute  symptoms 

subsided  and 

For the most part it is extremely difficult, if
not impossible, to assemble complete and accurate
details on many aspects of magic mushroom history
from source materials available today. Thus, it is an
instance  of  rare  good  fortune  and  a  boon  to
mushroom historians that E. Brande's description of
a typical psilocybin syndrome was augmented by J.
Sowerby,  author  of  "Coloured  Figures  of  English
Fungi  or  Mushrooms"  (London,  1803).  Sowerby's
book included a rendition and description of the

to 

mushroom species responsible for the poisoning
case described by Brande (see p. 17). Within the
context of Sowerby's book, only the variety of
mushrooms distinguished by their cone-shaped
caps were believed to cause intoxication. Figure
9 shows a typical rendition of Psilocybe
semilanceata. This mushroom species was
known to Sowerby's contemporaries as
"Agaricus glutinosus Curtis" and its descriptions
are fully compatible with current knowledge
about Psilocybe semilanceata.

A  few  years  later,  renowned  Swedish
mycologist  E.  Fries  referred 
to  "Agaricus
semilanceatus"  in  his  book  entitled  "Obser-
vationes Mycologicae" (1818). Later  on,  the
same mushroom also appeared under the names
Coprinarius  semilanceatus  Fr.  or  Panaeolus
semilanceatus (Fr.) Lge. Not  until  1870  did
Kummer and Quelet classify this mushroom as
a  member 
Psilocybe.
Consequently,  two  valid  designations  may  be
found in the literature:
-- Psilocybe semilanceata (Fr.) Kumm. 
-- Psilocybe semilanceata (Fr.) Quel.

genus 

or --

of 

the 

Around 1900, M. C. Cooke reported two or
three new instances of accidental mushroom
intoxication involving children in England.
Interestingly, Cooke noted that symptoms were
caused only by a variety of mushroom known to
turn blue (var. caerulescens).
He
was the first mycologist to wonder if a bluing
variety of this species was poisonous, or if the
bluish color was induced by external factors,
causing changes in the mushroom's chemical
composition so as to render them poisonous.

Early Descriptions

A close relative of Mexico's

psychoactive species, Psilocybe semilanceata is
a mushroom whose physical appearance
resembles Psilocybe semperviva Heim &
Cailleux and Psilocybe

Stalks  generally  single,  sometimes  clustered,  from  two  to  four  inches  in
height, the thickness of a goose quill, thread shaped whitish almost solid, the
tube  being  very  small,  glutinous;  ring,  a  little  below  the  cap,  scarce
perceptible.
“ Cap, from one to two inches in breadth, of a brown color; in the full. grown
ones  hemispherical,  always  convex,  and  more  or  lets  glutinous;  wet  with
rain,  it  becomes  browner  and  transparent,'so  that  it  sometimes  appears
striated.
“  Gills  numerous,  single,  of  a  brownish  purple  color,  clouded;  whole  ones
about twenty, horizontal, three shorter ones placed betwixt them; they throw
out a powder of a brownish purple color."
With respect to the use of it, he only says, « There is nothing acrimonious or
disagreeable  in  its  taste,  yet  its  appearance  will  not  recommend  it  to  the
lovers of mushrooms."

Figure 9 - Drawing and description of Psilocybe semilanceata by J. Sowerby (London, 1803).

1733. A. semilanceatus Fries (Observ. II. pag. 178).

Synon. : Agaricus semiglobatus Sowerby (Engl. Fungi taf. 240.

fig. 1-3). Hut etwas hautig, spitz kegelfdrmig, fast zugespitzt, 11/2 Cent.
breit, 1/2 Cent. hock, feucht klebrig, fein streifig, gelb oder grunlich,
zah, mit Anfangs umgeknicktem Rande und leicht trennbarer Oberhaut.
Stiel zah, gebogen, 11 Cent. hock, kahl, blass. Lamellen angeheftet,
aufsteigend, purpur-schwarz.    Sporen ellptisch, hellbraun, 9 -16 u
lang, 4 - 9 u dick.

Ax Wegen, auf Grasphitzen, besonders wo Mist gelegen hat.

spitzkegeliger  Kahlkopf  (Psilocybe  semilanceata).  Kegel-glockenformig  mit
papilenertiger spitze Hut-o,5-1 cm breit, bis 2cm hock, lehmfarben mit oliv-
grunem Stich, klebrig. Lamellen breit, oliv-lehmfarben, spater purpurbraun.
Stiel  schlank,  glanzend.  -  Gedungte  Wiesen,  Wegrander.  Stellenweise.
Wertlos.

Figure 10 - Two descriptions of Psilocybe semilanceata from the German-language
literature. The first description (top) was written over a hundred years ago, while the
second one (bottom) dates to 1962. Significantly, the more recent entry classifies the
species as "essentially worthless". Also see Figure 11.

to 

the 

mexicana Heim. Like Psilocybe semilanceata, these
Mexican  species  thrive  in  meadows  and  pastures.
Another common trait among these  species  is  the
rather  subdued  and  subtle  quality  of  their  bluing
reaction.  Recognition  of  these  similarities  with
Mexican species sparked the curiosity of scientists
who  wanted 
learn  more  about  Europe's
Psilocybe  species.  A  research  team  that  included
A. Hofmann and R. Heim began to study samples
of Psilocybe semilanceata, in collaboration with C.
Furrer, a mycologist who examined fruiting bodies
collected  in  Switzerland  and  France.  By  1963,
paper chromatography testing had yielded data of
historic  significance.  For  the  first  time,  scientists
had  confirmed  the  presence  of  0.25  %  psilocybin
in  dried  samples  of  Psilocybe  semilanceata.
Publication  of 
an
extraordinary achievement, because psilocybin had
never  before  been  detected 
in  a  European
mushroom  species.  Previously,  the  alkaloid  had
been  found  only  in  Psilocybe  species  native  to
Mexico, Asia and North America.

represented 

results 

shows  examples  of 

While  Psilocybe  semilanceata  was  not
recognized  as  an  important  psychoactive  species
until  the  1960s,  descriptions  of  the  species  were
included  in  many  standard  German  language
mycology reference books published before 1963.
Figure  10 
such
descriptions,  one  of  them  dated  1962  and  the
second  one  written  about  60  years  earlier.  Note
the  1962  version  designates  Psilocybe
that 
semilanceata  as  a  "worthless"  species  -  a  rather
incongruous  conclusion  likely  to  amuse  today's
readers.  On  the  other  hand,  accounts  of  and
knowledge  about  cases  of  mushroom  intoxication
in England did not find their way into Germany's
mycological  literature.  A  few  authors,  such  as
Michael  &  Schulz  (1927)  and  A.  Ricken  (1915)
see  Figures  11  and  12,  pp.  19-20)  contributed
excellent  and  valuable  descriptions  of  Psilocybe
semilanceata,  but  these  are  the  exceptions,  rather
of  Psilocybe
than the rule. A 
semilanceata from  1977  reflects  less  emphasis  on
details,  and  a 
to
differentiation of the species, except for additional
data 
the  mushroom's  microscopic
characteristics (see Figure 13).

rather  cursory  approach 

description 

In  addition,  a  German  aquarelle  painting
from  1927  of  five  fruiting  bodies  depicts  the
mushroom's  habitus  in  remarkably  realistic  detail
(see Figure 1, p. 4).

two 

on 

In 1967 and 1969 Psilocybe semilanceata
samples from Scotland and England were found
to contain psilocybin as well. Later on (1977),
Michaelis reported discovering the alkaloid in
samples collected in Germany (see Figure 14).

The Popularity of Psilocybe semilanceata

has 

Since  the  late  1970s,  investigators  in
several countries have been using of state-of-the-
art  methodology 
(High  Performance  Liquid
Chromatography)  to  test  samples  and  quantify
their  alkaloid  content.  The  following  sections
include  more  detailed  reviews  of  these  tests  and
their results.

Psilocybe 

semilanceata 

clearly
established itself as t h e psychotropic mushroom
species in Europe. The species thrives throughout
the  European  continent,  where  it  has  sparked
extensive  research  efforts.  In  terms  of  usage,
Psilocybe  semilanceata  is  Europe's  most  popular
psychoactive  species.  In  his  1983  monograph,
Guzman suggests that Psilocybe semilanceata may
well be the most common psychoactive Psilocybe
mushroom in the world. Even though the species
is  known  to  flourish  in  Europe,  North  America,
Australia  and  Asia,  the  mycofloras  of  many
countries  have  not  yet  been 
studied  or
documented.  Thus,  we  cannot  yet  evaluate  the
prevalence of Psilocybe semilanceata on a global
scale.

In  Europe,  however,  discoveries  of
Psilocybe  semilanceata  have  been  reported  from
the 
following  countries:  Finland,  Norway,
Sweden,  Denmark,  Germany,  Switzerland,
Austria,  The  Netherlands,  Belgium,  France,
Russia,  Poland, 
former  Czechoslovakia,
Hungary,  Romania,  Scotland,  England,  Wales,
Italy and Spain.

detailing 

Unfortunately, 

there  are  no  com-
prehensive  maps 
species's
distribution  pattern.  Traditionally,  mycologists
have often neglected relatively tiny species, such
as Psilocybe semilanceata, that tend to share their
habitats with other, more prominent species. The
sarcastic  phrase  "The  mushrooms  occur 
in
abundance  wherever  mycologists  abound" 
is
particularly pertinent in reference to the Psilocybe
species.  Prior  to  the  discovery  of  psilocybin,  the
Psilocybe  genus  languished  in  the  literature,
shrouded in obscurity. To this day, few

the 

the 

 189. Psilocybe semilanceata Fr. [Worthless]

The cap is uniformly conic to bell-shaped, with a pointy or obtuse center forming
an almost wart-like protrusion; initially, caps are often taller than they are wide, margins
are bent and curved inward; later on, width of cap is 1.5-4 cm. Hygrophanous; coloration
is  a  dirtyish  olive-brown  when  wet,  with  translucent  striate  margins;  at  the  center,
coloration is ocher or greenish-yellow against an overall shade of smudgy pale yellow and
oftentimes  some  greenish  stains;  only the  margins  are  banded  by  a  darkcolored,  watery
stripe  around  the  edge.  No  stripes  or  banding  evident  when  mushrooms  are  completely
dried.  Lacking  a  veil,  caps  are  thin-fleshed,  bald,  with  an  easily  separable  pellicle  that
remains gelatinous-sticky for a long time, turning shiny when dry.

Gills  are  olive  brown  to  blackish  purple  brown  in  color,  with  the  edges  often
remaining white, gill spacing is quite crowded; gill attachment is either roughly linear or
mostly adnexed; up to 3.5 mm wide; attached at the stem only, fully detached later on.

Spores are elongated to ellipitical in shape, smooth and large, measuring 12-16 u

by 6-8,u. Color of spore dust is blackish purple brown.

Stem is very slender, almost uniformly thin and always twisted, 6-12 cm long and
1.25-2 mm thick, yellowish or whitish in color; areas subjected to pressure develop bluish-
green stains. Stems are silky smooth and roughly at the center, cortinate fibrils appear like
remnants of a veil, which is brittle and lined with a white fibrous cord of wool-like
texture.

When dry, the flesh of the cap is colored pale yellow, while the stem's flesh is

ocher brown in color, especially towards the bottom. It is odorless and its flavor is mild.
The mushroom grows from August to October, frequently in gregarious clusters, and can
be found in pastures and along roadways, growing on dung that has undergone complete
decomposition. It is not a particularly rare species.

Figure 11(above)This excellent description of Psilocybe semilanceata by Michael & Schulz
(1927) is shown here as originally published in German, with an English translation.

trips, 

Mycologists specialize in the study of Psilocybes,
despite the fact that Psilocybe semilanceata is the
most common and conspicuous species among the
Psilocybes.  Also,  mushroom 
lovers  whose
interests are not purely scientific (see Chapter 7.4)
do  not  usually  preserve  their  knowledge  for
posterity in the form of distribution maps.
However,  there  is  one  map  from  1986,  which
the  distribution  pattern  of  Psilocybe
shows 
semilanceata  across  Germany  (see  Figure  20,  p.
28).
Almost  no  published  information  is  available
about  locations  where  Psilocybe  species  have
been found in eastern Germany. During my own
I  have  discovered  Psilocybe
field 
semilanceata specimens in various locations, such
as near my hometown of Mansfeld in the Vorharz
Mountains, in the marshlands of Duben as well as
in  other  eastern  German  marshland  areas.  In
addition,  friends  who  are  also  mycologists  have
told  me  about  finding  the  mushrooms  in  other
parts of the country. A book published in 1952 is
among the rare sources that includes details about
specimens discovered in the southeastern state of
Saxony (see Figure 16, p. 23).

The  Psilocybe 

species  grow  most
abundantly on wet pastures surrounded by forest
areas.  In  my  experience,  Psilocybe  semilanceata
grows in most of Germany's forestlands. The
species fruits during the fall, from late September
through  October. It favors  acidic  soil  and  grassy
terrain  alongside  trails  or  around  the  edges  of
forest lands. Specimens are generally clustered in
small groups of 30 mushrooms or less. Deer
droppings  or  other  animal  feces  are  usually
present  at  those  locations,  even  though  the
mushrooms  never  grow  directly  on  top  of  dung.
Occasionally,  extremely  stunted  specimens  may
be found in the mountains by the side of the road.
The soil below older cow pastures provides
an  excellent  medium  for  extensive  mycelial
growth.  In  some  locations,  large  areas  yield  an
abundance of fruiting bodies, mirroring the extent
of mycelial saturation in the soil. Given adequate
moisture, maximum yields can be expected, if the
pasture was grazed at least once during the weeks
before  fruiting  season.  However,  the  mushrooms
also thrive under similar conditions on horse and
sheep  pastures.  Such  grassy  areas  inside  forests
are  usually  grazing  areas  for  deer,  who  provide
the soil with additional fertilization. However,

from 

ranges 

the  coastal  areas 

level  (MTB-8443,  1985).  In 

Psilocybe semilanceata does not grow in locations
where  artificial  fertilizer  has  been  used.  Such
pastures  are  often  flanked  by  creeks  or  swamp
lands, which saturate the soil with water. During the
summertime,  the  warm  climate  in  these  wet  areas
provides  an  excellent  environment  for  optimal
mycelial  growth.  In  Germany,  the  mushroom's
habitat 
to
mountainous  regions,  where  the  species  has  been
found at altitudes of up to 1,720 m (5,160 ft) above
sea 
the  former
Czechoslovakia,  samples  have  been  collected  at
altitudes  ranging  from  330  to  1,000  m  (1,000  -
3,000  ft),  with  one  location  at  1,400  m  (4,200  ft)
above  sea  level.  According  to  these  distribution
patterns,  the  species  does  not  appear  to  favor  a
specific  altitude.  As  of  1986,  44  locations  in  the
former Czechoslovakia had been logged, yielding a
total of 54 samples. In contrast to other mushroom
species,  such  as  the  cultivated  commercial  white
Psilocybe
mushrooms 
semilanceata  will  fruit  in  a  comparatively  much
wider range of temperatures.

(Agaricus 

bisporis), 

While  Psilocybe  semilanceata  is  common
throughout Germany, the species does not appear to
favor  specific  areas  where  it  occurs  in  marked
abundance or density. One obvious limitation on the
growth  of  the  species  is  the  limited  presence  of
fertilizer in areas that would otherwise be excellent
locations for the mushroom to thrive in. Most likely
that is why the species has not expanded into new
habitats  in  Germany  over  the  last  few  decades.
Descriptions of frequency of occurrence in the older
literature 
contemporary
observations.
On 

Psilocybe
semilanceata can produce a huge number of fruiting
bodies  at  certain  locations  where  conditions  for
growth are excellent.

comparable 

occasion, 

however, 

are 

to 

Between a Creek and a Marshlands Pond....

8'/2 Inches Tall !

At this point, I would like to provide some
more details about two marshlands locations, where
we have conducted mycological field research over
the course of several years.

At  the  first  location,  the  fruiting  bodies
grew in a shallow grass valley among very tall grass
on slightly acidic soil. This grassy area was

a 

fall 

for 

three 

/2  in.[!]

the 

In  areas  exposed 

a forest clearing between a creek and a marshlands
pond. 
to  direct  sunlight,
temperatures  were  significantly  higher  than  they
were  in  surrounding  areas,  a  phenomenon  that
persisted  during  the  fall  season.  Deer  droppings
contributed to frequent fertilization of the area. The
fruiting  bodies  from  the  first  batch  of  mushrooms
found in this location had stems of up to 81
(21.5 cm) tall, due to very tall grass in the area. The
caps  of  the  mushrooms  were  so  tiny,  that  clear
as  Psilocybe
identification  of 
semilanceata  was  not  immediately  possible.  Even
though 
present,
chromatography testing was needed to confirm the
species.  Subsequent  discoveries,  however,  yielded
samples that could be identified on the spot based
on  their  morphological  characteristics.  We  were
able to collect 30 to 60 specimens at this location
every 
years.
Unfortunately,  the  location  was  destroyed  soon
afterwards,  due  to  man-made  modifications  to  the
marshlands and construction of an access road.

reaction  was 

consecutive 

species 

bluing 

During  the  same  year,  we  discovered  a
second location within about half a mile of the first
one. The area was very large, a former cow pasture
which  had  been  grazed  regularly.  It  was  located
next  to  a  creek  that  saturated  the  soil  completely.
Today, sheep occasionally graze the area and deer
droppings are commonly found in the grass. Here,
Psilocybe  semilanceata  fruits  in  abundance.  Each
fall season, the pasture is covered with hundreds of
fruiting bodies (see Figure 15, p. 23).

When 

For  three  years,  we  returned  to  the  area
three times each fall, and harvested a total of 2,800
mushrooms  (ca.  140  g  or  5  oz  dry  weight)  at  the
location.  While  some  of  the  fruiting  bodies  could
be spotted easily on the grassy soil (see Figure 17)
the  vast  majority  of  the  specimens  were  usually
concealed inside clumps of grass (see Figure 18).

the  weather 

is  dry,  Psilocybe
semilanceata is an easily recognizable species. The
fruiting bodies are extremely hygrophanous, which
is why the color of the caps changes to a dark olive
black-brown when the mushrooms are wet. Only a
close inspection of the gills and the crooked stems
enabled us to differentiate the wet mushrooms from
the Panaeolus species (see Chapter 3.3). Like many
other  psychotropic  mushroom  species,  a  crucial
characteristic of

Psilocybe  semilanceata  is  the  blue  discoloration
of parts of the cap and the lower half of the stem,
While  the  degree  of  discoloration  is  relatively
minor,  it  is  particularly  noticeable  when  the
mushrooms  are  wet.  Fruiting  bodies  that  are  old
and  wet  may  spontaneously  develop  transparent,
blue  stains  across  their  caps.  On  the  other  hand,
discoloration of the stems does not set in until the
fruiting  bodies  have  been  separated  from  the
mycelia for about 30 to 60 minutes. Even in areas
of  abundant  harvests,  I  have  always  found
mushrooms  with  bluish-green  discoloration’s
alongside  others  that  lacked  this  characteristic.
During the drying process, the blue coloration is
preserved, even though some fading may occur.

The  historic  descriptions  of  Psilocybe
semilanceata  cited  above  are  so  detailed  that  I
cannot add any of better quality. In spite of many
opinions in the literature to the contrary, there is a
noticeable odor that emanates from damp fruiting
bodies that have been opened. This odor is similar
to,  but  weaker  than  the  one  associated  with
Psilocybe  bohemica,  which  is  often  described  as
reminiscent  of  radishes  or  poppies,  but  as
generally not unpleasant (also see Chapter 3.2).

In addition, the mushrooms have another
special  attribute  that  rarely  occurs  in  other
species.  Under  the  light  of  a  quartz  lamp,
Psilocybe 
turn
fluorescent.  The  substance  responsible  for  this
phenomenon,  however,  has  not  yet  been
identified.

semilanceata 

specimens 

Accounts of Impressive Experiences

Psilocybe semilanceata is quite likely the
most potently psychoactive mushroom among the
European  species.  The  impressive  nature  and
rapid  onset  of  the  effects  are  reflected  in  the
description of an intoxication from England cited
above.  These  elements  are  also  part  of  the
following  account,  which  details  a  mycologist's
first self-experiment:

After  ingesting  1.3  g  (less  than  one-
sixteenth  of  an  ounce)  of  dried  and  pulverized
mushrooms (30 mushrooms total) in water on an
empty  stomach,  20  minutes  passed  before  the
sudden onset of hallucinatory effects, including a
heavy  flow  of  tears.  The  apparitions  are  best
described as a conjunction of visions and

Figure 17 - Psilocybe semilanceata on grassy soil.

Figure 18 - Psilocybe semilanceata hidden in high grass.

- 

the 

later  on 

I  discovered 

three  of  us 

thoughts 
term
"visualization" in the literature. I had an extremely
uncomfortable  experience  of  a  daydream-like
flight, where my arm had been seized by a witch...
There  were 
flying  somewhere,
sometime.  After  that,  all  objects  in  my  immediate
surroundings appeared pale and bleached. With my
eyes  closed  I  "saw"  abstract  ornaments  with  no
distinct luminescence or emotional impact. During
this  time, free-floating  dysphoria developed,  along
with guilt-ridden ruminations. After five hours, the
effects  ended  suddenly,  followed  by  the  gradual
onset of a mild headache, while no other side effects
were noted.

On  the  other  hand,  a  second  experiment
involving about half the previous dosage stood out
because  of  a  surge  of  memories  and 
the
simultaneous re-experience of childhood emotions,
along  with  some  curious  feelings  of  melting  and
merging:

One day in late summer I was out on a

nature walk and ingested 0.6 g of pulverized
mushrooms. The weather was warm and sunny and
I was walking through open areas near my
hometown, were I had often played as a child.
Suddenly, I experienced an emotional state most
accurately described as child-like wonder and
amazement about the surrounding forest. The area
nearby appeared in very sharp contrast and my
visual perceptions seemed fresh and pure. Suddenly
I remembered in vivid detail just how small the
trees had been decades ago and how I never
observed any other plant growth there before dark,
which had sometimes frightened me. At the same
time, my body movements felt much more elastic
and childlike. This delightful state of reliving my
childhood lasted for about two hours. On the way
home I noticed a small calf out on the pasture.

The calf evoked a great amount of empathy
in me, when I noticed how much it was bothered by
pesky flies.
These feelings of compassion
culminated in a brief experience of completely
merging with the calf. I found it to be rather strange
and quite uncomfortable.
After four hours,
the effects subsided without any lasting side effects.
Finally,  a  third  mushroom  experiment  with
to  an
identification  with  a

Psilocybe  semilanceata  in  Oregon  led 
experience  of  complete 
person from the 19th century:

We collected a large number of "liberty
caps" in a pasture near Astoria. Later on, back

at our lodgings, I ate no more than six fresh
mushrooms. The key stimulus for the following
experience was provided by a water color painting
of an elegant lady from the 19th century that
captured my attention completely. Suddenly I knew
that I was re-living an earlier incarnation, a life that
began when I was born in Germany in 1813.

My name was Alexander Schmitt, and I

As a child, I

knew that I had died in 1871.
travelled by boat to North America, together with
my parents and other immigrants. In the United
States, 1 changed my last name to Smith. I was a
logger in a small Kentucky town named Sharpville
or Shopville. My life there was hard and full of
sacrifices and I drank a lot of alcohol.
These
circumstances of my existence were indicative of
my lifestyle, which included beating my wife and
otherwise mistreating her like the tyrant I was. As
the experience deepened, I completely identified
with the person of Alexander Smith. During these
moments I forgot my native German altogether, and
my thinking processes unfolded entirely in English.
In this manner, I eventually experienced the last
hours of Alexander Smith's life. I was lying in bed
on several white sheets and was very ill. Suddenly I
knew that my wife had poisoned me, to put an end to
my continuous degrading treatment of her over the
years.
I knew that I did not have long to live. I was
about to die. Fortunately, the experience ended
before I had to face the final struggle against death.
Today, over three years later, this unique experience
is still etched into my memory in vivid detail.

The experience's emotional impact has not

diminished with the passage of time.

Such  experiences  of  earlier  incarnations
cannot be explained in terms of the accepted tenets
of western science. In any case, a thorough attempt
should  be  made  to  research  the  existence  and
historic  accuracy  of  the  locations  and  persons
involved.  The  individual  who  experienced  the
events  described  above  had  never  been 
to
Kentucky,  did  not  know  whether  or  not  a  town
named  Sharpville  or  Shopville  has  ever  existed
there and had never before had the slightest interest
in  this  U.S.  state.  Due  to  his  strictly  atheistic
upbringing, he had never thought such experiences
possible.  S.  Grof,  however,  has  described  similar
sequences  and  emphasized  that  they  can  occur
quite  unexpectedly  under 
influence  of
hallucinogens. He also noted that such experiences
are not exactly unusual, when

the 

an individual experiences repeated applications of
hallucinogenic substances.

In closing this section, I would like to
present a short account of an experience that
illustrates how the effects of psychotropic
substances can vary across individuals, depending
on the setting in which the experience takes place:

After ingestion of 0.6 g of pulverized

The initial images of entwined

mushrooms in orange juice, the effects began to
manifest after about 30 minutes: An endless
sequence of images behind closed eyes. At the same
time, no distinctly euphoric nor dysphoric
emotional states were noted; the reaction to these
images is most fittingly described as "temporary
amazement".
ornaments changed with the passage of time and
became plants, some of whom had several surreal
characteristics not known to exist on Earth. I
believe these images reflected my longstanding
preoccupation with the world of plants. Then,
when a mirror was placed in front of me, I
perceived "a gloomy-looking fellow with a fixed
gaze". Then I admitted, somewhat reluctantly,
that this impression did, in fact, reflect my
everyday demeanor and that I usually did not make
it easy for others "to see behind the facade ". The
experimental guide confirmed my own impressions.
Prior to this incident, we had never discussed this
issue.

States as well as from Switzerland and the former
Czechoslovakia  have,  for  the  most  part,  been
extensively  analyzed.  It  was  discovered  that  the
combined  analysis  of  several  dried  mushrooms
for alkaloid content yielded an average value of 1
%  psilocybin  of  the  dry  weight,  regardless  of
country of origin. The issue of chemical race has
been hotly debated with respect to other species,
such as the fly agaric mushroom. But in contrast
to  plants,  such  a  phenomenon  has  not  yet  been
proven  to  exist  in  the  higher  mushroom  species.
So far, there is no evidence to support the notion
that the basic chemical make-up of a species can
vary dramatically from sample to sample. Among
Psilocybe
the 
semilanceata  and  Inocybe  aeruginascens  (see
Chapter 3.4) appear to be the two species with the
lowest degree of variability in psilocybin content
across  samples.  The  first  three  analysis  results
shown  in  Table  1  represent  data  from  my  own
research  conducted  in  the  course  of  a  workshop
with other investigators in Prague.

discussed 

species 

here, 

TABLE 1

Average Psilocybin Content of Dried

Psilocybe semilanceata Samples

                                                                                                   Origin                     Psilocybin (%)

The Psychotherapeutic Potential of
Psilocybin's Psychotropic Effects

The preceding account of an experience by
a  67-year-old  mycologist  contains  elements  that
illustrate  the  beneficial  potential  of  psilocybin's
psychotropic 
to
psychotherapy.  We  will  return  to  a  discussion  of
these benefits in Chapter 9.

adjunct 

effects 

an 

as 

In accordance with their strong

psychoactivity, chemical analyses of Psilocybe
semilanceata specimens have revealed high levels
of psilocybin.
It is safe to say that this species
has been more thoroughly studied than any other
Psilocybe species, including the Mexican species,
whose dried mass is known to contain 0.2 - 0.6
psilocybin.

Collections  of  Psilocybe  semilanceata
from  England,  Scotland,  Norway,  Finland,
Belgium, Holland, Germany, France, the United

1. Dubener Marshlands,

Eastern Germany

2. Prague, Czech Republic
3. Krasna Lipa, Czech Republic
4. Norway
5. Pacific Northwest, USA
6. The Netherlands

0.96
1.05
0.91
0.95
0.93
0.97

Fresh  mushrooms  are  about  90%  water,
that is, one gram of mushroom material contains
an average of 1 mg of psilocybin.

Psilocin,  a  comparatively  less  stable
compound, is the phenol analogue of psilocybin
(see  Figure  19,  p.  27)  and  thus  oxidizes  much
psilocybin.  Psilocybe
more 
semilanceata  contains  only  trace  amounts  of
psilocin, if any at all.

readily 

than 

On the other hand, baeocystin as the

is

the 

Biochemical precursor of psilocybin is found in
all fruiting bodies of the Psilocybe species. The
precursor  has  a  hydrogen  atom  where
psilocybin's only CH3 group

located; the  average  baeocystin  content
is 0.2% of dry weight. In 1967, Leung and Paul
reported 
isolation  of  baeocystin  from
fruiting bodies of Psilocybe baeocystis Singer &
Smith  in  North  America.  In  1977,  Repke  and
Leslie  also  found  the  substance  in  a  Psilocybe
semilanceata  sample  from  the  same  place  of
origin.

Some 

investigators 

found
differences in alkaloid content when comparing
single fruiting bodies from the same location.

have 

TABLE 2

Alkaloid Content of Dried Mushrooms from a
Location in the Dubener Marshlands of
Eastern Germany (Selected Results)

Dry Weigh t (mg ) 

Psilocybi n ( % )       Baeoc ysti n (%)

18
30
70
85

1.25
0.96
0.72
0.90

0.34
0.21
0.19
0.10

(40 

                  Smaller mushrooms almost always
contained  more  alkaloids  than  larger  specimens.
This fording was then confirmed by another study
using considerably larger amount of investigative
materials 
mushrooms).  Moreover,
exceptionally  high  concentrations  of  baeocystin
have  been  shown  to  accumulate  in  the  caps  of
fruiting  bodies  that  contain  the  alkaloid.  In
addition,  one  mushroom  sample  from  Finland
deserves special mention due to its unusually high
psilocybin content of 2.37%!

Early 

studies 

controlled 

concluded 

the
psychoactivity  of  various  species  in  the  former
that  Psilocybe
Czechoslovakia 
semilanceata  is  a  more  potently  psychoactive
species  than  Psilocybe  bohemica,  even  though
both  species  were  found  to  contain  the  same
amounts  of  psilocybin.  Thus, 
researchers
hypothesized that the mushrooms are likely to

of 

contain additional substances that contribute to the
overall  psychotropic  effect.  This  hypothesis  is
supported by the fact that considerable amounts of
baeocystin  are  consistently  found  in  samples  of
Psilocybe  semilanceata.  I  am  also  aware  of  an
experiment  whose  results  showed  that  4  mg  of
baeocystin  caused  mild  hallucinations  for  three
hours, while 10 mg of baeocystin were found to be
about  as  psychoactive  as  a  similar  amount  of
psilocybin.

The Long Shelflife of Psilocybin

in  drying 

the  methods  used 

As  part  of  dried  mushroom  material,
psilocybin  is  a  remarkably  durable  substance.  A
sample of desiccated mushrooms dated 1869 from
a  Finnish  herbarium  was  still  found  to  contain
0.014%  of  psilocybin.  On  the  other  hand,  no
alkaloids  were  founds  in  another  sample  dated
1843.  Unfortunately,  it  is  no  longer  possible  to
determine 
these
samples. Temperatures over 50°C cause psilocybin
to  break  down  into  its  derivatives.  In  laboratory
settings,  mushrooms  are  usually  dried  at  room
temperatures.  Sometimes,  fruiting  bodies  are  also
freeze-dried for analysis. Freeze-dried mushrooms,
however, have  a  highly  porous  texture  that  causes
the alkaloids to break down relatively quickly, if the
samples are stored at room temperature (20°C). For
that  reason,  freeze-dried  samples  for  biochemical
analysis  are  stored  at  -10°C  prior  to  alkaloid
extractions  or  chromatography  testing.  In  addition
to the reports from Finland, investigators in North
America have noted that psilocybin's decay rate is
slowest  in  Psilocybe  semilanceata,  compared  to
other species.

   CH3

   CH3

(1)  R = H2P03
(2)  R = H

Figure 19 - Structural formulas for

psilocybin (1) and psilocin (2).

Psilocybe semilanceata

Figure 20 - Distribution pattern of  Psilocybe semilanceata in Germany and adjacent areas.

Locations are indicated by black dots.

CHAPTER 3.2

PSILOCYBE CYANESCENS - POTENT MUSHROOMS

GROWING ON WOOD DEBRIS

At  least  one  other  Psilocybe  species  in
addition to Psilocybe semilanceata is known to
exist in Europe. At this point, I must emphasize
that the differentiation of single species within
the  Psilocybe  genus  is  subject  to  considerable
controversy  among  eminent  taxonomists.  For
example, 
there  are  different  methods  of
distinguishing  the  Hypholoma  genus  from  the
Stropharia genus.

The Widespread Distribution

of Psilocybe cyanescens

While Psilocybe semilanceata is a species
that  has  long  been  clearly  defined  and  is  well
known  by  this  name,  there  are,  according  to
Krieglsteiner, other strongly bluing mushrooms
that  can  be  described  as  belonging  to  the
"Psilocybe  cyanescens  complex".  These  are  all
mushrooms that grow on raw compost and plant
debris.

In  accordance  with  current  states  of
knowledge, the following names in the literature
are  merely  synonyms  for  Psilocybe  cyanescens
Wakefield emend. Krieglsteiner:

- Hypholoma cyanescens R. Maire

- Hypholoma coprinifacies (Rolland ss.

- Geophila cyanescens (R. Maire) Kuhner &

Herink) Pouzar

Romagnesi

- Psilocybe serbica Moser & Horak
- Psilocybe mairei Singer
- Psilocybe bohemica Sebek

The  classification  of  these  synonyms  is
particularly  difficult,  because  the  mycologists
involved  provided  detailed  descriptions  for
isolated  collections  of  fruiting  bodies  only,
followed  by  comparisons  with  mushrooms
found at other locations, using dates provided in
the  literature.  Under  the  best  of  circumstances,
an  analysis  was  performed  on  dried  samples
from

different  herbariums.  However,  the  microscopic
data  pertaining  to  the  Psilocybe species  are  poorly
delineated  and  oftentimes  overlap.  It  is  therefore
imperative  that  additional  mycological  studies  of
Psilocybe  cyanescens  be  performed.  To  this  end,
fresh  mushroom  samples  from  various  European
locations should be used, and biochemical methods
must  be  included  in  the  investigation.  Guzman's
division  of  Psilocybe  cyanescens  by  geographic
area,  however,  definitely 
to  be
inaccurate.  According  to  his  system,  -North  Africa
was  home  to  Psilocybe  mairei,  while  Psilocybe
cyanescens were found in England and Holland and
Psilocybe  serbica  supposedly  grew  in  Serbia  and
Bohemia. The geographic distribution of the entire
species seems to cover a vast area, with variations
along climate and terrain at locations where samples
were collected. Such disparate morphologies are to
be  expected  when  dealing  with  "young"  species,
that is, species that have not yet firmly established
themselves  and  are  still  expanding 
into  new
locations.

turned  out 

Figure  7  (p.  14)  displays  locations  in
Europe  and  North  Africa  where  samples  of
Psilocybe cyanescens have been found.

Spores Introduced From Overseas?

In this section I would like to discuss

several aspects of the bluing Psilocybe mushrooms.
Detailed information about several isolated sample
collections has been presented by Krieglsteiner.
A description of any mushroom species
becomes valid only after a Latin diagnosis of the
collected sample has been published in a
mycological journal, along with distinctive
characteristics in relation to other species.

In 1946 Wakefield described as Psilocybe

cyanescens Wakefield a sample of bluing dark-
spored mushrooms collected at the botanical
gardens in Kew, England. It had been suggested

that  those  mushrooms  occurred  adventitiously,
that  is,  that  the  spores  had  been  imported  from
overseas together with other plant materials. The
presence of such mushrooms in botanical gardens
had  been  observed  quite  frequently,  and  such
imports  are  likely  whenever  the  mushroom  in
question  has  never  before  been 
in
surrounding  areas.  The  possible  importation  of
Gymnopilus  purpuratus  is  described  elsewhere
(see Chapter 3.5).

found 

The  mushrooms  displayed  a  much  more
than  Psilocybe
intense  blue  staining  reaction 
semilanceata.  They  were  observed  growing  on
small pieces of wood in the forested areas of Kew
Gardens  during  the  fall  season  for  several  years.
Among  the  mushrooms'  most  notable  features  are
their  undulating,  twisted  caps.  Guzman  believes
that  specimens  collected  in  British  Columbia  and
the  Pacific  Northwest  of 
the  United  States
(Northern  California,  Oregon,  Washington)  are
identical  to  those  found  in  Kew  Gardens  (see
Figure  24).  Indeed,  all  of  the  macroscopic  and
some  microscopic  descriptions  and  photographs
match the mushrooms found in England. However,
conclusive  proof  of  identity  can  be  provided  only
by results from DNA  analyses  and  cross-breeding
experiments  with  single-spore  mycelia.  I  will
elaborate on this method in a later section.

In  1975,  fruiting  bodies  of  this  species
were also discovered in Holland. Additional bluing
mushrooms  growing  gregariously  on  grass  and
decaying  reeds  were  found  in  the  Jura  Mountains
of  Switzerland 
in  1972  (MTB  8511).  Other
samples  are  known  to  have  been  collected  in  the
Steiermark region of Austria in the fall of 1976, as
well  as  on  the  Mediterranean  island  of  Corsica  in
1972 and 1984.

On  several  occasions,  a  number  of
fruiting  bodies  classifed  as  Psilocybe  cyanescens
were also discovered in Germany (see Figure 23, p.
32).

More elaborate descriptions of several such

collections are provided below:

On  October  31,  1983 

considerable
quantities  of  fruiting  bodies  in  all  stages  of
development  were  found  in  the  lower  regions  of
Bavaria  (MTB  7542).  Interspersed  with  grass,  the
mushrooms  grew  along  a  100-yard  stretch  right
next  to  an  old  garbage  dump  forming  colonies,
some  small  and  others  larger,  that  were  partially
intertwined. They were found scattered

across  decaying  plant  materials,  such  as  leaves,
twigs  and  mulch.  There  were  greenish  and
distinctly  bluish  stains  on  the  caps,  and  most
notably a bluish color near the base of the stem.
Other  fruiting  bodies  quickly  developed  blue
stains  in  reaction  to  being  handled,  even  in  very
cool temperatures.

The  description  of  Psilocybe  cyanescens
below  is  somewhat  condensed,  but  essentially
applies to all other collections, while the relative
measures and sizes may vary:

Caps: 5-40 mm broad, conic at first, with
cortinate fibrils ascending steeply to the stem, but
fading quickly, bell-shaped later on, partially with
an  acute  umbo.  Later  expanding  to  plane,  with
undulating or wavy margins, no remnants of veil,
also  broadly  convexed  to  umbonate  in  older
mushrooms. Deep chestnut brown when fresh and
moist, fading to a whitish color when drying, with
stains of bluish to blue-green coloration.

Gills: Attachment adnate to broadly
subdecurrent, color light to dirty beige when
young, later on changing to cinnamon-purple
brownish color due to maturation of spores. Blue
staining reaction is slight in response to pressure.
Stem: 30-85 mm long, uniformally thick at 1.5-3
mm. Stems and mycelial fibers turn blue in
response to touch, if blue stains not already
present.

Odor: Somewhat like flour or potatoes.
Spores: 6-8 x 9-14 u.
In  1976,  bluing  mushrooms  growing  on
plant debris were found in the Saarland region of
Germany.  Other  collections  came  from 
the
Southern regions of the Black Forest (MTB 7515,
1959, 1963), as well as the Vogtland area (1979)
and  the  Rheinland  area  (MTB  4706,  1982).
Similar  mushrooms  were  also  discovered  near
Hamburg (MTB 2428, 1983) and Bremen (1982,
latter  collections  are  especially
1983).  The 
interesting,  because 
the
Rhododendron  Park  and  People's  Park  in  those
cities  provided  layers  of  wood  chips  during  the
fall  which  enabled  the  mushrooms  to  fruit  much
more prolifically (thousands of mushrooms) than
they did naturally in surrounding areas, where the
species  was  also  fruiting  in  several  locations.
These  findings  most  likely  indicate  the  presence
of  a  similar,  imported  species,  because  native
fruiting  bodies  require  exposure  to  the  shock  of
colder temperatures of fall in order to develop

the  greenhouses  at 

from  the  mycelia.  For  instance,  other  wood
chipdwelling species have been reported from
the  Pacific  Northwest  of  the  U.S.,  such  as
Psilocybe 
stundi,  Psilocybe  baeocystis,
Psilocybe  pelliculosa  and  others  (also  see
Chapter  7.1).  Psilocybe  caerulescens  Murr.
from Mexico is also related to these species.
This was the first Psilocybe mushroom to be
recognized as psychoactive by Wasson in the
course  of  his  selfexperiment  on  June  29,
1955.

Very little is known about the chemical
composition of the collections cited above. I
analysed a few mushrooms from collections
found in the Rheinland area of Germany in
1989. The results were as follows:

Psilocybin: 0.51 % of dried mushrooms

Psilocin:

0.08 % of dried mushrooms

Baeocystin: 0.04% of dried mushrooms

the 

A  few  other  analyses  of  German
mushrooms  yielded  similar  results.  These
values  were  well  within 
range  of
concentrations of alkaloids found in Mexican
species. The  most  extensive 
studies  on
distribution,  psychoactivity  and  chemical
compounds of Psilocybe cyanescens complex
were 
former
Czechoslovakia,  where  the  mushrooms  are
generally  known  as  Psilocybe  bohemica,  a
name which is also used in the text below.

conducted 

the 

in 

An Amazing Discovery Near Poricko

In 

Kubicka first discovered the species on
December  6  and  13,  1942  in  the  Kresicky
Creek Valley village of Poricko v Pozavi near
Sazava (Czech Republic).
1950,
mycologist  Herink  described  the  mushrooms
in detail. He also believes that Fries classified
the  Psilocybe  cyanescens
mushrooms  of 
complex as Psilocybe callosa during the 19th
century.  On  November  11,  1986  I  had  the
opportunity  to  work  with  Herink  and  other
Czech  mycologists  on  a  mycological  field
research  project  at  the  location,  where  we
found 440 fruiting bodies (550 g or 19.6 ozs).
Covering  a  segment  almost  two  miles  long,
the  species  was  fruiting  among  nettles  along
both  sides  of  the  creek  on  wood  chips  of
Carpinus,  Alnus  and  Salix,  on  raw  compost
mixtures  of  Picea,  Pinus  and  Larix  needles,
as

well  as  on  decaying  pine  cones.  Several
specimens up to 15 cm (6 in.) tall with caps up to
5  cm  (2  in.)  broad  were  found  growing  on  a
rotting  log  whose  underside  was  exposed  to  the
running water. A water-loving Psilocybe species,
it primarily fruits in late autumn (see Figure 21,
below), when short night frosts induce maximum
possible  fruiting.  The  brown  caps  are  strongly
hygrophanous  and  their  color  fades  to  a  white-
milky  brown  when  dried.  Its  odor  has  been
compared  to  anything  from  radishes  to  poppies.
In my experience, the odor is highly variable and
thus  difficult  to  define.  Young,  dry  mushrooms
develop  intensely  blue  stains  in  response  to
handling,  while  older  fruiting  bodies  tend  to  be
found at the location with dark blue stains already
in  place.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  mushrooms
were  fruiting  at  the  same  location  near  Poricko
for  so  many  years  in  a  row,  producing  a  large
number 
year.
Unfortunately,  in  recent  years  the  location  was
partially destroyed, due to construction of a road.
By late 1982, the mushroom species had
been  found  at  51 
the  former
Czechoslovakia, with only seven of them located
in Bohemia, 40 in Moravia, and four in Slovakia.
Elevations vary from 200 m to 700 m (600 ft to
2,100 ft) above sea level, with only two locations
known  to  exist  above  700  m  (2,100  ft).  By  this
time,  112  collections  had  been  reported,  44  of
which  came  from  the  classic  location  near
Sazava.

locations 

fruiting 

bodies 

each 

of 

in 

Sept.           Oct.

   Nov.          Dec.         Jan.

Figure 21 - Fruiting curve of Psilocybe

cyanescens based on observations at several

locations in the former Czechoslovakia.

The mycelia make use of different kinds
of plant debris and even grow on wet cardboard,
where  they  develop  into  rhizomorphs  just  like
they  would  in  nature.  Rhizomorphs  are  thick
strands  of  mycelia 
transport
nutrients  and  water.  They  also  develop  intense
blue stains (see Figure 22).

that  serve 

to 

           Figure 22
 Psilocybe bohemica
rhizomorphs growing on
       wet cardboard.

Figure 23

Distribution pattern of Psilocybe

cyanescens
(according to Krieglsteiner). Locations are

 in Germany and adjacent areas

indicated by black dots.

Figure 24 - Psilocybe cyanescens at a natural location (USA).

Figure 25 - Psilocybe bohemica  on twigs and leaves.

Impressive Experiences

Psilocybe bohemica is a very psychoactive

species. Its effects are vividly documented in the
following account of one natural scientist's
experience as part of controlled clinical trials in
Prague:

About  30  mg  of  psilocybin  in  mushroom
tissue  was  prepared  in  hot  water,  with  effects
already  noticeable  ten  minutes  after  ingestion.  I
grew increasingly quiet. At first, my legs began to
tingle,  then  my  underarms  as  well.  Aside  from  a
deeper breathing rhythm, few other somatic effects
were  noted.  Initially  there  were  fits  of  laughter
caused  by  unusual  cognitive  associations;  this
laughter  also  affected  the  two  "sober"  guides.  A
growing  hyperacuity  interfered  with  the  ability  to
listen  to  music,  so  that  Vivaldi's  "Springtime"
caused  painful  stabs  inside  the  brain.  I  compared
the  pain  to  that  caused  by  a  "sawing  knife".  The
experimenters  appeared  bloated  and  yellow...
Existing  bodily  characteristics,  such  as  thinning
hair 
illusionary
transformation  into  a  monk  with  tonsure.  Their
voices  also  appeared  reverent  and, 
from  a
somewhat paranoid point of view, these gentlemen
at times seemed to be working a switching station
that, for some reasons, was my enemy. At the same
time,  I  found  both  of  them  to  be  quite  likeable.
During  this  time  period,  the  other  female  subject
perceived  fantastic  images  of  moving  colors  and
saw  visions  of  her  whole  life  unfolding  behind
closed eyes. During this period, I had the distinct
impression  that  an  electrical  current  was  flowing
through my body, which was not an uncomfortable
sensation.  About  three  hours  later,  the  gentlemen
retired  to  the  kitchen  and  the  nature  of  the
experience changed quite drastically.

stimulated 

person's 

a 

into 

In  a 

At first I felt as if my legs were increasingly
the  wall,  a  very  comfortable
merging 
state  of  utter  clarity  of
experience. 
consciousness, I finally felt as if I had no body at all.
I  said.  "The  most  descriptive  expression  is  the
experience of a pure soul". Using words as triggers,
we were able to induce shared experiences of color
visions  and  we  travelled  together  around  the  word
as  well  the  spiritual  realm.  She  made  a  clearly
telepathic  statement  about  my  hometown,  which  I
could not fathom or

interpret at the time, nor could I do so later on.
While under the impression that the thinking
process itself was something supernatural, I was
filled with confidence when I realized without a
doubt that death itself was but a levitation of the
soul, which may or may not entail looking down
upon the "normal" world. I did, however,
anxiously reject her offer to see into my future and
tell me about what she learned. Yet 1 knew that
she was already seeing such things.

in 

especially 

The  above  account  vividly  illustrates  the
the  mushrooms'
cosmic-mystical  aspects  of 
effects.  Such  effects  have 
frequently  been
described  following  ingestion  of  high  doses  of
hallucinogens, 
and
protective environments ("setting") coupled with a
positive,  internal  mood  ("set")  primed  by  careful
preparation. Of course, the detailed content of such
experiences  varies  across  individuals.  Pahnke's
masterful  study  during  Good  Friday  Services  in
1962 has become a famous event in the history of
research into these states of consciousness.

cautious 

Three  years  later,  a  remarkable  range  of
effects was observed in the same participant of an
experiment  conducted  in  Prague,  where  mycelia
from  Psilocybe  bohemica  were  used.  Due  to  an
analytical error, the four participants each ingested
72 mg of psilocybin, plus some psilocin, instead of
the intended dosage of 30 mg of psilocybin each:

Days  before  the  experiment,  I  already
began  to  suspect  that  this  experience  would  not
evolve as smoothly as it had three years ago, given
the amount of  personal stress I had suffered over
the previous two months. However, I had faith in
the  expertise  provided  by  psychiatric  guidance.
Prior  to  the  experiment,  I  asked  the  psychiatrist
about the possible causes underlying my seeming
inability to fully experience the unfolding of visual
imagery.  He  brushed  aside  my  question  with  a
short  and  terse  reply  :  "Resistance",  which  only
heightened my feelings of anxious tension.

After  ingestion  of  the  hot  preparation,
fifteen minutes passed until the sudden onset of its
effects.  I  ceased  to  perceive  the  music  and  sank
into  an  autistic  state  devoid  of  visions  which
lasted for three hours. This state was subjectively
experienced  as  one  of  confusion  with  a  partial
loss  of  consciousness  as  well  as  the  loss  of  a
sense of time and place. This torturous period,

brilliantly  blue  surface.  In  the  weeks  and  months
after the experiment, those  around  me  noticed  that
my behavior had changed to become more relaxed,
which  was  mentioned  spontaneously  on  several
occasions.

a  psycholytic 

the  experiment  apparently  facilitated 

The  experience  of  an  initial,  painful
delirium  illustrates  a  resistance  to  dealing  with
the conflicts that invariably emerge in response to
high  dosages  -  conflicts  that  were  resolved
through an intense psycholytic catharsis (also see
Chapter  9).  A  psychedelic  experience  ensued  as
both parts of the divided personality were merged
into  a  whole.  This  is  a  decidedly  positive
outcome  of 
episode  with
corresponding therapeutic benefits - a result that
was entirely unintended (!). Personal stress prior
to 
the
manifestation of deep-seated conflicts and issues
that might otherwise never have been dealt with.
With the exception of the attending psychiatrist,
outside  observers  appraised  this  experience  as  a
"bad  trip".  The  subject,  however,  thought  the
experience  to  be  enlightening  and  illuminating,
even five years after it took place. Grof describes
very  similar  reactions  to  LSD  therapy.  After
"going  through  Hell",  subjects  proceed  to  re-
integrate  their  personality  at  a  higher  level  of
consciousness,  while  experiencing  visionary
images of clear, bright lights and illumination.

TABLE 3
Concentrations of Psilocybin and its Derivatives
in Psilocybe bohemica (% of Dried Mushrooms)

Specimen # Weight
  (mg)

Psilocybin Psilocin Baeocystin

1
2
3
4
5
6

31
90
104
175
200
220

1.34
0.94
0.41
0.90
0.71
0.37

0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00

0.01
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.02
0.01

I saw him undergo

however, did not include any rough somatic
disturbances. After I woke up, I felt like a broken
machine; only the compassion of the other
participants, which were also suffering, helped to
clear my head temporarily. My experimenter
attempted to counterbalance these effects and to
provide a firmly grounded focus of reality, but his
efforts were unsuccessful in the long run. I felt as
if I was extremely drunk, except there was none of
the aggression typical of alcohol intoxication.
Soon afterwards, I began to project my emotions
onto the psychiatrist.
illusionary changes; initially he appeared to be a
dominant rooster which transformed into a punk
rocker. Then 1 felt that he would understand
what 1 was going through, given his extensive
background and experience with psycholytic
therapy. So I asked him, if the two of us could
retire to another room. When he consented, I
began to undergo a psychic split. The sound of
my voice was strange and whiny. I felt as if part of
me had split off and become an observer, while
the rest of my prone body had assumed the
position of an infant, sucking on a finger and
crying, crumbling up tissue papers at the same
time. On the psychoanalytic level, an
extraordinary experience began to unfold. I
became conscious of all recent and past conflicts,
especially those involving my parents.
This
part of my personality articulated and worked
through the emerging conflicts.
Even though
one might assume this process was facilitated by
the psychiatrist, this was not the case. In the semi-
darkness 1 perceived him as my deceased
grandfather, as a human skull and as an
American football player, whose armor I
recognized as a projection of my own uptight
personality.

Afterwards I looked at my reflection in a
large mirror and reconciled my differences with
myself as the two halves of my personality merged
into one. I saw a soft and tearful face and soon
realized that the person I was looking at was none
other than myself, that I had learned to accept
myself, in spite of all my problems. At the time I
also noticed that my self-disciplined behavior was
overly exaggerated, a trait generally judged as
unfavorable by those around me. I resolved to
become more relaxed and carefree in attending to
my daily routines. I believed this psychological
insight to be a revelation. With my eyes closed, I
saw images of translucent vessels atop a

Distribution Patterns of Psilocybe cyanescens

in the Wake of Environmental Changes

In  1973,  Semerdzieva  and  Nerud  first
reported  the  existence  and  qualitative  content  of
psilocybin  in  collections  of  Psilocybe  bohemica.
This  research  team  reported  psilocybin  levels  of
up  to  1.1  %  in  dried  samples.  Results  from  my
own  studies  also  revealed  variable  levels  of
alkaloids  in  different  mushrooms  collected  at  the
one location near Sazava.

In  spite  of  the  intense  blue  staining
reaction,  there  is  very  little  or  no  psilocin  in
mushrooms of the European Psilocybe cyanescens
complex.  By  chemical-taxonomic 
standards,
European  collections  are  very  different  from
Psilocybe  cyanescens  samples  collected  in  the
Pacific Northwest of the United States. The latter
are  known  to  contain  up  to  1  %  psilocin  (dried
mushrooms)  as  well  as  an  equally  high  level  of
psilocybin
(for a total alkaloid level of 2 %),

making it one of the most potent species in North
America. The study of extracts derived from these
mushrooms  revealed  that  enough  psilocin  was
present  for  the  oxidized  compound  to  be  visible
on  a  thin-layer  chromatography  plate.  This  was
not 
the  case  when  similar  analyses  were
performed on mushrooms collected in the former
Czechoslovakia. However, mushrooms from both
countries  contain 
levels  of
baeocystin.

similarly 

low 

Generally  we  can  say  that  this  potently
psychoactive  and  conspicuous  species  is  in  the
process  of  expanding  its  habitat  across  Europe.
Increasing use of fertilizer, the acidification of the
soil in many regions and the presence in any wet
forest  or  park  of  a  variety  of  fertile  substrates,
such as mulch, not dependent on the presence of
dung, are all factors that will likely help Psilocybe
cyanescens  achieve  a  remarkably  wide  area  of
distribution in the future.

Figure 26 - Psilocybe bohemica on twigs and compost.

CHAPTER 3.3

PANAEOLUS SUBBALTEATUS - MYCOLOGY AND MYTHS ABOUT THE

PANAEOLUS MUSHROOMS

the 

dark-spread 

Stories  about  involuntary  intoxications
with 
dung-inhabiting
mushrooms  (genus  Panaeolus) 
in  various
regions  of  the  world  have  been  in  circulation
since  at  least  the  early  19th  century.  In  1816,
an  impoverished  man  collected  mushrooms  in
London's  Hyde  Park  which  he  thought  to  be
edible  white  mushrooms  ("champignons  ",
Agaricus  bisporus). Soon  after  ingesting  these
mushrooms, his field of vision darkened and he
saw fog while feeling lightheaded and dizzy.

Trembling,  he  sank  into  his  chair.  He
felt all his strength draining from his body and
he  grew  oblivious  to  his  surroundings  and  no
longer knew where he was.
time
later, the feelings of dizziness subsided, and his
heart rate slowed down until he was finally able
to fall asleep.

Some 

The symptoms were later attributed to

"Agaricus campanulatus Linnaeus ", which the
man had mistaken for champignons. The same
species had been responsible for a similar case
of intoxication that happened about a year
earlier. Both accounts are highly reminiscent of
the 1799 intoxication with Psilocybe
semilanceata from St. James Green Park (see p.
15).
This would seem to be quite logical, as
there are psilocybin-producing mushrooms
even among the genus Panaeolus. However,
the question which of the 15 European species
actually produce the psychoactive substance is
an issue that remains the subject of
considerable scientific controversy. Even
though I cannot offer any decisive or final
evidence towards the resolution of this
problem, there are some fairly conclusive
results from modern biochemical analyses (see
Table 4 below) of mushrooms that were clearly
identified or obtained from herbariums, where
certain species were known to have been
deposited. Specifically, many American
species within the genus Panaeolus do not
appear to be the same as European species with
the same name.

At this point, I would like to present

some historic cases of Panaeolus intoxications.

A typical hallucinogenic experience blamed on the
accidental  ingestion  of  Panaeolus  papilionaceus
(Bull.:Fr.) Quel. occurred in Maine, USA, in 1914.

Below is an abridged version of the

description of effects by a Mr. W.:

On July 10, 1914, 1 gathered a good mess

of the mushrooms (Panaeolus papilionaceus) and
had them cooked for dinner. .... They were all eaten
by Mrs. Y. and myself. Peculiar symptoms were
perceived in a very short time.... A little later,
objects took on peculiar bright colors. A field of
redtop grass seemed to be in horizontal stripes of
bright red and green, and a peculiar green haze
spread itself over all the landscape... Soon both of
us became very hilarious, with an irresistible
impulse to laugh and joke immoderately, and almost
hysterically at times.... I then had a very
disagreeable illusion. Innumerable human faces, of
all sorts and sizes, but all hideous, seemed to fill the
room and to extend off in multitudes to interminable
distances, while many were close to me on all sides.
They were all grimacing rapidly and horribly and
undergoing contortions, all the time growing more
and more hideous. Some were upside down. The
faces appeared in all sorts of bright and even
intensive colors - so intense that 1 could only liken
them to flames of fire, in red, purple, green and
yellow colors, like fireworks.... The entire
experience lasted about six hours. No ill effects
followed.
disturbance of the digestion.

There was no headache, nor any

During  the  winter  of  1915,  a  species  of
Panaeolus spontaneously appeared in a mushroom
greenhouse  in  New  York.  These  fruiting  bodies
were  accidentally  eaten 
the
champignons that were cultivated there. This error
led  to  cases  of  intoxications  so  remarkable  that
Murrill  described  the  mushroom  as  Panaeolus
venenosus.  Some 
it  was
discovered  that  this  species  had  previously  been
described as Agaricus

time  passed  before 

together  with 

subbalteatus B. & Br. from England in 1861. The
combination  term that is in use today,  Panaeolus
subbalteatus (B.& Br.) Sacc. was first published in
1887.

Other  cases  of  intoxications  with  similar
symptoms  caused  by  the  Panaeolus  species  have
been reported in the United States (1917), as well
as  from  Australia  (after  1940),  where  the  species
involved  was  described  as  "Panaeolus  ovatus
Cooke & Massee".

agreement  with  Linder's 

In 1939, these reports induced Schultes,
in 
classification
experiments, to publish as Panaeolus sphinctrinus
(Fr.)  Quel.  the  teonanacatl  mushroom  described
in  the  Mexican  literature  from  the  16th  and  17th
centuries.

However,  Wasson,  Heim  and 

their
collaborators,  as  well  as  Singer,  were  unable  to
document  the  usage  of  Panaeolus  mushrooms  in
Mexico, in addition to their reports about the usage
of psychoactive Psilocybe species from the 1950s.
By 1959, even Guzman referred to this species as
"the false teonanacatl". So far, he has been unable
to  document  native  usage  of  any  Panaeolus
species in  Mexico. In  fact,  the  natives  of  Mexico
hallucinogenic  Panaeolus
consider 
mushrooms to be poisonous.

bluing, 

Despite the poisoning case reported in
England, the early German literature does not
classify Panaeolus species as poisonous (see
Figure 27). The Psilocybe species were treated
similarly.

Figure 27 describes the mushroom's
characteristics as accurately as Figure 3 (p. 6)
depicts its habitus. More recent descriptions are
usually less detailed and thorough than Michael &
Schulz's from 1927.

In  Germany,  a  case  of  intoxication  with
Panaeolus  mushrooms was first reported  in  1957
(see  Figure  28).  From  today's  perspective,  it
appears  that  the  mushroom  responsible  for  the
intoxication  was  most  likely  Panaeolus  retirugis
(Fr.) Gill.

About 30 to 60 minutes after ingestion of
the  cooked  mushrooms,  the  woman's  field  of
vision began to quiver increasingly. At the same
time,  her  pupils  were  extremely  dilated.  As  she
began to have difficulties breathing, she suffered
a full-fledged anxiety attack. All objects appeared
as  if  obscured  by  curtains.  After  the  effects  had
subsided,  no  symptoms  of  lasting  damage  could
be detected.

In 1970, another poisoning case with
Panaeolus  subbalteatus  occurred  in  Leipzig.
Similar to the 1915 incident in New York, the
mushrooms  spontaneously  emerged  among  a
culture  of  artificially  cultivated  mushrooms
(Stropharia  rugoso-annulata  Farlow,  in  this
case)  and  then  were  eaten  by  mistake.  The
description of its effects is somewhat peculiar.
Growing on Dung, Manure and Compost

The stories about intoxications as well as the
very name "dung-inhabiting" mushroom offer
clues about the kinds of habitats this species
prefers to grow in.
At times, they grow directly on top of dung or
on pastures that have been heavily fertilized.
They are also found on trash heaps, on
compost or on straw substrates where mush
rooms are commercially cultivated. European
Panaeolus species that produce psilocybin
have a special attribute that differentiates them
Psilocybe species: they very seldom develop
blue stains when handled or injured.
In his description of a Scottish case of
intoxication in 1977, Watling mentions marked
blue colorations along the caps of stems of
Panaeolus subbalteatus, which also developed
in reaction to pressure. According to my
observations, the formation of blue stains is
very rare. Reports from the Pacific Northwest
United States also state that only one in a hundred
mushrooms actually turns blue.
One controversial issue in the literature
concerns the toxicity of one species: Panaeolus
foenisecii (Pers.:Fr.) Kuhn.
This species
has previously been classified as Psilocybe as
well as Psathyrella, and has been described as
Panaeolina in contrast to Panaeolus, because it
is a species that does not grow on dung, fruits
only after the hay harvest, and develops spores
that are purplish-brown and abrasive. Other
Panaeolus species, however, have black spore
prints when placed on white paper underneath a
glass vessel to prevent dehydration. But, even
the spores of Panaeolus foenscecii (Pers..-Fr.)
Kuhn.do not all ripen at the same time, which
can cause the gills to appear mottled.
Due to the complications with taxonomic
differentiation, there are certainly no reliable

192. Panaeolus subbalteatus Berk.u.Br.

The cap is broadly convex, obtuse, often with a slight umbo in the middle,
usually 3-4 cm broad, sometimes up to 5 cm. Hygrophanous, reddish brown when
wet, pale and brownish to flesh-colored when dry. Margins moist to watery at times,
and banded with a dark brown stripe around the edges. Surface smooth or lightly
wrinkled, bald, rather fleshy, no veil.
The gills are reddish brown when young, later on sooty or black, gill spacing
is rather crowded and bulgy, gills are 7-8 mm wide and somewhat thick. Gills are
initially attached to the stem, and detached later on.
The spores are almost lemon-shaped, 13-14u long and 8-9,u wide, smooth,
black and opaque.
The  stems  are  slender,  4-8  cm  in  length  and  uniformly  thick  (3-4  mm,
sometimes up to 5 mm). Stems are often curvy and reddish brown in color; silky-
fibrous with a slight ring at the top. Stems are narrowly tubular and break easily.

The flesh is pale and odorless with a mild taste.

             Habitat and season: The mushroom grows cespitosely to gregariously from
June through October in grassy areas. It particularly thrives on fertilized fields and
pastures, but occurs there comparatively less often.

Figure 27 - Description of Panaeolus subbalteatus by Michael & Schulz from

1927 (with English translation below).

Figure  28  -  First  description  of  a  Panaeolus  intoxication  in  Germany   (1957).  Symptoms  are
compared  to  those  of  alcohol  poisoning,  such  as  difficulties  standing  or  walking,  incoherent  or
inappropriate laughter and talking, and visions of objects moving or dancing. Other symptoms include
remarkable hallucinations with splendid color combinations, as well as red eyes and dilated pupils.

Figure 29 - Panaeolus cyanescens in Hawaii (USA).

Figure 30 - Gymnopilus purpuratus on sawdust.

maps showing distribution patterns for the
European Panaeolus species.

Taxonomic Confusion

In 

the 

On  May  25,  1986,  in  the  village  of
Heringsdorf on the Eastern German Sea Coast, I
fruiting  bodies  of  Panaeolus
found  147 
subbalteatus  in  all  stages  of  development.  They
were growing on a compost heap that originally
contained  horse  manure.  Unlike  the  Psilocybe
species,  Panaeolus  mushrooms  can  be  found
anytime  from  spring  throughout  the  fall  season.
The  differentiation  of  Panaeolus  species 
is
further  hindered  because 
they  are  very
hygrophanous,  with  caps  whose  colors  can
change  from  whitish  to  grey,  or  from  reddish
brown 
to  a  very  dark  black-brown.  Older
mushrooms  on  the  compost  heap  had  caps  that
had  cracked  with  age,  and  margins  that  had
curved  upwards  and  were  covered  with  spore
dust.  Only  two  mushrooms  had  blue-stained
caps,  and  the  stems  did  not  change  color  in
reaction to pressure.
American
literature Panaeolus subbalteatus has been labeled
"Panaeolus variabilis", because some of the stems
imitate  the  appearances  of  other  mushroom
species and thereby contribute to the taxonomic
confusion.
The  species  is  also  known  to
grow  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Panaeolus
foenisecii 
(Pers.:Fr.)  Kiihn.,  creating  more
opportunities  for  mistakes,  especially  if  the
mushrooms are not closely inspected. The caps of
Panaeolus  subbalteatus  become  flat  as 
the
mushrooms  age,  a  feature  that  is  taxonomically
significant.

from 

its  name.  Only 

The  cap's  long,  watery  marginal  zone
gives 
the  mushroom 
the
psilocybin-producing species will be discussed in
more  detail  below.  Results 
recent
comprehensive  analyses  clearly  show 
that
Panaeolus  subbalteatus  is  the  most  important
psychoactive European species among the genus
Panaeolus.  Ola'h's  world  monograph  about  the
genus Panaeolus was published in the 1960s and
has caused much confusion, since he described a
number  of  species  as  "latent  psilocybin-
producers".  He  proposed,  for  example,  that
Panaeolus 
foenisecii  occasionally  produces
psilocybin.  All  Panaeolus  species  share  one
characteristic  that  differentiates  them  from  all
other species discussed in this book: They

to 

produce  5-substituted  indole  compounds,  such  as
serotonin and its biochemical precursor, 5hydroxy-
tryptophan. Serotonin is a compound widely found
in animals and humans. It acts as a neurotransmitter
in  the  brain,  even  though  not  all  of  serotonin's
effects have been entirely understood. It should be
noted, however, that both serotonin and 5-hydroxy-
tryptophan  are  completely  inactive  when  taken
orally.  When  performing  paper  or 
thin-layer
chromatographies,  both  of  these  substances  can
easily be mistaken for psilocin. It is remarkable that
Ola'h's results contradict current findings, in that his
data frequently showed the existence of psilocin in
Panaeolus species!

traced 

More  recent  studies  of  carefully  identified
mushroom  material  from  the  European  Panaeolus
species  did  not  document  substantial  amounts  of
psilocin  in  these  samples.  Also,  "chemical  races"
associated  with  specific  species  could  not  be
established.  I  believe  that  almost  all  accidental
intoxications  can  be 
ingestion  of
Panaeolus subbalteatus, with the possible exception
of one case caused by an imported tropical species.
Very little is said in the literature about Panaeolus
retirugis,  its  area  of  distribution  and  chemical
composition.  The  intoxication  case  from  Bremen,
however, indicates that this species is psychoactive
(see Figure 28). In 1985, I found two fruiting bodies
in a pasture, whose dried weight contained 0.03
- 0.05 % psilocybin, as well as serotonin. All of the
mushrooms' features, such as wrinkled, fleshcolored
caps,  corresponded  to  descriptions  of  Panaeolus
retirugis.

the  dried 

Based  on  his  analyses,  Stijve  concluded
fruiting  bodies  of  Panaeolus
that 
subbalteatus  contain  about  0.1  %  psilocybin,
regardless of location, as well as a tiny amount of
baeocystin.  Still,  accounts  of  intoxications  with
consistently potent psychoactive effects would seem
to provide evidence against such small amounts of
alkaloids  in  Panaeolus  subbalteatus.  Indeed,  dried
mushrooms  from  the  Pacific  Northwest  region  of
the  United  States  have  been  reported  to  contain
0.16%  -  0.65%  psilocybin.  Moreover,  the  first
analyses of the species in North America (1959) led
to the isolation of a water-soluble indole compound
which  is  now  generally  thought  to  be  baeocystin.
My own analyses of mycelia and 19 fruiting bodies
from the Heringsdorf location indicated levels of

psilocybin that are fully compatible with the data
from the United States:

TABLE 4

Ingredients Found in Mycelia and Fruiting

Bodies of Panaeolus subbalteatus

(% of Dried Material )

Ingredient
Psilocybin
Psilocin 
Baeocystin 
Serotonin 
Urea 

Mycelia
0.07
0.00 
0.00 
0.10 
0.00 

Fruiting Bodies
0.08(stem)-0.70
0.00
0.05(stem)-0.46
0.08-0.30
1.80-2.30(cap)

Table 4 shows that the nature and relative

amounts of the substances found are different in
the fruiting bodies compared to the base
mycelium, which was tested here for the first time.
As far as active ingredients are concerned,
levels  of  urea  are  trivial.  The  substance  does,
however,  have  some  significance  in  terms  of
chemo-taxonomy.
Among  species  discussed
here, urea is present only in Panaeolus and Pluteus
species.  Urea  was  detected  "incidentally"  during
thin-layer  chromatography  testing  intended  to
discover the presence of indole compounds. Stijve
has  collected  and  tested  samples  of  Panaeolus
foenisecii 
three
continents 
and
Australia),  but  has  consistently  failed  to  find
psilocybin  in  addition  to  5-substituted  indole
compounds. My own analyses of 100 mushrooms
from  a  wide  variety  of  locations  across  Germany
also failed to confirm the presence of this alkaloid
and  its  derivatives.  While  the  local  European
species that are discussed here also tend to occur
on  other  continents  (Panaeolus  subbalteatus,  for
example,  grows  in  Hawaii),  there  are  tropical
varieties  of 
this  genus  which  are  highly
psychoactive  as  well.  Given  the  best  possible
climate  conditions, 
fruit
adventively in Europe for short periods of time.

from  eight  countries  across 
(namely,  America,  Europe 

these  species  may 

Panaeolus  cyanescens  is  the  most  well-
known representative of these species (see Figure
29).  Like  other  tropical  Panaeolus  and  Psilocybe
species,  Panaeolus  cyanescens  exhibits  a  strong
blue staining reaction. The

large  number  of  existing  synonyms  for  the
species,  as  presented  by  Gerhardt  (see  Figure
taxonomic
31),  again 
confusion, 
insufficient
communication and exchange of information.

indicates  substantial 
as 

well 

as 

Panaeolus Experiences

in  order 

to  attach 

unpopular 

increasingly 

their  names 

Sometimes  it  is  difficult  to  avoid  the
conclusion that many prominent mycologists are
only  too  willing  to  disregard  existing  research
to
results 
definitions  of  "new"  species.  Singer 
lists
Panaeolus  cyanescens  separate  from  Panaeolus
as belonging to the genus Copelandia, along with
other species. Nowadays,  this  classification  is
becoming 
among
mycologists, and many of them do not accept it.
Panaeolus cyanescens is responsible for a number
of remarkable intoxications which occurred on
August 19, 1965 in Menton, located on the French
Mediterranean Coast. The mushroom
spontaneously appeared on compost which
consisted of straw and decayed horse dung. The
compost was intended to improve lawn
quality. It should be noted that the horse dung
came from a race track used by horses from
tropical countries. Under these circum-stances, it is
quite likely that the species responsible for the
intoxications was imported to the location from
another country. On one occasion, in the early
1970s, Panaeolus cyanescens was found at the
Budapest Fairgrounds next to the pavilions from
Thailand and Vietnam!
About the course of the intoxications: A woman
and her two children ate a meal consisting of only
about 60 g (2.1 ozs.) of the mushrooms. Within less
than fifteen minutes after ingestion, she began to
feel weak, followed by visual disturbances and
marked dilation of the pupils. About one hour after
the meal she developed dizzy spells that came and
went in waves. Increasingly, all colors in her
immediate surroundings coalesced into shades of
green. The hallucinations were fearsome; the heads
of monsters became visible and a wall opened up
into an abyss. There was a succession of human
figure with animal heads. The next day, everything
was back to normal. The oldest child (age 14) also
saw her parents' hair color turn green, had dilated
pupils and watched geometric shapes appear on the
wall.

The youngest child

(age 11) experienced cramps and lost
consciousness.

In  1960,  Singer  and  Guzman  suggested
that  Panaeolus  cyanescens  might  contain
psilocybin,  because  of  the  intense  blue  staining
they had observed.
It wasn't until after the
intoxications in Menton had been publicized, that
a  research  team  working  with  A.  Hofmann
detected  0.2%  of  psilocybin  in  the  mushrooms.
Considering  the  powerful  effects,  however,  this
concentration appears to be too low to cause such
impressive 
on,  Sandoz
Laboratories  reported  the  level  of  psilocybin  in
dried samples as 0.8%, along with 1.2% psilocin.
The  level  of  psilocin,  however,  may  have  been
falsely elevated by the presence of serotonin and
its  derivates  in  the  mushroom  sample  that  was
being tested.

reactions.  Later 

According to Stijve, a mushroom sample
collected  by  J.W.  Allen  in  Thailand  contained
0.4%  -  1.05%  of  psilocin,  with  only  trace
amounts of psilocybin; serotonin was present in
large  amounts,  comparable  to  concentrations
found in all Panaeolus species.

Apparently, Panaeolus cyanescens

produces more psilocin than psilocybin. Still, I
was able to detect 0.4% of psilocybin in mycelia
cultivated on malt agar, with no other indole
compounds present.

Discussion of the Panaeolus species

would remain incomplete without pointing out
that those subjectively terrifying psychoses
reported in 1965 cannot be attributed to a specific
mushroom ingredient, but were likely
precipitated by the circumstances (set and setting)

surrounding the incident. The effects described by J.
Allen in Hawaii after eating 20 specimens paint a
different picture altogether:

With radio music playing softly in the

The stars in the sky assembled in

dark, euphoria began to come on in waves. After
20 minutes, visions became so intense that I tried
to close my eyes. Whenever 1 did close my eyes,
my eyelids felt as if they were being sprayed from
the outside.
Colors were sharp and clear, but
I always quickly opened my eyes again. Colors
were dancing like laser beams to the rhythm of
the music.
clusters that reached all the way into my soul. I
was a little scared at the idea that the ocean
water might rush up all the way into our hut.
Other than that, feelings of euphoria were
overwhelming. At times, I was overcome by fits of
laughter. That night, I slept like "a prince ". The
following morning I gathered up my belongings
and had to walk back across the pasture where I
had collected the mushrooms the day before. I
noticed a lot of new mushrooms that had grown
during the previous night's rainfall. By way of a
lingering after effect I felt that the mushrooms
were sending me a message: "Don't forget us,
come back, if you can ".

It  is  important  to  keep  in  mind  that  more
comprehensive studies on taxonomy and biochemical
composition are needed in order to fully understand
the Panaeolus species. Perhaps A. Weil's suggestion
that Panaeolus subbalteatus from America's Pacific
Northwest  induces  comparatively  stronger  somatic
effects than the Psilocybe species can be investigated
chemically  as  well  as  toxicologically,  in  order  to
reject or support this hypothesis.

Figure 31 - Synonyms for Panaeolus cyanescens (according to Gerhardt).

CHAPTER 3.4

INOCYBE AERUGINASCENS: FAST-SPREADING NEW ARRIVALS

On  June  15,  1965,  1.  Ferencz  discovered
fruiting bodies known as "fibrehead mushrooms" in
Osca,  Hungary,  county  of  Pest.  The  mushrooms'
characteristics  did  not  match  those  of  any  known
species  of  the  genus  Inocybe,  as  described  in  the
literature.  That  same  year,  as  well  as  on  several
occasions  later  on,  Ferencz  and  other  mycologists
found  large  numbers  of  mushrooms  of  the  same
species growing in different  locations.  Eventually,
in 1968, these mushrooms were described as a new
species  named  Inocybe  aeruginascens  Babos  (see
Figure 33, p. 47).

Strange Distribution Patterns in

Hungary and Germany

a 

that 

noted 

In  1985, 

article,  Babos 

few  mycologists  who
specialized in the study of the genus Inocybe found
fibreheads  with  greenish  discolorations 
in  17
locations  (46  specimens)  across  Hungary.  In  her
Inocybe
1983 
aeruginascens  had  become  the  most  common
mushroom  of  the  Lower  Valley's  sandy  areas
around the Hungarian capital city of Budapest. The
species is known to fruit across these areas, singly
or  in  gregarious  clusters  on  the  sandy  soil  of  the
poplar  forests,  or  in  mixed  forests  that  include
poplars.  They  have  also  been  found  on  meadows
near poplar trees. The mushrooms are loyal to the
location  and  grow 
there  every  year,  climate
conditions permitting.

In  1975,  Kaspar  collected  the  Inocybe
species in Berlin (K6penick District) as well. More
detailed  studies  revealed  that  the  mushrooms  had
previously  been  misidentified.  As  early  as  1965,
fruiting  bodies  of  the  species  were  found  in  the.
arboretum  at  Berlin  (Baumschulenweg  District).
The  species  had  been  noted  "in  passing"  by  other
mycologists  with  little  interest  in  the  mushrooms.
Many  species  (about  160)  of  the  large  European
Inocybe genus cannot be easily differentiated from
each other, and therefore attract little interest from

expert mycologists.
The species are part of a
large  group  of  mushrooms  that  are  nicknamed
"LBMs"  (Little  Brown  Mushrooms)  in  the
American literature and as such they often entail
considerable  taxonomic  problems.  Other  ex-
amples  of  mushrooms  in  this  group  are  the
Panaeolus species as well as those of the genus
Psilocybe.

the  1930s.  He 

Whenever  a  "new  mushroom"  appears
spontaneously,  the  question  of  its  origin  has  to
be  addressed.  Herink,  the  Czech  mycologist,
maintains  that  he  had  already  discovered  the
species  during 
reportedly
deposited  samples  in  a  herbarium,  but  the
mushrooms have never been clearly identified as
Inocybe  aeruginascens  on 
the  basis  of
biochemical  analyses.  As  fruiting  bodies  of  the
Inocybe 
found
simultaneously  in  Hungary  and  Germany,  the
direction  of  the  species'  geographical  migration
could not be determined.
is  possible
that the species was initially confined to a very
small  area  and  only  began  to  attract  attention
after it had migrated into new habitats. We can
only speculate about the possibility of mutations
that may have evolved from known species over
a relatively short period of time.

aeruginascens 

Finally, during the 1980s, a few fruiting
bodies  were  collected  at  locations  in  Holland
(1980) and the Rhone Valley (Wallis Canton) of
Switzerland (1984).

were 

It 

In 1983, the species immediately
attracted the attention of biochemists and
clinicians, after G. Drewitz described mysterious
psychotropic intoxications caused by these
mushrooms in the city and district of Potsdam,
Germany, during June and July, 1980. The
observed range of effects was sensational for
mushrooms of the Inocybe genus, because many
of its species induce typical muscarine poisoning
symptoms. Muscarine causes parasympathetico-
mimetic symptoms, such as pupil contraction
(miosis), increased salivation and saliva
production. Muscarine has been identified in at
least 40 species of the Inocybe genus.
first reports

The

about  deaths  following  ingestion  of  the  potent
muscarine-containing  Inocybe  patouillardi  Bres.
date back to the early 20th century.

Identification Errors

Below is a more detailed description of the

effects of Inocybe aeruginascens:

On June 30, 1980 a teenager collected the
mushrooms  near  Potsdam  and  misidentified  them
as fairy ring mushrooms (Marasmius oreades (Bolt.
&  Fr.)  Fr.),  a  species  known  as  a  choice  table

mushroom.  At  home,  the  teenager's  father  sauteed
the  mushrooms  in  margarine,  and  they  were
subsequently  eaten  by  both  of  them.  The  son  ate
only about one-third of the cooked mushrooms.

About 35 to 45 minutes after the meal, both

father and son began to experience initial
symptoms. The son mainly reported colorful
illusions and hallucinations. The woven pattern of
his white handkerchief suddenly appeared as
shining stripes of crimson red. With his eyes
closed, he saw magically illuminated, abstract
structures.
foolish silliness that occurred for apparently no
reason at all.
instructions, he soon found himself outside, in the
pouring rain, running back to a near-by railroad
embankment, still laughing and giggling, in order
to gather more of the mushrooms that had
poisoned him.

He noticed his own state of

Following his father's

increasing 

experienced 

The  father's  symptoms  initially  included
yawning and a burning sensation of  the  face, as
well as itching at the hairline and fatigue.
He
then 
numbness
(paraesthesia) of the left half of his face and his
left arm. Later on, these symptoms spread to the
right  half  of  his  body.  Fully  conscious,  he  also
noticed  motor  disturbances  that  disrupted  his
language ability.
His
psyche was increasingly dominated by images of
depersonalization:  For 
the
experience  he  felt  that  he  "was  standing  beside
himself as an observer", while his voice sounded
very strange to him.

the  duration  of 

The second case of intoxication in Potsdam

occurred on July 13, 1980:

Seventy-five minutes after ingestion of

fibrehead mushrooms with greenish discolorations
(Inocvbe aeruginascens), the woman began to
experience hot flashes, nausea without vomiting,
strongly dilated pupils, along with a

".  Spacial 

marked sense of intoxication that she described as
"mostly  amusing 
illusions  were
experienced in combination with striking feelings of
weightlessness, distances appeared to be magnified.
After several hours, these symptoms gradually faded
without  lasting  consequences;  only  the  dilation  of
the pupils persisted well into the next day.

Based  on  these  cases,  Drewitz  proposed
that  the  mushrooms  contain  psilocybin  or  similar
substances,  a  hypothesis  that  was  later  confirmed
(see Tables 6 and 7, p. 49).

More cases of intoxications were reported
in the years that followed and earlier cases could
also be traced to this mushroom species. In each of
these cases, the mushrooms were misidentified as
fairy ring mushrooms.

TABLE 5

Accidental Intoxications with Inocybe
aeruginascens in Eastern Germany

Year 

1977
1980
1980
1984
1984
1985
1986

# of People                 Location
Hohen-
Neuendorf
Teltow
Potsdam
Oranienburg
Magdeburg
Woltersdorf
Potsdam

3
2
1
4
2
3
7

In  all  cases,  the  symptoms  subsided  after
several  hours,  with  no  lasting  side  effects.  A
psychiatrist  surely  would  have 
these
situations  interesting  -  especially  the  last  case
involving  an  extended  family  -  and  would  most
likely have welcomed the opportunity to study the
psychodynamics and social interactions during the
period of collective intoxication.

found 

In  1983,  Babos  reported  another  case  of
unintentional ingestion of Inocybe aeruginascens in
Budapest, which had occurred on July 1, 1970. In
this case, symptoms included subjective feelings of
decreasing gravity, colorful hallucinations, spacial
illusions and nausea without vomiting.

Flights of the Soul

In this context, the following account is of
interest;  it  details  the  experience  of  a  mycologist
who took 2.4 g of dried mushrooms in the course of
a test experiment:

The  mushrooms  tasted  like  ordinary  table
mushrooms. While reclining in a state of relaxation
about 30 minutes later, a very comfortable feeling
of  loss  of  gravity  set  in,  with  no  other  somatic
effects. Abstract hallucinations developed slowly, in
the form of bursting colors and lights. Once a state
of  complete  loss  of  gravity  was  attained,  it  was
followed  by  a  very  vivid  sensation  of  the  soul  in
flight, coupled with feelings of euphoria. When
looking  out  the  window  into  the  dark  night  of  a
forest  landscape,  visions  of  strange  patterns  and
formations occurred, which were deeply impressive
and seemed to impart an inkling of eternity. At the
end of four hours, the effects had dissipated without
dysphoria or any type of somatic side effect.

A  control  experiment 

for  comparison
purposes  was  performed  using  0.8  g  of  dried
Psilocybe semilanceata. The onset of symptoms was
much more sudden, including a heavy flow of tears,
so that there was an initial phase of anxiety. Only in
a  later  phase  of  the  experience  was  it  possible  to
perceive  ornaments  in  the  form  of  "underwater
streamers",  and  to  appreciate  the  aesthetically
enhanced nature of these visions.

regular pattern

of.    involuntary
intoxications is a good indicator for the large scope
of  expansion  of  Inocybe  aeruginascens  into  new
habitats during the 1980s. For example, at the time
of  the  initial  intoxications  -  when  the  species  was
still 
few  easily  quantifiable
collections  -  the  mushrooms  had  spread  from
Potsdam  to  the  location  known  in  1982,  and  from
there  moved  on  to  several  other  locations  in  the
vicinity,  where  more  than  150  mushrooms  were
found (see Figure 34).

restricted 

The

to  a 

Symbiosis With Trees

Starting in late May 1984, fruiting bodies

of the species could be found in abundance at
countless new locations across the Brandenburg
region of Germany. They tend to grow near the

roots of  different  deciduous  trees  (Populus,  Tilia,
Quercus, Betula), on lawns in parks and gardens,
at the edges of trails and in the paved margin areas
of  tree-lined  sidewalks  (where  they  may  even
grow on bare, sandy soil) as well as amongst the
greenery  of  residential  areas  in  the  suburbs  and
communities in and around Berlin.

Inocybe  aeruginascens 

psychotropic  mushroom 

Herein  lies  the  most  marked  difference
and  other
between 
species:
European 
Inocybe  aeruginascens  grows  only  in  areas  of
human development. Their prime locations are in
the middle of villages and towns, where they grow
locally much like other Inocybe species. They may
temporarily  produce  mass  quantities  of  fruiting
bodies, in those locations that are typical habitats
for the edible varieties of the fairy ring mushroom.
So far, the most abundant crop of fruiting
bodies  was  observed  in  1987,  due  to  very  wet
weather conditions, which allowed the mushrooms
to thrive. The following years were comparatively
dry and the species hardly fruited at all. It wasn't
until 1990 that a few mushrooms re-emerged at the
classic  location  in  Potsdam.  Despite  1989  having
been  a  bad  year  for  mushrooms,  it  was  the  year
when  Inocybe  aeruginascens  was  found  for  the
first time at four locations in and around Rostock,
a city located on the Eastern German coast, which
is  famous  for 
the
mushrooms  at  these  locations  is  evidence  for  a
much  wider  expansion  of  the  species.  In  coming
years,  we  should  expect  the  species  to  further
migrate into areas with sandy soil.

its  wet  climate.  Finding 

The  Inocybe  species  are  mycorrhizal
mushrooms, that is, in contrast to other psilocybin-
containing  species,  they  require  a  symbiosis  with
certain  types  of  wood  in  order  to  fruit.  Fruiting
occurs at the time of greatest biochemical activity
of  the  symbiotic  partner  trees.  Following  periods
of extended rainfall, Inocybe aeruginascens grows
in  the  trees'  root  areas  from  late  May  until
October.  The  mushrooms  are  especially  common
in  May  and  June,  a  time  period  during  which
Inocybe  aeruginascens  is  easily  differentiated
from  other  species  of  fibreheads,  as  long  as  one
pays close attention to locations, the characteristic
greenish 
the
mushrooms are stored overnight, especially in the
refrigerator) and the description shown below (see
Figure 32).

to  bluish  discoloration  (e.g. 

if 

Figure 32 - Description of Inocybe aeruginascens  (Germany, 1986) with English translation at right.

Figure 33 - First description of Inocybe aeruginascens

in the mycological literature (M. Babos, 1968).

Figure 34 - Inocybe aeruginascens fruiting bodies from

Potsdam, Eastern Germany.

that 

that 

here, 

species  of 

thin-fleshed  Psilocybe
Unlike 
mushrooms  that  do  not  fruit  until  fall,  Inocybe
aeruginascens frequently suffers from fly larvae
infestations,  especially  in  older  colonies.  The
resulting  lesions  are  injured  areas  that  turn
greenish-blue. It must be noted, however, that of
Inocybe
all 
aeruginascens  is  most  easily  misidentified  by
laypersons,  as  it  is  of  the  same  genus  as  the
potentially 
produce
muscarine.

introduced 

species 

species 

lethal 

Drewitz's 

speculation 

Inocybe
aeruginascens contains psilocybin was supported
by results from my own investigations in 1984.
Extracts of more than 100 mushrooms collected
in  Hungary  and  Germany  from  1967  to  1990
were  examined.  Quantitative  analyses  revealed
that  the  fruiting  bodies  contained  a  fairly
constant  amount  of  psilocybin  each,  as  well  as
some  baeocystin.  These  results  were  first
reported in February, 1985. Later that year,  the
presence of psilocybin in Inocybe aeruginascens
was  confirmed  by  research  teams  from  the
former West Berlin, Regensburg (Germany) and
Switzerland.  Known  cases  of 
intoxication
seemed  to  indicate  that  the  fruiting  bodies
contained small amounts of muscarine. But
among  all  the  samples  that  were  tested  -  at  all
stages of development and from widely different
collections  -  not  one  specimen  contained  even
trace amounts of muscarine.

In  collaboration  with  colleagues  from
Czechoslovakia,  we  were  able  to  confirm  that
the average alkaloid content does not vary much,
a  finding  based  on  analyses  of  extracts  from
several  mushrooms.  Moreover, 
the  alkaloid
content  of  fruiting  bodies  stored  for  prolonged
periods declined only slightly over time:

TABLE 6
Psilocybin Content of Inocybe aeruginascens
from Various Locations (% of Dried Samples)

Location
Potsda
Potsda
Potsda
Berlin
Hungar

Year Found
1984
1983
1982
1975
1967

Year Analyzed

1984
1984
1984
1985
1985

Psilocvbin
0.38
0.34
0.33
0.11
0.22

to 

those  found 

Psilocybin levels in Inocybe aeruginascens
in  Psilocybe
are  comparable 
mexicana Heim. Moreover,  Inocybe aeruginascens
contain 
traces  amounts  of  psilocin  at  most.
Baeocystin,  on  the  other  hand,  is  accumulated  at
levels  comparable  to  those  of  psilocybin.  The
alkaloid content of the Inocybe species differs from
those found in the Psilocybe species, which contain
three 
than
baeocystin.  The  variation  of  alkaloid  content
across  different  samples  of  fruiting  bodies  is
illustrated in Table 7, which shows the results from
analyses  of  mushrooms  collected  at  a  location  in
Caputh near Potsdam on June 8, 1986 (see Figures
32 and 34).

times  more  psilocybin 

five 

to 

TABLE 7

Psilocybin and Baeocystin Content in Single
Inocybe aeruginascens Fruiting Bodies (%

of Dry Weight)

Mushroom
1
2 
3
4 
5

Dry Weight (mg)

0.110
0.118 
0.220
0.221 
0.298

Psilocvbin
0.43
0.26 
0.23
0.50 
0.16

Baeocvstin

0.15
0.24
0.22
0.25
0.20

In addition, it should be noted that results
from 
these  analyses  of  mushroom  extracts
indicated  the  presence  of  a  previously  unknown
alkaloid,  which  I  have  named  aeruginascin.  The
molecular  structure  of  this  substance  must  be
similar to those of psilocybin and baeocystin. It is
a compound that is soluble only in polar solvents,
such as water, methanol and acetic acid. The levels
of  concentration  of  aeruginascin  found  in  the
fruiting bodies is comparable to those of the other
two  alkaloids.  The  compound  is  characteristic  of
the Inocybe species, so that the analytical results of
mushrooms 
thin-layer
chromatography  constitute  a  kind  of  fingerprint
identification of Inocybe aeruginascens.

extracts 

using 

Of course, there is the question whether

this substance contributes to the psychoactive
effects of Inocybe aeruginascens. It is remarkable
that all cases of involuntary intoxication

likely 

induced  a 
feeling  of  euphoria,  despite  a
psychological  state  of  mind 
to  create
extremely  unfavorable  internal  conditions  ("set")
for having a "positive experience" (i.e. knowledge
of  being  poisoned  by  mushrooms  with  unknown
and  potentially  fatal  consequences).  In  addition,
these cases of intoxications happened in the course
of pursuing normal, everyday activities,  including
appointments  and  other  interferences  ("setting")
which  should  have  precipitated  a  much  more
negative type of experience. Future research must
focus  first  on  the  discovery  of  the  molecular
structure  of  aeruginascin,  as  well  as  its  synthesis.
the
Subsequent 
potentially  moodaltering 
this
substance in terms of the mushroom's psychoactive
effects  as  a  whole.  Moreover,  we  cannot  exclude
the  possibility  that  ingestion  of  the  mushrooms
may  cause  a  slow  release  of  alkaloids  from  the
organic  matrix, 
their  gradual
resorption,  a  process  suggested  by  the  effects  of
the  mycologist's  test  experiment  described  above.
In the meantime, the presence of psilocybin along
with  baeocystin  has  also  been  confirmed  in  the
following Inocybe species:

investigate 
of 

followed  by 

influence 

studies 

should 

Inocybe corydalina Quel.
Inocybe haemacta Berk. & Br.
Inocybe tricolor Kuhner
Inocybe coelestium Kuyper

in 

these 

These 

species,  however, 

are  not
significant  contributors  in  terms  of  involuntary
intoxications,  because,  for  the  most  part,  these
Inocybe  species  are  extremely  rare  and  grow
almost  exclusively 
their
psilocybin levels were lower than those found in
Inocybe aeruginascens.

forests.  Also, 

Among 

species, 

Inocybe
corydalina  is  the  most  common.  An  analysis
revealed a psilocybin content  of  only  0.011%  -
0.1%,  a  concentration  so  low,  that  this  species
would  become  clinically  relevant  only  if  large
amounts of the mushrooms were eaten.

As  part  of  my  own  experiments,  I  also
detected  psilocybin  in  Inocybe  calamistrata
(Fr.:Fr.) Gill, a species whose lower stem  area
is blue. Other  authors  have  not  succeeded  at
confirming  the  presence  of  psilocybin  in  this
species.

CHAPTER 3.5

GYMNOPILUS PURPURATUS - MAGNIFICENT MUSHROOMS

FROM SOUTH AMERICA

Another  controversy  documented  in  the  literature
revolves  around  the  psychoactivity  of  several
species of the genus Gymnopilus.
More  than  50  years  ago,  in  October  1942,  a
remarkable  case  of 
intoxication  occurred  m
Cleveland, Ohio, which was attributed to Pholiota
spectabilis.
Today,  these  mushrooms  have
been identified as Gymnopilus spectabilis (Fr.)A.H.
Smith  (USA).  In  Europe,  they  are  also  Known  as
Gymnopilus junonius (Fr.) Orton.
A woman had been out for a walk in the woods one
afternoon  and  had  taken  a  few  nibbles  from  a
mushroom that she found, feeling confident that she
could distinguish the edible from the poisonous ones.
As soon as she lay down, she began to experience the
most glorious visions of color and sounds of music,
but  with  no  feelings  of  discomfort  whatsoever.  A
friend who was with her felt that a doctor should be
called  immediately.  When  she  consulted  me  about
her symptoms, I told her that certain mushrooms are
known to cause the symptoms she suffered.
I
added that these mushrooms were not classified as
poisonous, nor did the effects last very long.
called 
the
that  same  evening  and  said 
hallucinations  had  soon  passed  and  that  she  was
feeling perfectly normal again. She added that if this
was the way one was supposed to die of mushroom
poisoning, she was all for it.
Another case of poisoning was chronicled in
Harvard, Massachusetts:
On September 9, 1966, at about 9 a.m., a 56~year-
old retired mechanical engineer of Harvard,
Massachusetts, picked a bunch of mushrooms
clustered by the side of the road in front of his house.
Under the mistaken impression that they were honey
mushrooms (Armillaria mellea  an edible species) he
tasted the fresh flesh and found them to be slightly
bitter However, he took them home, where his wife
washed them and fried them in butter.
He ate
two or three caps around noon and within 15
minutes began to feel disconnected and "woozy" .
head felt numb and his vision was blurred.

that 

The room seemed smaller, and the walls closer than
usual.  Objects  were  shimmering,  and  appeared
yellow with dark areas in the center. The trees and
grass  were  a  vivid  green,  with  spots  of  radiant
purple.  These  sensations  were  not  unpleasant.
Everything  seemed 
to  be  unnaturally  colored,
resembling the image of a color TV. Even though he
was unable to collect his thoughts, his mind felt sharp
and  clear:  he  asked  himself  questions  and
immediately  knew  the  answers.  By  contrast,  after
having  put  down  a  book,  he  was  unable  to  find  it
again. After a few hours all three of the involuntary
participants had recovered and were able to give a
coherent account of their experience.

In this case, the mushrooms involved were
identified  as  Pholiota  spectabilis.  This
also 
identification  is  questionable,  however,  because
the  species  is  generally  described  as  having  an
extremely bitter taste. It was determined that there
are  significantly  more  species  of 
the  genus
Gymnopilus in North America (73) than there are in
Europe (15).

Mushrooms 24 Inches Tall!

Even  though  Gymnopilus junionius is one
of  the  largest-sized  species  of  mushrooms  (with
stems  that  have  been  observed  to  grow  up  to  24
inches [60 cm] tall), there are no known European
cases  of  intoxications  caused  by  Gymnopilus
species. The extremely bitter taste typical of some
Gymnopilus  species  is  an  effective  deterrent  to
their ingestion as table mushrooms, anyway.

However, the cases of intoxication in the
U.S.  prompted  Hatfield  and  his  collaborators  to
perform  phytochemical  testing  on  some  of  these
species.  From  1968  to  1971  this  group  of
investigators reported that eight species, including
Gymnopilus 
inactive
styrylpyrones,  such  as  bis-noryangonin.  In  the
wake of yet another case of unintentional

contained 

junonius 

Still, 

intoxication with Gymnopilus validipes in the U.S.,
the same research team was able to confirm that this
species  contained  psilocybin  (0.12%).  They  also
found the alkaloid in three other species, including
Gymnopilus spectabilis.
similar 

analyses  of  European
Gymnopilus  species  continued  to  yield  negative
results.

It  was  only  through  a  set  of  strange
circumstances that the presence of psilocybin and its
derivatives  was  finally  confirmed  in  European
mushroom species of the genus Gymnopilus.

As far back as May 1887, a new species of
mushroom was found growing on a tree fern trunk
in the botanical gardens at Kew, England (also see
p. 30, bottom right). The discovery eventually led to
the publication of these mushrooms as a new species
named  Flammula  purpurata  Cooke  &  Massee.  In
this context, we must credit Mordecai Cooke (1825-
1914), a mycologist of outstanding competence and
expertise, who studied a vast number of mushrooms
species, including Psilocybe semilanceata. He was
the first to formulate a hypothesis about the nature
of  the  bluing  phenomenon  and  to  point  out  its
physiological  significance  (  also  see  p.  16,  bottom
right). He discovered Inocybe haemacta as well as
several  Panaeolus  species  and  classified 
the
Flammula  species  mentioned  above.  Remarkably,
one of his first publications was a book of popular
folk  tales  entitled  "The  Seven  Sisters  of  Sleep"
(1860),  which 
an
interdisciplinary investigation of narcotic plants. Did
he himself, perhaps, sample one of the psychotropic
mushroom species? Most likely, we will never know
the  answer 
the
Flammula  species  came  to  be  recognized  as  being
native  to  Australia  and  South  America  (Chile),
where  the  mushrooms  fruit  on  dead  tree  trunks
during the month of May. Later on the mushroom's
name  was  changed  to  Gymnopilus  purpuratus
(Cooke & Massee) Sing.

this  question.  Eventually, 

happened 

just 

to 

be 

to 

Mushrooms on Compost Mixture of

Wood Chips and Pig Manure

In 1983, a conspicuous mushroom was

observed growing on discarded bark and wood chips
near a particle board factory in RibnitzDamgarten
on the Eastern German seaboard.

The  mushroom  was 
initially  classified  as
Tricholomopsis  rutilans  (Schaeff.:Fr.)  Sing.
However, 
this  magnificent  and  beautiful
mushroom  was  found  to  have  spore  dust
colored  orange  to  rusty  brown,  along  with  a
well-formed,  bright  yellow  cortina.  It  also
turned blue in reaction to pressure and with age.
Closer  study  revealed  that  the  specimen  was
actually of the species Gymnopilus purpuratus,
a  mushroom  that,  after  a  hundred  years,  had
once  again  been  imported  into  Europe.  The
microclimate  essential  for 
the  mushroom's
growth  had  been  created  by  mixing  liquid  pig
manure  with  the  discarded  wood  chips.  A
powerful  composting  process  results  from
pouring  the  liquid  manure  onto  heaps  that  are
up to 20 yards long and several yards tall.The
process  is  designed  to  eliminate  both  types  of
refuse. Measurements inside the heaps revealed
temperatures  of 
about  176°  Fahrenheit.
Consequently,  the  Gymnopilus  species  were
able  to  thrive  on  the  top  layers  of  the  heaps,
along with other species from Asian and South
American countries with warm climates.

There  is,  of  course,  the  question  of  just
how the Gymnopilus species got to Europe in the
first place.
In the late 1970s, large  amounts  of
feed grain were imported from Argentina. Thus,
it appears likely that some mushroom spores may
have  stuck  to  the  grain  from  where  they  passed
unharmed through the pigs' digestive systems and
went on to colonize the compost heaps.

Even  though  the  compost  heaps  are
plowed  at  least  twice  a  year  and  shipped  as
fertilizer  to  surrounding  fields  after  about  two
years of storage, the mushrooms continue to grow
on  wood  piles  in  new  locations  whenever  its
spores  have  reproduced  (see  Figure  30,  p.  40).
However,  in  the  wake  of  changes  in  economic
conditions  and  growing  ecological  awareness  in
Eastern Germany, it is likely that this composting
process  will  soon  be  discontinued  so  that  this
mushroom species may disappear in Europe once
again.

The  following  description  characterizes
the  Gymnopilus  species  that  does  not  have  a
bitter taste:

Cap: 15-42 mm broad, occasionally

larger sizes up to 20 cm in diameter. Flesh thin,
broadly convex without an umbo. Evenly covered
with pointy scales, purplish to ruby on yellow
background, dry. Margin inrolled at first,

incurved later, occasional blue stains.

Gills:  Close,  golden  yellow  at  first,
rusty  yellow  later  on  due  to  maturation  of
spores, edges concolorous with lamellae and
bald.

Stem:  Not  hollow,  6-10  mm  x  30-80
mm, very rarely up to 15 cm tall, cylindrical
to  slightly  club-shaped,  coarse 
fibrils,
striated,  lower  stem  area  and  base  bruise
grayish-blue  to  Greenish  when  injured  and
with age, found alone or in clusters of up to
22 mushrooms.

yellow, 

Cortina:  Sulphur 

almost
appendiculate  along  margin,  fibrous  at  the
apex  without  forming  a 
true  annulus,
disappears with age.
Basidia: Approximately 35 u long, club

By 1969, Singer had noted that based on
analyses  performed  by  Cassels  in  Chile,  the
mushroom contained an indole derivative and
that 
the  species  may  be  hallucinogenic
because  of  the  bluing  reaction.  By  1988,
reports  from  Germany  also  confirmed  the
presence of psilocybin in mushroom extracts
of  the  same  species,  as  evidenced  by  the
results  of  thin-layer  chromatography  testing
(qualitative  detection  only).  That  same  year,
my  own  quantitative  analyses  of  26
mushrooms  also  revealed  that  psilocin  and
baeocystin were present in all fruiting bodies
of  the  Gymnopilus  species.  So  far,  no  other
European  species  has  been  found  to  contain
as much psilocin as Gymnopilus purpuratus:

TABLE 8

Alkaloid Content in Two Collections of
Gymnopilus purpuratus (% of Dry Weight).

Mushroom       Psilocybin Psilocin Baeocystin

Sample Collected in 1988
1                    0.29
2                    0.31
Sample Collected in 1987
1                    0.32
2                    0.21

0.28
0.29

0.03
0.02

0.05
0.04

0.03
0.02

Table  8  illustrates  the  unstable  nature  of
the psilocin molecule: during the one-year storage
time  until  analysis  in  1988,  much  of  the  sample's
psilocin had already decayed.

Alkaloid  concentrations  were  found  to  be
higher in smaller mushrooms, as shown in Table 8.
Larger mushrooms contained about 0.1 % of both
psilocin  and  psilocybin.  I  am  not  aware  of  any
cases  of  accidental  intoxication  nor  any  self
experiments involving Gymnopilus purpuratus.

Intoxicating Potions of the

Yurimagua Indians

In light of the discovery of psilocybin as an
active ingredient in a South American Gymnopilus
species, numerous historic accounts also appear in
a different light.

Jesuits of the 17th and early 18th centuries
who  had  travelled  to  the  western  Amazon  (Peru)
reported  that  the  Yurimagua  Indians  habitually
prepared  a  potently  intoxicating  potion  derived
from  a  tree-dwelling  mushroom.  The  mushrooms
appeared  on  fallen  trees  as  a  kind  of  reddish
growth with a spicy taste. The potion was said  to
be  so  potent  that  nobody  who  swallowed  three
mouthfuls of the brew was able to resist its effects.
The  mushroom  was  considered  to  be  Psilocybe
yungensis  Singer  &  Smith.  However, 
since
Gymnopilus  species  are  reddish  in  color  (see
description  of  Gymnopilus  purpuratus,  above)  and
tend  to  colonize  dense  tree  trunks,  those  strange
tree-dwelling  mushrooms  were  most 
likely  a
Gymnopilus  species.  The  Psilocybe  species,  after
all,  grow  almost  exclusively  on  wood  sprigs  and
tree bark debris. On only one exceptional occasion
did we discover a specimen of Psilocybe bohemica
growing on a thoroughly rotted, wet tree trunk (see
p.  31,  top  right).  Most  likely,  the  reddishcolored
tree-dwelling  species  was  closely 
to
Gymnopilus 
of
psilocybin  in  a  mushroom  of  the  Gymnopilus
species  marked  the  first  time  this  substance  had
ever  been  found  in  a  member  of  the  family
Cortinariaceae.

related 
discovery 

purpuratus.  The 

The Inocybe species who were found to
contain psilocybin later on, are also members of
this family. Since the alkaloid had previously been
found in Psilocybe, Panaeolus and Conocybe
species - which are not closely related

to  each  other  - 
the  hypothesis  postulating
psilocybin's  significance  as  an  important  chemo-
taxonomical substance had to be abandoned.

Future  research  should  attempt  to  verify
the  presence  of  psilocybin  and  its  derivatives  in
other tropical and subtropical Gymnopilus

species.
Taxonomically, the genus has not yet
been exhaustively studied, and mushroom lovers
may want to watch out for occurrences of
Gymnopilus purpuratus in certain European
locations, such as botanical gardens or
herbariums.

C H A P T E R   3 . 6

CONOCYBE CYANOPUS - TINY M U S H R O O M S   O F

R E M A R K A B L E   P O T E N C Y

While studying the magic mushrooms of Mexico
during  the  1950s,  R.  Heim  described  a  new
species of the genus Conocybe.

Conocy
be siligineodes Heim was reported to grow up to
8 cm (3.25 in.) tall, a beautiful, reddish brown to
orange-colored mushroom that thrived on rotten
wood  and  which  was  used  as  a  psychotropic
species  by  the  Indians  as  well.  However,  the
species did not appear again in the literature, nor
were the chemical composition or the effects of
these  samples  published.  Even  after  decades  of
field research in Mexico, Guzman was unable to
find  the  species  there.  Similarly,  he  did  not
discover  native  usage  of  any  kind  of  Conocybe
species.  Heim's  description  however,  aroused
curiosity as to the chemical composition of this
species.  Approximately  55  European  species
which existed  saprophytically  were  relegated  to
a shadow existence in the older literature. Also,
the  differentiation  of  these  species  is  very
problematic  at  times.  For  the  most  part,  the
mushrooms are small and fragile, decay quickly
and  grow  mostly  in  grassy  and  mossy  areas,
where they are easily overlooked.
             Around  1930,  J.  Schaffer  discovered
numerous  Conocybe 
in
abundance  on  a  fertilized  grassy  area  near
Potsdam.  Intrigued  by  the  mushrooms'  extra-
ordinary  variety  of  forms  and  colors,  he  was
inspired  to  undertake  the  kind  of  taxonomic
classification 
to  pursuing
mushroom research. One species that he found in
Potsdam,  Berlin  as  well  as  in  Germany's  Harz
Mountains  showed  bluish  discolorations  at  the
base  of  their  stems.  This  "Galera"  species  was
included  by  Kuhner  as  Conocybe  cyanopoda  in
his 1935 monograph about the genus Conocybe.
Today, this species is referred to in the literature
as Conocybe cyanopus (Atk.) Kuhn. This species
with a blue base had been previously discovered
in the U.S. (Ithaca, NY) in 1918 and was judged
by  Kuhner  to  be  identical  with  the  European
mushrooms.

species  growing 

is  essential 

that 

The following is an adequate description

of Conocybe cyanopus, because its bluish
discoloration is a sufficiently unique attribute to
allow differentiation of this species from other
European Conocybe species.

Cap: 

0.3-2.5 

nearly
hemispheric  to  convex,  striated,  ocher  to  dark
brown without grey-green stains.

broad, 

cm 

Stem: 2-4 cm long, 1-1.4 cm thick,

whitish at first, equal to slightly curved at the
base, silvery later on, stains bluish-green -
particularly at base - in reaction to injuries or with
age.

Spores: 7-10 x 4-5 um

Basidia: 4-spored, pleurocystidia absent,

cheilocystidia present, 18-25x6, 5-10 ,um
Habitat: On grassy areas or moss, summer
through fall.

The Conocybe genus is a member of the
Bolbitiaceae  family,  which  is  similar  to  the
Coprinaceae, a family of dark-spored mushrooms
that includes the Panaeolus species.

The  Conocybe  species  are  very  rare  in
Europe.  The  mushrooms  are  hardly  ever  found
lists  of  mushroom  discoveries  from
among 
European  countries.  Aside 
from  Schaffer's
discovery, the mushroom was reportedly found or
described only twice (!) within the territory of the
former East Germany over the last 60 years (both
discoveries  were  made  during 
the  1980s).
However,  there  are  only  few  mycologists  who
specialize in the study of the Conocybe genus, due
to its lack of attractiveness.

Even though the mushroom is very rare, I
was  able  to  include  one  picture  of  Conocybe
cyanopus  in  this  book  (see  Figure  36,  p.  57).  1
also  had  the  good  fortune  to  obtain  a  dried
Conocybe cyanopus sample for chemical analysis
(see Table 9, p. 56).

Psilocybin was discovered for the first

time in a sample of fruiting bodies of the species
Conocybe cyanopus which had been collected on
September 4, 1961 in Seattle, WA. No psilocin

however mysterious they may remain.

in 

these  samples.  Finally 

In  1977,  Repke  and  his  research  team
reported  the  discovery  of  baeocystin,  as  well  as
psilocybin  in  a  Conocybe  species  from  the  United
States  and  Canada.  Once  again,  no  psilocin  was
found 
in  1982/83,
Norwegian  researchers  confirmed  the  existence  of
trace amounts of psilocin, in addition to 0.330.55%
of  psilocybin,  an  alkaloid  that  was  also  reportedly
discovered  in  Finnish  samples.  Finally,  Beug  and
Bigwood  reported  0.93%  of  psilocybin  in  samples
collected 
the  Northwestern  United  States.
Interestingly, the second sample ever discovered in
Eastern  Germany  was  found  on  July  2,  1989  near
Potsdam,  where  several  fruiting  bodies  of  the
Conocybe  cyanopus  species  were  growing  in  a
grassy  area  on  sand.  The  original  area,  however,
where Schaffer first discovered the species 60 years
ago, lay within the Potsdam city limits and its exact
location can no longer be determined.

in 

The sample collected in 1989 consisted of

five mushrooms that were found to have
concentrations of psilocybin and baeocystin similar
to levels found in Psilocybe semilanceata:

Concentrations  of  psilocybin  were
strikingly  similar  to  those  found  in  samples
collected in the Northwestern United States.

After  several  days,  spores  from  one  of
the fruiting bodies germinated on malt agar and,
compared  to  other  species,  proceeded  to  grow
very  slowly  into  their  permanent  forms  or
"sclerotia" (see Figure 35, p. 57). The sclerotia
showed no blue discolorations, and were found
to contain 0.25 % psilocybin when dry, while no
additional alkaloids were detected.

In summary, it is reasonable to assume
that  due  to  its  small  size  and  extreme  rarity,
Conocybe  cyanopus  is  a  species  that  is  not  a
significant  contributor 
in
Europe, nor is it likely to gain such prominence
in  the  future.  My  own  analyses  of  other,  non-
bluing  Conocybe  species,  such  as  Conocybe
tenera (Schaeff.:Fr.) Fayod and Conocybe lactea
(Lge)  Metrod 
the  presence  of
physiologically inactive ingredients only.

intoxications 

revealed 

Samples  of  Conocybe  species  from
warm countries have not yet been analyzed and
may  yet  yield  remarkable  results  in  terms  of
chemical composition and alkaloid content.

to 

TABLE 9

Selected Test Results on the Alkaloid Content
 of Conocybe cyanopus (% of Dry Weight)

Mushroom Dry Weight(mg)

Psilocybin Baeocystin

1
2
3
4
5

5
6
7
10
12

0.84
0.73
1.01
0.91
0.89

0.15
0.12
0.20
0.16
0.14

Figure 35 - Sclerotia of Conocybe cyanopus grown on malt agar.

Figure 36 - Fresh Conocybe cyanopus fruiting bodies

from the Pacific Northwest (USA).

CHAPTER 3.7

PLUTEUS SALICINUS: A LITTLE-KNOWN WOOD-INHABITING SPECIES

at the base, colors intensify in response to
pressure.

Within  the  Pluteaceae  family,  there  are
about  45  European  species  of  the  genus  Pluteus,
some of whom also produce psilocybin.

Historically, 

the  Pluteus  species  were
classified  as  belonging  to  the  Amanitaceae  family,
which also include the "death cap" and its relatives,
as well as the fly agaric mushroom, both of which
belong  to  the  genus  Amanita.  Unlike  all  the  other
psychoactive  mushrooms  mentioned  here  in  this
book,  the  Pluteus  species  are  classified  as  light-
spored  mushrooms,  because  of  their  rose-colored
spore dust.

No  accidental 

involving
Pluteus  species  have  been  documented  in  the
literature.

intoxications 

The  first  description  providing  qualitative
evidence for the presence of psilocybin and psilocin
was  provided  by  Saupe  in  1981,  who  examined
extracts of Pluteus salicinus (Pers.:Fr.) Kumm. from
Illinois.  Surprisingly,  psilocin  turned  out  to  be  the
alkaloid with the highest levels of concentration in
the  samples  tested.  This  mushroom  species  had
previously  been  described  in  Europe  about  200
years  ago.  Since  then,  however,  it  has  rarely  been
mentioned in the literature, and only briefly, if at all
(see Figure 37, p. 59).

Some  taxonomic  methods  of  classification
used  earlier  can  still  cause  confusion  today.  For
example,  Ricken  (1915)  designated  the  mushroom
as Pluteus petasatus.

By way of expanding the description from
1962 (see Figure 37), Pluteus salicinus is identified
by the following characteristics:

Medium-sized  mushroom  with  a  more  or
less  intensely  bluish  to  bluish-green  coloration.
Older  mushrooms  are  sometimes  colored  olive
green.

Caps in some cases up to 8 cm in diameter,
lighter colored around the margin, silver grey, hairy
and felt-like, even hairier and felt-like towards the
middle of the cap, often scaly.

Stems up to 10 cm in length, with

spontaneous grey-green or grey-blue discolorations

to 

There are also mushrooms of this species
that  are  white  in  color  (see  Figure  38,  p.  60).
However, these albino fruiting bodies have stems
whose bases show a slight grey-green coloration
as  well,  as  do  the  apex  areas  of  their  caps.
Pluteus  salicinus  has  been  described  as  being
anywhere  from  "very  rare"  to  "not  rare"  in  the
wet deciduous forests of Europe. The species of
the genus Pluteus are final wood-destroyers, that
is,  they  grow  saprophytically  on  wood  that
appears  rotten  and  discolored,  because  it  has
decomposed  due 
the  presence  of  other
mushrooms  over  the  course  of  many  years.
Pluteus salicinus fruits from May to October on
stumps of willows, alder-trees, lime-trees, beech-
trees,  poplars,  maple-trees  and  possibly  on  the
wooden  remnants  of  other  tree  species  as  well,
The  fact  that  this  mushroom  has  not  been  the
cause of any intoxications may be explained by
its fruiting bodies' occurrence on tree stumps as
single  mushrooms  or  in  groups  of  very  few
mushrooms.  Also,  compared  to  other  wood-
inhabiting  mushrooms,  Pluteus  salicinus  is  not
very  attractive  in  appearance.  The  mushroom's
habitus is well illustrated by Figure 39 (p. 60).

For unknown reasons, Kreisel described
all  Pluteus  species  as  "non-poisonous"  in  his
1987  handbook  of  mushrooms,  despite  the  fact
that psilocybin (0.35 % of dried mushrooms) had
already  been  discovered  in  samples  of  this
species  in  1981  (North  America)  and  1984
(Norway).  The  alkaloid  was  also  found  in
mushrooms from Holland, Finland, Sweden and
France. The latter tests, however, were limited to
very few fruiting bodies in each case.

Whereas Stijve found an average of 0.25
%  of  psilocybin  in  dried  mushrooms  from  20
samples  collected  in  Switzerland  from  1984  to
1986,  my  own  analyses  of  non-bluing  (!)
mushrooms collected in Thuringen, Germany in
1986 
alkaloid
concentrations:

yielded  much 

higher 

TABLE 10

Psilocybin and Urea Content of

Pluteus salicinus (% of Dry Weight)

Sample#

1
2
3
4 
5

Psilocybin
Cap
1.38
1.57
1.57
1.22 
139

Stem
0.48
0.71
0.71
1.14 
0.64

Urea

Cap
2.50
2.60
2.60
1.40 
2.40

Stem
Traces
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.43

in 

Additional  analyses  of  four  bluing
mushrooms  collected 
the  Dubener
marshlands  (Eastern  Germany)  in  1988,
confirmed the presence of only about 0.2  -
0.7 % psilocybin in those mushrooms. This
sample also contained very small amounts of
baeocystin.

These 

results 

indicate 

the
variability  m  alkaloid  content  in  Pluteus
salicinus  has  not  yet  been  sufficiently
calibrated.  Therefore,  more  analyses  are
needed. In contrast to the findings based on
studies of mushrooms collected in America,
it  is  certain  that  the  European  mushrooms
produce only traces of psilocin at most.

that 

Stijve and Bonnard were able to examine
original material collected by Saupe in the United
States. To their surprise, they discovered that the
mushrooms  were  not  identical  to  those  found  in
Europe.  They  also  did  no  longer  contain  any
alkaloids.  These  findings  show  that  mushrooms
of  the  same  name  from  different  continents  are
not necessarily identical.

All  other  Pluteus  species  tested  so  far
contained  urea,  a  substance  that  can  also  been
found  in  the  Panaeolus  species.  However,  the
latter  also  produce  compounds  like  serotonin,
which do not occur in the Pluteus species. Hence,
the  different  species  are  once  again  identifiable
by their unique "fingerprints".

Other rare Pluteus species with bluish or
violet  discolorations  are  mentioned 
the
literature,  such  as  a  Pluteus  cyanopus  from
Europe. However,  so  far,  very  small  amounts  of
psilocybin  (0.035%  of  dried  mushrooms)  have
been found only in Pluteus nigroviridis Babos, an
extremely rare species from Hungary.

in 

Therefore, additional analyses of this

fairly neglected genus are urgently needed.

Figure 37 - Description of Pluteus salicinus  from 1962 (Germany).

See page 58 for description in English.

Figure 38 - Pluteus salicinus  at a natural  location (Germany).

Figure 39 - Fresh Pluteus salicinus  fruiting bodies.

CHAPTER 4

MUSHROOM IDENTIFICATION: TAXONOMIC CONFUSION AND

THE POTENTIAL FOR DEADLY MISTAKES

(USA) 

the  mushrooms  belonged 

On December 16, 1981, three teenagers
for  psychoactive  mushrooms  on
hunting 
Whidbey 
collected
Island,  WA 
specimens of a Galerina species, in the mistaken
belief  that 
to  a
Psilocybe species. All three of them fell ill after
eating the mushrooms, but did not report their
symptoms or seek medical help for another two
days,  afraid  of  being  prosecuted  for  using
psilocybin. After medical treatment,  two of the
teenagers  made  a  full  recovery.  The  third
victim,  however,  a  16  -year-old  girl,  died  on
December 24, 1981.

errors, 

several  case  histories  of 

As  presented  by  Beug  and  Bigwood,  this
tragic incident underscores the dangers inherent
is  careless  or  erroneous 
identification  of
mushroom species, especially when a situation is
complicated  by  overzealous 
legislative  and
punitive  measures.  The  psilocybin-producing
species  as  well  as  culinary  mushroom  varieties
often share some characteristics with many other
species.  Casual  mushroom  hunters  and  lay-
to  making
persons  are  especially  prone 
identification 
suffering 
accidental
ittoxications  as  a  result.  Previous  chapters
included 
such
involuntary  intoxications.  To  be  sure,  modern
mycological  keys  are  valuable  tools  when  it
comes  to  accuracy  in  deciding  the  family  and
genus of an unknown mushroom sample. It can
be  extremely  difficult,  however,  to  identify  the
specific  species  of  questionable  specimens,
especially  if  the  sample  belongs  to  the  vast
category  of  "LBM"s,  or  "little  brown  mush-
rooms". We currently know very little about the
"LBM"  species,  since 
their  habitats  and
variations  in  habitus  have  not  been  studied  in
systematic  detail.  Not  surprisingly,  reference
books  are  often  limited  by  incomplete  descrip-
tions 
for
differentiating  one  species  from  others  that  are
similar or related. I vividly recall my own first
attempts to identify unknown samples by relying
on  what  appeared  to  be  precise  definitions  in
standard  mycological  reference  works.  I  found
many  of  the  listed  traits  to  be  descriptive  of  a
wide range of sometimes very different species.
As I compared my samples with the text, I

the  essential  criteria 

lack 

that 

noticed  a  tendency  to  disregard  some  of  the  finer
details  in  the  literature,  so  that  "my  mushrooms"
would better match the descriptions. Naturally, this
approach resulted in errors. Luckily, I would quickly
discover and correct my mistakes upon consultation
with  my  mycologist  friends.  In  my  experience,
competence and expertise in the area of mushroom
identification  are  skills  honed  over  time  through
extensive  fieldwork,  consultations  with  established
mycological experts, and careful analyses of samples
based on information found in appropriate reference
books.

clearly 

indicates 

literature 

that
Psilocybe semilanceata is one species that, at prime
locations, can be easily identified without consulting
a  diagnostic  key.  Psilocybe  semilanceata  is  known
for  its  uniquely  distinctive  appearance,  so  that
microscopic tests are not needed to distinguish this
species  from  other  pasture-dwelling  mushrooms.
The  situation  is  different,  however,  for  Psilocybe
species that thrive on wood debris, as illustrated by
the  tragic  story  at  the  beginning  of  this  chapter.
Besides,  compared  to  Europe,  the  North  American
mycoflora  includes  a  much  broader  and  varied
spectrum of mushroom species to begin with.

The 

Warning: Amatoxins are Lethal!

The  Galerina  genus  includes  a  number  of
poisonous mushrooms. These species are dangerous,
because they contain the same deadly amatoxins as
the  "death  cap"  (Amanita  phalloides)  and 
its
relatives, "death angel" and "destroying angel". Their
toxins are insidious,  with  no  symptoms  evident  for
about 12 hours. During this latency period, the toxins
can cause major irreversible internal damage, which
is why many cases are fatal in spite of treatment. A
is  Galerina
common  North  American  species 
autumnalis (Peck) Singer & Smith, which grows on
wood debris in parks and forests, just like several of
the  Psilocybe  species.  At  first  glance,  Galerina
autumnalis resembles Psilocybe stuntzii Guzman &
Ott, and the two species may grow

found 

side  by  side  at  the  same  location.  The  Galerina
species,  however,  does  not  turn  blue.  I  once
discovered a grassy area that was home to a cluster
of  Psilocybe  stuntzii  specimens  entangled  with  a
Galerina  species.  The  mushrooms  had  grown  so
entwined  that  individual  fruiting  bodies  could  be
identified only by spore analyses.

Pholiotina  filaris  (Fr.)  Sing.  (also  known
as  Conocybe)  is  another  North  American  species
known  to  contain  amatoxins.  At  the  same  time,
these  toxins  have  not  been  found  in  European
samples  of  this  species.  Thus,  Pholiotina  filaris
(Fr.) Sing. most likely does not refer to the same
species  on  both  continents.  Still,  at  least  one
European  Galerina  species  (Galerina  marginata
(Fr.) Kuhn.) contains the same toxins found in the
"death cap" mushroom. This species also grows on
decaying  wood  substrate  and  its  fruiting  bodies
the  amount  of
contain  about  one-third  of 
phalloides.
amanitines 
Incredibly,  older  mushroom  books  list  Galerina
marginata as an edible species.

in  Amanita 

subbalteatus 

In  a  previous  chapter  on  the  Panaeolus
species I illustrated the potential for identification
errors associated with commercial cultivation areas
that are "invaded" by outside species. Due to their
rapid  growth,  the  Panaeolus  species  in  particular
will  often  fruit  in  artificial  growing  areas  long
before  the  cultivated  species  that  is  grown  there.
Chapter  3.3  details  the  1970  poisoning  incident
involving  Panaeolus 
a
cultivation  area  in  Leipzig.  In  that  case,  the
intruding  species  was  mistaken  for  Stropharia
rugoso-annulata  Farlow  (the  Giant  Stropharia),
based  on  information  from  a  mushroom  book.
Apparently nobody realized the glaring differences
between  the  book's  description  and  the  actual
characteristics,  except  for  the  assumption  that  the
sample's  small  size  meant  the  mushrooms  simply
had  not  grown  as  tall  as  portrayed  in  the  book.
This  flawed  conclusion 
type  of
judgment 
amateur
mushroom  hunters  who  falsely  believe  that  they
are experts. Having been shown a single sample of
wild  mushrooms,  for  example,  some  mycophiles
become  convinced  they  will  always  be  able  to
recognize the species in the future. That is how one
such mushroom hunter accidently ingested Inocybe
aeruginascens  specimens  that  he  believed  to  be
common fairy ring mushrooms. In a similar case of
Inocybe 
the
mushrooms 
as  white
champignons,  even  though  this  common  culinary
mushroom bears no

aeruginascens 
been 

intoxication, 
picked 

illustrates  a 
among 

common 

error 

from 

had 

however, 

resemblance, either in size or form, to Inocybe
aeruginascens.  Overall, 
these
unfortunate cases have also contributed to our
understanding of mushroom biochemistry.
In this context, I want to emphasize
once more that the hallucinogenic varieties
among the Inocybes can easily be mistaken for
those muscarine-producing Inocybe species
that are extremely poisonous.

As  part  of  his  investigation  of  the
Psilocybe  genus,  Guzman  noted  a  common
trait  among  the  hallucinogenic  species,  in
addition  to  the  bluing  reaction:  a  flour-like
smell  or 
inherent
subjective  nature  of  our  sense  of  smell  and
taste,  a  common  odor  is  a  trait  that  definitely
does  not  apply  to  the  European  species  (also
see Chapter 3.2).

taste.  Apart  from 

the 

Mycophile or Mycophobe?

easily 

semilanceata 

There  are  reports  from  the  Western
United  States  about  people  with  expert
knowledge  of  Psilocybe 
-
devoted  mushroom  hunters  who  can  identify
the  species  with  drill  and  accuracy.  At  the
same  time,  however,  these  experts  cannot
identify 
table
mushrooms,  nor  are  they  able  to  differentiate
the Agaricus species (champignons) from other
mushrooms, even when these species grow on
the  same  pasture.  Such  individuals,  then,  are
not  interested  in  species  other  than  Psilocybe
semilanceata.  In  my  opinion,  this  attitude
reflects  a  rare  combination  of  mycophilia  and
mycophobia.

common 

spotted 

information  obtained 

A  mushroom's  spore  dust  provides
important  information  needed  to  determine
identity. A spore print is left by the gills when
the  cap  is  placed  on  black  or  white  paper
(depending  on  spore  color).  As  the  process
takes  several  hours,  a  glass  vessel  must  be
placed  over  the  cap  to  prevent  drying.  While
useful, 
from  spore
analyses  has  its  limitations,  For  instance,
spores  derived  from  mushrooms  belonging  to
different genera may have the same color, but
reveal basic differences under the microscope.
There is also a high degree of similarity among
spores from different Psilocybe species. Thus,
the  only  way  to  prevent  grave  errors  and
potentially  deadly  intoxications  is  to  rely  on
experienced 
mushroom
identification,  a  process  that  must  include
analysis of available ecological data.

experts 

for 

CHAPTER 5

THE BLUING PHENOMENON AND METOL
TESTING: REALITY VS. WISHFUL THINKING

the  most 

examined,  Psilocybe 

As previously discussed in Chapters 3.1
and  3.7,  the  bluing  reaction  is  characteristic
of species that produce psilocybin. Still,  for
unknown  reasons,  some  species  or  samples
belonging to a genus that usually  turns blue
may  not  always  change  color,  regardless  of
psilocybin content. Among the species that I
bohemica
have 
displayed 
impressive  bluing
reaction.  The  caps  of  this  species  stain  very
quickly in reaction to pressure. Other species,
such  as  Psilocybe  cubensis  (Earle)  Sing.
have  stems  that  develop  very  intensely  blue
stains,  while  their  caps  do  not  exhibit  the
bluing  reaction.  By  contrast,  Psilocybe
semilanceata,  Conocybe  cyanopus  and
Inocybe  aeruginascens  are  species  whose
stems develop only slight stains m reaction to
pressure and only after a relatively long time
period has elapsed.
respect  to  time  delay  and  intensity  of  the
bluing reaction, Gymnopilus purpuratus is a
species  that  falls  in  between  these  two
extremes.

With

A Rich Color Spectrum

The colors range from green to a deep

blue. Psilocybe cubensis is a species in
which the latter color may also take on a
blackish-blue hue. 'The mechanisms
underlying the color reactions in these
mushrooms has not yet been studied. I have
already mentioned Cooke's speculation from
the early years of the 20th century about the
significance of the bluing reaction in
Psilocybe Smilanceata (see p. 16). In the
1950s, it was Singer and Smith who
emphasized that discolorations observed in
the psychotropic Psilocybe and Panaeolus
species must somehow be linked directly or
indirectly to the mushrooms' active
ingredients.
Hofmann and his collaborators reported the
successful isolation of these ingredients.
They were the first to observe that pure
psilocin grows unstable when exposed to
oxidizing agents such

Eventually, in 1958, A.

as air and that solutions of psilocin turn bluish-
green in an alkaline range.

the  phosphate  group 

These  results  provided  proof  that  the
bluing  reaction  resulted  from  a  mushroom
ingredient's breakdown by oxidation. From 1960
on,  Blaschko,  Levine  and  Bocks,  as  well  as
Horita  and  Weber  performed  in-vitro  studies  of
the  biochemical  reactions  of  psilocybin  and
psilocin. They concurred that only psilocin can be
oxidized into a product of bluish-green color. The
phosphate group prevents direct oxidation of this
alkaloid  (see  Figure  19,  p.  27).  However,  the
typical bluing phenomenon does occur when this
protective group is removed by enzymes, such as
various phosphatases, which are very common in
human  as  well  as  in  mushroom  tissue.  I  also
observed  the  bluing  reaction  following  removal
of 
from  baeocystin.
Observations  from  in-vitro  experiments  explain
why  Psilocybe  bohemica  displays  a  strong
bluing  reaction,  despite  the  fact  that  levels  of
psilocin  in  this  mushroom  are  low  or  non-
existent:  Apparently,  the  enzymatic  removal  of
the  phosphate  group 
the  psilocybin
molecule  occurs  quite  quickly.  This  is  how
psilocin  is  formed  in  reaction  to  injuries  to  the
fruiting bodies. Immediately afterwards, psilocin
continues 
to  break  down  and  disappears
completely,  while  a  number  of  blue-colored
substances  are  created. 
In  addition,  some
enzymes  were  discovered  which  accelerate  the
breakdown of psilocin. Cytochrome oxidases and
laccases  are  examples  of  such  enzymes.  The
latter  has  also  been  found  in  the  mycelia  of
Psilocybe cubensis. Most likely, the enzymes are
also  formed  in  those  mushrooms  that  display
bluish discolorations in reaction to metol testing.
Trace amounts of Iron" ions accelerate the bluing
reaction as well. The structure of the blue-colored
compounds  has  not  yet  been 
investigated.
Apparently, they are quite unstable and involve a
type of chemical bond known as chinones. Many
pigments are known to have this basic structure.

from 

Figure 40 - Psilocybe cubensis fruiting bodies whose

growth was accelerated with plant hormones.

Figure 41 - Mycelial culture of Psilocybe cubensis on

malt extract (3 % solution).

the  presence  of  psilocybin  and  its  derivatives.
Even  the  brown  and  white  varieties  of  the
commercial champignon mushroom change colors
when exposed to a metol solution, just like many
other mushrooms do as well.

The Limitations of Reagents

The discovery and usage of different color
reagents as a means to differentiate certain species
or even genera has been attempted for quite some
time,  with  only  moderate  success,  for  the  most
part.  Melzer's  Reagent  is  a  well-known  mixture
whose  usage  was  propagated  as  a  method  for
identifying the Psilocybe species. For this purpose,
however, it turned out to be just as nonspecific and
worthless as metol.

G. Drewitz discovered that the application
of  iron  chloride  to  fruiting  bodies  of  Inocybe
aeruginascens  caused  a  deep  blue  discoloration,
while the muscarine-producing species of the same
genus did not change color. Iron chloride is a salt
that  reacts  with  different  phenoles 
to  form
intensely  blue  molecules.  The  underlying
mechanism  of  this  reaction  is  more  realistic  than
the  others,  because  psilocin  will  also  react  as  a
phenole. Independent of this color formation, mere
trace  amounts  of 
to
accelerate the oxidation of psilocin by air.

ions  will  suffice 

iron 

However, Inocybe aeruginascens is a
species that produces only trace amounts of
psilocin; therefore, it is very likely that the iron
salt reacts with other phenoles in this mushroom
species.

In  summary,  only  those  bluing  reactions
that are spontaneous or caused by injuries provide
reliable clues as to the presence of psilocybin and
its  derivatives  in  Agaricales.  The  presence  of  the
bluing  phenomenon 
reveals
nothing about the type and quantity of any specific
indole  compound  that  may  be  present  in  gilled
mushrooms.

itself,  however, 

in 

The Agaricales As Alkaloid Producers

Even though the blue discoloration does
not occur in ali mushroom species that produce
psilocybin  and  psilocin,  we  can  say  that,
conversely,  all  species  of  the  order  Agaricales
(gilled mushrooms) displaying this reaction are
capable  of  producing  alkaloids.  Historically,
this problem associated with the bluing reaction
did  not  particularly  impress  early  mycologists,
because there were a number of boletes which
turned  blue  in  reaction  to  pressure  and  were
thought to be  among  the  most  valued  culinary
the  mushrooms'  color
mushrooms.  Indeed, 
reaction 
that  are
physiologically  inactive.  The  boletes  also  do
not  display 
spontaneous
discolorations  with  age  that  are  frequently
noted in the psychotropic species.

the  kinds  of 

is  based  on 

ingredients 

that 

the 

first 

those 

found 

revealed 

As  results  of  my  own  analyses  have
shown, the alkaloid concentrations in Psilocybe
semilanceata and Panaeolus subbalteatus - whose
fruiting  bodies  showed  a  slight  degree  of
discoloration  at  most  -  are  within  the  same
orders  of  magnitude  as 
in
mushrooms that do not turn blue. Evidently, the
pigments  involved  have  a  high  degree  of
intensity; the tiny amounts that were produced
did not measurably contribute to the destruction
of the active ingredients. On the other hand, my
own  experiments 
levels  of
psilocin and psilocybin in very old and strongly
discolored  fruiting  bodies  and  mycelia  of
Psilocybe  cubensis  were  considerably  lower  in
comparison  to  younger  specimens.  In  1948,
Singer  was 
the
intensification of the bluing reaction, including
a change in color towards violet, in samples of
Psilocybe  cubensis  which  had  been  moistened
with  an  aqueous  solution  of  the  photographic
reagent  metol 
(p-methylaminophenol).  Ten
years later he reported further examinations of
some  psychotropic  Psilocybe  species  whose
stems  usually  turned  purple  through  contact
with this reagent.
Since  1970,  various
"field  guides" 
the
identification  of  North  American  Psilocybes
have also described this reaction as specific to
the  Psilocybe  species.  For  practical  purposes,
however,  this  guideline  is  all  but  useless.  The
metol  merely  reacts  with  the  laccase  enzyme
(several  structural  types)  contained  in  the
mushrooms  and  it  is  not  a  reagent  able  to
confirm

to  describe 

intended 

to  aid 

CHAPTER 6

MUSHROOM CULTIVATION:

CLASSIC FINDINGS AND NEW TECHNIQUES

research  on 

While  conducting 

the
Mexican  mushroom  species  during  the  1950s,
R.  Heim  and  R.  Cailleux  determined  the  basic
conditions essential to the cultivation of various
mushrooms. Before providing additional details,
I would like to briefly summarize the nutritional
requirements  and  characteristics  of 
fungal
growth,  to  the  extent  that  these  issues  are  of
interest here.

Extraterrestrial or Earthly Organisms?

In  terms  of  cultivation  parameters  and
the  psychotropic  species  are  no
nutrients, 
different  from 
table  mushrooms  and  other
common gilled mushrooms. For that reason, Oss
and  Oeric's  speculations  about  extra-terrestrial
origins  of  these  species  clearly  belong  into  the
realm  of  fables.  In  addition,  psilocybin  and
psilocin are substances that can be derived from
tryptophan  by  means  of  discernable  reactions;
indeed,  the  amino  acid  tryptophan  in  its  free
form  has  been  found  in  a  large  number  of
mushroom species.

The  natural  propagation  of  higher
mushrooms  is  linked  to  their  basidiospores,
which  are  produced  on  the  gills  of  developing
fruiting  bodies  and  which  are  eventually  cast
off.  Once  the  spores  have  been  dispersed  -  by
the  wind,  for  example  -  they  will  germinate
favorable 
when  conditions  are 
(nutrients,
temperature,  moisture, 
lack  of  competing
organisms)  and  finally,  they  gradually  colonize
available  substrates.  Initially,  a  monokaryotic
mycelial thread (i.e. a  mycelium with only one
nucleus  per  cell)  grows  out  of  the  spore  and
superficially  penetrates  the  nutrient  substrate.
When  two  of  these  hyphae  meet,  they  form  a
mycelium  with  two  nuclei,  or  a  dikaryotic
mycelium ("mycelial network"). Later on, these
mycelial  strands  go  on  to  differentiate  into
sporeproducing  fruiting  bodies 
  ("fruiting").
Eventually, their spores disperse  and  germinate
once again.

the  year, 

During  most  parts  of 

the
dikaryotic mycelium grows unnoticed in its natural
substrate and remains purely vegetative, that is, it
continues  to  spread  and  to  utilize  new  nutritional
resources without producing mushrooms, provided
there is sufficient moisture and temperatures do not
drop  below  freezing.  ln  its  dormant  state,  the
mycelium  can  weather  droughts  and  the  cold
temperatures  of  winter,  only  to  begin  to  grow
anew.  Some  species  have  mycelia  with  thick
strands that are visible within the substrate (e.g. the
rhizomorphs of Psilocybe cyanescens), while other
species,  such  as  Psilocybe  semilanceata,  develop
comparatively thin strands that are hardly visible at
all.

The Secret of "Overnight" Growth

Every  mushroom  collector  knows  that
there  are  years  of  maximum  mushroom  yields.
Other years, mushrooms are scarce and dry periods
may  pass  with  no  apparent  crops  of  gilled
mushrooms  or  boletes.  For 
the  majority  of
mushroom species, the specific conditions required
to  reach  the  fruiting  phase  have  not  yet  been
determined.

The  saprophytic  species  (including  the
hallucinogenic  ones  except  the  Inocybe  species:
mycorrhiza with trees) generally fruit after optimal
mycelial  growth  has  been  induced  by  appropriate
nutrient  substrates,  as  long  as  the  following
environmental conditions are maintained:
1)  Decrease of the temperature until time of

optimal fruiting.

2)  Increase of the humidity to 95-100%.
3)  Decrease of carbon dioxide concentration

through increased air circulation.

4)  Exposure to light may be necessary for

fruiting.

The last two items already touch upon the essential
requirements for mushroom cultivation, since these
conditions are always present in

this 

Nature, but often need to be specially created for
mushroom cultivation inside glass containers or
enclosed rooms.

time  and 

It  is  no  coincidence  that  the  saprophytic
species almost always fruit during the fall. Plant
substrates  such  as  twigs  and  leaves  fall  to  the
ground  during 
they  are
immediately  colonized  by  available  mycelia
from  mushroom  spores  as  part  of  the  natural
cycle.  The  concurrent  drop  in  temperature  and
in  humidity  are  preconditions  for
increase 
fruiting.  The  proverbial 
rapid  growth  of
mushrooms "overnight" is a function of mycelia
that have previously massed together into knots,
followed  by  a  differentiation  process 
into
primordia,  with  progressive  divisions  into  caps
and stems. The whole mushroom is then ready to
develop  very  rapidly,  given  sufficient  moisture
and  ideal  temperatures.  Figure  42  illustrates  a
comparable  in-vitro  fruiting  process  that  took
about  a  week,  with  mycelia  from  Psilocybe
cubensis (Earle) on an agar substrate.

Cultivating High Yield Strains

the  outset, 

Artificial  cultivation  is  an  attempt  to
imitate  and  optimize  the  natural  conditions
essential  for  mushroom  growth,  and  may  even
result  in  the  discovery  of  additional  nutrient
substrates on which these species cannot grow in
Nature.  From 
this  method  of
cultivation  requires  a  sterile  environment,  in
order  to  eliminate  often  fast-growing  organisms
such  as  bacteria  and  molds.  For  this  purpose,
laminar  flow  hoods  are  used  in  mycological
laboratories.  A  small  sterile  space  is  created
inside  these  containers  by  installing  a  filtration
system that removes germs from a stream of air.
The sterile space is used for the performance of
tasks  such  as  isolation  of  strains,  and  the
production  of  sterile  cultures  and  spawn  for
fruiting 
as
gentamycin  (0.01%)  are  often  added  to  the
nutrient  media,  especially  in  the  early  stages  of
this process.

experiments.  Antibiotics 

such 

Two methods are used to produce sterile

cultures of fungal mycelia.

The first method mimicks the mushrooms'
natural reproductive process. Spores that fell off
or were removed from the gills are suspended in
sterile water. With microscopic

and 

control procedures in place, the spore solution is
germinated  on  nutrients  of  various  compositions
that  have  been 
thickened  with  agar.  One
commonly  used  nutrient  medium  contains  3-6
malt  extract  along  with  1.5%  agar.  It  induces
spores  from  many  different  species  to  germinate
in a matter of several days. Prior to germination,
in  autoclaves  and
all  substrates  are  placed 
sterilized  with 
simultaneous
germination  of  a  large  number  of  spores  will
result  in  the  growth  of  monokaryotic  mycelia
which spontaneously combine and go on to form
dikaryotic mycelia. Alternatively, one can attempt
to  systematically  fuse  selected  monokaryotic
strands  in  order  to  develop  vigorous  strains  for
cultivation  (criteria:  rapid  growth,  high  yield).
This is a standard technique that is widely used in
(Agaricus
the  cultivation  of  champignons 
bisporus).

steam.  The 

At  the  same  time,  such  cross-breeding
experiments  enable  the  grower  to  determine
whether  mushrooms  from  different 
locations
belong to the same species. Using this method, I
was able to establish that mycelia obtained from
Psilocybe 
from  Psilocybe
cyanescens  (collected  in  the  U.S.)  can  never  be
fused  together,  which  means  that  these  two
mushrooms are not of the same species.

bohemica 

second  method  of  cultivation
requires cutting a piece of tissue from the inside
of  young,  unopened  fruiting  bodies,  using  a
disinfected  knife  in  a  sterile  environment.  The
piece  of  tissue  is  then  placed  onto  nutrient  agar
medium.  In  most  cases,  visible  mycelial  growth
will occur within a few days. This method has the
advantage  of  all  mycelia  being  genetically
identical  to  the  mushroom  from  which  they
originated,  unlike  mycelia  grown  from  spore
samples. Therefore, this method makes it easy for
the  grower  to  reproduce  high  yield  strains  of
saprophytic  species.  Some  wild  strains  obtained
from  various  species  do  not  fruit  at  all  when
cultivated,  or  else,  they  do  so  very  late,  with  a
yield of fruiting bodies that is sparse at best.

Such differences in response to attempted
cultivation  were  also  observed  by  R.  Heim  with
various  strains  of  Psilocybe  mexicana  Heim.  As
early  as  1956,  he  took  spore  sprints  from  a
number of fruiting bodies in Mexico. Later on, in
Paris,  he  was  able  to  germinate  the  spores  and
isolate mycelial cultures of five different species.
In collaboration with R. Cailleux, Heim

The 

Figure 42 - One-week growth progression of Psilocybe

cubensis cultivated on a malt agar (2%) substrate.

cultivation 

succeeded  at  growing  fruiting  bodies  of  the
species  Psilocybe  mexicana,  using  compost
substrate  as  a  medium.  This  type  of  substrate  is
the most widely used nutrient soil for commercial
mushroom 
(champignons).  The
fruiting  bodies  grown  by  Heim  and  Cailleux
provided the dried material that A. Hofmann and
his  collaborators  used  to  isolate  psilocybin  and
psilocin  for  the  first  time.  In  Basel,  it  was  also
possible  to  cultivate  mycelia  from  different
species  on  liquid  solutions  of  malt  extract.  The
mycelial tissue was found to produce  psilocybin
without having to go through the fruiting process.
This  important  discovery  became  the  basis  for
harvesting large amounts of alkaloids. Unlike the
fruiting process, which yielded five harvests over
the course of several months, a species' mycelial
cultures  produced  much 
larger  amounts  of
mushroom tissue in only four weeks (see Figure
41). The cultures were grown on stationary malt
extract  (4-6%)  with  0.2%  agar  added  for
increased viscosity.

saprophytic 

these  species 

This  kind  of 

surface
cultivation  can  be  easily  adapted  for  growing
species which are difficult to fruit under in-vitro
conditions, such as Psilocybe zapotecorum Heim,
permitting  cultivation  of 
for
alkaloid  production.  Even  though  the  mycelial
tissue grown from the Mexican species contained
only  half  as  much  psilocybin  (0.1-0.2%  of  dry
weight)  as  the  mushrooms  did,  high  yields
(approximately 20g/1) along with easy and rapid
cultivation  of  mycelial 
than
compensated for the lower psilocybin content. It
is interesting to note that mycelia from the North
American  species  of  Psilocybe  cyanescens  will
turn blue and accumulate psilocybin when grown
on  a  medium  of  solid  malt  agar,  while  both  of
these traits disappear  completely  when  the  same
strain is cultivated on the type of liquid medium
described  above,  even  if  levels  of  nutrients  are
identical.  The  reasons  for  this  inconsistency
remain a mystery.

tissue  more 

When  mycelial  cultures  are  kept  in  the
dark,  the  mycelial  forms  may  become  partially
permanent (sclerotia). Sclerotia may be hardened,
are largely dark to black in color and they contain
psilocybin as well. The formation of sclerotia was
initially observed as part of the firstever attempt
to  cultivate  psychotropic  mushrooms  on  an  agar
medium. In 1935, H.J. Brodie reported permanent
formations of bluish-green

tissue while cultivating Panaeolus subbalteatus on
malt agar.

Initially,  he  believed  that  his  nutrient
substrates  had  been  contaminated  by  molds,
because  Panaeolus  subbalteatus  is  a  species  that
almost  never  spontaneously  turns  bluish-green.
Figure  47  shows  a  distinct  sclerotia  formation  of
the species Psilocybe semilanceata. The formation
of  these  permanent  structures  with  Conocybe
cyanopus has been described in a previous chapter
(see Figure 35, p. 57).

Heim and Cailleux primarily described the
fruiting  of  Psilocybe  mexicana  and  Psilocybe
cubensis  on  agar  (0.05-2%  malt  extract)  and  on
their  experiments,  Psilocybe
compost.  During 
mexicana  produced 
the  highest  yields,  while
Psilocybe  cubensis  fruited  quite  vigorously  as
well.  At  about  the  same  time,  R.  Singer  had  also
started  mycelial  cultures  derived 
six
mushroom species. Singer and his co-workers soon
concentrated on Psilocybe cubensis in their efforts
to  induce  fruiting.  Soon  after,  in  the  early  1960s,
robust
R.  L.  Kneebone 
mushroom 
across
subtropical  climate  zones,  can  also  be  induced  to
fruit on a rye-grain medium.

reported 
species,  which 

this 
thrives 

from 

that 

Counter-Cultural Expertise Gains

Mainstream Acceptance

In 

for 

the 

the  mid-1960s,  Psilocybe  cubensis
became the species of choice for experiments that
made use of submersed fermentation to investigate
the biosynthesis of psilocybin from tryptophan and
other  precursors.  We  should  note  in  this  context
that around the same time, this technique was also
used  to  obtain  mycelial  pellets  of  the  species
Psilocybe  baeocystis  Singer  &  Smith,  providing
the  material 
isolation  of
baeocystin from mushroom tissue.

first-ever 

counter-culture  on 

From the 1970s on, a growing number of
books  were  published  in  the  United  States  that
distributed  information  acquired  by  members  of
the 
cultivation  of
psychotropic  mushrooms.  The  scope  of  these
books soon narrowed, with a primary emphasis on
Psilocybe cubensis, which may be explained by the
fact that, initially, only R. Heim's research results
were  published,  thus  making  them  available  to  a
larger audience.

the 

In 1971, new results were published

about the champignon's ability to fruit on a rye-
grain medium, provided a cover layer was added
on top. It wasn't long before these findings were
applied to the cultivation of Psilocybe species.

By  1932, 

J.  Sinden  had  already
published  a  patent  for  a  cultivation  process  that
involved  the  inoculation  of  mushroom  mycelia
derived  from  champignons  into  horse  dung
compost  (a  medium  widely  used  for  cultivation
purposes) but only after the mycelia had already
grown to permeate a medium of sterilized grains.
Since  that  time,  this  process  has  mainly  been
used  in  the  production  of  table  mushrooms,
specifically,  for  manufacturing  the  spawn  to  be
placed  onto 
inducing
fruiting  on  grain.  Psilocybe  cubensis  fruits  after
about three to eight weeks on this substrate.

the  compost  without 

If  a  moist  cover  layer  is  added  (e.g.  a
peat  moss/lime  mixture,  2:1),  the  yields  may
double.  However,  this  process  is  risky,  because
over-saturation  can  render  the  containers  non-
sterile and invite contamination from bacteria and
molds. Most authors prefer a mixture of rye and
water that has been inoculated with mycelia from
an  agar  culture.  Still,  rice,  barley,  wheat  and
other  grains  have  also  been  used  with  varying
degrees  of  success.  Figure  52  shows  that,  after
about  five  weeks,  small  mushrooms  even  grew
on wet pages of a newspaper that used to be the
official  print  medium  controlled  by  the  former
("Sozialistische
East  Germany's  SED  Party 
Einheitspartei  Deutschlands" 
or 
"Unified
Socialist Party of Germany").

Some Recent Findings

Today,  Psilocybe  cubensis  is  clearly  one
of  the  most  easily  cultivated  mushroom  species
around  and  it  can  thrive  on  a  large  variety  of
substrates.  Naturally  occurring  specimens  are
most  often  found  growing  on  cow  dung.
Generally, the species tends to grow on dung and
straw  as  a  primary  decomposer,  but 
the
mushrooms  can  also  utilize  nutrients  previously
converted  by  other  organisms,  such  as  various
types  of  compost,  among  others  (see  Figure  53,
p. 77).

Within the scope of this book, it is

impossible to discuss all details pertaining to the
fruiting process of psychotropic mushroom
species. P. Stamets and J.S. Chilton are the

the 

to 

rate 

then 

should 

the  dung 

the 
development 
robust  specimens 

authors of two outstanding books that deal with
all 
technical  and  practical  aspects  of
mushroom cultivation. The psychotropic species
are included along with information about many
kinds of culinary mushrooms. Still, I would like
to  make  special  note  of  the  fact  that  Psilocybe
cubensis  cultures  benefit  when  horse  or  cow
dung  is  added  to  the  original  nutrient  mixtures,
as evidenced by the mushrooms' relatively faster
growth 
of
and 
comparatively  more 
(see
Figure  45,  p.  71  and  Figure  49,  p.  74).  Before
adding 
the  nutrient  mixture,
however, it must first be suspended in water and
autoclaved, which considerably reduces the risk
of  contamination.  Only 
the
suspension  be  added  to  the  rye  grain  substrate
and sterilized once more.
               In spite of numerous claims in the
popular literature, most attempts by laypersons
to cultivate fruiting bodies of Psilocybe cubensis
on rye grain substrate are thwarted by the
presence of contaminating agents such as
bacteria and molds. Even though mushrooms are
organisms that do not perform photosynthesis
and thus are no longer thought of as plants, some
mushroom species, including Psilocybe cubensis,
are heliotropes, meaning they will grow toward
stationary sources of light. All Psilocybe species
examined to date require light to promote the
biochemical process in the mycelia that will
induce fruiting. Additional exposure to light is
needed, if the fruiting bodies are to develop into
normal shapes and produce spores.
        Apart from a series of interesting
physiological experiments performed by E.R.
Badham during the 1980s, there are a few other
noteworthy substrates for cultivation of
Psilocybe cubensis fruiting bodies. For instance,
we were the first to discover that a new type of
plant hormone (brassinosteroids) will accelerate
fruiting of the mycelia (Figure 40, p. 64). During
these experiments, we were also able to
completely suppress the formation of psilocybin
and psilocin through high concentrations of
phosphate. It is now possible to design future
physiological experiments to study different
hallucinogenic mushroom species under these
conditions.
              In recent years I have also succeeded at
cultivating the European hallucinogenic
mushroom species.

Figure 43 - Gymnopilus purpuratus

fruiting on wet rice and saw dust.

Figure 44 - Psilocybe bohemica on a

rice substrate.

Figure 45 - Psilocybe cubensis fruiting bodies grown an a

mixture of cow manure and rice.

than 

Psilocybe  semilanceata  is  a  mushroom
species  whose  mycelia  grow  at  a  significantly
the  mycelia  of  Psilocybe
slower  rate 
cubensis,  Gymnopilus  purpuratus,  Panaeolus
subbalteatus and Psilocybe bohemica. Despite the
that  only  a  few  strains  of  Psilocybe
fact 
semilanceata  actually  fruited,  cultivation  of  this
species succeeded with different substrates. After
a mycelial growth period of three to four months,
the mushrooms  emerged on compost (see  Figure
46)  as  well  as  on  a  mixture  consisting  of  grass
seeds, dung, and rice (see Figure 66, p. 116). Four
flushes of fruiting bodies were observed.

Panaeolus subbalteatus also  fruited  after
92 days on a mixture of cow dung and damp rice.
The  physical  appearance  of  these  fruiting  bodies
differed considerably from specimens of the same
species  that  had  grown  on  naturally  occurring
substrates (Figure 3, p. 6 and Figure 51, p. 76).

According 

to  Stamets  and  Chilton,
Panaeolus  cyanescens  is  a  species  that  does  not
layer.  However, 
fruit  without  a  cover 
this
statement  does  not 
seem  very  plausible,
considering  the  species  can  be  found,  much  like
Psilocybe cubensis, growing on top of dung under
natural conditions.

Psilocybe  bohemica  was  another  species
that  fruited  on  damp  rice  after  two  or  three
months.  These  in-vitro  specimens  also  appeared
to  be  much  hardier  in  comparison  to  fruiting
bodies collected at a natural location near Sazava,
Bohemia 
(Czech  Republic).  The  cultivated
specimens even developed two (!) rings, yet these
robust  mushrooms  did  not  fruit  until  after  an
exposure  to  the  shock  of  cold  temperatures  (see
Figure 44, p. 71).

At  about  the  same  time,  Gymnopilus
purpuratus fruited on a moist mixture of rice and
saw dust after six to eight weeks (see Figure 43,
p.  71).  In  this  case,  however,  the  cultivated
mushrooms turned out to be smaller than fruiting
bodies  that  developed  from  fruiting  mycelia  on
wood shavings at a location outside the laboratory
(Figure 30, p. 40).

During the 1980s, there were also reports
about success in cultivating psilocybin-containing
sclerotia  of  Psilocybe  mexicana  and  its  close
relative  Psilocybe 
tampanensis  Guzman  &
Pollock.  In  both  cases,  the  sclerotia  form  after
three to twelve weeks, preferably in the dark on a
substrate of lolium (rye grass) seeds. All strains of
Psilocybe tampanensis originate from a

single fruiting body that was found near Tampa,
Florida in 1977. Sclerotia from this species have
also  been  cultivated  on  a  straw  substrate.
Compared  to  lolium  seeds,  soft  rice  has  the
advantage  of  not  drying  out  as  fast,  so  that  the
sclerotia will form more evenly than they would
on  rye  grass  seeds.  A  photograph  of  Psilocybe
tampanensis  sclerotia  is  shown  on  page  117
(Figure 69).

Psilocybe natalensis, which we first

discovered in South Africa in January 1994 (see
Chapter 7.6), is another species that easily fruits,
within four to eight weeks, on compost or on
straw with potting soil for a casing.

from 

In  closing,  I  would  like  to  comment  on
the  mycorrhiza  problem.  Due  to  the  close
interrelationship  between  mushroom  mycelia
and  their  symbiotic  partner  trees,  there  exists  a
unique exchange of growth hormones and other
products - substances whose study has only just
begun. For this reason, all attempts to fruit these
species  in-vitro  have  remained  unsuccessful.
Nonetheless,  we  were  able  to  start  mycelial
cultures from some of these species, but in most
cases,  growth  rates  remained  very  slow.  As  a
result  of  my  own  investigations,  I  was  able  to
Inocybe
isolate 
aeruginascens  (see  Figure  50,  p.  75),  which
grew  and  developed  greenish  sclerotia  at  the
same  time.  The  dried  mycelial  mass  contained
about 0.1 % psilocybin, Figure 48 (p. 74) shows
three  Inocybe  aeruginascens  fruiting  bodies
whose  mycelia  grew  naturally.  These  mycelia
were  found  to  contain  no  baeocystin  and  less
psilocybin  (0.05%)  than  the  fruiting  bodies
shown in Figure 48.

cultures 

sterile 

Several  months  after  these  mycelia  had
been  isolated  from  spores  and  fruiting  body
tissue samples, they began to degenerate and lost
their  ability  to  sustain  growth,  most  likely
because  information  available  about  conditions
and  requirements  for  optimal  growth  was
insufficient.

Incidents  of  mycelial  degeneration  in
saprophytic  species  have  rarely  been  described
in the literature. However,  this  condition  can  be
easily prevented through usage of more than just
one  type  of  nutrient  media;  thus,  the  specific
composition  of  a  medium  should  be  changed
from time to time. In addition, only fast-growing
mycelial 
(rhizomorphs)  should  be
selected for propagation. By contrast, prolonged
degeneration  of  strains  can  be  caused  by  new
inoculations of material taken from agar-based

threads 

Figure 46 - Psilocybe semilanceata on compost

Figure 47 - Surface culture of Psilocybe semilanceata

(with sclerotia formation).

Figure 48 - Inocybe aeruginascens on grassy soil

Figure 49 - Psilocybe cubensis  on horse manure and rice.

portions  of  mycelia  whose  texture  is  somewhat
like wool. The kind of viruses known to appear in
champignon  cultures  -  where  they  have  already
caused  a  lot  of  damage  -  have  so  far  not  been
found in cultures of the Psilocybe and Panaeolus
species.

established that the process of differentiation
whereby mycelia are transformed into sclerotia or
fruiting bodies is linked to increased production
of psilocybin as well as psilocin, especially in

It is safe to say that we currently know a
great  deal  about  the  nutritional  requirements  of
Psilocybe  cubensis.  To  a  lesser  extent,  such
information  is  available  about  other  species  as
well.  Armed  with 
future
researchers  may  well  discover  new  insights  into
physiology  of  these  species,  as  well  as  the
biochemical changes that occur during fruiting.
In my experiments, it has already been

this  knowledge, 

Psilocybe cubensis.
                 Due to the relatively complex
methodology and the type of equipment needed to
isolate and maintain sterile cultures, it appears
unlikely that cultivation of Psilocybe cubensis
mushrooms by laypersons will significantly
heighten the mushroom's popularity or widen its
area of distribution anytime soon.

However, since the early 1980s, growing
numbers  of  mycophiles  in  North  America  and
Europe  have  successfully  used  "natural  outdoor
cultivation"  to  fruit  Psilocybe  cyanescens  and
similar species. This process involves selection of
natural  wood  substrates  striated  with  mycelia
(rhizomorphs)  that  usually  turn  blue  in  response
to handling. The mycelia are then transferred onto
fresh wood chips or commercial mulch (not from
cedar trees). After several months of growth, the
mycelia fruit during the fall season.

Figure 50 - Surface culture of Inocybe aeruginascens on a liquid nutrient medium.

Figure 51 - Panaeolus subbalteatus on cow dung and rice.

Figure 52 - Psilocybe cubensis on wet newspaper.

CHAPTER 7

PSYCHOTROPIC MUSHROOM SPECIES

AROUND THE WORLD

Figure 53 - Psilocybe cubensis on compost.

Figure 54 - Psilocybe stuntzii (grasslands variety) from British Columbia.

Figure 55 - Giant mushroom sculpture from Kerala, India. There is considerable debate among

experts about the significance and purpose of the sculpture.

Figure 56 - Magic mushrooms & water buffalo t-shirt from Thailand,

designed for the Western tourist market.

CHAPTER 7.1

SPOTLIGHT ON NORTH AMERICA AND HAWAII

In  1961,  V.E.  Tyler  became  the  first
investigator to report the detection of psilocybin in
Psilocybe pelliculosa (Smith) Singer & Smith,
a  North  American  mushroom  species.  One  year
later, two research groups, working independently,
discovered  psilocybin,  as  well  as  psilocin,  in
samples  of  Psilocybe  baeocystis  Singer  &  Smith
from  the  Pacific  Northwest  region  of  North
America.  Additional  chemical  and  taxonomic
findings  on  that  region's  mycoflora  have  been
published up to the present day. This area includes
the states of Washington (USA), British Columbia
(Canada) and western Oregon (USA). The region
is  considered  a  major  center  of  psychoactive
mushroom  use  in  North  America.  Some  areas
along  the  U.S.  Gulf  states  have  acquired  similar
reputations.

to  be  very  similar 

In  1966,  Heim  and  his  colleagues
reported  that  an  unknown  Psilocybe  species  had
been  confiscated  in  Canada.  The  mushrooms
to  Psilocybe
appeared 
semilanceata.  Shortly 
thereafter,  A.H.  Smith
determined  that  the  same  mushroom  species  was
popular  among  students  in  Vancouver.  It  wasn't
semilanceata  was
long 
recognized as a species quite common throughout
the Pacific Northwest. Moreover, the  mushrooms
turned  out  to  indistinguishable  from  European
Psilocybe semilanceata samples.

before  Psilocybe 

The Spread of Psilocybe semilanceata

From  the  late  1960s  onward,  Psilocybe
semilanceata usage increased, particularly in areas
between  the  Pacific  Ocean  and  the  Cascade
Mountains that range from Southern Oregon north
to British Columbia. It is likely that during these
years,  Tom  Robbins's  popular  book  "Another
Roadside Attraction " significantly contributed to
the  mushroom's  increasing  popularity.  Today,
Psilocybe  semilanceata  is  the  most  widely  used
species in the Pacific Northwest, and its habitat is
expanding  into  pasture  lands  east  of  the  Cascade
Mountains.

As in Great Britain, the mushroom is

referred to as "Liberty Cap" in the United States.

In 

Psilocybe semilanceata has the reputation of being
one  of  the  most  potent  species  without  generally
causing  unwanted  physical  side  effects  (also  see
Chapter  3-1).  As  indicated  in  previous  chapters,
recurrent  claims  about  different  types  of  effects
from  different  psychoactive  species  should  be
systematically  studied,  including  comprehensive
biochemical  analyses.  These  research  efforts  will
likely uncover new biodynamic ingredients.

Another  factor  that  accounts  for  different
types  of  effects  is  the  variability  in  levels  of
alkaloid  content. 
the  course  of  casual
experimentation  it  is  also  not  uncommon  for  a
number  of  expectations  to  become  self-fulfilling.
The  assumption  that  Psilocybe  baeocystis  (see
Figure  72,  p.  119),  a  strongly  bluing  species,
causes  a  comparatively  larger  number  of  physical
problems than other species is undoubtedly rooted
in  the  mushroom's  "reputation"  as  being  the  only
Psilocybe  species  to  date  responsible  for  the  only
known  fatality  involving  Psilocybe  baeocystis  -  a
child  who  died  after  eating  some  of 
these
mushrooms (see Chapter 8 for more details on this
incident).

Psilocybe  baeocystis  primarily  grows  in
inland  areas  of  the  Pacific  Northwest,  on  top  of
wood debris and on lawns in parks. It is a species
that can often be found and collected on school and
university  campuses.  Psilocybe  pelliculosa,  a
mushroom  mentioned  in  previous  chapters,  is  a
species 
"Liberty  Cap".
Macroscopically, 
to
distinguish  from  Psilocybe  semilanceata.  Unlike
the  latter  species,  however,  Psilocybe  pelliculosa
will grow in forests on wood chips and sawdust.

is  extremely  difficult 

known 
it 

than 

comparable 

Beug  and  Bigwood  were  able  to  furnish
analytical  proof  in  support  of  the  claim  that
Psilocybe pelliculosa is weaker in its psychotropic
species.  Psilocybe
effects 
pelliculosa  contains  about  30-50%  of  the  amount
of psilocybin found in Psilocybe cyanescens (slang
names:  Blue  wavy,  Cyan,  Grandote),  a  species
common  across  the  Pacific  Northwest.  It  fruits
primarily in parks, forming partial fairy rings. This
species did not become popular

also 

as 

among users until the mid-1970s.

species still fruits most abundantly in the fall.

A New Psychoactive Mushroom

Mushroom Trips as a Popular Sport

of 

the 

that 

descriptions 

Several  additional  Psilocybe  species  have
been  found  in  the  Pacific  Northwest,  even  though
the  taxonomic  classification  of  most  of  these
species  remains  inadequate,  despite  the  fact  that
monographs such as those by P. Stamets offer quite
detailed 
psychotropic
mycoflora.  In  the  mid-1970s,  Guzman  and  Ott
reported  a  rather  spectacular  event  concerning  the
spread  of  a  "new"  mushroom  species.  During  the
fall  of  1972,  large  numbers  of  a  strongly  bluing
gilled  mushroom  with  a  distinct  ring  pattern  were
found  at  the  University  of  Washington  in  Seattle.
The  fruiting  bodies  were  found  growing  on  bark
mulch,  which  came  from  a  central  distribution
point and which had been spread widely across the
campus  by  gardeners.  Due  to  the  bluing  reaction,
students  at 
the
mushroom  contained  psilocybin,  a  belief  that  was
confirmed  later  on.  The  sudden  appearance  of
massive  numbers  of 
fruiting  bodies  quickly
inspired  students  at  the  university  to  use  the
mushrooms as a hallucinogen.

the  university  assumed 

In  my  opinion,  it  is  still  uncertain  if  the
mushroom 
really  appeared  spontaneously,  or
whether it fruited on bark debris simply because the
substance  had  previously  been  mixed  with  spawn
derived 
that  originated
elsewhere.

fruiting  bodies 

subbalteatus 

In any case, in 1976, the mushrooms were
named  Psilocybe  stuntzii  Guzman  &  Ott  (slang
name:  "blue  veil"  or  "stuntzees",  (see  Figures  54
and 71). Today, the species can be found growing
on  bark  and  on  lawns  in  parks,  on  golf  courses,
football fields and gardens in numbers so large that
it is considered the second most important species
in terms of usage, after Psilocybe semilanceata. In
addition,  Panaeolus 
is  another
regionally 
important  mushroom  species  (slang
name: "red cap"), even though its users believe it to
be  slightly  more  poisonous  than  the  Psilocybe
species.  Still, 
is  used  quite
frequently,  because  it  begins  to  fruit  during  the
spring. The Psilocybe species, on the other hand, do
not appear until fall and continue to grow into early
winter, when temperatures consistently drop below
freezing,  which  inhibits  further  fruiting  of  the
species. Under favorable conditions, only Psilocybe
stuntzii can fruit year-round, even though this

the  mushroom 

from 

applied 

dosages 

thousands 

In  1977,  J.  Ott  estimated  that  several
tens 
of
of 
psychotropic  mushroom  material  are  harvested
and  used  each  year,  particularly  in  the  Pacific
Northwest.  Despite  these  quantities,  there  have
never  been  reports  of  fatalities  or  serious
physical damage as  a consequence of using  the
Psilocybe  or  Panaeolus  species.  Local  papers
merely  mentioned  occasional  panic  reactions
that subsided as soon as the acute effects of the
mushrooms had worn off.

to 

Since 

late  1960s, 

The usage of psychotropic mushrooms in
the  United  States  tends  to  cluster  geographically
in areas that are considered mushroom Eldorados.
For example, the city of Redmond, WA used to be
known  as  the  "bicycle  capital".  Since  1978,
several  newspapers  have  renamed  this  city  the
"psilocybin capital".
the 

the  usage  of
Panaeolus cyanescens and its closest relatives has
become  fashionable  in  Hawaii,  even  though  the
the  Panaeolus
taxonomic  differentiation  of 
species  from  each  other  is  extremely  difficult.
There  were  initial  attempts  to  preserve  the  fresh
mushrooms  by  freezing  them  with  dry  ice  (solid
carbon  dioxide) 
the  Pacific
Northwest  and  Southern  California.  Apparently,
these entrepreneurs were unaware of the fact that
psychoactive  ingredients  will  remain  stable,  as
long  as  the  mushrooms  are  dried  and  stored  at
temperatures  below  50'C  (122'F).  Such  export
efforts were soon abandoned, because freezing the
mushrooms  turned  them  to  mushy  pulp  that  was
difficult  to  transport.  In  addition,  several  local
species  had  been  discovered 
the  Pacific
Northwest. During the early 1970s, fruiting bodies
of  the  Panaeolus  species  preserved  in  honey
began  to  appear  on  the  black  market  in  Hawaii
and,  on  occasion,  in  North  America.  Again,  this
method  fell  short,  because  mushrooms  could  be
preserved for only short periods of time.

for  export 

Panaeolus  subbalteatus  grows  in  several
areas  in  the  Hawaiian  Islands,  but  it  is  used  less
frequently  than  other  Panaeolus  species.  Even
though  one  often  hears  about  "Hawaiian  strains"
of Psilocybe cubensis, the species is not native to
The  Islands  and  should  grow  there  only  under
conditions  of  artificial  cultivation.  Any  spawn
used for cultivation, however, must have been

in 

not 

by 

the 

that 

isolated  from  fruiting  bodies  that  originated
elsewhere.  In  Hawaii,  the  extent  of  adverse
reactions  was  also  limited  to  a  few  panic
reactions observed in recreational users who had
ingested  mushrooms  of  the  species  Panaeolus
cyanescens.  In  1972,  an  apparent  fatality  was
definitely 
of
mushrooms,  but  instead  was  most  likely  the
consequence  of  a  heroin  overdose,  as  reported
by  J.  Allen,  who  has  researched  this  incident
extensively.

ingestion 

caused 

The  legislatures  in  North  America  and
Hawaii  do  not  pay  very  much  attention  to  the
usage  of  psychoactive  mushrooms.  The
identification  of  species  is  often  quite  difficult,
so  that  police  enforcement  activities  primarily
target  misdemeanors such  as  parking  violations
and  the  willful  destruction  of  fences  around
pastures.  The  latter  is  not  uncommon  during
attempts 
into  areas  where
Psilocybe semilanceata can be found.

to  force  entry 

In  December  1979,  the  High  Court  of
British  Columbia  ruled 
the  Canadian
Narcotics  law  prohibits  psilocybin  only  in  its
pure  form,  whereas  mushrooms  containing  the
alkaloid as a natural ingredient are exempt from
the  law.  This  decision  seems  both  realistic  and
reasonable, 
substantial,
uncontrollable  spread  of  these  mushrooms  and
an  ongoing  battle  against  truly  addictive  drugs
that requires all available efforts and resources.

considering 

subbalteatus  grows  across 

Even though the extent of prosecution of
drug law violators in Canada and the U.S. varies
from state to state, psilocybin-containing mush-
rooms are only a minor factor in the overall "war
on  drugs".  In  California,  however,  mushroom
cultures  are  illegal,  as  well  as  spore  prints  (!)
the  Psilocybe  species.  Spore  prints,
from 
however,  are  impossible  to  control.  Psilocybe
cubensis  is  common  across  the  South,  and
Panaeolus 
the
Southwestern  U.S.,  where  the  mushrooms  are
used  extensively.  By  one  estimate,  there  were
100,000 "Magic Mushroom People" in the state
of California alone, a number likely to be much
higher  today.  The  demand  created  by  this
growing  market  is  probably  being  met  through
cultivation  of  Psilocybe  cubensis.  These  users
ingest  psychotropic  mushrooms  as  a  form  of
recreation,  or  incorporate  them  in  the  ritual
practice of natural mysticism. Other users prefer
mushrooms  as  an  aid  to  meditation  or  to  attain
communication  with  the  realm  of  the  divine.
Regardless  of  motivation,  users  tend  to  lead
secluded, self-sufficient lives in close proximity

with  Nature.  Across  North  America,  the  total
number of magic mushroom consumers is likely
close to one million, quite possibly higher.

By the early 1980s, prominent experts in
the  field  had  estimated  that  the  number  of
hallucinogenic  mushroom  users  in  the  United
States outnumbered LSD users for the first time,
a  trend  that  went  hand  in  hand  with  a  rise  in
environmental  awareness.  In  this  context  it  is
interesting to note that the Drug Abuse Warning
Network  (DAWN),  which  collects  data  from
throughout  the  United  States,  documented  only
31  cases  of  clinical  interventions  for  usage  of
psilocybin-containing  mushrooms  in  1982.  In
some of these cases, the mushrooms were used in
combination with other substances, confusing the
pharmacological  picture.  In  comparison,  LSD
was  involved  1,498  times,  while  marijuana  was
cited  in  5,295  cases.  It  should  be  noted  that  the
high  number  of  marijuana  cases  cited  appears
inflated  and  suspect,  in  light  of  data  from  other
studies.

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  T.  Leary's
psilocybin  experiments  during  the  early  1960s
provoked severe reactions of a moralistic-puritan
nature,  while  medical  reports  about  prolonged
psychoses  and  other  such  side  effects  did  not
appear until the "LSD era" some years later.

North  America's  mushrooms  offer  many
opportunities for additional taxonomic work and
many  more  still  remain  to  be  discovered.  To
illustrate, a new mushrooms species was recently
reported from Oregon. The mushroom, Psilocybe
azurescens  Stamets  &  Gartz  is  unusually  large
and  very  potent  due  to  its  high  psilocybin
content.  North  America's 
rich  mycoflora,
particularly  in  regions  of  wet  climates  in  the
eastern  and  midwestern  United  States  is  wide
open  for  further  research  efforts  that  may  well
yield valuable and amazing new results.

As  early  as  1909,  Murrill  described
"Inocybe  infida",  a  mushroom  with  "narcotic"
effects  from  New  York.  In  1911,  Ford  named
"Inocybe  infelix"  as  a  species  that  also  caused
strange  effects,  without  inducing  symptoms  of
muscarine 
descriptions
immediately  bring 
the  psilocybin-
producing  fibreheads,  even  though  visionary
experiences are not expressly mentioned.

poisoning. 

to  mind 

These 

In  the  future,  we  should  expect  an
increase  in  usage  of  local,  psychoactive  species
from locations across the U.S. and Canada.

CHAPTER 7.2

MYCOPHILIA IN CENTRAL AND SOUTH AMERICA

its 

from 

to 

local 

relate 

Compared  to  the  time  of  Wasson  and
Heim's  discovery,  recent  decades  have  brought
significant changes to several regions of Mexico in
terms  of  how 
the
psychotropic  Psilocybe  species.  In  many  remote
parts  of  the  country,  mushroom  cults  still  exist  in
their  specific  contemporary  forms  which  combine
Christian views with elements from pagan and pre-
Christian Nature religions.

Indians 

tourism 
the 

By  contrast,  in  other  parts  of  the  country,
mushroom  rituals  have  fallen  into  disuse  in  the
wake  of  interaction  with  Mexico's  "modern  life"
industry.  When  Guzman
and 
investigated 
taxonomy 
and  geographic
distribution  of  Psilocybe  aztecorum  Heim  in  1978,
he noted that several active "curanderas" had been
the  focal  point  of  sacred  mushroom  worship  20
years earlier. Today, the next generation of Indians
no  longer  ingest  the  mushrooms  and  consider  the
hallucinogenic species to be nothing but a popular
trading commodity for Western tourists.

industrialized 

Starting  in  the  1960s,  large  numbers  of
young 
people 
nations
("hippies") began to visit the centers of mushroom
worship  as  tourists,  favoring  the  state  of  Oaxaca.
They  came  mostly  from  the  United  States,  and
initially  their  main  destination  was  the  village  of
Huautla  de  Jiminez,  to  visit  Maria  Sabina,  who
guided  R.G.  Wasson  during  his  first  mushroom
session 
that  magic
mushrooms have been labeled "fool's  mushrooms"
or "joker's mushrooms" in Europe, it is interesting
to  note  here  that  Maria  Sabina  herself  repeatedly
referred  to  the  mushrooms  as  "clowns"  and  called
herself  "chief  of  the  clowns"  or  "lord  of  the
clowns".  In  Mexico,  magic  mushrooms  are  also
known as "mushrooms of pure laughter".

in  1955.  To 

the  extent 

Today  we  know  that  this  run  on  Mexico's
mushrooms  helped  destroy  the  cultural  identity  of
the  native  Indians,  causing  discontent  and  rising
crime  rates  in  several  villages.  Self-appointed
"curanderas",  with  no  traditional  roots,  presided
over mass ceremonies with magic mushrooms.

species  were  discovered 

Participants who had panic reactions did little to
ease tensions among the local population. Finally,
the police and the army were called in to put an
end  to  the  resulting  turmoil.  Mushroom  tourism
in  Mexico  dropped  off  rapidly,  especially  after
similar 
in  other
countries.  Despite  legal  prohibitions,  however,
various  Psilocybe  species  are  still  being  sold  to
tourists in some areas of the country today. This
phenomenon is not limited to Mexico. In the mid-
1970s,  Lowy  reported  from  Guatemala  that
Indian children near the capital city were offering
Psilocybe mexicana Heim for sale to foreigners, a
trading  practice  that  has  been  observed  in  other
parts of the country as well.

about 

knowledge 

Experts on bluing gilled mushrooms, who
travelled  to  South  America  and  the  Caribbean,
discovered  several  psychotropic  species  (e.g.
Panaeolus  cyanescens  in  Jamaica),  even  before
mycological research established the existence of
these  species.  According  to  those  few  scientific
publications on taxonomic identity, the two most
commonly  used  species  are  Psilocybe  cubensis
and Panaeolus cyanescens. Around 1970, tourists
who  had  previously  been  looking  for  Psilocybe
species in Mexico learned that they are abundant
among  Colombia's  mycoflora 
as  well.
Consequently, 
these
mushrooms  spread  quickly  among  Colombian
youngsters,  possibly  as  a  result  of  Central
America's  Indian  tradition.  Thousands  set  out  in
search of these species in and around their areas
of  residence.  Special  communes  were  formed,
situated 
the  Andes
Mountains.  The  most  famous  among  them  was
known  as  La  Miel  ("honey").  Psilocybe cubensis
and the Panaeolus species were also found to be
common across those regions of Amazonia where
Colombia,  Peru  and  Brazil  share  common
borders. The archaeological park at San Augustin
near Bogota has been dubbed "heart of the magic
mushroom  land".  These  species  have  also  been
used  in  Peru.  During  the  1980s,  road  side  signs
proclaiming  "No  To  San  Ysidro  Drugs!"  were  a
common sight. The slogans referred to Psilocybe

regions  of 

idyllic 

in 

indigenous, 

cubensis  under  an  old  name.  South  America's
problems, however, cannot be solely blamed on
the 
non-lethal
mushrooms.  Socio-economic  problems 
are
rooted  in  poverty  and  destitution,  epidemics,
civil warlike conditions in some parts, as well as
the  rampages  of  the  cocaine  mafia.  Today,
Argentina  and  Brazil  are  two  countries  where
magic  mushroom  use  is  still  common.  In  1975,
Pollock  reported  the  practice  of  mixing  a  drink
from  milk,  honey,  bananas 
and  magic
mushrooms.

In terms of interdisciplinary research in

ingestion 

of 

Central and South America, there remains the

vast  challenge  of  uncovering  additional  clues
about ritual usage among early cultures, coupled
with  efforts  to  trace  and  analyze  more  recent
kinds  of  uses.  Chapter  3.5  already  included  one
historic account of magic mushroom use several
centuries ago. A large number of golden pendants
in a variety of mushroom shapes have been found
in  Colombia,  suggesting  that  magic  mushrooms
have been  used  there  for  centuries.  At  the  same
time,  research  into  the  taxonomy  and  chemistry
of  South  American  psychotropic  species  has
barely just begun.

CHAPTER 7.3

THE AUSTRALIAN MYCOLFORA ATTRACTS ATTENTION

In 1934 J. Cleland publicized the existence
of 12 mushroom species of the genus Psilocybe in
South Australia. Up to that time, there had been no
accounts about psychotropic intoxications from the
fifth continent.

Cleland  was  probably  the  most  renowned
Australian mycologist of the 20th century. As early
as  1927  he  had  already  described  a  new  species
named  Psilocybe  subaeruginosa.  This  mushroom
grows  in  New  South  Wales,  Victoria  and  South
Australia  and  turns  bluish-green  with  age  or  in
response  to  pressure.  During  the  1940s  several
accounts  surfaced  which  detailed  a  series  of
"hysterical psychoses" caused by Panaeolus ovatus
Cke. & Mass. (also see Chapter 3.3).

thought 

In 1958, Aberdeen and Jones described the
geographic  distribution  of  Psilocybe  cubensis
across the southeastern valleys of Queensland and
New  South  Wales.  They  speculated  that  this  was
the  mushroom  responsible  for 
the  cases  of
intoxication,  not  the  Panaeolus  species.  They
proposed  this  hypothesis,  because  the  mushrooms
in  question  were 
to  have  been
champignons,  who  resemble  the  fleshy  Psilocybe
species  much  more  closely  than  any  of  the
Panaeolus  species.  In  addition,  the  Psilocybe
species  had  been  described  as  being  much  more
common in the area. Under wet climate conditions,
the  Psilocybe  species  can  be  found  growing  in
abundance  on  cattle  dung,  especially  along  the
sunshine coast of Queensland, in the open valleys
around  Brisbane  and  in  areas  that  used  to  be  rain
forests,  but  have  now  been  transformed  into
pastures.  It  is  quite  likely  that  the  species  was
brought  into  the  country  by  its  early  settlers.  It
wasn't  until  the  early  20th  century  that  land  in
Australia's  subtropical  and  tropical  regions  was
converted into pastures.

Today,  it  is  generally  thought  that  the
mysterious  Panaeolus  ovatus  species  was,  in
reality, Panaeolus cyanescens.

It wasn't until the early 1970s that the latter

species was identified. Soon after, the Panaeolus
species were recognized as being very common
throughout Northern and Southern

Australia.
             Despite the widespread geographic
distribution of psychotropic species in Australia,
there were only a few efforts to publish
information about their chemical composition. In
1970, Picker and Rickards reported the isolation
of 0.45 % of psilocybin from dried fruiting bodies
of Psilocybe subaeruginosa, but failed to find any
psilocin in that sample. Later on, other authors
reported only about one-tenth of this amount of
psilocybin, a number that I believe to be too low,
considering reports about the mushrooms' strong
psychoactive effects.

Psilocybin was also found in Australian
samples of Psilocybe cubensis (see Figure 2, p.
5), while Panaeolus cyanescens was reported to
contain psilocybin, along with even higher levels
of psilocin and serotonin as well.

in 

the 

Starting 

late  1960s,  popular,
widespread  usage  of  psychotropic  mushrooms
began to catch on in Australia. At the same time,
these  accounts  of  mushroom  use  were  the  only
comprehensive reports that originated in a country
other than Mexico.

In  the  summer  of  1969,  a  4,000-hectare-
region  near  the  coast  of  Queensland  gained
notoriety  because  of  its  Psilocybe  cubensis  crop
that  grew  there  after  the  rainy  season.  Interested
collectors  flocked  to  the  area  in  droves.  Media
reports  at  the  time  gave  the  impression  that  the
mushrooms  were  an  entirely  new  discovery,
completely 
disregarding  Central  American
traditions. Psilocybe cubensis conquered the black
market, where the mushrooms were sold for about
U.S.$1  per  fruiting  body.  In  the  wake  of  an
above-average rainy season, the species fruited so
abundantly  that  special  transportation  companies
were  founded  for  delivery  of  the  mushrooms  to
Australia's large cities.

However,  even  here  the  mushrooms  did
not  grow  in  heaven:  the  epidemic  subsided
somewhat,  and 
the  usage  of  psychotropic
mushrooms  became  endemic  across  all  of
Australia.  On  May  8,  1971,  the  governor  of  the
conservative state of Queensland prohibited

to 

study 

possession  of  Psilocybe  cubensis  and  the  species
fell  under  the  same  legal  guidelines  as  Cannabis
sativa  (hemp)  and  Papaver  somniferum  (opium
poppies).

Still,  usage  of 

the  Psilocybe  species
continued,  despite  harsh  penalties  for  possession
and use (a total of 74 individuals were sentenced
in 1972, and 27 in 1973).

continued 

Also, those interested in mycological field
Psilocybe
research 
subaeruginosa and even discovered the species in
the  northern  part  of  the  country.  Like  Psilocybe
cubensis,  this  species  is  also  known  by  the
colloquial name of "gold top", whereas Panaeolus
cyanescens, a species that wasn't discovered until
later,  acquired  the  nickname  "blue  meanies"
within  the  counterculture  (an  expression  that
refers to a collection of several fruiting bodies). It
is  likely  that  these  mushrooms  were  named  after
the  small  blue  men  featured  in  the  classic
psychedelic  Beatles  movie  "Yellow  Submarine",
which was released in 1968.

colloquial  Australian 

English,
"mushies"  is  a  commonly  used  short  form  for
"mushrooms".

Next  to  fresh  mushrooms,  "processed"
preparations  also  began  to  appear  on  the  black
market:  In  Hobart,  Tasmania,  for  example,  dried
and  ground  up  mushrooms  packaged  in  gelatine
capsules  were  sold  for  $6  a  fruiting  body.  The
availability  of  mushroom-based  hallucinogenic
substances drastically reduced the market share of
LSD,  which  was  generally  a  lot  more  expensive.
By  1972,  LSD  had  almost  disappeared  from  the
black market.

Based on Southcott's (1974) writings, it is
likely that the unpleasant taste of fresh specimens
of Psilocybe cyanescens was the main reason for
the processing of the fruiting bodies.

In 

Bizarre Reactions

Considering 

the  widespread  use  of
psychoactive mushrooms in Australia, there were
only  a  handful  of 
reports  about  medical
complications, 
only  minor
complaints  from  a  few  individuals.  Symptoms
were almost exclusively limited to panic reactions
due  to  excessively  high  doses.  These  reactions
were  precipitated  by  bizarre  psychic  sensations,
which the person was unable to integrate. One

amounting 

to 

17  year  old  teenager,  for  example,  developed  a
panic reaction when she suddenly felt like a banana
that  was  being  peeled  (Southcott).  In  all  cases,
symptoms  disappeared  within  several  hours  as  the
psilocybin  wore  off.  While  a  few  cases  included
complaints  such  as  stomach  cramps  and  kidney
pain,  these  symptoms  are  not  characteristic  of  the
Psilocybe  species  and  their  relatives.  It  is  likely,
that  other,  poisonous,  mushrooms, 
such  as
muscarine-producing  species,  were  to  blame  for
these syndromes.

I would like to close this chapter with a
report from an Australian mushroom lover, who
illustrates the reasons and circumstances of
psychoactive mushroom use in Australia
(Southcott)

Report about the effects of a "gold top "

mushroom:

this 

throughout 

The mushrooms which were prepared in a
broth and boiled for about two minutes may be used
to induce an extremely powerful hallucinatory trip.
When  eaten  raw,  the  effects  can  take  up  to  two
hours to come on, but taken in soup form they can
begin  to occur  within  five  to  ten  minutes  of  being
eaten.  The  first  noticeable  effect  is  a  tingling
sensation  from  head  to  toe,  followed  by  extreme
warmth  or  cold 
the  body.  Mild
hallucinations begin to occur within a quarter of an
hour  and  become  stronger  as  the  trip  reaches  its
peak. This peak can be a terrifying experience for
the  novice;  individuals  may  not  know  what  to
expect and may believe they have gone insane.
In
many  cases, 
.  "insanity"  can  also  be
pleasurable and can cause a person to lose all fear
of  things  which  had  previously  seemed  impossible
to bear. Everything material and  otherwise  is  laid
out in front of  you  for examination and nothing is
beyond  human  comprehension.  In  my  opinion  and
experience, 
these  mushrooms,  when  used  by
persons  capable  of  understanding  the  tremendous
power  contained  within 
them,  can  only  be
beneficial in their effects.

(Psilocybe
subaeruginosa - Southcott) growing in flatbottomed
valleys and on gentle slopes. They thrive in moist,
grassy soil and can range in size from a quarter of
an  inch  up  to  two  or  three  inches  in  diametre.  In
regard  to  an  overdose  of  these  mushrooms,  this
user feels that it is not really an accurate term for
this condition. It is more an extreme fear of certain
things or people

found 

them 

have 

I 

that causes 'freak-outs ".
The  trip  can  change
from one of fear and hysteria to one of pure ecstasy
in  a  matter  of  a  second,  if  a  person  is  treated
correctly. The police, in my opinion, are the cause
for  more  bad  experiences  than  all  other  factors
combined.  I  myself  have  almost  lost  all  fear  of
everything  I  previously  dreaded.  I 
to
continue the use of these mushrooms and see
where it leads me, whether it be a good (lawful)
or bad thing....

intend 

Description:  The  mushrooms  (Psilocbe
aeruginosa  Southcott)  have  caps  colored  yellow
to  dark  brown  on  top,  and  cream-colored  to
almost  yellow  underneath.  If  picked  fresh,  the
stem and parts of the cap will turn green and blue
or  sometimes  violet.  This  discoloration  does  not
occur  until  after  the  mushrooms  have  been
picked.

CHAPTER 7.4

EUROPEAN CUSTOMS

The first report ever published in a
scientific European journal about usage of
Psilocybe semilanceata in Europe was written by
M. Carter and appeared in New Scientist in
September 1976.

"Mushrooms Are Mushrooms"

The  mushrooms  quite  suddenly  emerged
in the spotlight of public attention in 1976, when
Judge  Blomefield  of  Great  Britain's  High  Court
handed down a verdict of "not guilty" in the trial
of  a  man  accused  of  possession  of  psilocybin  in
the form of dried fruiting bodies from the species
Psilocybe  semilanceata.  According  to  Carter's
report,  the  acquittal  was  justified  as  follows:
"Psilocybin  is  a  chemical  and  mushrooms  are
mushrooms".  In 
this  decision,
however,  a  few 
in  Britain  were
nonetheless 
of
possession 
psilocybin,  because  the  British  legal  system  is
based  on  the  principles  of  common  law,  which
means  that  the  High  Court  decision  was  not
necessarily  binding  in  cases  that  went  to  trial  in
lower courts after the man had won his acquittal in
the High Court.

the  wake  of 
individuals 
for 

sentenced 

Despite its Celtic ancestry and the practice
of  Nature  religions,  England  is  among  those
countries whose population has traditionally been
quite  mycophobic 
toward
mushrooms, which have always been thought of as
poisonous,  slimy  and  moldy.  It  is  therefore  quite
remarkable that these values appear to be changing
with  the  current  younger  generation.  Could  it  be
that  England's  Celtic  heritage 
is  making  a
reappearance after centuries of dormancy?

its  attitudes 

In  1978  ,  C.  Hyde  and  his  collaborators
reported  several  cases  of  voluntary  intoxications
with  Psilocybe  semilanceata  from  a  medical
perspective, describing symptoms experienced by
mushroom  collectors  that  range  from  typically
visionary  experiences  to  the  manifestation  of
acutely delirious states. The authors emphasized

in 

that  the  mushrooms  were  well-known  within  the
hippie  subculture  of  Manchester.  Thirty  to  forty
Psilocybe 
semilanceata  mushrooms  were
considered  an  appropriate  dose  to  attain  a  fully
hallucinatory state.

According to British users, the effects of

Psilocybe semilanceata include intense visuals
without any of the negative feelings that may be
caused by LSD. British colloquial names for the
mushroom are quite poetic, such as:

-  Liberty Cap
-  Magic Mushroom
-  Blue Legs
-      Pixie Caps

Contrary  to  common  opinion,  "liberty
cap"  is  not  a  new  name,  since  M.C.  Cooke
mentioned it in his writings that date  back  to the
19th century.

Due to the widespread distribution of this
Psilocybe  species  across  England,  particularly
Scotland  and  Wales,  Psilocybe  semilanceata
appears to be more popular in England than in any
other  European  country,  with 
the  possible
exception of Norway. This is an opinion echoed in
numerous scientific and medical articles published
on  the  subject  in  Great  Britain.  In  my  opinion,
these  publications  contain 
the  most  detailed
descriptions of casual use of psilocybincontaining
mushrooms species by laypersons anywhere in the
world.

the  species  fruited  abundantly 

One  analysis  by  P.R.  Mills  and  his
collaborators  described  seven  Scottish  patients
with  symptoms  caused  by  ingestion  of  Psilocybe
semilanceata mushrooms during the fall of 1978,
when 
the
Glasgow  area  after  heavy  rainfall.  Four  of  the
seven  men  had  eaten  no  less  than  one  hundred
mushrooms  each,  which  meant  they  had  taken
about 50 mg of pure psilocybin a person. It is not
surprising,  then,  that  such  dosages  should  cause
visions  that  lasted  several  hours,  along  with
marked somatic symptoms.

in 

Mega Mushroom Festival

While  there  is  talk  about  "hippies"  in  the
report from Manchester, a 1980 newspaper article
from  Wales  describes  a  "new  kind  of  gypsy",
whose  exploits  included  a  mushroom  celebration
near  Cardiff  with  100  participants.  The  occasion
was  the  discovery  of  yet  another  bumper  crop  of
Psilocybe  semilanceata  in  that  area.  Nineteen  of
the  revelers  felt  so  seriously  ill  they  had  to  seek
medical treatment.

It  appears  that  in  the  early  days  of
mushroom  usage 
in  Great  Britain,  massive
amounts of Psilocybe mushrooms were consumed
on  several  occasions,  which  caused  a  higher
number  of  panic  reactions  than  elsewhere  in  the
world.

However, it is clear from articles published
in  medical  journals  that  these  cases  were  merely
"the tip of the iceberg", that is, they were a small
group of users whose reactions to the acute stages
of  mushroom 
intoxication  attracted  attention
because 
relevant
included 
they 
symptoms such as states of pathological depression
with no recognition of surroundings.

clinically 

In an attempt to describe patterns of usage
of  the  Psilocybe  species  in  the  Tayside  area  near
Dundee,  Scotland,  N.R.  Peden 
his
collaborators found that the typical user was much
younger  there  than  in  Manchester  or  Wales.  The
authors  examined  27  patients,  whose  ages  ranged
from  12  to  24  years.  I  have  previously  cited
accounts  about  accidental  intoxications  indicating
that  children  can  have  abnormal  reactions  to
psilocybin, 
loss  of
consciousness.  Teenage  use  of  hallucinogens  and
other  psychoactive  substances,  including  alcohol
and nicotine can have disastrous consequences.

cramps  or 

The  results  of  a  survey  at  two  Scottish
schools of 59 children aged 14 to 15 years revealed
that  66%  of  them  had  already  heard  about  the
mushrooms'  effects.  Also,  a  paper  published  by
R.E.  Young  and  his  research  team  in  1982  found
that the mushroom users in the Glasgow area as a
group are quite young.  In  1981,  these  researchers
treated 49 children and adults aged 12 to 28 years.
These  authors  are  correct  in  pointing  out  that  the
mushrooms cannot be eradicated due to their large
area  of  distribution.  At  the  same  time,  however,
they  demand 
that  fungicides  be  sprayed  on
mushroom

such 

and 

as 

fruiting areas that are easily accessible!

that 

their 

This  is  a  baffling  and  incomprehensible
proposition - to acutely endanger all residents of a
certain  area  by  exposing  them  to  poison,  simply
because there were a few mild cases of mushroom
intoxications,  with 
soon
disappeared. If anyone is to blame, it is the users
for 
recklessness.
Fortunately, these crypto-schizophrenic proposals
were never implemented.

carelessness 

symptoms 

On  the  other  hand,  there  are  interesting
statistics  available  from  the  poison  center  in
London,  about  reported  cases,  where  medical
attention  was  required  following  ingestion  of
Psilocybe  semilanceata.  The  numbers  below
show  how  many  people  received  therapeutic
treatment in Great Britain in a given year:

and 

33
1978 
47
1979 
1980 
96
1981      142

these 

The average age of the mushroom collectors was
between 15 and 19 years. Reports mostly came in
during  September  and  October  of  each  year,
which  corresponds  to  the  mushroom's  fruiting
period.  Cases  that  were  reported  during  other
months of the year had been caused by ingestion
of dried mushroom material.

individuals, 

In  36%  of 

the
mushrooms  caused  significant  visual  distortions
and  visions.  Five  people  acted  aggressively
without  experiencing  perceptual  alterations.
Dosage varied from half a mushroom (effects?) to
up  to  two  or  three  pounds.  If  the  latter  amounts
have  been  reported  truthfully,  those  individuals
ingested  about  1  to  1.5  g  of  pure  psilocybin,
assuming  an  alkaloid  content  of  0.1  %  in  fresh
mushrooms.  However,  in  cases  where  whole
mushrooms had generally been eaten according to
the  Mexican 
liquids  removed  via
contained  whole
stomach 
mushrooms.  Failure 
the
mushrooms before swallowing means that only a
fraction  of  the  available  amount  of  alkaloids  is
extracted  from  the  mushrooms  and  absorbed  by
the body.

to  carefully  chew 

tradition, 

largely 

pumps 

Panic Reactions

In cases when intoxications were caused
by eating 'normal' amounts of mushrooms and the
ingestion  of  potentially  deadly  species  could  be
excluded, pumping the patients' stomachs turned
out to be a procedure that was both too drastic as
well  as  unnecessary. 
In  younger,  hyper-
suggestible patients, the procedure can precipitate
extremely  aggressive  behavior.  In  addition,  it
often doesn't work, because the mushrooms tend
to clog the pumping apparatus.

Therefore, panic reactions after ingestion
of  Psilocybe  semilanceata  is  a  condition  that,  in
some cases, may be aggravated or even induced
by improper treatment of the patient at hospitals
and  clinics.  After  evaluation  of  the  statistics  on
Psilocybe semilanceata usage in Great Britain, J.
Francis and V.S.G. Murray emphasize that there
has  not  been  a  single  fatality  among  some  318
poisoning  cases  -  in  fact,  no  severe  somatic
symptoms  were  noted,  nor  have  there  been
incidents  of  misidentification  of  the  mushroom
species.  According  to  the  authors,  intoxication
can  be  a  quite  unpleasant  experience  for  the
individual.  Panic 
the  only
significant  hazard,  which  may  endanger  the
individuals  as  well  as  their  surroundings  for  the
duration of the mushrooms' effects.

reactions  pose 

As an ideal treatment, they proposed that
patients be moved to a darkened, beautiful room,
and that they be watched until the effects have
subsided.
diazepam should be administered.

If necessary, tranquilizers such as

R.  Watling  mentions  a  non-fatal  case  in
Scotland,  where  Inocybe  geophylla  (Sow.  &  Fr.)
Kumm., a mescaline-containing species, had been
mistaken for the Psilocybe species.

In the 1980s, Psilocybe semilanceata was
named  as  the  mushroom  species  that  caused  by
far  the  largest  number  of  intoxications  in  Great
Britain. Today, usage of this psychotropic species
in that country is not quite as popular anymore as
it  was  10  years  ago.  Also,  mushroom  eaters  are
no longer prosecuted.

By  comparison,  a  short  report  by  a
medical  student  from  Manchester  was  not
convincing. The report claimed that a 24-year old
patient  suffered  from  severe  depression  with
somatic side effects for three months ("persistent
psychiatric symptoms") and that these symptoms

the 

time, 

had  been  induced  by  ingestion  of  Psilocybe
semilanceata.  At 
the  patient  was
experiencing  personal  stress  and  had  also  taken
other  substances  as  well.  Despite 
the  wide
distribution  of  psychoactive  mushrooms  around
the  world,  there  have  been  no  reports  of  similar
episodes.

The  usage  of  Psilocybe  semilanceata  in
Norway  was  first  described  during  the  fall  of
1977, in Sandnes, near the Rogaland area. Up to
that  time,  the  Norwegian  literature  had  depicted
Psilocybe semilanceata as merely a small, inedible
mushroom  known  to  grow  in  grass  interspersed
with  other,  similar,  species.  Apparently,  the
experiences  in  England  and  the  United  States
inspired the use of these mushrooms in  Norway,
as well as in other European countries. However,
it is also possible that a report published in 1976
about  the  discovery  of  psilocybin  in  Norwegian
collections contributed to subsequent usage of the
mushrooms.

Knowledge  about  the  mushrooms  spread
quickly  around  Norway,  especially  in  the  fjord
areas,  were  the  species  fruits  most  abundantly.
Daily and weekly papers as well as underground
magazines  dealt  with  the  mushrooms  at  length.
Only  a  small  number  of  panic  reactions  were
known  to  have  occurred  in  Norway,  with  some
individuals requiring temporary clinical attention.
Nonetheless,  in  December  1981,  the  mushroom
species was classified under Norwegian narcotics
law  as  an  "absolutely  forbidden  substance".  The
same  classification  applies  to  the  potentially
dangerously  addictive  drugs  of  the  heroine  type,
as well as to the pure hallucinogens, such as LSD,
mescaline  and  psilocybin,  all  of  which  are
pharmacologically completely different from any
of the heroine-type drugs. By contrast, Figure 57
that  other  European  nations  have
illustrates 
attitudes  similar 
in  British
Columbia,  which  form  the  basis  for  my  own
analytical work with mushroom materials.
there 
of 

less
Psilocybe
information 
semilanceata from other countries. The year 1981
has  been  named  as  the  starting  date  of  usage  in
Finland; by 1984, there had only been one patient
who required medical attention.

those  found 

to  Norway, 

Compared 

usage 

about 

There  are  additional  countries  where  the
mushrooms are being used and collected, more or
less sporadically: The Netherlands, Austria,

to 

is 

Sweden, 

Belgium, 

Denmark, 
Germany,
Switzerland,  and  recently  Russia  near  the  St.
Petersburg area. The mushrooms have even been
found  in  Siberia.  In  some  areas,  where  the
mushrooms 
in  abundance,  a  more
comprehensive  mode  of  usage  can  be  observed,
without  attracting  much  additional  attention  over
a longer period of time.

thrive 

Costly measures, such as the deployment of

helicopters over pastures in the Jura Mountains of
Switzerland to flush out mushroom collectors have
rarely been used and were quickly abandoned.
Switzerland is another country where

Psilocybe cubensis is being cultivated and used
without attracting much attention. Below is an
account provided by a Swiss friend about his first
ever experience with this species:

Intense, kaleidoscope-like colors are being

generated. I begin to dive in and out of other
realities, followed by the painful loss of ego, death
and life. Suddenly I find myself inside a wooden
box. My body is a black mass full of low-level pain.
I have the black plague. I was put inside the box,
because I was thought to be dead, but I am still
alive. I am being carried to and placed on top of
cart so that I can be transported to be burned. Few
others are being given such a box.
am in despair, but then I know that the end is near,
anyway. Death is a liberation for me.
remember: I see my house in the city center of
Metz, where I used to live until now. Then came the
plague. My years of selfish dedication of helping
sick, degenerate, stinking, hungry and dying people.

At first I

I

I provide comfort and companionship, as

well as medication that remains ineffective. I
continuously make house calls, there is no end in
sight.
At first I deny this
fact, but now I am inside this wooden box, in a state
of semi-consciousness. I know that the end is here.

I become ill myself.

I know that I am a physician named
Claudius Vinzen and that the year is 1427.

I  wake  up  in  the  reality  of  winter,  1990.
Metz, where is Metz? Later on, I locate the city on a
map of France and until this day, I have been trying
to  verify  if  this  physician  lived  there  during  the
Middle  Ages.  I  am  reminded  of  my  long  years  of
professional work with criminal and drug-addicted
youngsters.
I  sense  the  common  elements  of
these  two  realities  (karma?),  the  sacrifices  of
selfless helping.

Such deeply moving experiences do
not appear to be unusual (compare to reports of
experiences with Psilocybe semilanceata in
Chapter 3.1) and should always be studied in all
seriousness.

to  engage 

Only  France  seems 

in
elaborate  activities  designed  to  locate  collectors
of  psychotropic  mushrooms.  Despite  its  grand
mycological  traditions,  France  is  a  country  that
has  a  rather  absurd  prohibition  against  the
exhibition  of  Psilocybe  and  Stropharia  species
(European  Stropharia  species  do  not  produce
psilocybin)  at  scientific  conventions.  As  a
consequence,  French  mycologists  have  been
the  genus  Psilocybe.
avoiding 
Nowadays, 
conventions,
Psilocybes  are  exhibited  under  the  old  name  of
Geophila (Quelet), which appears to have gotten
around the problem of breaking the law.

at  mycological 

the  use  of 

According 

to  my  personal  commu-
nications  with  mycologists, 
the  usage  of
Psilocybe  semilanceata  in  Italy  began  in  about
1980/1981  and  has  been  rising  steadily  since
then.  At  the  same  time,  there  have  been  no
clinically  relevant  cases,  nor  any  legislative
action  on  the  matter.  Towards  the  late  1980s,
usage of psychoactive Psilocybe species began in
the former Czechoslovakia, for instance, around
the  region  of  Brno.  It  appears  that  Psilocybe
bohemica is used more often in this country than
Psilocybe semilanceata, as the former species is
quite common there.

Very little is known about European usage

of mushroom species from other genera. In the
mid-1980s, Spanish youngsters near Barcelona
were observed using Panaeolus mushrooms.

The well-known booklet  authored  by  Oss
and  Oeric  about  the  cultivation  of  Psilocybe
cubensis has been translated into several European
languages  and  published  in  different  countries.  It
is almost certain that the book is being used as a
cultivation guide in Europe, however, there are no
available  data  about  the  success  rate  of  these
experiments. In many cases, commonly occurring
contaminants  probably  prevent  fruiting  of  this
subtropical species on rye substrate.

I won't risk making predictions about the

extent of future usage of indigenous European
psychoactive mushroom species, nor am I able to
predict which species may or may not gain in

popularity.  However,  it  is  possible  to  speculate
that  the  increased  geographic  distribution  of
species  such  as  Inocybe  aeruginascens  and
Psilocybe cyanescens may lead to more

unintentional  intoxications,  which,  in  turn,  may
result  in  creating  a  generally  deeper  knowledge
base about the attributes of these mushrooms.

Figure 57 - A letter from the "Central Bureau of Substance Abuse" in the former East
Germany, detailing some legal restrictions on psychoactive plants. At the time (1983),
Psilocybe mexicana was not a controlled substance and no restrictions applied to its use.

Figure 58 - Woodcut entitled "Cooking Witches" by Baldung Grien (1514). Such cultural practices undoubtedly
included familiarity with psychotropic mushrooms, even though such knowledge was considered pagan at the time.
The practice of "witchcraft" was maligned and accused witches were persecuted, tortured and executed, as the
Christian Inquisition was desperate to suppress pagan beliefs and wisdom.

CHAPTER 7.5

JAPANESE EXPERIMENTATION

Mushroom species containing psilocybin
are also found in Japan. Tales about the infamous
"Laughing Mushroom" date as far back as the
Middle Ages. An account from the 11th century
became famous:

Several lumberjacks from Kyoto got lost in
the  woods  for  reasons  that  remain  unknown.
Suddenly  they  encountered  four  or  five  Buddhist
nuns,  whose  behavior  did  not  at  all  conform  to
expectations: instead of immersing themselves into
their inner selves in a quiet quest for Nirvana, the
search  for  Absolute  Nothingness,  these  daughters
of  Buddha  were  found  dancing  and  laughing.  It
turned out that the nuns had also gotten lost in the
woods and dealt with their hunger by eating some
delicious  mushrooms.  The  faithful  nuns  soon
discovered,  however,  that  they  could  not  stop
dancing 
lumberjacks's
stomachs,  in  the  meantime,  had  also  begun  to
growl  and,  thinking  that  what  was  good  for  the
nuns  was  good  enough  for  them,  the  lumberjacks
ate  some  of  the  mushrooms  as  well.  Soon  after,
they  also  succumbed  to  overwhelming  fits  of
laughter  and  the  urge  to  dance....  The  linguistic
moral of the story: since that time, the mushrooms
in question have been referred to in Japanese as

laughing.  The 

and 

- "maitake" (Dancing Mushrooms)

and later on

- "waraitake" (Laughing Mushrooms).

literature 

For a long time, the species thought to be
responsible for these symptoms were identified in
as  Panaeolus
the  mycological 
papilionaceus  and  as  Gymnopilus  spectabilis
("giant laughing mushroom"). However, today we
know that the former is a species from Europe and
North  America  which  does  not  contain  any
psychoactive  substances,  while  even  Japanese
authors  have  been  unable,  since  1980,  to  confirm
the  existence  of  psilocybin  and  its  derivatives  in
the 
inactive
in  Gymnopilus
substances  have  been 
spectabilis.

latter  Gymnopilus  species.  Only 

found 

In Japan, the investigation of these

long 

tradition:  There 

mushrooms  has  a 
is
evidence that mushrooms have been cultivated in
Japan for no less than 2,000 years, by collecting
naturally  grown  mycelia  of  Lentinus  edodes
(Berk.)  Singer  and  transferring  onto  pieces  of
wood selected to serve as new substrates.

Incidentally, literary sources from China
also attest to knowledge about mushrooms from
that country, where such mushrooms were said to
be the cause of a (temporary) "disease of dry
laughter".

Still, the reports about an irresistible urge
to  dance  constitutes  a  rather  unusual  effect  of
psilocybin, from our current point of view. While
psilocybin  is  initially  known  to  cause  fits  of
laughter,  this  phase  is  generally  followed  by  a
state of relaxation and a drop in levels of physical
activity.  It  is  likely  that,  in  this  case,  medieval
Japanese  mentality  was  a  cultural  factor  that
modified  the  specific  expression  of  an  altered
state of consciousness.

Aside  from  the  two  disputed  mushroom
species  mentioned  above,  several  psychoactive
Psilocybe species can be found in Japan. There are
several  known  cases  of  accidental  ingestion  that
occurred  during  the  20th  century,  resulting  in
psilocybin  syndromes  without  inducing  fits  of
dancing.

For  example,  in  1932,  S.  Imai  described
cases  of  intoxications  from  1929  and  1931  which
involved  his  newly  classified  species  Stropharia
caerulescens.  Later  on,  the  species  was  named
Stropharia  venenata  Imai,  which  grows  on  top  of
wood and dung. Today, it is being classified within
the genus Psilocybe as a close relative of Psilocybe
cubensis.

thought 

Imai  mentions  an  event  that  occurred  on
June  21,  1929:  A  43-year-old  woman  collected
about  13  oz.  of  a  type  of  mushroom  that  she
to  be  honey  mushrooms
erroneously 
(Armillaria  mellea). The 
following  day,  she
prepared  a  tasty  mushroom  meal  and  served  it  to
her family. As family members began to notice the
effects, they immediately went to see a doctor, who
determined that the woman was experiencing the

most  potent  effects:  Her  stomach  was  pumped
without delay and laxatives were administered, but
she  still  had  muscle 
followed  by
hallucinations  and  a  comatose  (?)  state.  The  son,
who  had  eaten 
the  soup  only,  experienced
hallucinations as well, because the cooking process
had served to extract the water-soluble compounds
from the mushrooms.

twitches, 

No Danger from Psilocybes in Japan

and 

Singer 

Unfortunately, 

Smith
mistakenly  cited  these  incidents  in  their  (1958)
monograph about the Psilocybe genus as examples
of  the  mushrooms  species'  fatal  effects.  For  that
reason,  this  species  was  unjustly  branded  for
decades  in  the  literature  as  a  highly  dangerous
poisonous mushroom.

There  are  other  psychoactive  mushroom
species  that  grow  in  Japan,  such  as  the  bluing
species  Psilocybe 
subcaerulipes  Hongo  and
Psilocybe argentipes Yokoyama. These species also
caused intoxications in three people, who mistook
the  mushrooms  for  the  honey  mushroom.  These
cases  brought  about  the  isolation  of  psilocybin  in
crystalline  form  from  dried  fruiting  bodies  of  the
species, as well as recognition of the species' wide
area of distribution. In 1973, Yokoyama published
the  results  from  systematic  experimentation  with
Psilocybe  argentipes.  No  "urge  to  dance"  was
noted  in  these  investigations  as  well.  Below  are
some excerpts from his research protocols:

J.H.  (a  24-year-old  male)  ingested  four
cooked  mushrooms  at  night,  after  a  meal  (!),  and
then ate another three fresh mushrooms 30 minutes
later.  This  was  followed  by  regurgitation,  and  45
minutes later, he started to sweat profusely all over
his  head  and  body.  His  pulse  rate  and  breathing
were  accelerated,  but  slowed  down  later  on.  He
laid down and experienced visual

K 

The 

that 

hallucinations, which caused him to panic and to
run  a  distance  of  about  1,200  ft.  to  consult  the
nearest doctor. The physician noted widely dilated
pupils,  and  proceeded  to  have  the  patient's
stomach  pumped  and  then  prescribed  laxatives.
Three hours later, the abnormal state had largely
subsided;  by  the  next  morning,  there  was  no
evidence of any other side effects.

M.K. (a 22-year-old male) ate just one

fresh mushroom, which had no effects at all.
.Y.  (a  31-year-old  male)  ate 

five
mushrooms.  Regurgitation  occurred  30  minutes
after  ingestion,  followed  by  sweating  around  the
head  and  body;  his  extremities  appeared  to  be
slightly  paralyzed.  This  paralysis  persisted  for
another three hours. During this time, the subject
had  great  difficulties  handling  a  pen  for  writing,
his  mood  was  depressed  and  he  experienced
hallucinations,  such  as  colorful  lights  flooding
down from the sky. By the following morning, all
of  these  effects  had  dissipated.  The  fresh  fruiting
bodies were bitter, a taste that disappeared after
the mushrooms had been cooked in water.
are 

rather
amateurish,  and  the  descriptions  of  results  are
heavily  influenced  by  a  simplistic  perspective
which 
the  mushrooms's
pharmacological  effects  proceed  along  a  single,
narrow  track.  Still,  these  accounts  demonstrate
that  comparable  dosages  of  Japanese  mushroom
species have psychotropic effects similar to those
caused  by  Psilocybe  species  found  on  other
continents.

experiments 

assumes 

above 

Much work still remains to be done in the
areas of phytochemistry and taxonomy before the
body of knowledge about psychotropic mushroom
species  in  Japan  can  grow  to  become  adequate.
The geographic distribution and ingredients of the
Japanese  Panaeolus  species  must  also  be  studied
further.  For  instance,  Panaeolus  subbalteatus  is
one  of  the  species  that  are  growing  on  several
Japanese islands today.

CHAPTER 7.6

INTOXICATIONS AND THE OLDEST KNOWN

MUSHROOM CULT IN AFRICA

So  far,  the  mycoflora  of  the  African
continent  has  been  studied  only  peripherally  and
remains  largely  unknown.  During  the  late  1980s,
Italian  mycologist  G.  Samorini  and  Terence
McKenna, working independently, found evidence
for  the  oldest  known  mushroom  cult  in  Africa.
Their  discoveries  were  not  just  sensational,  but
most  surprising  as  well.  On  the  other  hand,  it
really shouldn't come as a surprise that the oldest
traces  of  human  contact  with  mushrooms  were
found on the very continent known as the cradle of
humanity.

10,000 Years Old

(Chad) 

(Libya)  and  Ennedi 

From 9,000 to 7,000 years ago, the area of
the  Sahara  -  between  Tassili  (Southern  Algeria),
Acacus 
-  was
populated  by  human  beings  who  created
magnificent rock drawings, a pictorial legacy that
preserved  for  posterity  impressive  images  of
everyday  life.  These  pictures  tell  about  a  time
when  the  Sahara  was  still  a  blooming  garden,  a
time when no one even suspected that processes of
erosion and desolation, starting about 3,500 B.C.,
would  turn  the  area  into  a  desert  quite  hostile  to
human life.

The  rock  drawings  date  from  as  far  back
as  10,000  B.C.  up  to  the  present.  Among  the
drawings from the Stone Age (7,000-5,000 B.C.),
there are those described as typical of the so-called
"round  head  phase".  They  include  pictures  of
pasture  animals  as  well  as  evergreen  and
deciduous trees. On top of a Sahara plateau, at an
altitude  of  6,500  ft.,  there  exist  pictures  of
mythical  beings  with  anthropomorphic  and
zoomorphic  attributes  which  are  reminiscent  of
early  Mexican  images:  many  scenes  depict  tiny
horned dancers alongside mushrooms. Deities with
masks  and  horns  are  seen  holding  mushrooms  in
their hands; sometimes the mushrooms are shown
attached directly to body parts. In addition, those
Stone Age artists created

of 

anthropomorphic 

images 
beings  with
mushroom-like  heads.  There  are  many  other
indications  pointing  toward  the  existence  of  a
comprehensive mushroom cult.

they  connect 

interesting,  because 

Among  the  most  striking  renditions  at
Tin-Tazarift, Tassili District (Algeria) is a picture
of  masked  anthropomorphic  beings  engaged  in
ecstatic dancing. (See Figure 5, p. 8). This figure,
"Anthropomorphic Beings Engaged in Mushroom
Dance",  includes  several  dashed  lines,  which  are
most 
the
mushroom  with  the  center  of  the  head.  At  the
same time, these lines represent a flow of energy,
maybe  even  the  mushrooms'  influence  on  the
human  soul.  This  picture  is  clearly  indicative  of
psychotropic  mushroom  use.  It  seems  quite
remarkable  that,  as  early  as  9,000  -  7,000  years
ago, the head was apparently considered to be the
seat  of  consciousness.  By  contrast,  four  or  five
millennia 
the  European  era  of
classical  antiquity,  the  brain's  role  was  merely
thought  to  be  similar  to  that  of  a  kind  of  cooler.
Other  rock  drawings  also  depict  mushrooms  as
being mythologically linked with fish.

later,  during 

images, 

These 
for 

then,  furnish  powerful
the  usage  of  psychoactive
evidence 
mushrooms  within  a  mystical-religious  frame-
work.  The  rock  drawings  consistently  show  two
kinds of mushroom shapes: one of them resembles
Psilocybe semilanceata, in that the caps are drawn
with an acute umbo on top, while the other shape
represents larger mushrooms with a habitus much
like that of the Amanita or Stropharia species.

Despite  their  age,  the  rock  drawings'
colors  have  retained  brilliant  hues.  Pictures  of
mushrooms were drawn in white as well as several
shades  of  ochre.  Also,  a  few  mushrooms  were
drawn in blue colors. While this is the exception, it
may  well  be  a  representation  of  the  so-called
bluing phenomenon.

In  Nature,  these  colors  are  associated
with  the  bluing  Psilocybe  and  Panaeolus  species.
These mushrooms could have grown on several

substrates,  such  as  fallen  twigs  and  raw  compost,
grounds  littered  with  the  remains  from  evergreen
and deciduous trees or dung left behind by pasture
animals.  Among  the  mushroom  species  that  may
have grown in the area thousands of years ago, the
most  likely  candidates  are  relatives  of  Psilocybe
cubensis  and  Panaeolus  cyanescens 
(dung-
inhabiting  species),  Psilocybe  semilanceata  (a
as  Psilocybe
nitrophilic 
cyanescens,  a  species  that  grows  on  top  of  raw
compost.

as  well 

species) 

Considering the impressive nature of

existing historic evidence, the obvious question
would seem to be whether any of these species can
currently be found in Africa, where the cradle of
mankind is located.

African Species Related to

Psilocybe Cyanescens?

Interestingly,  on  October  24,  1912,  R.
Maire  first  collected  several  specimens  of  bluing,
dark-spored  mushrooms  which  he  found  growing
on  raw  compost  underneath  some  cedar  trees  in
Algeria, at Chrea Pass near the city of Blida south
of Algiers. He collected additional specimens every
year  up  until  1926  and  published  his  findings  in
1928,  naming  the  species  Hypholoma  cyanescens
nov. spec..

Later on, G. Malencon classified a number
of  similar  specimens  from  his  own  samples
collected in the Central Atlas Mountains (Morocco)
as  belonging  to  this  species.  In  1973,  Singer  then
classified  the  species  as  Psilocybe  mairei  Sing.
Krieglsteiner,  however,  considered  this  species  to
be  identical  with  Psilocybe  cyanescens  Wakefield,
as found in Europe. Thus, bluing Psilocybe species
can still be found in Africa today.
his  monograph 

on  Panaeolus
mushrooms  from  the  1960's,  Ola'h  mentions  two
Panaeolus species that are strongly psychoactive:

In 

-  Panaeolus africanus Ola'h and
-  Panaeolus tropicales Ola'h

There are also accounts from Africa about

typical hallucinatory intoxications, caused by
mistaken identification of a yellow Stropharia
species as a culinary mushroom. In 1945, E.R.
Cullinan and D. Henry described 22 cases in

Nairobi, which occurred in July of that same year.
The  symptoms  started  one  hour  after
ingestion  of  the  mushrooms,  peaked  within  three
hours  and  then  persisted  for  24  to  48  (?)  hours.
Symptoms consisted of emotional imbalance, fits of
mirthful  and  irresponsible  laughter  alternating
with depressive moods, during which patients felt
they wanted to die. Patients were unable to sleep,
due  to  nightmarish  feelings  that  descended  when
they closed their eyes... They  remained  conscious
throughout the experience and their speech, while
somewhat uncontrolled, was rational.

In 1957, A.D. Charters reported additional
cases of intoxication from Nairobi: On May 18,
1949, a man and his wife - both Europeans who
resided in Nakuru, ate generous portions of
mushrooms for lunch. Within 30 minutes, both of
them developed mental symptoms, along with pupil
dilation and a tingling sensation in the fingers.

The man
experienced visions of pink colors and a sense of
euphoria in association with delusions. He felt
that he was passing into the next life and he could
see his own body.   He stated that he realized "we
are in the process of working toward our next life
".

His wife also reported delusions, and she
felt  that  she  was  inside  the  tube  that  was  part  of
the apparatus used for pumping her stomach at the
time.  She  believed  that  she  was  going  to  die  and
she was afraid of death. She had laughing fits and
felt  sensations  that  alternated  between  happiness
and depression. Both patients had their stomachs
pumped  and  recovered  completely  within  six
hours.

Given  sufficiently  wet  climate
conditions, Psilocybe cubensis can often be found
in other parts of the world growing on pastures in
areas  located  up  to  30°  north  as  well  as  south  of
the equator. Therefore, it is likely that the yellow
Stropharia  species  from  the  Highlands  of  Kenya
may  actually  have  been  Psilocybe  cubensis
mushrooms  or  at  least  a  close  relative  of  this
species.

In  January  1994,  M.  Smith  and  myself
were  collaborating  in  South  Africa,  where  we
discovered  a  bluing  Psilocybe  species  in  Natal
Province.  It  was  the  first  psychotropic  Psilocybe
species  ever  found  in  the  area.  This  species  is
generally withish in color and does not have an

annular ring. The mushrooms are comparable in
size  to  Psilocybe  cubensis,  but  do  not  grow
directly on top of dung in cow pastures. Having
been  compared  with 
samples  of  known
Psilocybe  species,  the  new  species  is  currently
being  published  under  the  name  Psilocybe
natalensis Gartz, Reid, Ecker & Smith.

The mushroom samples and reports of

intoxications  described  in  this  chapter  indicate
that  psychoactive  species  do  occur  in  Africa,
which,  in  turn,  supports  the  hypothesis  of  an
ancient mushroom cult on the African continent.
However,  additional  work 
is  needed  with
respect  to  the  African  species,  including  their
areas 
taxonomic
classification  and  the  essence  of  their  active
ingredients.

distribution, 

of 

their 

Figure 59 - Outline of a rock drawing from Tassili, Algeria
 (ca. 7,000 B.C.). The figure on the left clearly is holding a

mushroom-shaped object.

CHAPTER 7.7

USAGE IN SOUTH EAST ASIA AND THE SOUTH PACIFIC ISLANDS

has 

Since  the  late  1960s,  the  custom  of  using
psilocybin-containing  mushrooms 
been
evolving  in  various  countries  across  Asia  and  the
Pacific  Islands.  However,  there  is  no  conclusive
evidence  indicating  that  mushroom  usage  was
endemic  among  native  cultures  prior 
the
discovery  of  the  Mexican  species.  Most  likely,
global tourism has been the most significant factor
behind 
relevant
mushroom species among the populations of these
countries,  especially  after  searches  for  strongly
bluing  gilled  mushrooms  were  successful.  These
mushrooms, most notably those found growing on
pasture  land,  strongly  resembled  similar  species
from other continents.

increasing  knowledge  about 

to 

Neo-Mycoflora

species 

specific  mushrooms 

Western  amateur  mycologists  helped
disseminate  information  about  these  species  and
published  articles  on  the  mushrooms  in  various
publications  of  their  home  countries.  However,
little  or  no  efforts  were  made  to  identify  and
describe 
found
growing  in  Asia  and  the  South  Pacific  Islands.
There  have  also  been  no  research  efforts  to
investigate the overall mycoflora in this part of the
world.  Thus,  during 
the  1970s,  a  group  of
teenagers  in  Samoa  discovered  the  psychoactive
effects  of  Panaeolus  cyanescens.  At  first,  the
police took measures to suppress the practice. But
persecution  by  law  enforcement  agencies  was
halted  when  it  became  apparent  that  ingestion  of
the  mushrooms  did  not  pose  a  significant  health
risk.  According  to  Cox,  the  teenagers'  parents
considered  their  children's  mushroom  experience
"a foolish, but totally harmless episode and a part
of normal teenage development". In light of such a
reasonable  frame  of  reference,  the  historic  label
"fool's  mushrooms" 
immediately
comes to mind.

(Chapter  2) 

By  contrast,  customs  of  psychoactive
mushroom usage in  New  Zealand  evolved  around
the same species found in Australia, with criminal

and 

semilanceata 

penalties  also  modeled  after  Australian  measures
of  law  enforcement.  However,  in  contrast  to
Psilocybe 
Panaeolus
cyanescens,  Psilocybe  cubensis  is  not  a  species
native  to  New  Zealand,  and  all  psychoactive
species  are  generally  referred 
to  as  "magic
mushrooms".

To date, we do not know about all those
geographic regions where the discovery of bluing
mushroom  species  was  an  event  that  did  not
attract  much  attention,  yet  contributed  to  the
mushrooms's  growing  popularity  and  an  ever-
increasing  number  of  "silent"  users.  Scientific-
mycological  investigations  of  a  small  number  of
samples  provided  clues  to  the  identification  of
psychoactive  species  relevant  in  this  context:  the
two  dung-inhabiting  species  Psilocybe  cubensis
and Panaeolus cyanescens,  as  well  as Panaeolus
tropicales, a close relative of the latter species. In
most  cases, 
two
Panaeolus species is an extremely difficult task.

the  differentiation  of 

the 

Panaeolus cyanescens Omelettes

During  the  seventies  and  eighties,  the
mushroom  restaurants  of  Bali  became  quite
famous,  since  interested  tourists  could  order
mushroom  omelettes  made  with  Panaeolus
cyanescens - house specialties, and all completely
legal to boot. At first, local children collected the
mushrooms  needed  to  prepare  the  dishes.  In
response  to  increasing  demand  for  this  culinary
specialty, however, commercial cultivation of the
Panaeolus  species  began,  using  the  method  of
transferring  dung  with  naturally-grown  mycelia
onto fresh buffalo manure.

Apparently,  no  major  complications
type  of  mushroom  usage
ensued,  and 
remained  unchallenged  for  a  long  time.  In  Bali,
ingestion of mushrooms has been limited, for the
most part, to visiting tourists. In 1992, a German
tourist  reported  that,  if  anything,  the  number  of
restaurants had increased compared to the 1980s.
The number of restaurant patrons, however,

this 

Figure 60 - Psilocybe samuiensis on a
mixture of rye and horse dung

to  have  decreased, 
familiarity  with 

indicating  an
appeared 
psychoactive
increasing 
mushrooms  species  in  the  tourists's  countries  of
origin.

stories 

Similar 

about  mushroom
specialties exclusively prepared for tourists have
also  been  reported  from  Sumatra,  Java  and  The
Philippines.

Those mushroom species described
above are based on samples collected from
islands; thus, it is quite logical to expect finding
those same species growing on the Asian
mainland as well. Soon after Earle published his
description of Stropharia (Psilocybe) cubensis in
a 1906 edition of a Cuban agriculture journal,
Patouillard proposed the species name
Naematoloma caerulescens for his own samples
of the same species, which were collected in
Tonkin (Vietnam) in 1907. In Thailand and
Cambodia, Heim found fruiting bodies of the
species Psilocybe cubensis, providing the first
sample from outside of Mexico used by Hofmann
and his collaborators to confirm the presence of
psilocybin in the fruiting bodies.
results 

the
proposal that psychoactive Psilocybe and  related
species thrive on all continents, a hypothesis that
has been fully confirmed.

Such  positive 

inspired 

bluing  mushroom 

Other  mushroom  species from the  genus
Panaeolus have been found in mainland Asia as
well. For example, Ola'h's monograph describes
Panaeolus
a 
cambodginiensis Ola'h & Heim, a species - as its
name  suggests  -  found  only 
in  Cambodia.
According  to  Ola'h,  all  of  the  species's  fruiting
bodies contain psilocybin.

named 

Monsoon Climate, Manure and

Water Buffaloes

In 1981, Schroeder reported the results
of his mycological field work conducted in Nepal
during 1978 and 1979, where his research efforts
established  that  mushrooms  of  the  Psilocybe
species  are  wide-spread  throughout  the  area.
Guzman  proposed  that  these  species  can  quite
possibly  be  classified  as  Psilocybe  cubensis  and
Psilocybe subcubensis Guzman. Macroscopically,
the latter species is very similar to the subtropical
Psilocybe cubensis species, but its spores are

comparatively smaller and its habitat limited to
tropical regions.

The  mushrooms  primarily  grow 

in
valley  areas  with  monsoon  climate  conditions,
at  altitudes  of  about  3,000  ft.  on  substrates  of
partially decomposed cow manure as well as on
water buffalo dung. While the species fruits all
year round, it does so most abundantly in May
and  June,  the  rainy  months  that  precede  the
monsoon season.

Nepal  is  another  country  where  no
evidence was found of any mushroom usage by
the indigenous population. Mycophilic Western
visitors,  however,  having  discovered 
the
species,  soon 
the
in  usage  of 
for  hallucinatory  purposes,  a
mushrooms 
practice 
to  draw  much  public
attention. It appears that a relatively large dose
was  required  to  achieve  the  desired  effects,
since  several  individuals  consumed  forty  or
more of the fleshy mushrooms at a time.

that  failed 

indulged 

"Soma": A Psilocybian Species?

Within  the  context  of  discovering  this
species, Schroeder and Guzman proposed a most
interesting  hypothesis.  They  suggested 
that
"soma", the substance revered as a deity by the
mysterious,  ancient  Aryan  civilization,  who  are
said  to  have  developed  a  soma  cult,  did  not,  in
fact, refer to the fly agaric mushroom, as initially
proposed by Wasson. More likely, soma was the
name  of  a  psychedelic  Psilocybe  species,  based
on  its  spectacular  psychotropic  effects  and  the
mushroom's geographic distribution pattern.

An  article  authored  by  J.W.  Allen  and
M.D. Merlin concludes that currently Thailand is
the  country  with  the  largest  consumption  of
psychoactive mushrooms.

In several areas across Thailand, tourists
can find menus offering mushrooms prepared as
part  of  omelettes,  soups,  teas,  pizzas  or  juices.
Allen  specifically  studied  patterns  of  usage  on
the  two  islands  of  Koh  Samui  and  Koh  Pha-
ngan.  Previously,  sporadic  reports  from  other
islands off the Thai coast contained descriptions
of similar practices there. In January 1990, Allen
also  confirmed  usage  of  the  mushrooms  in  the
northern areas of Thailand.

than 

longer 

lasted  much 

with  a  synthetic  hallucinogen  (LSD?)  whose
effects 
those  of
psilocybin.  This  dangerous  practice  caused
unexpected reactions with effects lasting for up to
10 
experienced
dysphoric side effects which persisted for as long
as  several  days.  One  individual  developed  an
aversion against all kinds of mushroom dishes for
several months.

hours.  Some 

consumers 

As  in  Mexico  during  the  sixties,  a  large
variety  of  mushroom  images  and  products  are
marketed  commercially  in  Thailand  these  days.
Among  merchandise  offered  for  sale  there  are
hand-painted  and  mass-produced  T-Shirts  (see
Figure  56,  p.  78)  with  pictures  of  Panaeolus
cyanescens  and  Psilocybe  subcubensis,  shown
together  as  well  as  separately,  not  to  mention
postcards,  posters,  lighters  and  key  rings,  all
featuring  mushroom-motif  decorations.  Allen
reported  that  such  goods  are  available  in  both
Northern and Southern Thailand.

In  coming  years,  we  can  well  expect  a
wealth  of  new  discoveries  and  insights  into  the
ethnopharmacology, 
and  natural
chemistry of Asia's mycoflora.

taxonomy 

Not surprisingly, another new mushroom
species  was  discovered  in  Thailand  in  August,
1991  and  named  Psilocybe  samuiensis  Guzman,
Bandala  &  Allen  (see  Figure  60,  p.  99).  The
species  is  similar  in  appearance  to  Psilocybe
semilanceata,  but  the  fruiting  bodies  do  not
contain  baeocystin.  Psilocybe  samuiensis  is  a
bluing  species  that  grows  on  fertilized  soil,  but
not  directly  on  top  of  dung.  We  successfully
cultivated this species on a mixture of rye, horse
dung and water (2:1:2), but found that we needed
to add a casing layer consisting of peat and chalk
(2:1).

German Tourist Boom

some  Thai 

teenagers  use 

On  Koh  Samui  and  Koh  Pha-ngan,  the
mushroom  dishes  are  enjoyed  primarily  by
tourists.  Along  with  a  few  other
German 
foreigners, 
the
mushrooms  as  well,  sometimes  even  attempting
to smoke them in  a  bamboo  pipe.  As  a  salt-like
chemical 
requires
temperatures  of  about  200°C  for  it  to  melt  and
partially break down without sublimation, so that
a tobacco pipe will not be effective in achieving
the desired psychoactive effects.

compound, 

psilocybin 

During the fall of 1988, Thai authorities
distributed  warning  leaflets  at  tourist  centers,
providing a detailed description of a bizarre panic
reaction  experienced  by  an  Australian  tourist,
who  was  hospitalized  briefly  as  a  result.  Allen
thoroughly  analyzed 
this  event  by  seeking
additional information about the circumstances of
this  case,  including  interviews  with  all  other
individuals  involved.  Allen  discovered  that  the
Australian visitor had used excessive amounts of
various 
highly
addictive substances, which is why he eventually
required hospitalization.

pharmaceuticals, 

including 

subcubensis 

Finally,  in  January  1989,  this  incident
was  central  to  justifying  passage  of  a  law  that
prohibits  usage  of  psychoactive  mushrooms
("hed  keequai"  in  local  language),  with  harsh
penalties provided for non-compliance. Until that
time,  many  restaurants  posted  signs  advertising
the  various  types  of  mushroom  dishes  on  their
menus.  But  mushroom  usage  continued  despite
passage  of  the  law.  Specific  species  still  being
used  were  identified  as  Psilocybe  cubensis,
Psilocybe 
Panaeolus
cyanescens. It is unknown if a tourist in Thailand
has ever been sentenced for usage or possession
of mushrooms. In  addition  to  the  collection  of
fruiting  bodies  growing  naturally  on  buffalo
dung, Thai as well as German residents  on  Koh
Samui and Koh  Pha-ngan began  to  cultivate  the
mushrooms,  outdoors  and  inside  houses.  In
accordance  with 
cultivation"
approach, rice debris was added to fresh manure
and  mixed  with  dung  already  permeated  by
mycelia. After prohibition, mushroom cultivation
continued at hard-to-reach wilderness locations.

"natural 

Moreover,  Allen  found  evidence  that
some restaurants temporarily served dishes made
from regular table mushrooms apparently spiked

and 

the 

CHAPTER 8

SOME COMMENTS ON EFFECTS OF MUSHROOMS FROM

THE CATEGORY PHANTASTICA

the 

Specifically, 

Extensive  animal  research  efforts  during
the  1950s  furnished  evidence  that  both  psilocybin
and  psilocin  are  alkaloids  of  negligible  acute
toxicity.
of
psilocybin  that  caused  death  in  50%  of  the
experimental  mice  (LD  50)  was  determined  to  be
280 mg/kg body weight. By comparison, noticeable
effects in humans generally occur at dosages as low
as 0.02 mg/kg.

dosage 

Animal  tests  showed  that,  on  average,
psilocybin  was  a  substance  only  half  as  toxic  as
mescaline,  and  at  the  same  time,  turned  out  to  be
50 times more potent as a psychoactive substance.
For  example,  up  to  2  g  of  mescaline  were  being
administered with no dangerous side effects, while
the  usual  dose  of  psilocybin  ranged  from  3  to  30
mg  as  part  of  psychological 
testing  and
psychotherapy sessions.

As  is  the  case  with  other  psychotropic
substances, human beings most likely have a more
sensitive  reaction  in  response  to  psilocybin  than
mice  do.  Still,  the  range  of  safety  in  controlled
experiments  comes  to  several  hundred  times  the
amount of the active dosage. The same goes for the
consumption  of  mushroom  material, 
since
psilocybin  concentrations  in  mushrooms  can  vary
up  to  a  factor  of  10.  Consequently,  J.  Ott
speculated that adults would need to eat their own
body weight in fresh mushrooms, in order to finally
reach the dosage limit of lethal toxicity. Despite the
hundreds  of 
self-
experiments  taking  place  every  year  in  the  U.S.
alone,  no  fatalities  caused  by  magic  mushrooms
have ever occurred there. Small children, however,
have abnormal reactions to psilocybin, such as loss
of consciousness, cramps and danger of death.

thousands  of  voluntary 

It was in the fall of 1960, that a child from
Milwaukee,  Oregon,  picked  several  mushrooms
from  grassy  soil  below  a  cluster  of  conifers.
Having 
child
experienced cramps and a high fever. Similar to a
condition  described  as  "status  epilepticus  ",  the
symptoms were treated by medications, with

the  mushrooms, 

eaten 

the 

limited success. The child died within three days.

The  mushroom  sample  involved  in  this
incident was identified as Psilocybe baeocystis. P.
Stamets, however, contested this finding, claiming
the species had been misidentified. He referred to
a  publication  about  the  incident  that  included  a
picture  of  the  mushrooms,  which,  according  to
Stamets, shows a sample of Psilocybe cyanescens.
This  species 
is  wellknown  as  exceptionally
potent,  due  to  high  levels  of  psilocybin  and
psilocin. Still, we cannot determine whether toxic
concentrations  of  alkaloids  were  the  cause  of
death,  or  whether  ingestion  of  the  alkaloids
triggered a latent case of epilepsy in the form of
an  acute  episode  that  could  not  be  treated  or
controlled.
If  a  similar  incident  happened
nowadays, 
fatal  outcomes  could  be  easily
prevented, since the last three decades of progress
in pharmaceutical research included the discovery
of  new  drugs  capable  of  aborting  convulsive
episodes.

in  1960, 

baeocystis, 

to  publicity  generated  by 

the
unfortunate  accident 
two  alkaloids
(baeocystin and norbaeocystin) first isolated from
Psilocybe 
acquired
reputations of being extremely poisonous as well
as  strongly  psychoactive.  Both  claims,  however,
are wrong and unsubstantiated. Specifically, both
baeocystin and norbaeocystin are present in other
Psilocybe
mushroom 
semilanceata,  and  at  generally  higher  levels
compared  to  the  alkaloid  content  of  Psilocybe
baeocystis.

species, 

receptor 

Biochemical  research  efforts  accelerated
and  large  numbers  of  studies  were  conducted,
primarily with LSD. These investigators sought to
discover 
for
hallucinogenic  compounds  in  the  brain  and  to
understand 
the
genesis  of  psychedelic  visions.  Today,  we  still
lack  a  sound  theoretical  framework  able  to
explain 
relationship  between  chemical
compounds and the manifestation of their

the  mechanisms  underlying 

binding 

times 

such 

sites 

the 

the 

Due 

at 

as 

a 

a 

function  of 

psychoactivity.  Even  though  basic  research  is
certainly important, its methods, unfortunately, are
often 
rather  one-sided
pharmacological  approach  to  investigating  the
effects  of  psilocybin,  LSD  and  mescaline  -  an
approach that is, in fact, too narrow to address the
remarkably unusual nature of these substances and
their effects.

between 

in  an  effort 

Misunderstandings 

pharma-
cologists  and  toxicologists  on  the  one  hand  and
psychiatrists  and  psychologists  on  the  other  can
often  be  traced  all  the  way  back  to  the  1950's,
creating  a  legacy  of  disputes  and  arguments  that
have  yet  to  be  resolved.  S.  Grof  undertook  the
tedious task of analyzing 5,000 experimental LSD
protocols 
isolate  "absolute"
symptoms  that  are  reported  or  occur  all  of  the
time. His results were negative. According to Grof,
hallucinogenic substances are non-specific triggers
causing  a 
states  of
consciousness,  which  do  not  fit  the  syndrome
labeled  "toxic  psychosis".  Rather, 
the
individual's 
the
experimental  setting  that  significantly  shape  the
nature of the psychedelic experience. This view is
shared by a majority of experts with considerable
experience 
in  conducting  psychedelics-assisted
psychotherapy.  Even  "real"  somatic  symptoms,
such as nausea or vomiting, can often be controlled
through  psychological 
techniques
intervention 
administered by trained professionals.

is 
along  with 

sequence  of  altered 

personality, 

to 

it 

A Plethora of Names

of 

the 

use 

other 

The  broad  range  of  possible  experiences
than
inspired 
"hallucinogens",  with  widely  differing  semantic
psychedelics,
connotations: 
illusionogens, 
psychomimetics,
psychodysleptica, psychoemetics and others.

entheogens, 
psycholytics, 

labels 

"Phantastica"  (Lewin)  is  the  oldest  label
ever used to describe this class of substances. This
term  successfully  evokes  dream-like,  fanciful
aspects of the experience, as well as the potential
for  euphoric  and  dysphoric  emotional  overtones.
More  recent  terminology  often  says  more  about
semantic  biases  of  those  who  use  the  labels  than
about  any  factual,  objective  characteristics  of  the
alkaloids  they  refer  to.  Accordingly,  official  anti-
drug propaganda since

the  1960's  has  disparaged  "psychedelics"  as
excessively glamorous and too positive a label, as
the term was popular among Timothy Leary's fans
and supporters.

When  used  in  low  doses  or  for  the  first
time,  these  substances  are  most  likely  to  bring
about  a  kind  of  magical 
transformation  of
surroundings, with a heightened ability to perceive
subtle  differences  along  the  color  spectrum  -
effects  an  individual  often  takes  in  with  a  great
sense of wonder and awe. Based on these types of
experiences,  the  label  "psychoesthetica"  has  been
used as well.

During the 1950's, those experiments of a
purely  pharmacological  nature  revealed 
that,
within a specific low dosage range, the effects of
psilocybin  and  LSD  were  largely  similar,  except
for 
the  psilocybin
experience.  That  is  why  there  are  numerous
comparisons 
literature  of  10  mg  of
psilocybin  with  100  ug  of  LSD  as  equivalent
dosages.

the  shorter  duration  of 

Other 

There  are  several  authors,  however,  who
focus  on  the  more  visionary  and  metaphysical
nature  of  the  psilocybin  experience  compared  to
other  hallucinogenic  substances.  A.  Hofmann
conducted  self-experiments  with  both  substances
and  found  the  altered  state  of  consciousness
induced  by  psilocybin  to  be  both  deeper  and
somewhat gloomier than those produced by LSD.
portrayed
psilocybin as "friendlier" - a substance that is not
as  fierce  as  LSD  in  exposing  possible  traumas
hidden within the subconscious mind (see Chapter
3.2).  Such  differences  in  comparative  evaluations
of  psilocybin  and  LSD  are  likely  linked  to  a
variety  of  factors,  such  as  dosage  differences,
research  protocols  less  than  comprehensive  and
exhaustive  in  scope,  as  well  as  personality  and
environmental variables.

investigators 

have 

the 

in 

LSD "Flashbacks"

R.  Fischer  conducted  a 

series  of
experiments  designed  to  study  the  effects  of
psilocybin  compared  to  LSD  and  mescaline.  The
results confirmed what had already been common
knowledge among those who used the mushrooms
in various contexts around the world: "flashbacks"
are quite rare, and very mild, if they occur at all,
nor do abnormal symptoms persist

the 

and  other 

theories  which 

once  the  effects  of  the  alkaloid  have  worn  off.
Widespread  reports  of  LSD-induced  "flashbacks"
spawned  biochemical 
falsely
postulate  that  LSD  is  stored  inside  the  body  and
can  be  released  at  a  later  time  to  induce  short
periods  of  visions 
"psychotic"
manifestations.  Such  conjecture  about  the  body's
"storage capacity" persisted despite prior evidence
to the contrary that established LSD as a substance
rapidly metabolized and eliminated from the body.
The  assumption  of  a  prolonged  storage
period  following  ingestion  of  LSD  had  already
been  debunked  by  LSD-assisted  psychotherapy
during the 1960's. According to M. Hausner, who
worked  in  the  former  Czechoslovakia,  several
patients who went through a series of LSD sessions
did  experience  "flashbacks"  in  between  sessions.
However, 
therapeutic  administration  of
hallucinogens  was  continued  in  these  cases  and
those  flashback  episodes  that  did  occur  were  far
less  spectacular  than  expected  based  on  some  of
the more dramatic descriptions of the phenomenon.
Within  the  context  of  M.  Hausner's  studies,
to  be  merely
flashback  episodes 
temporary  manifestations  of 
that  had
reached the conscious mind. Moreover, flashbacks
disappeared  as  therapy  progressed  with  continued
administrations and did  not  recur  after  conclusion
of the therapy program. These observations are at
odds with the biochemical theory which predicted
that 
increase
storage  of  the  substance  inside  the  body,  causing
increasingly powerful flashback episodes.

repeated  administrations  would 

turned  out 

issues 

carefully 

Considering  the  highly  variable  nature  of
psilocybin's  effects  as  illustrated  by  examples  of
unintentional 
controlled
experimentation described in this book alone, some
striking parallels with Grof's findings on the effects
of  LSD  virtually  suggest  themselves.  Grof  noted
the emergence of, in that order, abstract, aesthetic,
psychodynamic,  perinatal  and  transpersonal  types
of  experiences  during  hallucinogenic  sessions.
With  repeated  administrations  of  relatively  low
doses,  participants  typically  progressed  through
these  stages  one  by  one,  eventually  attaining  and
lingering at the transpersonal level of analysis.

The  accounts  of  psychoactive  mushroom
experiences included in this book are by necessity
limited to only one to three trials over time.

and 

into 

the 

Thus,  detailed  analyses  comparing  the  effects  of
LSD and psilocybin must await results from future
research efforts, assuming researchers will be able
to conduct these types of studies.

By contrast, relatively high doses of LSD
as well as psilocybin typically "bypass" the initial
phases  of  experience,  propelling  the  individual
transpersonal
directly 
consciousness.  The  natural 
first
experiment  with  Psilocybe  bohemica  or 
the
incidents of accidental intoxication with Psilocybe
cubensis  in  Africa  both  illustrate  these  kinds  of
transpersonal experiences.

realm  of 

scientist's 

Aside from psilocybin's psychotherapeutic
applications  as  detailed  in  Chapter  9,  there  are
other interesting phenomena and potential uses for
psilocybin  as  well  as  those  mushrooms  whose
active  ingredients  can  be  analyzed  and  measured
accurately.

The  investigation  of  frequent  symptoms
such  as  compulsive  laughter,  yawning  and  the
flow  of  tears  without  dysphoria  may  reveal
interesting 
neurophysiological  mechanisms,
provided we can isolate and separate the influence
of  psychological  factors  in  the  manifestation  of
these symptoms.

Psilocybin as a Research Tool for Study

and Diagnosis of Brain Damage

The benefits of diagnosing brain-damaged
patients  with  psilocybin  were  investigated  in  the
former  Czechoslovakia  during 
the  1960s.
Psilocybin  was  the  alkaloid  of  choice  for  these
studies,  due  to  its  minimal  toxicity  and  because
participants  were  not  expected 
to  develop
additional  chronic  dysfunctions  as  a  result  of
ingesting  psilocybin.  Visual  hallucinations  were
found  to  be  almost  completely  suppressed  in
patients  suffering  from  lesions  to  parts  of  the
central  nervous  system  known  to  mediate  visual-
sensory functions.

On  the  other  hand,  the  discovery  that
psilocybin  tended  to  potentiate  a  variety  of
neurological  processes  effectively 
the
alkaloid into a diagnostic tool used to reveal latent
paralyses and other subtle types of damage to the
central  nervous  system.  While  LSD  could  also
have  been  used  for  this  purpose,  researchers
preferred psilocybin, because dosage measurement
was comparatively simpler, its effects were

turned 

short-term and patients experienced less fatigue
with psilocybin than with LSD.

In one exceptionally remarkable case, one

of the participants, while under the influence of
the substance, clearly saw a brain tumor inside
her skull - a tumor that was not discovered until
an examination that followed the session.

the 

that 

increasingly 

letters,  with 

R.  Fischer  (see  Figure  61)  conducted  a
series  of  controlled  experiments  involving  the
presentation of words and sentences composed of
incomplete 
larger
portions  of  the  letters  covered  in  several  stages,
from the top down. In the end, only the stumps of
the letters remained in the display, which was no
longer 
influence  of
psilocybin, however, the ability to "re-synthesize"
these  characters  was  observed  quite  frequently:
Participants  were  able  to  read  a  significantly
larger  number  of  words,  with  some  reportedly
able to see the partial letters, complete and uncut,
in a display that showed little more than a white
background area.

readable.  Under 

the  most 

the  context  needed 

These observations are powerful evidence
confirming 
the  effects  of  mushroom
ingredients  are  certainly  not  just  "psychotic"  in
nature,  a  notion  preferred  by  those  pharma-
cologists  partial  to  terminology  such  as  "toxic
psychosis", with all its connotations as evoked by
the  "fool's  mushroom"  label.  Psilocybin  and  its
relatives  apparently  act  as  catalysts  that  initiate
new  information  processing  mechanisms  and
patterns  of  coordination  between  the  different
interactive  areas  of  the  brain.  As  such,  the
substances  create 
for
integrating  emotional  and  rational  processes  in
favorable  of
new  ways.  Under 
circumstances, 
such 
are
experienced  not  only  as  a  profound,  impressive
expansion of one's consciousness, but may also be
of
reflected 
performance.  I  believe,  however, 
these
temporary  gains  in  skills  are  rarely  attained  by
casual  or 
recreational  users  of  psilocybin-
containing  mushrooms,  because  set  and  setting
are  often  less  than  ideal,  and  alkaloid  content
tends  to  be  highly  variable.  Most  researchers,
including  A.  Hofmann,  strongly  advised  against
usage  of  hallucinogens  by  youngsters,  even  in
controlled experimental settings. Adolescence is a
time  of  upheaval,  a  developmental  stage  when
youngsters  struggle  with  themselves  and  their
surroundings, searching for a purpose and a firm

states  of  mind 

improvements 

short-term 

that 

in 

direction in life: Numerous conflicts arise in the

process and need to be dealt with and integrated.
Besides inducing altered perceptual states,
hallucinogenic substances, including psilocybin are
bound to release a stream of new emotions and
conflicts. Such experiences often serve to confuse
teenaged users and to compound existing areas of
conflict, threatening to disturb the youngster's
equilibrium, which is rather fragile tc begin with.

injury 

to  control 

those  determined 

risking  damage  or 

Quite  likely,  the  search  for  a  means  to  escape
reality plays an important role in this situation. In
fact, the escapist aspect of LSD portrayed against a
backdrop of political upheaval fuelled a reactionary
zeal  among 
the
substance  during  the  1960's.  As  a  consequence  of
these restrictive legislative measures, the unbiased,
scientific  evaluation  of  hallucinogenic  substances
remains an all but impossible task. These examples
from  the  LSD  research  literature  suggest  that
controlled  human  subjects  research  is  possible
without 
the
participants, while gaining a wealth of new insights
beyond psychotherapy applications.
investigations 

these
substances have long ago proven beyond doubt that
psilocybin,  mescaline  and  LSD  are  not  physically
addictive, nor do they cause withdrawal symptoms
of  any  kind.  Repeated  self-experimentation  over
long periods of time is rare;  most long-term users
eventually  reduce  frequency  of  use  due  to  the
nature  of  these  substances  that  initiate  powerful
transpersonal 
the
emergence  of  personal  conflicts.  Besides,  habitual
daily  users  quickly  develop  tolerance  to  the  point
of  being  unable  to  experience  any  psychoactive
effects at all. That is why clinical trials are spaced
to allow for intervals of at least one week between
repeated applications.

Comprehensive 

processes 

facilitate 

and 

of 

to 

Ecstasy is More than Entertainment

Renowned  pharmacologist  R.  Siegel
described hallucinogenic mushroom consumption
in  California  as  merely  "experimental  use".
According  to  his  definition,  almost  all  users  of
psychoactive mushrooms have anywhere from at
least  one  up  to  10  experiences,  with  several
weeks or months in between repetitions. Or

consider  R.  G.  Wasson's  poetic  answer  to  a
question from his banker friends who wanted to
know  why he  did not  eat  the  mushrooms  every
day:

"There are many who never

experienced ecstasy and who may think this is
entertaining. But ecstasy is not a form of
entertainment:

trembles. What  kind  of  person  would  think
nothing of submitting to a sense of pure, absolute
awe or of floating through that doorway into the
presence  of  the  divine?  Those  who  have  never
known  ecstasy  first-hand,  distort  the  word  each
time they use it. We must comprehend anew the
entire, frightening meaning inherent in this word.

Figure 61 - "Letter Resynthesis" experiment by R. Fischer.

Figure 62 - "Peter Pan in Kensington Gardens".
Lithography by Arthur Reckham (London, 1890).

Figure 63 - "Handing me one of the halves, he spoke

the single word, drink. " From Etidorhpa by J.U. Lloyd (1904).

CHAPTER 9

P S Y C H O T H E R A P Y

We live in an era of profound sociocultural
changes,  while  a  growing  sense  of  insecurity
pervades  many  areas  of  our  lives.  At  the  same
time,  our  achievement-oriented 
society  has
fostered a set of values propagated by industrious,
hard-working  and  successful  citizens.  Naturally,
not  all  members  of  society  are  able  to  embody
these ideals or embrace them all the time.

Psycholytic Therapy

to 

Oftentimes, the origins of chronic neuroses
are  rooted  in  early  childhood.  Neurotic  behavior
can evolve under a wide variety of circumstances
that  include  combinations  of  unfortunate  personal
and  social  conditions.  There  are  numerous  forms
of neuroses and symptoms can vary considerably.
Neurotic  disorders  afflict  a  large  segment  of  the
population, significantly impairing their quality of
life.

turned 

According 

practitioners, 

the  various  schools  of
traditional  psychoanalytic  thought,  the  dissolution
of  neuroses  is  a  lengthy  process,  whose  progress
depends  on  penetrating 
layers  of  "character
armoring"  and  identifying  the  root  causes  of
unhealthy fixations. Hoping to shorten the duration
of treatment by accelerating the pace of resistance
dissolution 
to
pharmaceuticals  as  an  adjunct  to  the  therapeutic
process.  Thus,  upon  discovery  of  the  unique
properties  of  hallucinogenic  agents  during  the
1950's,  LSD  gained  widespread  popularity  as  a
therapeutic  agent,  while  mescaline 
remained
obscure,  as  it  was  used  by  comparatively  few
practitioners. Patients under the influence of these
substances  confronted  long  repressed  traumatic
events as they began to surface and enter conscious
awareness. In some cases, such emerging traumatic
experiences  had  been 
repressed  since  early
childhood.  Medical  records  and  case  histories
indicate  that  many  patients  not  only  remembered,
but actually  relived  traumatic  experiences  in  their
past.

have 

At 

At  this  point,  I  would  like  to  summarize
the  major  elements  of  this  psychotherapeutic
approach, based on the excellent books written by
H. Leuner, S. Grof and S. Widmer. From a variety
of different perspectives, these authors thoroughly
examine  the  therapeutic  process,  drawing  on
extensive  clinical  expertise  representing  decades
of experience in several countries.

awesome 

individuals 

intensity  of 

from  within 

times,  critics 

the
psychiatric  establishment  have  claimed  that  a
"short-term  high" 
is  simply  not  capable  of
propelling  complex  processes 
into  conscious
awareness,  and  that  psychoactive  substances  are
no short-cut to quicker treatment. These are weak
objections at best, because we already know that
the 
an  unfolding
psychedelic  episode  is  sufficiently  powerful  to
propel 
towards  gaining  valuable
insights of a highly personal nature (see accounts
in  Chapter  3.2).  Such  landmark  experiences  are
likely 
to  stand  out  as  significant  personal
milestones  whose  impact  will  not  diminish  for
many years, even if the individual never uses the
substance  again.  On  the  other  hand,  due  to  the
profound,  far-reaching  nature  of  the  psycholytic
process,  skillful  and  responsible  guidance  is
crucial  to  preventing  the  genesis  of  new  sets  of
neurotic  symptoms.  Whenever  a  new  therapy  is
adopted,  occasional  mistakes  are  not  uncommon
during  the  initial  phases.  The  medical  use  of
hallucinogenic  substances  was  no  exception.
However,  our  knowledge  base  and  expertise  on
procedures 
essential 
practical 
grown
considerably  since 
the  pioneering  days  of
psycholytic  therapy.  Having  learned  from  initial
errors,  we  can  now  prevent  problems  and  avoid
mistakes.

has 

Psilocybin as the Drug of Choice

Following 

and
discovery  of  its  chemical  structure,  psilocybin
quickly joined the group of hallucinogens used in

isolation 

initial 

its 

other 

designed 

substances 

to  10  mg  are  not  only  known 

therapeutic  settings.  The  alkaloid  was  considered
to  be  quite  safe,  based  on  existing  toxicological
data. H. Leuner still considers psilocybin the most
effective  alkaloid  for  use  as  a  pharmaceutical  aid
in
in  psychotherapy,  despite  recent  progress 
developing 
for
therapeutic  applications,  such  as  the  substituted
like  MDMA.  Psilocybin's
phenethylamines 
reputation  as  a  substance  well  suited 
for
psychotherapeutic  applications  is  related  to  its
extremely low toxicity. Most importantly, dosages
below the 10 mg threshold can be measured with
accuracy.  This  is  significant,  because  dosages  of
up 
to  be
therapeutically  efficient,  but  effects  within  this
dosage range can always be brought under control.
The states of consciousness induced by psilocybin
last  only  five  hours,  on  average,  and  thus  can  be
more  conveniently  utilized  than  altered  states
caused  by  LSD,  whose  effects  persist  for  much
longer  time  periods.  LSD  should  be  considered  a
more  difficult  substance  to  work  with,  due  to  the
possible  emergence  of  unwanted  symptoms  in  a
small  percentage  of  users  and  the  prolonged
process  of  "coming  down"  when  symptoms
subside.  Unlike  other  hallucinogens,  psilocybin
also  has  the  advantage  of  almost  never  inducing
"hangovers" the day after experimental sessions.

It is important to note in this context that
that  hallucinogens  are  no
all  authors  stress 
substitute  for  lack  of  skills  on  the  part  of  the
therapist  and  that  the  usage  of  these  substances
should  remain  limited  to  carefully  selected  cases.
Usage  of  hallucinogens  "merely"  shortens  the
duration  of  psychoanalytic  treatment,  as  problem
conflict  areas  surface  faster  and  with  greater
clarity, mediated by the process of selfexploration
and  discovery  that  is  the  essence  of  psychedelic
experiences.  Repressed  patterns  of  normal
behavior  and  reactions  must  be  gradually  re-
constructed 
therapist-patient
relationship.

within 

The capacity for emotional immersion into
one's  own  problems  under  the  influence  of  a
psychoactive substance is provoked and amplified
by  the  emergence  of  memories,  as  well  as  the
elimination  of  the  Me/You  boundary.  As  this
process  unfolds, 
therapist  gains  valuable
insights 
into  existing  psychopathologies  and
psychodynamics.  Still,  in  addition  to  providing
proper guidance for the patient, the therapist must

the 

the 

also be able to separate bizarre forms of alienation
that may appear from the emerging conflict matter.

The Language of Statistics

In 

the 

is  a 

improvement. 

remarkably  efficient 

According  to  statistical  data,  psycholytic
therapy 
form  of
treatment, most notably in patients suffering from
neuroses. A follow-up study of 82 patients showed
that  65  %  of  them  showed  long-term,  clinically
In  all,  28  authors
significant 
described  1,600 
therapy  cases,  covering  42
investigations that took place from 1953 to 1965.
The  course  of  illness  was  judged  very  grave  and
The  dministration
chronic in 68 % of the cases.
of 
the
psychotherapy  setting  resulted  in  success  rates  of
up to 70% ("good and substantial improvement"),
especially  in  the  treatment  of  neurotic  anxieties,
depressive-neurotic dysphorias as well as neurotic
character disorders.

substances  within 

hallucinogenic 

("psychosynthesis")  where 

former  Czchechoslovakia,  M.
Hausner  also  tested  Psilocybe  bohemica  for
psycholytic 
therapy  sessions,  with  successful
outcomes comparable to those observed following
administration  of  LSD.  For  many  years  up  until
1974, Hausner has used LSD with more than 350
patients  in  about  3,000  sessions.  In  Mexico  from
1967  until  1974,  S.  Roquet  developed  an
interesting  modification  of 
therapeutic
technique 
hallu-
cinogens  are  used  as  an  adjunct  to  the  therapy
process.  His  conceptual  approach  was  strongly
influenced  by  the  shamanistic  uses  of  different
substances  in  his  home  country.  Groups  of  10  to
20  people  experienced  effects  of  a  diversity  of
substances  (psilocybin  mushrooms,  peyote,  LSD,
ololiuqui).  While  stereo  music  played  in  the
background, several slide and film projectors were
used  to  present  images  whose  emotional  content
ranged  from  pictures  of  love  to  scenes  of  horror.
Thus, 
hallucinogeninduced
emotional stimulation, patients are also exposed to
powerful  external  stress  factors,  modifying  the
experience  into  one  of  a  very  deeply  emotional
nature.  Duration  of  treatments  varied  from  18
months up to two years, with many hours of drug-
free  therapy  and,  on  average,  one  hallucinogen-
assisted  session  a  month.  On  a  few  occasions,
patients received the substance in

addition 

the 

in 

to 

individual settings. Roquet reported successful
treatment of neurotic character disorders in 85 of
the patients. The psychoanalytic and transpersonal
elements of a substances' effects were considered
therapeutic agents, supported by sustained positive
feelings among group session participants.

The Conquest of Fear in the Face of Death

of 

During 

behavior. 

Elsewhere, 

the  1960's  and  1970's,  most
therapists  in  Europe  were  limiting  the  scope  of
their  work  by  exploring  only  the  psychodynamic
however,
level 
practitioners  of  hallucinogen-assisted 
therapy
dispensed  large  doses  of  psychoactive  drugs,
maximizing the emergence  of  transpersonal  states
of  consciousness  that  often  resembled  mystical
experiences.  These  episodes  of 
transpersonal
transcendence  ("psychedelic  therapy"  in  the  U.S.)
contribute  to  the  therapeutic  process;  they  may
even be the sole source for future progress.

the 

intensity  of 

Under  these  conditions,  stereo  music  also
significantly  deepened 
the
experience.  It  appears  that  these  kinds  of  specific
experiences  may  also  account  for  the  remarkable
success  of  treating  terminal  patients  with  LSD  to
ease their fears in the face of death and to reduce
even the most severe forms of pain. In many such
cases,  symptoms  disappeared  entirely,  and  relief
from pain and anxiety that continued even after the
drug's  acute  effects  had  worn  off.  A  book  by  S.
Grof  provides  a  compassionate  analysis  of  such
successful  treatments,  which  serves  to  underscore
the fact that systematic efforts to investigate these
particular 
just
begun.  So  far,  LSD  has  been  the  most  widely
studied substance in terms of easing the suffering
of  terminally  ill  patients,  as  well  as  dipropyl-
tryptamine  (DPT),  a  synthetic  drug  structurally
similar  to  psilocybin  that  is  active  only  when
administered by injection.

therapeutic  benefits  have  only 

Below, a young woman from Switzerland
gives a detailed account of her second mushroom
experience.  Her  first  experiment,  with  Psilocybe
cubensis,  had  already  introduced  her  to  the  realm
of  mystical  experiences.  For  her  second  journey,
she used 20 Psilocybe semilanceata mushrooms as
part of a group ritual and achieved transcendence.
A remarkable feature of her

account  is  that  the  presence  of  an  experienced
guide  was  needed  to  realize  the  full  potential  of
this visionary quest.

"1 sat down next to another participant,
seeking to connect with others in preparation for
We proceeded to eat the fresh
my journey.
The room grew quiet and lovely
mushrooms.
music began to play.
The mushrooms's effects
came on much faster than they did during my first
experiment.
contact with my fellow participant, but he was
very nervous, and no source of reassurance for
me. I was seeking my spiritual companion, but did
not find that person among the present group. I
became a figure in a long, white robe, wandering
aimlessly among the columns (Greece?), still
searching.

Twice I tried to establish closer

My gaze lingered briefly on the wall next

I asked

I felt as if all life energy was

to the door and I saw faces and figures appear
and vanish, but they did not hold my interest. It
was hopeless. I continued my aimless roaming,
and I was on the material plane, which I wanted
to leave - had to leave. Suddenly, I found myself
with one of the guides, who wanted to help me. I
stared off into the distance, longing to be free of
the material plane, but unable to do so. For a long
time, I failed to connect with the guide; our two
worlds were just too different.
Suddenly I sensed
that he wasn't able to look at me directly. The path
by which to reach me runs through my eyes,
because only they are truly alive.
him to help me on my way and invited him to look
into my eyes.
draining from my body and my breathing became
erratic. My body contracted, struggling to cast off
its worldly shell.
The guide began to talk to
me in a calm and quiet voice, then laid back down
and stroked my right arm.
Quite suddenly, I
felt at peace. I took a deep breath and relaxed.
The guide said that it's alright, to just let go, to
give up my resistance. The goddess awoke and
told him that he is the one resisting.
Why?
Didn't he want to learn anything about me? I
smiled the goddess's smile and had become her, as
he replied that he was afraid of my eyes, because
they appeared so bottomless and dark that he
feared losing himself in them. I answered that I
was dangerous, the Goddess Kali the Terrible, a
man-eater, and that he should look at me and
enter. My gaze penetrated him into eternity; a
connection had finally been established. His face
turned green, covered with

moss and I saw horns. It was a kind face, yet full of
cunning,  a  little  devil's  face,  like  Pan's.  At  times,
stripes  streaked  across  his  face;  I  had  become  a
seer.

I saw a child, a young man with blond hair
cropped just above his shoulders, ca. 17th century.
He is busy writing, inside a small house located in
a city; a poet perhaps, or a scribe? Germany or
Holland? This was a state of infinite harmony, a
light that seemed to come from everywhere and
nowhere at all; something that had always been
there and always will be, something that simply
exists. There is no past and no future.
Consciousness beyond body and barriers, infinite,
all-consuming; an infinite, universal love that
embraces everything.
I had a strong sense of
agelessness, because I embodied
a  principle  that  had  always  existed.        How
intensely I felt these unearthly emanations, this very
eternity.  I  saw  through  what  appeared  to  be  a
succession  of  many  caves, 
through  myriad
dimensions, and all of them were flooded with light
- my energy. An energy existing simultaneously at
its source as well as throughout eternity.
was  a  plane  of utter  harmony,  devoid  of contrasts
such as good and evil, marked by the overwhelming
peace of a spirituality both cosmic and infinite. The
Goddess  smiled.  I  no  longer  existed  as  a  woman
and as such could not be reached by others.

After  that,  the  effects  began  to  subside
slowly.  In  the  presence  of  my  guide  I  felt  infinite
protection and total understanding.
Under  his
guidance  and  protection,  I  began  to  ease  into  the
slow and gentle descent back to my earthly state of
being. In the process, I found myself able to switch
back  and  forth  repeatedly  between  both  states  of
consciousness.  I  realized  that  even  my  deepest
agonies  had  become  insignificant  over  "on  the
other side ". Furthermore, I understood that all the
religions with their sets of rules had been created at
one  time  or  another  for  the  sole  purpose  of
providing  guidelines  for  humanity,  yet  excessively
narrow interpretations of these rules have rendered
them all but irrelevant. Anyone who embarks on a
deliberate  search  for  a  higher  harmony,  seeking
spirituality, has no need for such rules at all. "
It is instructive to consider some of the

comments made by R.G. Wasson's wife Valentina
Pavlovna, as they appear in the second report about
Mexico's magic mushrooms in 1957,

This

written in the wake of experiencing the impressive
effects of her self-experiment. A medical doctor by
profession,  V.  Pavlovna  brought  up  the  potential
for medical applications, given successful isolation
of  the  active  mushroom  ingredient.  According  to
her  writings  from  that  period,  she  believed  the
substance to become a significant new tool in the
study  of  psychic  processes,  that  it  would  benefit
the  treatment  of  alcoholism,  drug  addiction  and
mental  problems,  and  help  ease  the  suffering  of
terminally  ill  patients  with  severe  pain.  It  was
several  years  later  that  a  number  of  researchers,
unaware  of  V.  Pavlovna's  article,  began  to  treat
these very same conditions with LSD, a substance
that  is  much  harder  on  the  patients'  systems  than
psilocybin!

The medical use of psilocybin, a basically
non-toxic  substance,  as  well  as  mushrooms  with
known  active  ingredients,  should,  in  my  opinion,
be  permitted  with  terminally  ill  patients.  The
promise  of  easing  the  suffering  of  dying  patients
alone should be reason enough to allow the use of
psilocybin and related substances, considering the
reality  of  fatal  illness  as  one  of  the  grimmer
universals of human existence. Many psychiatrists
and  pharmacologists  maintain  that  the  mystical
aspects  of  hallucinogenic  substances  should  be
described  more  accurately  as  psychotic  in  nature,
and 
these
symptoms are cause for worry and concern, since
their existence and nature cannot be explained. The
convictions  behind  these  beliefs,  however,  pale
compared to the promise of being able to provide
that which strikes at the very essence of practicing
medicine:  to  help  patients  endure  the  ultimate
anguish  of  impending  death,  while  making  sure
they are not left alone to deal with pain and fear.

repeated  manifestations  of 

that 

Scientific Research Under Fire
It  was  about  30  years  ago  that  legislation
was  enacted  severely  restricting  the  use  and
availability of hallucinogens. It is most unfortunate
that  these  sweeping  prohibitions  dealt  a  crippling
blow  to  legitimate  research  efforts,  forcing  more
and  more  investigators  to  abandon  this  area  of
study.  Thus,  despite  the  success  of  psycholytic
therapy,  its  practice  was  discontinued  during  the
1970's.  In  retrospect,  a  calm  and  pragmatic
analysis  of  these  events  can  surely  help  us
recognize that those years of pioneering

research laid the foundation for the development of
a  whole  new  form  of  treatment  -  one  that  has
already  proven  effective  in  aiding  the  healing
process and relieving the symptoms of hundreds of
gravely ill patients in various countries around the
world. In many cases, improvement occurred after
all  previous  methods  of  treatment  had  failed
completely.  Today,  we  are  faced  with  a  situation
so  bizarre  it  defies  reason  and  logic:  the  entire
pharmacological  class  of  hallucinogens  is  subject
to  even  more  severe  taboos  than  truly  addictive
substances  that  do  have  legitimate  medical  uses,
such  as 
their
derivatives.

the  morphine-type  drugs  and 

H-Bomb for the Soul?

The 

irrational 

fears  surrounding 

the
"proper  functioning"  of  our  consciousness  were
responsible  for  the  genesis  of  two  very  extreme
views about LSD during the 1960's, dating back to
the earliest phases of research into this substance.
Proponents praised LSD as a "miracle drug", while
its detractors were quick to brand LSD the "devil's
drug"  (or  "an  H-bomb  for  the  soul").  It  was  the
latter  group  that  prevailed  in  the  end  by  way  of
political power.

This  controversy,  already  a  matter  of
historic  record,  has  been  marked  by  a  pattern  of
confusing  emotion  with  scientific  standards.
Today, we are surely capable of overcoming past
controversies, by embracing a rational approach to
resolving  problems  and  issues  of  contention.
Viewed  objectively,  an  unbiased  assessment  of
hallucinogen-assisted  psychotherapy  is  possible
only in terms of measuring success. In order to do
this,  however,  we  must  be  allowed  to  use  these
substances  in  therapeutic  and  unbiased  scientific
settings.

In  1988, 

There is some hope that current lop-sided
attitudes  against  hallucinogens  may  be  changing
for  the  better,  as  efforts  by  the  Swiss  Medical
Society  for  Psycholytic  Therapy  to  re-legitimize
therapy  have  met  with
hallucinogen-assisted 
modest  success. 
the  Swiss  gave
permission  to  a  few  selected  psychotherapists  to
use psychoactive substances for psychotherapeutic
purposes, at least within a narrow range of strictly
defined  conditions  and  for  a  limited  time.  Thus,
legal psycholytic therapy in Switzerland continued
until  1993,  with  efforts  to  renew  the  permit
currently underway. Thus, we can hope that in the
future,  psychedelics-assisted  psychotherapy  will
experience a similar renaissance in other countries
as well. If so, psilocybin is likely to stand out as
the  most  valuable  and  beneficial  substance,  as
well as the least risky among the group of possible
substances that may be used in this context.

Figure 64 - Laboratory culture of Psilocybe mexicana Heim.

Figure 65 - Vial of pharmaceutical LSD with

CHAPTER 10

OUTLOOK

Apparently,  all  of  the  most  important
psilocybin-producing European mushroom species
are  already  well  known.  Their  geographic
distribution and migration patterns, however, have
investigated.  This
not  yet  been  adequately 
knowledge  gap  primarily  applies 
to  recently
discovered species outside the Psilocybe genus. In
addition, there is a lack of comprehensive sources
of information on distribution patterns of Psilocybe
cyanescens for a number of different countries.

More Taxonomic, Ecological and

Chemical Data are Needed

from 

the  study  of 

I  would  like  to  suggest  that,  for  most
species,  even  chemical  analysis  data  should  be
viewed as merely preliminary in nature. In order to
learn  the  truth  about  these  mushrooms  and  such
issues as prevalence, migrations into new habitats,
specific positions within the mycological system as
a whole, or chemo-taxonomical concerns, we must
first  acquire  more  taxonomic,  ecological  and
chemical  data 
relevant
mushroom  species.  While  further  analysis  of
fruiting body samples from known species in order
to  determine  alkaloid  content  variability  remains
an essential task, future research must also include
efforts to identify secondary substances, as well as
their structural isolation. Baeocystin, for example,
appears  to  be  an  alkaloid  primarily  found  in
mushrooms from temperate climate zones, and it is
less common in tropical species. Today, there are
substantial  doubts  over  whether  the  synthesis  of
Baeocystin  as  described 
is  actually
feasible.  There  is  an  urgent  need  for  additional
research  on 
this  substance.
Possibly,  a  number  of  different  mushroom
ingredients  may  have  psychotropic  effects.  As
such,  they  could  act  as  modifiers  of  psilocybin's
primary  effects  in  various  ways.  For  instance,
accounts of mushroom usage from ancient Mexico
already included observations about different types
of effect associated with the various mushroom

the  synthesis  of 

in  1988 

species in use. Perhaps these distinctions are not
just  the  result  of  different  concentrations  of
psilocybin  and  psilocin.  Moreover,  among
European  and  North  American  mycophiles,  the
vast  majority  stress  the  popularity  of  Psilocybe
semilanceata,  a  species  favored  over  all  others,
because of its reputation for causing the "richest"
kinds  of  experiences. 
Indeed,  analyses  of
Psilocybe semilanceata extracts typically confirm
the presence of eight indole compounds, whereas
other species, such as Psilocybe cubensis, usually
contain  only  half  as  many.  Understanding  just
how  such  ingredients  interact  with  psilocybin
may  well  result  in  the  development  of  new
clinical applications for these substances.
literature 

includes
information about several rare, if "questionable",
species,  some  of  which  have  been  reported  to
show blue discolorations.
The  Mycena  and
Pluteus genera, for example, include descriptions
of  such  mushroom  species.  If  indole  alkaloids
were  to  be  found  in  mushrooms  other  than  the
Agaricales  (gilled  mushrooms),  it  would  mean  a
sensational  discovery.  Future  chemical  analyses
are  bound  to  identify  additional  psilocybin-
producing  mushrooms  among 
the  European
species,  which  number  about  5,000.  There  is  an
even greater likelihood of discovering alkaloids in
many nonEuropean species, as the mycofloras of
most  countries  have  not  been  researched  as
extensively as Europe's.

The  mycological 

Understanding the Mushrooms'

Powerful Magic

Ethnopharmacological 

research  efforts
are  also  bound  to  generate  remarkable  results  in
the  near  future.  G.  Samorini,  for 
instance,
recently reported that Catalonia, Spain, is a region
where  Psilocybe  semilanceata  has  traditionally
been  known  by  the  unusual  name  of  "sorgin
zorrotz",  or  "witches'  tread".  This  label  strongly
suggests  early  ritualistic  usage  of  Psilocybe
semilanceata in that area. Interestingly, Catalonia
is also known as

is  growing  evidence 

Europe's  only  region  where  traditional  usage  of
Amanita muscaria has been confirmed. In addition,
there 
that  other  world
religions,  especially  in  Africa,  have  embraced  the
usage  of  psychoactive  mushrooms  as  well,  an
intriguing possibility that calls for further study.

While the number of psychotropic

mushroom species has risen dramatically all across
Europe, the pace of progress in developing medical
uses for mushroom ingredients has not followed
suit. However, hallucinogens, including psilocybin
have a history of therapeutic usage, a practice that
is documented by a great deal of information,
experiences and insights.

Given  the  lack  of  alternate  methods  to
study these substances, the revival of medical and
interdisciplinary research efforts is a more crucially
important issue now  than  ever before.  After  all,  a
better  understanding  of  psychotropic  substances
may  well  benefit  a  vast  number  of  patients,
possibly by contributing to the processes of mental
and  psychic  healing.  A  glimmer  of  hope  for  the
revival  of  large-scale  research  comes  from  the
United  States,  where  a  very  small  number  of
investigators  have,  on  occasion,  succeeded  at
securing government permission to conduct studies
on the medical aspects of hallucinogens, including
psilocybin.  The  conceptual  approach  behind  the
design  of  these  research  projects  suggests  that
virtually  no  reliable  pharmacological  data  is  in
existence. In fact, these substances have undergone
extensive study over the course of several decades.
To  the  extent  that  relationships  of  dosage  and
effects have  already  been  determined,  current  and
future  research  efforts  should  build  upon  existing
knowledge,  instead  of  neglecting  or  ignoring
previously  published  results.  High-tech  metho-
dology may well yield new results - techniques for

exploring  and  enhancing  our  understanding  of
mushrooms at the biochemical level. But increased
biochemical knowledge does not permit us to draw
any  sort  of  conclusion  about  other  aspects  of
psychoactive substances, such as psychedelic peak
experiences, 
the
subconscious  mind,  as  well  the  development  of
therapeutic applications based on these effects.

realms  of 

exploring 

the 

have 

Certain  hypnotherapy 

techniques  are
known  to  induce  experiences  similar,  but  not
identical  to,  those  caused  by  administration  of
hallucinogens.  Recent  studies  have  demonstrated
that  hypnosis  can  benefit  the  immune  system,  a
finding 
that  suggests  psilocybin  and  related
compounds  may 
similar
properties. Meditation and dreaming are additional
examples  of 
states  of  consciousness  with
interesting parallels to psychedelic experiences, yet
very  little  is  known  about  these  links,  due  to  the
scarcity of research efforts in this area.

potentially 

In  recent  years,  the  non-medical  use  of
psychotropic  species  has  become  an  increasingly
popular  pastime.  I  agree,  however,  with  the
assessment of Swiss toxicologist R. Flammer, who
has written  about  the  possible  problems  linked  to
this practice:

"....There is no need to panic, considering
the severity of existing problems with alcohol and
hard addictive drugs, which make the Panaeolus
mushrooms and their close relatives appear
harmless by comparison. "

In order to guard against being dazzled or
overwhelmed  by  the  mushroom's  powerful  magic
we must embrace the pursuit of in-depth research
into hallucinogenic mushrooms, a method that can
protect us from jumping to conclusions, and in the
process,  from  hampering  the  advancement  of
beneficial applications.

Figure 66 - Psilocybe semilanceata cultured on a mixture of grass seeds, dung

and grains of rice.

Figure 67 - Psilocybe semilanceata at a natural location in Austria.

Figure 68 - Inocybe aeruginascens fruiting bodies at a natural location.

Figure 69 - Psilocybe tampanensis sclerotia on lolium seeds.

Figure 70 - Stone sculpture of a mushroom deity from the classic
period of Mayan culture (300-600 A.D.). Statue is about 12 in. tall.

(Rietberg Museum, Zurich).

Figure 71 - Psilocybe stuntzii on mulch (Northwestern United States).

Figure 72 - Psilocybe baeocystis from Seattle, USA.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Boire, R.G. (1995). Sacred Mushrooms and the

Law. Spectral Mindustries, Davis, CA.

Carter, M. (1976). Will the legal Liberty Cap

cause home office hallucinations? New Scientist,
16 Sept., 59.

Cox, P.A. (1981). Use of a hallucinogenic

mushroom, Copelandia cyanescens, in Samoa.
Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 4, 115-116.
English, M.P. (1987). Mordecai Cubitt Cooke.
Biopress Ltd., Bristol, Great Britain.

Ford,  W.W.  (1923).  A  new  classification  of
poisoning).
mycetismus 
Transactions  of  the  Association  of  American
Physicians, 38, 225-229.

(mushroom 

the 

vast  amount  of 

Considering 
relevant
mycological  literature,  it  makes  sense  to  subdivide
citations 
into  categories  representing  distinct
subject areas and specific species and genera. While
some  entries  deal  with  more  than  one  mushroom
species, they are listed only once, under the category
heading of the species that is the main focus of the
work cited. This will aid in locating citations about
specific  species,  as  well  as  those  with  a  more
generalized  scope,  since  titles  alone  often  do  not
accurately  reflect  overall  content  or  specific
emphases.

1. Basic Reviews

Journal 

Allen,  J.W.,  Merlin,  M.D.  &  Jansen,  K.L.R.
review  of
(1991).  An  ethnomycological 
psychoactive  Agarics  in  Australia  and  New
Zealand.  Journal  of  Psychoactive  Drugs,  23,
39-69.

the  known  species  of 

Allen, J.W., Gartz, J. & Guzman, G. (1992). Index
to  the  botanical  identification  and  chemical
analysis  of 
the
hallucinogenic fungi. Integration, 2&3, 9197.
Allen,  J.W.  &  Merlin,  M.D.  (1992).  Psychoactive
mushroom  use  in  Koh  Samui  and  Koh  Pha-
Ngan, 
of
Ethnopharmacology, 35, 205228.

Allen, J.W. & Gartz, J. (1995). Some recent notes
and  observations  on  the  occurrence  and  use  of
entheogenic  fungi  in  third  world  countries.
Psychedelic  Monographs  and  Essays,  7  (in
press).

Thailand. 

Anonymous  (1978).  Mycologists  and  the  law.
Bulletin  of  the  British  'Mycological  Society,
12,56-57.

Auert,  G.,  Dolezal,  V.,  Hausner,  M.  &
Semerdzieva,  M. 
(1980).  Halluzinogene
Wirkungen  zweier  Hutpilze  der  Gattung
Psilocybe 
tschechoslowakischer  Herkunft.
Zeitschrift furArztlicheFortbildung, 74, 833835.
Badham,  E.R.  (1984).  Ethnobotany  of  psilocybin
mushrooms,  especially  Psilocybe  cubensis.
Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 10, 249-254.

 Beug,  M.  &  Bigwood,  J.  (1982).  Psilocybin  and
psilocin  levels  in  twenty  species  from  seven
genera  of  wild  mushrooms  in  the  Pacific
Northwest,  USA.  Journal  of  Ethnopharma-
cology, 5, 271-285.

Bocks,  S.M.  (1968).  The  metabolism  of  psilocin
and psilocybin by fungal enzymes. Biochemistry
Journal, 106, 12-13.

Gartz, 

J. 

(1986).  Ethnopharmakologie  and
Entdeckungsgeschichte  der  halluzinogenen
Wirkstoffe  von  europaischen  Pilzen  der
Gattung  Psilocybe.  Zeitschrift  fur  Arztliche
Fortbildung, 80, 803-805.

(1992/93).  New  aspects  of 

the
occurrence,  chemistry  and  cultivation  of
European  hallucinogenic  mushrooms.  Ann
Mus. Civ. Roverto (Italy) Sez. sc. nat., 8, 107-
124.

Gartz,  J. 

Gartz, J. (1994). Extraction and analysis of indole
derivatives  from  fungal  biomass.  Journal  of
Basic Microbiology, 34, 17-22.

Gartz,  J.,  Allen,  J.W.  &  Merlin,  W.  (1994).
Ethnomycology,  biochemistry  and  cultivation
of Psilocybe samuiensis Guzman, Bandala and
Allen,  a  new  psychoactive  fungus  from  Koh
Samui,  Thailand.  Journal  of  Ethnopharma-
cology, 3, 73-80.

Gartz, J., Rei

D., Eicker, A. & Smith, M.T.

(1995). Psilocybe natalensis sp.nov. - the first
indigenous blueing member of the Agaricales
of South Africa. Integration, 6, 29-34.
Guzman, G. (1983). The genus Psilocybe.
Beih. Nova Hedwigia, 74.

Guzman,  G.,  Bandala,  V.M.  &  Allen,  J.W.
from

(1993).  A  new  bluing  Psilocybe 
Thailand. Mycotaxon XLVI, 155-160.

Hall, M.C. (1973). Problems in legislating against
abuse  of  hallucinogenic  fungi  in  Australia.
Bulletin on Narcotics, 25, 27-36. Hofmann, A.
(1960).  Die  psychotropen  Wirkstoffe  der
mexikanischen  Zauberpilze.  Chimia,  14,  309-
318.

Hofmann, A. (1980). LSD - My Problem Child.

McGraw-Hill, New York.

Hofmann,  A.,  Heim,  R.,  Brack,  A.,  Kobel,  H.,
Frey, A., Ott, H., Petrzilka, Th. & Troxler, F.
(1959).  Psilocybin 
zwei
psychotrope Wirkstoffe aus mexikanischen

and  Psilocin, 

Zauberpilzen. Helv. Chim. Acta, 42, 15571572.
Knecht,  S.  (1962).  Magische  Pilze  and  Pilz-
zeremonien.  Zeitschrift  fur  Pilzkunde,  28,  69-
78.

Kaplan, R.H. (1975). The sacred mushroom in

Scandinavia. Man, 10, 72-79.

Larris, S. (1984). Psilocybinsvampe. Svampe, 9,

23-29.

Lloyd, J.U. (1895). Etidorhpa. Robert Clarke

Company, Cincinnati.

Margot, P. & Watling, R. (1981). Studies in
Australian Agarics and Boletes 2. Further
studies in Psilocybe. Transactions of the
British Mycological Society, 76, 485-489.

 McKenna, T. (1992). Food of the Gods. Bantam,

New York.

Ott, J. (1976). Hallucinogenic Plants of North
     America. Wingbow Press, Berkeley, CA.
Ott, J. (1993). Pharmacotheon. Natural Products
     Co., Kennewick, WA.
Ott,  J.  &  Bigwood,  J.  (1978).  Teonanacatl  -
Hallucinogenic Mushrooms of North America.
Madrona Publishers Inc., Seattle, WA.

 Pollock,  S.H.  (1975).  The  psilocybin  mushroom
pandemic.  Journal  of  Psychedelic  Drugs,  7,
73-84.

Pollock, S.H. (1977/78). Psychotropic mushrooms
and  the  alteration  of  consciousness:  1:  The
ascent 
mushroom
consciousness.  Journal  of  Altered  States  of
Consciousness, 3, 15-35.

psilocybian 

Pollock, S.H. (19

.  Psilocybian  mycetismus
with special reference to Panaeolus. Journal of
Psychedelic Drugs, 8, 43-57.

Ratsch, C. (1989). Gateway to Inner Space. Prism

of 

Press.

Riedlinger,  T.J.  (1990).  The  Sacred  Mushroom
for  R.  Gordon  Wasson.

Seeker:  Essays 
Dioscorides Press, Portland, OR.

Ruck, C.A.P., Bigwood, J., Staples, D., Ott, J. &
Wasson, R. G. (1979). Entheogens. Journal of
Psychedelic Drugs, 11, 145-147.

Sahiti, A. (1990). Drogen von A-Z. Beltz

Weinheim-Basel.

in 

Samorini, G. (1992). The oldest representations of
hallucinogenic  mushrooms 
the  world
(Sahara Desert, 9,000-7,000 B.C.), Integration,
2&3, 69-79.

Schroder,  R.F.  &  Guzman,  G. 

(1981).  A
psychotropic fungus in Nepal. Mycotaxon, 13,
346-348.

Schultes,  R.E.  &  Hofmann,  A.  (1979).  Plants  of
the Gods. McGraw-Hill Book Company (UK)
Limited, Maidenhead.

Schultes, R.E. & Hofmann, A. (1980). The Botany

and Chemistry of Hallucinogens.

Charles C. Thomas Publisher, Springfield,
Illinois.

Seeger, R. (1985). Psilocybin. Deutsche

Apothekerzeitung, 125, 65-66.

Shulgin, A.T. & Shulgin, A. (1996). TIHKAL.

Transform Press, Berkeley, CA.

Siegel,  R.K.  (1985).  New  trends  in  drug  use
in  California.  Bulletin  on

among  youth 
Narcotics, 37, 7-17.

Singer, R. (1958). Pilze, die Zerebralmyzetismen
verursachen.  Schweizerische  Zeitschrift  fur
Pilzkunde, 36, 81-89.

Singer,  R.  (1958).  Mycological  investigation  on
teonanacatl, 
the  Mexican  hallucinogenic
mushroom. 1: The history of teonanacatl, field
work  and  culture  work.  Mycologia,  50,  239-
261.

Stamets,  P.  (1982).  Psilocybe  Mushrooms  and
their  Allies  (2nd  ed.).  Homestead  Book  Co,
Seattle, WA.

Stamets,  P.  &  Gartz,  J. 

(1995).  A  new
caerulescent Psilocybe from the Pacific Coast
of  Northwestern  America. Integration,  6,  21-
27.

Thompson,  J.P.,  Anglin,  M.G.,  Emboden,  W.  &
Fischer,  D.G.  (1985).  Mushroom  use  by
college  students.  Journal  of  Drug  Education,
15, 111-124.

Wasson, R.G. (13 May 1957). Seeking the magic

mushroom. Life, 13 May: 42(19), 100ff.

the 

Wasson,  R.G.,  Kramrisch,  S.,  Ott,  J.  &  Ruck,
-
C.P.A. 
Entheogens and the Origins of Religion. Yale
University Press, New Haven, CT.

(1986).  Persephone's  Quest 

Wasson,  V.P. 

(1957).  1  ate 

sacred
mushrooms.  This  Week  Magazine,  19  May,
8ff.

Watling,  R.  (1983).  Hallucinogenic  mushrooms.
Journal of the Forensic Sciences Society, 23,
53-66.

Weil,  A.T.  (1977).  The  use  of  psychoactive
mushrooms  in  the  Pacific  Northwest:  An
Botanical
ethnopharmacological 
Museum  Leaflets,  Harvard  University,  25,
131-149.

report. 

2. Medical-pharmacological Literature

Aboul-Enein,  H.Y. 

a
pharmacological profile. American Journal of
Pharmacology, 146, 91-95.

(1974).  Psilocybin: 

Barnett, B.E.W. (1971). Diazepam treatment for
     LSD intoxication. The Lancet, 270.
Benjamin, C. (1979). Persistent psychiatric
     symptoms after eating psilocybin mushrooms.

British Medical Journal, 1319-1320.

Charters, A.D. (1957). Mushroom poisoning in

     Kenya. Transactions of the Royal Society of
     Tropical Medicine & Hygiene, 51, 265-270.

Cooles, P. (1980). Abuse of the mushroom

Panaeolus foenisecii. British Medical Journal,
 446-447.

Dittrich, A. & Scharfetter, C. (1987). Ethno
     psychotherapie. Enke, Stuttgart (Germany).
Dubansky, B. & Vyhnankova, M. (1967).
     Differences in the reaction of psilocybin in brain
    damaged subjects as related to the location of the
     lesion. Activitas Superior Nervosa, 9,  418-420.
Fischer,  R.  &  Goldman,  H.  (1975).  Therapeutic
usefulness  of  hallucinogenic  drugs  as  a
function  of 
structure.
their 
Pharmakopsychatrie 
/Neuro-
Psychopharamakologie, 8, 176-178.

chemical 

Fischer, R. & Rockey, M. (1967). Psilocybin.

Experientia, 23, 150.

to 

Francis,  J.  &  Murray,  V.S.G.  (1983).  Review  of
enquiries  made 
the  NPIS  concerning
Psilocybe  mushroom  ingestion,  1978-1981.
Human Toxicology, 2, 349-352.
Grinspoon,  L.  &  Bakalar, 

(1981).
Psychedelic  Drugs  Reconsidered.  Basic
Books, New York.

J.B. 

Grof, S. (1975). Realms of the Human

Unconscious: Observations from LSD
Research. The Viking Press, Esalen, CA.
Grof, S. (1981). LSD Psychotherapy. Hunter

H      ouse, New York.

Grof, S.

Halifax,  J.  (1977).  The  Human
Encouner  _with  Death.  E.P.  Dutton,  New
York.

Harries, A.D. & Evans, V. (1981). Sequelae of a
"magic  mushroom  banquet".  Postgraduate
Medical Journal, 57, 571-572.

Hyde,  C.,  Glancy,  G.,  Omerod,  P.,  Hall,  D.  &
Taylor,  G.S.  (1973).  Abuse  of  indigenous
psilocybin  mushrooms:  a  new  fashion  and
complications.  British
some 
Journal of Psychiatry, 132, 602-604

psychiatric 

Leuner, H. (1968). Ist die Verwendung von LSD-
25  fur  die  experimentelle  Psychiatrie  heute
noch vertretbar? Der Nervenarzt, 39, 356-360.

Leuner, H. (1981). Halluzinogene. Hans Huber

(Bern/Stuttgart/Wien).

Malitz, S., Esconer, H., Wilkens, B. & Hoch, P.H.
(1960).  Some  observations  on  psilocybin,  a
new  hallucinogen, 
in  volunteer  subjects.
Comprehensive Psychiatry, 1, 8-17. McCarthy,
J.P. (1971). Some less familiar drugs of abuse.
Medical Journal of Australia, 2, 1078-1081.

McCawley,  E.L.,  Brumett,  R.E.  &  Dana,  G.W.
(1962).  Convulsions  from  Psilocybe  mush-
room poisoning. Proceedings of the
Western Pharmacological Society, 5, 27-33.
McGlothlin, W.H. & Arnold, D.O. (1971). LSD
     revisited: A ten-year follow-up of medical LSD
     use. Archives of General Psychiatry, 24,  35-49.
Mills,  P.R.,  Lesinkas,  D.  &  Watkinson,  G.
(1979).  The  danger  of  hallucinogenic
mushrooms.  Scottish  Medical  Journal,  24,
316-317.

Parashos, A.J. (1976/77). The psilocybin-induced
"state  of  drunkenness"  in  normal  volunteers
Behavioral
and 
schizophrenics. 
Neuropsychiatry, 8, 83-86.

Peden,  N.R.,  Bissett,  A.F.,  Macaulay,  K.E.C.  &
Pelosi,  A.J.  (1981).  Clinical  toxicology  of
"magic  mushroom"  ingestion.  Postgraduate
Medical Journal, 57, 543-545.

Peden, N.R. & Pringle, S.D. (1982). Hallucino-
     genic fungi. The Lancet, 13 Feb., 396-397.
Peden, N.R. & Pringle, S.D. & Crocks, J. (1982).
     The problem of psilocybin mushroom abuse.
     Human Toxicology, 1, 417-424.
Schwartz, R.H. & Smith, D.E. (1988).

Hallucinogenic mushrooms. Clinical
Pediatrics, 27, 70-73.

Southcott,  R.V. 

(1974).  Notes  on 

some
poisonings and other clinical effects following
South
ingestion 
Australian Clinics, 6, 441-478.

of  Australian 

fungi. 

Stein,  S.I.  (1958).  An  unusual  effect  from  a
species  of  Mexican  mushrooms  Psilocybe
cubensis  Mycopath.    et  Mycol.  Applicata,  9,
263-264.

Stein,  S.I.  (1959).  Clinical  observations  on  the
effects  of  Panaeolus  venenosus  versus
Psilocybe  caerulescens  mushrooms.  Myco-
logia, 51, 49-50.

Trotter,  J.E.  (1944).  A  report  of  nine  cases  of
Journal  of

fungus  poisoning.  Medical 
Australia, 1, 393.

Van  Went,  G.E.  (1978).  Mutagenicity  testing  of
three hallucinogens: LSD, psilocybin and O9-
THC, 
test.
Experientia, 34, 324-325.

the  micronucleus 

Widmer, S.  (1989).  Uber  MDMA and  LSD:  Die
unerwunschte  Psychotherapie.  Nachtschatten
Verlag, Solothurn (Switzerland).

Young,  R.E.,  Milroy,  R.,  Hutchison,  S.  &
Kesson,  C.M.  (1982).  The  rising  price  of
mushrooms. The Lancet, 23 Jan., 213-215.

using 

3. General Reference Books

Pharm. Suecica, 3, 37-44.

Bresadola, J. (1931). Iconographia mycologica

18. Mediolani.

Bresinsky,  A.  &  Besl,  H.  (1985).  Giftpilze.
Wissenschaftliche  Verlagsgesellschaft  Stutt-
gart (Germany).

Buch, R. (1952). Die Bldtterpilze des nordwest-
   lichen Sachsens. Leipzig (Ger many). Cooke, M.C.
    (1880-90). Illustrations of  British Fungi. London.
Flammer, R. (1980). Differentialdiagnose der
     Pilzvergiftungen. Fischer Stuttgart (Germany).
Flammer, R. & Horak, E. (1980). Giftpilze -
     Pilzgifte. Franckh Stuttgart (Germany).
Heim, R. (1967). Nouvelles Investigations sur les

Champignons Hallucinogenes. Museum
Nationale d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris.

Heim, R. (1969). Champignons d'Europe. Boubee

& Cie., Paris.

Heim,  R.  &  Wasson,  R.G. 

(1958/9).  Les
champignons  hallucinogenes  du  Mexique.
Museum  National  d'Histoire  Naturelle,  Paris.
Kuhner,  R.  &  Romagnesi,  H.  (1953).  Fiore
analytique 
supirieurs.
Masson & Cie., Paris.

champignons 

Lange,  J.E.  &  Lange,  M.  (1962).  600  Pilze  in
Farben.  Bayrischer  Landwirtschaftsverlag
Munchen (Germany).

des 

Michael, E. & Schulz, R. (1927). Fuhrer fur
     Pilzfreunde, Bd. 2. Leipzig (Ger many). Michael,
E., Hennig, B. & Kreisel, H. (Eds.), (1978-8 ).
     Handbuch fur Pilzfreunde, Bd. 1-6. ustav

Fischer Jena (Germany).

Moser,

. (1983). "Die Rohrlinge and Blatter-

pilze". In: Kleine Kryptogamenflora by H.
Gams, Vo1.2b/2, 5th ed. Stuttgart (Germany).
Phillips, R. (1981). Das Kosmosbuch der Pike.
Stuttgart (Germany).

Ricken, A. (1915). Die Bldtterpilze. Leipzig

(Germany).

Wasson,  R.G.  &  Wasson,  V.P.  (1957).  Mush-
rooms,  Russia  and  History.  Pantheon,  New
York.

Wasson,  R.G.  (1974).  Maria  Sabina  and  her
Mazatec  Mushroom  Velada.  Harcourt  Brace
Janovich, New York.

Wasson, R.G. (1980). The Wondrous Mushroom:
in  Mesoamerica.  McGraw-Hill,

Mycolatry 
New York.

4. Mushrooom Cultivation

Agurell,  S.,  Blomkvist,  S.  &  Catalfomo,  P.
(1966).  Biosynthesis  of  psilocybin  in  sub-
merged culture of Psilocybe cubensis. Acta

Agurell, S. & Nilsson, L.G. (1968). Biosynthesis
of  psilocybin.  Acta  Chem.  Scand.,  22,  1210-
1218.

tryptophan 

Agurell,  S.  &  Nilsson,  L.G. 

(1968).  A
biosynthesis  sequence  from 
to
psilocybin. Tetrahedron Letters, 9, 1063-1064.
Ames, R.W., Singer, R., Stein, S.I. & Smith, A.H.
(1958).  The 
temperature  on
mycelial  growth  of  Psilocybe,  Panaeolus  and
Copelandia.  Mycopathologia,  9,  268-274.
Badham, E.R.(1980). The effect of light upon
basidiocarp  initiation  in  Psilocybe  cubensis.
Mycologia, 72, 136-142.

influence  of 

Badham, E.R. (1982). Tropisms in the mushroom

Badham,  E.R. 

Psilocybe cubensis. Mycologia, 74, 275-279.

(1984).  Modeling  growth,
development,  transpiration  and  translocation
in the mushroom Psilocybe cubensis. Bulletin
of  the  Torrey  Botanical  Club,  111,  159-164.

Badham,  E.R.  &  Kincaid,  D.T. 

(1984).

Analysis  of  anemotropism  in  the  mushroom
Psilocybe  cubensis.  Canadian  Journal  of
Botany, 62, 296-300.

Badham, E.R. (1985). The influence of humidity
upon  transpiration  and  growth  in  Psilocybe
cubensis. Mycologia, 77, 932-939.

Bigwood, J. & Beug,  M.W.  (1982).  Variation of
psilocybin  and  psilocin  levels  with  repeated
flushes  (harvests)  of  mature  sporocarps  of
Psilocybe  cubensis  (Earle)  Singer.  Journal  of
Ethnopharmacology, 5, 287-291.

Brack, A., Hofmann, A., Kalberer, F., Kobel, H.
&  Rutschmann,  J.  (1961).  Tryptophan  als
biogenetische  Vorstufe  des  Psilocybins.
Archiv  der  Pharmazie.,  294,  230-234.
Catalfomo,  P.  &  Tyler,  V.E.  (1964).  The
production of psilocybin in submerged culture
by  Psilocybe  cubensis.  Lloydia,  21,  53-63.
Clemencon,  H.  (1994).  Der  Nodulus  and  die
Organogenese  wahrend  der  fruhen  Frucht-
korperentwicklung  von  Psilocybe  cyanescens.
Zeitschrift fur Mykologie, 60, 49-68.

Gartz, J. (1987). Variation der Indolakaloide von
Psilocybe  cubensis  durch  unterschiedliche
zur
Kultivierungsbedingungen. 
Kenntnis der Pilze Mitteleuropas, 3, 275-281.
Gartz, 
(1989).  Biotransformation  of
tryptamine  in  fruiting  mycelia  of  Psilocybe
cubensis. Planta Medica, 55, 249-250.

Beitrdge 

Gartz, J. (1989). Biotransformation of tryptamine

J. 

derivates in mycelial cultures of Psilocybe.
Journal of Basic Microbiology, 29, 347-352.
Gartz, J. (1989). Bildung and Verteilung der
Indolalkaloide in Fruchtkorpern, Mycelien

and  Sklerotien  von  Psilocybe  cubensis.
Beitrdge  zur  Kenntnis  der  Pilze  Europas,  5,
167-174.

Gartz,  J.  &  Muller  G.K.  (1990).  Versuche  zur
Kultur  von  Gymnopilus  purpuratus,  Purpur-
flammling.  Mykologisches  Mitteilungsblatt
(Germany), 33, 29-30.

Gartz,  J.,  Adam,  G.  &  Vorbrodt,  H.M.  (1990).
Growth-promoting  effect  of  a  brassinosteroid
in  mycelial  cultures  of  the  fungus  Psilocybe
cubensis. Naturwissenschaften, 77, 388-389.

semi-industrielle 

 Heim, R. & Cailleux, R. (1957). Culture pure et
obtention 
des  Agarics
hallucinogens du Mexique. Compt. Rend., 244,
3109-3114.
Heim, R., Hofmann, A., Brack, A., Kobel, H. &
zur
Cailleux,  R. 
Herstellung  and  Gewinnung  von  Psilocybin
and Psilocin. Patent 1087321-C12d30hc.
 Kneebone,  L.R.  (1960).  Methods  for 

the
production of certain hallucinogenic agarics.
Abstract. Dev. Ind. Micro., 1, 109.

(1959).  Verfahren 

norbaeocystin:  New 

Leung,  A.Y.  &  Paul,  A.G.  (1968).  Baeocystin
of
and 
psilocybin 
baeocystis.
Journal  of  Pharmaceutical  Sciences,  57,
1667-1671.

from  Psilocybe 

analogs 

Leung, A.Y., Smith, A.H. & Paul, A.G. (1968).
Production  of  psilocybin 
in  Psilocybe
baeocystis  saprophytic  culture.  Journal  of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, 54, 1576-1579.

Leung,  A.Y.  &  Paul,  A.G. 

(1969).  The
relationships of carbon and nitrogen nutrition
of Psilocybe baeocystis to the production of
psilocybin  and  its  analogs.  Lloydia,  32,  66-
71.

Neal, J.M., Benedict, R.G. & Brady, R. (1968).
Interrelationship  of  phosphate  nutrition,
nitrogen  metabolism  and  accumulation  of
key  secondary  metabolites  in  saprophytic
culture  of  Psilocybe  cubensis,  Psilocybe
cyanescens  and  Panaeolus  campanulatus.
Journal  of  Pharmaceutical  Sciences,  57,
1661-1667.

Oss,  O.T.  &  Oeric,  O.N.  (1976).  Psilocybin:
Magic  Mushroom  Grower's  Guide.  And/Or
Press, Berkeley, CA.

Pollock,  S.H.  (1977).  Magic  Mushroom  Cultiva-
tion.  Herbal  Medicine  Research  Foundation,
San Antonio, TX.

Stamets, P. & Chilton, J.S. (1983). The Mushroom

Cultivator. Agarikon Press Olympia, WA.

Stamets,  P. 

(1993).  Growing  Gourmet  &
Medicinal  Mushrooms.  Ten  Speed  Press,

5. Popular Literature

Cooper,  R.  (1980).  A  Guide  to  British  Psilocybin
Mushrooms (2nd ed.). Hessle Free Press, London.
Estrada, A. (1980). Maria Sabina - Botin der heiligen

Pike. Trikont, Miinchen (Germany).

Haard,  R.  &  Haard,  K.  (1980).  Poisonous  &
Hallucinogenic  Mushrooms  (2nd  ed.).  Homestead
Book Company, Seattle, WA.

Harris, B. (1989). Growing Wild Mushrooms (revised
edition). Homestead Book Company, Seatlle, WA.
Leary,  T.  (1990).  Flashbacks:  A  Personal  and
Cultural History of an Era. J.P. Tarcher Inc.,
Los Angeles.

Menser, G.P. (1984). Magic Mushroom
    Handbook. Homestead, Seattle, WA. Stafford, P.
    (1992). Psychedelics Encyclopedia (third
     expanded edition). Ronin Publishing, Berkeley,
     CA.
Stevens,  J.  &  Gee,  R.  (1987).  How  to  Identify
and Grow Psilocybin Mushrooms. Sun Magic
Publishing, Seattle, WA.

6. Conocybe

Benedict,  R.G.,  Brady,  L.R.,  Smith,  A.H.  &
Tyler, V.E. (1962). Occurrence of psilocybin
and  psilocin 
in  certain  Conocybe  and
Psilocybe species. Lloydia, 25, 156-159.

 Benedict,  R.G.,  Tyler,  V.E.  &  Watling,  R.
(1967). Blueing in Conocybe, Psilocybe and a
Stropharia  species  and 
the  detection  of
psilocybin. Lloydia, 30, 150-157.

Christiansen, A.L., Rasmussen, K.E. & Holland,
K.  (1984).  Detection  of  psilocybin  and
psilocin in Norwegian species of Pluteus and
Conocybe. Planta Medica, 51, 341-343.

Gartz,  J.  (1985).  Zur  Analytik  der  Inhaltsstoffe
zweier  Pilzarten  der  Gattung  Conocybe.
Pharmazie, 40, 366.

Ohenoja,  E.,  Jokiranta,  J.,  Maekinen,  T.,
Kaikkonen,  A.  &  Airaksinen,  M.M.  (1987).
The occurrence of  psilocybin  and  psilocin  in
Finnish  fungi.  Journal  of  Natural  Products,
50, 741-744.

7. Galerina

Besl,  H.  (1993).  Galerina  steglichii  spec.  nov.,
ein  halluzinogener  Haubling.  Zeitschrift  fur
Mykologie, 59, 215-218.

Gartz, J. (1995). Cultivation and analysis of

Psilocybe  species  and  an 
investigation  of
Galerina  steglichii.  Ann.  Mus.  Civ.  Rovereto
(Italy) Sez. sc. nat., 10, 297-305.

8. Gymnopilus

Buck, R. W.

(1967). Psychedelic

effect of
Pholiota  spectabilis.  New  England  Journal  of
Medicine, 267, 391-392.

Cleland, J. B. (1934). Toadstools and mushrooms
and  other  larger  fungi  of  South  Australia.
Adelaide.

Gartz,  J. 
psilocin 
purpuratus. Persoonia, 14, 19-22.

(1989).  Occurrence  of  psilocybin,
in  Gymnopilus

and  baeocystin 

Hatfield,  G.M.,  Valdes,  L.J.  &  Smith,  A.H.
in

(1978).  The  occurrence  of  psilocybin 
Gymnopilus species. Lloydia, 41, 140-144.

 Koike,  Y.,  Wada,  K.,  Kusano,  G.,  Nozoe,  S.  &
Yokoyama,  K.  (1981).  Isolation  of  psilocybin
its
from 
determination 
some
mushrooms.  Journal  of  Natural  Products,  44,
362-365.

argentipes 
specimens 

Psilocybe 
in 

Kreisel,  H.  &  Lindequist,  U. 

(1988).
Gymnopiluspurpuratus,  ein  psilocybinhaltiger
Pilz adventiv im Bezirk Rostock. Zeitschrift fur
Mykologie, 54, 73-76.

and 
of 

Singer, R. (1969). Mycoflora Australis. Beih.

Nova Hedwiga, 29.

Singer, R. (1975). The Agaricales in Modern

Taxonomy (3rd ed.). Vaduz.

Walters,  M.B.  (1965).  Pholiota  spectabilis,  a
hallucinogenic  fungus.  Mycologia,  57,  837-
838.

9.Inocybe
Babos,  M.  (1968).  Eine  neue  Inocybe-Art  in
n.sp.

Ungarn: 
Fragmenta Botanica, 6, 19-22.

aeruginascens 

Inocybe 

Babos,  M.  (1983).  Beobachtungsangaben  bei
(in
summary).

einer 
Hungarian,  with  German 
Mikologicie Kozlemenyek, 3, 143.

halluzinogenen 

Inocybe-Art 

Bekker,  A.M.,  Guervich,  L.S.,  Nezdoiminogo,
E.L.,  Onoprienko,  B.B.  &  Koz'min,  Y.P.
(1989).  Chromatographische  Studie  einiger
Indolmetabolite 
Inocybe
(Basidiomyceten)  2  (in  Russian).  Mikol.
Fitopatol., 23, 129, ref. C.A. 111, 53870a.

in  der  Gattung 

 Besl,  H.  &  Mack,  P.  (1.985).  Halluzinogene
Risspilze. Zeitschrift fur Mykologie, 51, 183-
184.

Bohus, G. & Babos, M. (1977). Fungorum

Gartz, 

Drewitz,  G. 

rariorum icones coloratae Pars 8. J. Cramer
(Liechtenstein).

(1983).  Eine 

halluzinogene
Risspilzart.  Grunlichverfarbender  Risspilz
aeruginescens).  Mykologisches
(Inocybe 
Mitteilungsblatt, 26, 11-17.

(1985).  Vergleichende 

diinn-
schichtchromatographische  Untersuchungen
zweier  Psilocybe-  and  einer  halluzinogenen
Inocybeart. Pharmazie, 40, 134.

J. 

in 

Gartz,  J.  &  Drewitz,  G.  (1985).  Der  erste
Nachweis des Vorkommens von Psilocybin in
Risspilzen. Zeitschrift fur Mykologie, 51, 199-
203.

Gartz,  J.  (1986).  Nachweis  von  Tryptamin-
derivaten in Pilzen der Gattungen Gerronema,
Hygrocybe,  Psathyrella  and  von  Inocybe.
Biochem. Physiol. Pflanzen, 181, 275-278.

 Gartz,  J.  (1986).  Psilocybin  in  Mycelkulturen
von Inocybe aeruginascens. Biochem. Physiol.
Pflanzen, 181, 511-517.

Gartz,  J.  (1986).  Untersuchungen  zum  Vor-
Inocybe
fur

kommen 
aeruginascens 
Babos. 
Mykologie, 52, 359-361.

des  Muscarins 

Zeitschrift 

Gartz,  J.  &  Drewitz,  G.  (1986).  Der  Grunlich-
erfarbende  Risspilz  -  eine  Inocybeart  mit
halluzinogener  Wirkung.  Zeitschrift  fur  Arzt-
liche Fortbildung, 80, 551-553.

Gartz, J. (1987). Variation der Alkaloidmengen in
Fruchtkorpern  von  Inocybe  aeruginascens.
Planta Medica, 53, 539-541.

Gartz, J. (1989). Analysis of aeruginascin in
fruiting bodies of the mushroom Inocybe
aeruginascens. International Journal of Crude
Drug Research, 27, 141-144.

Gurevich,  L.S.:  Psilocybin  and  muscarin  as
possible  chemotaxonomic  markers  of 
the
genus  Inocybe  (Fr.)Fr.(Cortinariaceae)(rus.)
cit.in: Chemical Abstracts, 118, 35586c.

 Haeselbarth,  G.,  Michaelis,  H.  &  Salnikow,  J.
(1985).  Nachweis  von  Psilocybin  in  Inocybe
Mykologisches
aeruginascens 
Babos. 
Mitteilungsblatt, 28, 59-62.

Hohmeyer,  H.  (1984).  Inocybe  aeruginascens
Babos  in  Berlin(West)  gefunden.  Zeitschrift
fur Mykologie, 50, 211-214.

Kaspar,  R.  (1977).  Inocybe  aeruginascens  bei
Berlin-Kopenick  -  Erstfund  fur  die  DDR.
Mykologisches Mitteilungsblatt, 21, 99.

 Robbers, J.E., Brady, L.R. & Tyler, V.E. (1964).
A  chemical  &  chemotaxonomic  evaluation  of
Inocybe species. Lloydia, 27, 192.

 Semerdzieva, M., Wurst, M., Koza, T. & Gartz,
J.  (1986).  Psilocybin  in  Fruchtkorpern  von
Inocybe aeruginascens. Planta Medica, 47, 83-
85.

Stijve,  T.,  Klan,  J.  &  Kuyper,  Th.W.  (1985).
Occurrence  of  psilocybin  and  baeocystin  in
the genus Inocybe (Fr.)Fr. Persoonia, 12, 469-
473.

Stijve, T. & Kuyper, Th. W. (1985). Occurrence
of  psilocybin  in  various  higher  fungi  from
several  European  countries.  Planta  Medica,
46, 385-387.

10. Panaeolus

Aberdeen,  J.E.C.  &  Jones,  W. 

(1958).  A
hallucinogenic  toadstool.  Australian  Journal
of Science, 21, 149.

Benedict,  R.G.  &  Tyler,  V.E. 

(1962).
Examination of mycelial cultures of Panaeolus
species  for  tryptophan  hydroxylase  activity.
Lloydia, 25, 46-54.

Bergner,  H.  &  Oettel,  R.  (1971).  Vergiftungen
durch  Dungerlinge.  Mykologisches  Mittei-
lungsblatt (Germany), 15, 61-63.

Brodie, H.J. (1935). The heterothallism of Pana-
eolus  subbalteatus  Berk.,  a  sklerotium-pro-
ducing agaric. Canadian Journal of Research,
12, 657-666.

Ceruti-Scurti, J., Fuisselli, N. & Jodici, R. (1972).
in  basidiomiceti  3.

Idrossi-indol  derivati 
Allionia, 19, 91-96.

Ceruti-Scurti, 

J.  &  Bianco,  M.A. 

di  miceli 

(1973).
di

Caratteristiche 
colturali 
Panaeolus. Allionia, 19, 5.

Douglass, B. (1917). Mushroom poisoning.

Torreya, 17, 207-221.

Fiusello,  N.  &  Ceruti-Scurti,  J. 

(1971-72).
Idrossi-indol  derivati  in  basidiomiceti  1.  Atti
della Accad. science di Torino, 106, 725.

 Fiusello,  N.  &  Ceruti-Scurti,  J.  (1972).  Idrossi-
indol derivati in basidiomiceti 2. Allionia, 18,
85-90.

Gartz, J. (1985). Zum Nachweis der Inhaltsstoffe
Panaeolus.

der  Gattung 

einer 
Pharmazie, 40, 431.

Pilzart 

Gartz, J. (1985). Zur Analyse von Panaeolus

campanulatus (Fr.)Quel. Pharmazie, 40, 432.

Gartz, J. (1989). Analyse der Indolderivate in
     Fruchtkorpern and Mycelien von Panaeolus
    subbalteatus (Berk.& Br.)Sacc. Biochem. Physiol.
                         Pflanzen, 184, 171-178.
Gerhardt, E. (1987). Panaeolus cyanescens (Bk.&
antillarum
Br.)Sacc. 
(Fr.)Dennis, 
in
Mitteleuropa. Beitrdge zur Kenntnis der Pilze
Mitteleuropas, 3, 223-227.

Adventivarten 

Panaeolus 

zwei 

Glen,  G.  (1816).  A  case  proving  the  deleterious
effects  of  the  Agaricus  campanulatus  which
was mistaken for the Agaricus campestis or

and 

champignon. London Medical and Physical
Journal, 36, 451-453.

Gurevich,  L.S.  (1993).  Indole  derivatives  in
certain  Panaeolus  species  from  East  Europe
and  Siberia.  Mycological  Research,  97,  251-
254.

Heim, R., Hofmann,  A.  &  Tscherter,  H.  (1966).
Toxicologie: Sur une intoxication collective a
syndrome  psilocybien  causee  en  France  par
un  Copelandia.  C.R.  Acad.  Sci.  (D)  (Pars),
262, 519-523.

Murrill, W.A. (1916). A very dangerous
     mushroom. Mycologia, 8, 186-187.
Neuhoff, W. (1958). Eine Dungerlingsvergiftung
    in Bremen. Zeitschrift fur Pilzkunde, 24, 87-91.
Ola'h, G.M. (1970). Le genre Panaeolus. Rev.

Mycol., Hors-Serie 10, 1-222.

the 

Ott,  J.  &  Guzman,  G.  (1976).  Detection  of
psilocybin in species of Psilocybe, Panaeolus
and Psathyrella. Llyodia, 39, 258-260.

Pollock,  S.H.  (1974).  A  novel  experience  with
Panaeolus  -  a  case  study  from  Hawaii.
Journal of Psychedelic Drugs, 6, 85-89.

evidence 

 Repke, D.B., Leslie, D.T. & Guzman, G. (1977).
in  Psilocybe,  Conocybe  and

Baeocystin 
Panaeolus. Lloydia, 40, 566-578.

Robbers, J.E., Tyler, V.E. & Ola'h, G.M. (1969).
the
in  Panaeolus

Additional 
occurrence  of  psilocybin 
foenisecii. Lloydia, 32, 399-400.

supporting 

Singer,  R.  &  Smith,  A.H.  (1958).  About  the
identity  of 
"weed  Panaeolus"  or
"poisonous  Panaeolus".  Mycopathol.  Mycol.
Appl., 9, 280-284.

Stein,  S.I.,  Closs,  G.L.  &  Gabel,  N.W.  (1959).
Observations  on  psychoneurophysiologically
significant  mushrooms.  Mycopathol.  Mycol.
Applicata, 11, 205-216.

Stijve,  T.,  Hischenhuber,  C.  &  Ashley,  D.
(1984).  Occurrence  of  5-hydroxylated  indole
derivatives  in  Panaeolina  foenisecii  (Fries)
Kuehner  from  various  origins.  Zeitschrift  fur
Mykologie, 50, 361-368.
Stijve, T. (1985). Een chernische verkenning
van het geslacht Panaeolus. Coolia, 28, 81-89.
Stijve, T. (1987). Vorkommen von Serotonin,
Psilocybin and Harnstoff in Panaeoloideae.
Beitrdge zur Kenntnis der Pilze
Mitteleuropas, 3, 229-234.

Stijve,  T.  (1992).  Psilocin,  psilocybin,  serotonin
& urea in Panaeolus cyanescens from various
origins. Persoonia, 15, 117-121.

Tyler,  V.E.  &  Malone,  M.H.  (1960).  An  inves-
tigation of the culture, constituents & physio-
logical activity of Panaeolus campanulatus. J.
Amer. Pharm. Assoc., Sci. Ed., 49, 23-27.

Verrill, A.E. (1914). A recent case of mushroom

intoxication. Science, 40, 408-410.

Watling, R. (1977). A Panaeolus poisoning in

Scotland. Mycopathologia, 61, 187-190.

11. Pluteus

Gartz, J. (1987). Vorkommen von Psilocybin and
in  Fruchtkorpern  von  Pluteus

Baeocystin 
salicinus. Planta Medica, 53, 290-291.

Saupe,  S.G.  (1981).  Occurrence  of  psilocybin  /
in  Pluteus  salicinus  (Pluteaceae).

psilocin 
Mycologia, 73, 781-784.

Stijve,  T.  &  Bonnard,  J.  (1986).  Psilocybine  et
le  genre  Pluteus.  Mycologia

uree  dans 
Helvetica, 2, 123-129.

12. Psilocybe cyanescens Complex

Gartz,  J.  &  Muffler,  G.K.  (1989).  Analysis  and
cultivation  of  fruiting  bodies  and  mycelia  of
bohemica.  Biochem.  Physiol.
Psilocybe 
Pflanzen, 184, 337-341.

Guzman,  G.  &  Bas,  C.  (1977).  A  new  bluing
species of Psilocybe from Europe. Persoonia,
9, 233-238.

Krieglsteiner, G.J. (1984). Studien zum Psilocybe
cyanescens-Komplex  in  Europa.  Beitrdge  zur
Kenntnis der Pike Mitteleuropas, 1,61-94.

Krieglsteiner,  G.J.(1986).  Studien  zum  Psilocybe
cyanescens-callosa-semilanceata-Komplex 
in
Europa.  Beitrage  zur  Kenntnis  der  Pike
Mitteleuropas, 2, 57-72.

Kysilka,  R.,  Wurst,  M.,  Pacakova,  V.,  Stulik,  K.
&  Haskovec,  L.  (1985).  High-performance
chromatographic  determination  of
liquid 
hallucinogenic 
indoleamines  with  simulta-
neous UV, photometric and voltametric detec-
tion.  Journal  of  Chromatography,  320,  414-
420.

Kysilka,  R.  &  Wurst,  M. 

(1989).  High-
performance 
chromatographic
determination  of  some  psychotropic  indole
derivates.  Journal  of  Chromatography,  464,
434-437.

Kysilka,  R.  &  Wurst,  M.  (1990).  A  novel
for  psilocybin  and
extraction  procedure 
psilocin  determination  in  mushroom  samples.
Planta Medica, 56, 327-328.

Moser, M. & Horak, E. (1968). Psilocybe serbica
spec.  nov.,  eine  neue  Psilocybin  and  Psilocin
bildende  Art  aus  Serbien.  Zeitschrift 
fur
Pilzkunde, 34, 137-144.

liquid 

Muller, G.K. & Gartz, J. (1986). Psilocybe

cyanescens 
Kahlkopfart 
Mitteilungsblatt (Germany), 29, 33-35.

-  eine  weitere  halluzinogene
in  der  DDR.  Mykologisches

(1980).  Bohmischer  Kahlkopf,
Psilocybe  bohemica.  Ceska  Mykologie,  37,
177-181.

Sebek,  S. 

zweier 

Semerdzieva,  M.  &  Nerud,  F. 

(1973).
Halluzinogene Pilze in der Tschechoslowakei.
Ceska Mykologie, 27, 42-47.

Inhaltsstoffe 

Semerdzieva,  M.  &  Wurst,  M.  (1986).  Psycho-
trope 
Psilocybe-
Arten/Kahlkopfe  aus  der  CSSR.  Mykologi-
sches  Mitteilungsblatt  (Germany),  29,  65-70.
Tjallingii-Beukers,  D.  (1976).  Een  blauw-
wordernde  Psilocybe  (Psilocybe  cyanescens
Wakefield 1946). Coolia, 19, 38-43.

Unger,  S.E.  &  Cooks,  R.G.  (1979).  Application
of  mass  spectometry,  mass  spectometry
(MS/MS)  to  the  identification  of  natural
products  in  Psilocybe  cyanescens.  Analytical
Letters 12 (Part B), 1157-1167.

Wurst,  M.,  Kysilka,  R.  &  Koza,  T.  (1992).
Analysis  and  isolation  of  indole  alkaloids  of
fungi  by  high-performance  liquid  chromato-
graphy.  Journal  of  Chromatography,  593,
201-208.

13. Psilocybe semilanceata (Liberty Cap)

Brenneisen,  R.  &  Borner,  S.  (1988).  The  occur-
rence  of  tryptamine  derivatives  in  Psilocybe
semilanceata.  Zeitschrift  fur  Naturforschung,
43c, 511-515.

Brenneisen,  R.,  Borner,  S.,  Peter-Oesch,  N.  &
(1988).  Synthesis  of
Schlunegger,  U.P. 
baeocystin,  a  natural  psilocybin  analogue.
Arch. Pharm., 321, 487-489.

Christiansen, A.L., Rasmussen, K.E. & Hoiland,
K.  (1981).  The  content  of  psilocybin  in
Norwegian  Psilocybe  semilanceata.  Planta
Medica, 42, 229-235.

Christiansen,  A.L.,  Rasmussen,  K.E.  &
Tonnesen,  F. 
(1981).  Determination  of
psilocybin  in  Psilocybe  semilanceata  using
high-performance liquid chromatography on a
silica  column.  Journal  of  Chromatography,
210, 163-167.

Christiansen,  A.L.,  Rasmussen,  K.E.  (1982).
Analysis  of  indole  alkaloids  in  Norwegian
Psilocybe 
high-
performance liquid chromatography and mass
spectometry.  Journal  of  Chromatography,
244, 357-364.

semilanceata 

Christiansen,  A.L.,  Rasmussen,  K.E.  (1983).
Screening  of  hallucinogenic  mushrooms  with
high-performance liquid chromatography and

using 

multiple detection. Journal of Chromato-
graphy, 270, 293-299.

Cooke,  M.C.  (1902-06).  Agaric  transformations.
the  British  Mycological

Transactions  of 
Society, 2, 29-30.

Dawson P. & Morelli, C. (1975).  A Guide to the
Major  Psilocybin  Mushroom  of  British
Columbia: 
semilanceata.
Vancouver.

Psilocybe 

Fries, E.M. (1818). Observationes Mycologica.

Havniae.

J. 

Gartz,  J.  (1985).  Zur  Isolierung  des  Baeocystins
aus  den  Fruchtkorpern  einer  Psilocybeart.
Pharmazie, 40, 274.
(1985). 

and
Chromatographie  des  blauen  Farbstoffes  einer
Psilocybeart. Pharmazie, 40, 274-275.

Extraktion 

Gartz, J. (1985). Zur Untersuchung von Psilocybe

Gartz, 

Zur 

semilanceata (Fr.)Kumm. Pharmazie, 40,506.

Gartz,  J.  (1986).  Quantitive  Bestimmung  der
Indolderivate  von  Psilocybe 
semilanceata
(Fr.)Kumm.  Biochem.  Physiol.  Pflanzen,181,
117-124.

Gartz,  J. 

(1991).  Further 

investigations  on
psychoactive  mushrooms  of 
the  genera
Psilocybe,  Gymnopilus  and  Conocybe.  Ann.
Mus.  Civ.  Rovereto  (Italy)  Sez.  sc.  nat.,  7,
265-274.

Heim,  R.  (1971).  A  propos  des  proprietes
hailucinogenes  du  Psilocybe  semilanceata.
Naturaliste can., 98, 415-424.

Heim, R., Genest, K., Hughes, D.W. &  Belec,  G.
(1966). Botanical and chemical characterisation
of a forensic mushroom specimen of the genus
Psilocybe.  Journal  of  the  Forensic  Science
Society, 6, 192-201.

Hofmann,  A.,  Heim,  R.  &  Tscherter,  H.  (1963).
Presence  de  la  psilocybine  dans  une  espece
europeenne d'Agaric, le Psilocybe semilanceata.
Compt. Rend., 257, 10-12.

Hoiland,  K.  (1978).  The  genus  Psilocybe  in
Norway.  Norwegian  Journal  of  Botany,  25,
111-122.

Horak, E. (1968). Synopsis generumAgaricalium

(Die  Gattungstypen  der  Agaricales).  In:
Beitrage Kryptogamenflora Schweiz, 13. Bern.
Jokiranta,  J.,  Mustola,  S.,  Ohenoja,  E.  &
(1984).  Psilocybin 
in
semilanceata.  Planta

Airaksinen,  M.M. 
Finnish  Psilocybe 
Medica, 50, 277-278.

Mantle, P.G. & Waight, E.S. (1969).  Occurrence
of  psilocybin  in  the  sporophores  of  Psilocybe
semilanceata.  Transactions  of 
the  British
Mycological Society, 53, 302-303.

Michaelis,  H.  (1977).  Psilocybe  semilanceata
(Fr.)Quel.  (Spitzkegeliger  Kahlkopf)  -  Nach-
weis  von  Psilocybin  in  deutschen  Funden.
Zeitschrift fur Pilzkunde, 43, 305-310.

Repke, D.B. & Leslie, D.T. (1977). Baeocystin in
Psilocybe  semilanceata.  J.  Pharm.  Sci.,  66,
113-114.

Schumacher, T. (1976). Hallusinogene sopper.
Vare Nyttevekster (Norway), 71, 110-115.

Stahl, E., Brombeer, J. & Eskes, D. (1978).

Rauschgiftpilze mit LSD? Archiv Pr
Kriminologie, 162, 23-33.

Stijve, T. (1984). Psilocybe semilanceata als
      hallucinogene paddestoel. Coolia, 27, 36-43.
     Vanhaelen-Fastre, R. & Vanhaelen, M. (1984).
     Qualitative and quantitative determinations of
     hallucinogenic components of Psilocybe
     mushrooms by reversed-phase highperformance
     liquid chromatography. Journal of
     Chromatography, 312, 467-472.
Weil, A.T. (1975). Mushroom hunting in Oregon
3: On the trail of the Liberty Cap. Journal of
Psychedelic  Drugs,  7,  96-102.  White,  P.C.
(1979).  Analysis  of  extracts  from  Psilocybe
liquid
semilanceata 
of
chromatography. 
Chromatography, 169, 453-456.

high-pressure 

Wurst, M., Semerdzieva, M. & Vokoun, J. (1984).
Analysis  of  psychotropic  compounds  in  fungi
of the genus Psilocybe by reversed phase high-
performance  liquid  chromatography.  Journal
of Chromatography, 286, 229-235.

Journal 

by 

INDEX (With Active Links' Just Click On A Number To Go To A Page)

Page numbers in italics refer to illustrations

Aberdeen, J.E.C. & Jones, W. 84
Accidental intoxications, 15, 16, 37-38, 45, 51, 61, 88-

Coprinarius semilanceatus, 16
Cortinariaceae, 53
Cox, P.A., 98
Cross-breeding experiments, 30, 67
Cullinan, E.R., 96
Cultivation, 62, 66-75, 81, 90, 98, 101
DAWN, 81
DNA analysis, 30
Dikaryotic mycelia, 65
Dipropyltryptamine, 110
Drewitz, G., 44ff, 65
Entheogens, 103
Enzymatic destruction, 63, 65
Enzymes, 63, 65
Epilepsy, 102
Experiences, 25-26, 34-35, 37-38, 42-43, 45-46, 51,

85-86, 90, 93-94, 102, 105, 110-111

Ferencz, I. , 44
Fischer, R., 103, 105, 106
Flammer, R., 115
Flammula purpurata, 52
Flashbacks, 103-104
Fly Agaric, 10-11, 26, 58, 100
Fool's mushrooms, 7, 11-12, 82, 98
Foolish mushrooms, 12
Ford, W.W., 81
Francis, J. & Murray, V.S.G., 89
Fries, E., 16, 31
Fruiting, 66-70
Furrer, 18
Galera spp., 55
Galerina spp., 61-62
Galerina autumnalis, 61
Galerina marginata, 62
Gentamycin, 67
Geophila cyanescens, 29
Gerhardt, E., 41, 42
Gold tops, 85
Good Friday experiment, 34
Grof, S., 26, 35, 103-104, 108, 110
Guzman, G., 18, 29-30, 38, 43, 55, 62, 80, 82, 100
Gymnopilus spp., 51-54, 63, 71, 72, 93
Gymnopilus junonius, 51
Gymnopilus purpuratus, 30, 40, 51-54, 63, 71, 72
Gymnopilus spectabilis, 51-52, 93
Gymnopilus validipes, 52
HPLC, see High-performance liquid chromatography
Hallucinations, 10-11, 27, 42, 45, 51, 85, 94
Hallucinogens, 10-13, 26, 34, 88-89, 102-105, 108-

112,115

Hatfield, G.M., 51
Hausner, M., 107, 109

 89, 93-94, 102

Aeruginascin, 49
Agaricales, 65, 114
Agaricus campanulatus, 37
Agaricus glutinosus, 16
Agaricus semilanceatus, 16
Agaricus subbalteatus, 37
Alkaloids, 9, 13, 18, 26, 27, 31, 36, 41, 49-50, 55-56,

58-59, 63-65, 69, 88, 102-105, 114

Allen, J.W., 43, 81, 100
Amanita muscaria, 10-11, 115
Amanita phalloides, 61-62
Amanitaceae, 58
Armillaria mellea, 51, 93
Babos, M., 46f, 47
Bad trip, 35, 85f
Badham, E.R., 70
Baeocystin, 28, 31, 35-36, 41-42, 49-50, 53, 56, 59,

63, 69, 72, 101-102, 114

Berserkers, 11
Beug, M.W., 56, 61, 79
Bigwood, J., 56, 61, 79
Biochemical reactions (psilocin and psilocybin), 63
Blue meanies, 85
Bluing, 63-65
Bolbitiaceae, 55
Boletes (bluing), 65, 66
Bolond Gomba, 11
Brande, E. 15, 16
Brassinosteroids, 70
Brodie, H.J., 69
Bwyd Ellylon, 10
Cailleux, R. 66-67, 69
Carter, M., 87
Champignon (Agaricus bisporis), 21, 37, 62, 67, 69
Charters, A.D., 96
Chemical races, 41
Chilton, J.S., 70, 72
Cleland, J., 84
Clusius, 11
Conocybe spp., 55-56, 63, 69
Conocybe cyanopoda, 55
Conocybe cyanopus, 55-56, 57, 63, 69
Conocybe lactea, 56
Conocybe siligineodes, 55
Conocybe tenera, 56
Contamination, 70
Cooke, M.C., 16, 52, 63, 87
Copelandia spp., 42
Coprinaceae, 55

Heim, R., 9, 18, 38, 55-56, 66-67, 69, 79, 82, 100
Henry, D., 96
Herink, J., 31, 44
High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC),18
Hofmann, A., 9, 13, 18, 43, 63, 69, 100, 103
Hyde, C., 87
5-Hydroxy-tryptophan, 41
Hygrophanous species, 19, 22, 31, 39, 41
Hypholoma spp., 29, 96
Hypholoma coprinifacies, 29
Hypholoma cyanescens, 29, 96
Hypnosis, 115
Illusions, 45
Imai, S., 93
Indole compounds, 41-42, 43, 65, 114
Inocybe spp., 26, 44-50, 62-65, 72-75, 81, 89, 91
Inocybe aeruginascens, 26, 44-50, 48, 62-65, 72,
            74-75, 91, 117
Inocybe calamistrata, 50
Inocybe coelestium, 50
Inocybe corydalina, 50
Inocybe geophylla, 89
Inocybe haemacta, 50, 52
Inocybe infelix, 81
Inocybe infida, 81
Inocybe patouillardi, 45
Inocybe tricolor, 50
Inquisition, 7, 10
Kaspar, R., 44
Kneebone, L.R., 69
Kreisel, H., 58
Krieglsteiner, G.J., 14, 30, 32, 96
Kubicka, 31
LBM's (Little Brown Mushrooms), 44, 61
LD 50, 102
LSD, 13, 35, 81, 85, 87, 89, 101-105, 108-112, 113
Laccase, 63
Laminar flow hood, 67
Leary, T., 12, 81, 103
Lentinus oreades (shiitake), 93
Leuner, H., 108-109
Liberty cap, 34, 79, 87
MDMA, 109
Maire, R., 96
Maitake, 93
Malencon, G., 96
Malt agar, 43, 56, 68, 69
Marasmius oreades, 45
McKenna, T., 95
Melzer's reagent, 65
Merlin, M.D., 100
Mescaline, 89, 102-103, 105, 108
Metol reaction, 63-65
Michael & Schulz, 18, 19, 38, 39
Michaelis. H.. 18. 19, 20

Mills, P.R., 87
Monokaryotic mycelium, 66
Morphine, 112
Murrill, W.A., 37, 81
Muscarine, 44-45, 49, 62, 65, 81, 85, 89
Mycelia, 7-8, 21-22, 30-31, 34, 41-42, 43, 63-67, 69-

70, 72, 75, 93, 98, 101
Mycelial degeneration, 72, 75
Mycena spp., 114
Mycophilia, 7, 12, 62
Mycophobia, 8, 12, 62
Mycorrhiza, 46, 66, 72
Naematoloma caerulescens, 100
Nerud, F., 36
Norbaeocystin, 102 Ola'h,
G.M., 41, 96, 100
Ololiuqui, 109
Oss, O.T. & Oeric, O.N., 66, 90
Ott, J
Pahnke, W., 34
Panaeolus spp., 16, 35-43, 62, 65, 69, 72, 76, 80-81,

,80, 102

82, 84-85, 94, 96, 98, 100-101

Panaeolus africanus, 96
Panaeolus cambodginiensis, 100
Panaeolus cyanescens, 41, 42, 43, 80-81, 82, 84-85,

                   96, 98,101

Panaeolus foeniscecii, 38, 41-42
Panaeolus ovatus, 38, 84
Panaeolus papilionaceus, 37, 93
Panaeolus retirugis, 38, 41
Panaeolus semilanceatus, 16
Panaeolus sphinctrinus, 38
Panaeolus subbalteatus, 6, 37-43, 62, 65, 69, 72, 76,

80-81, 84, 94, 96

Panaeolus  tropicales,  96
Panaeolus  variabilis,  41
Panaeolus  venenosus,  37
Parkinson, J., 12
Peden, N.R., 88
Peyote, 109
Phantastica, 102ff
Pholiota spectabilis, 51
Pholiotina filaris, 62
Picker & Rickards, 84
Pluteaceae, 58
Pluteus spp., 58-60
Pluteus nigroviridis, 59
Pluteus salicinus, 58-60, 59, 60
Pollock, S.H., 83
Potocki, V., 12
Prague research, 26, 34
Primordia, 67
Psathyrella, 38
Psilocin 9, 26, 27, 31, 34-36, 41-42, 43, 49, 53,

55-56, 58, 63-66, 69-70, 75, 79, 84,102,
114

Saprophytic species, 55, 58, 66-67, 69, 72
Saupe, S.G., 59
Saxo Grammaticus, 11
Schroeder, R.F., 100
Sclerotia, 56, 57, 69, 73, 72, 75, 117
Semerdzieva, M., 36
Serotonin, 41-42, 43, 59, 84
Siegel, R., 105
Sinden, J., 70
Singer, R., 38, 42, 43, 53, 63-65, 69, 94, 96
Smith, A.H., 63, 79, 94, 96
Soma, 100 Sowerby, J., 16, 17
Spore prints, 38, 62, 81
Spores, 29-30, 38, 41, 52-53, 55-56, 62, 66-67, 70,

72, 100

Stamets, P., 70, 72, 80, 102
Sterile conditions (cultivation), 67ff
Stijve, T., 41-42, 43, 58-59
Stropharia spp., 29, 38, 62, 93, 95-96
Stropharia caerulescens, 93
Stropharia rugoso-annulata, 38, 62
Stropharia venenata, 93
Styrylpyrones, 51
Submersed fermentation, 69
Surface cultivation, 69
Symbiosis (with plants), 46, 72
TLC, see Thin-layer chromatography
Tassili rock paintings, 8, 95ff, 97
Taxonomy, 9, 41ff, 82-83, 94, 101
Teonanacatl (Panaeolus sphinctrinus), 7, 12, 38
Thin-layer chromatography (TLC), 36, 41-42, 49, 53
Toxic psychosis, 103
Toxicity, 38, 102, 109
Tryptophan, 66, 69
Tyler, V.E., 79
Urea, 42, 59
Wakefield, 29
Waraitake, 93
Wasson, R.G., 7, 9, 12, 31, 38, 82, 100, 106, 111
Watling, R., 38, 89
Weil, A., 43
Widmer, S., 108
Witch hunts, 10-11, 92
Yokoyama, K., 94
Young, R.E., 88

Psilocybe spp., 4,  5, 9, 10 -12, 14-15, 16-28,  17, 23-
24, 29-37, 32-33, 36, 46, 49, 52-53, 56, 61-
67, 64, 68, 69-70, 71, 73, 72-75, 74, 76-77,
79-81, 82-91,  93-98, 99, 100-102, 104,
109, 113, 114-115, 116, 119

Psilocybe argentipes, 94
Psilocybe aztecorum, 82
Psilocybe azurescens, 81
Psilocybe baeocystis, 27, 31, 69, 79, 102, 119
Psilocybe bohemica, 12, 22, 27, 29, 31, 32-33,
             34-36,53, 63, 67, 71, 72, 104, 109
Psilocybe caerulescens, 16, 31
Psilocybe cubensis, 5, 63-65, 64, 67, 68, 69-70, 71,
72, 74, 75, 76-77, 81, 82-85, 90, 93, 96-97,
98, 100-101, 104, 109, 114

Psilocybe cyanescens, 14, 29-36, 32-33, 66-67, 69,

75, 80, 91, 96, 102, 114

Psilocybe mairei, 29, 96
Psilocybe mexicana, 18, 49, 67, 72, 82, 91, 113
Psilocybe natalensis, 72, 97
Psilocybe pelliculosa, 31, 79
Psilocybe samuiensis, 99, 101
Psilocybe semilanceata, 4, 9, 10-12, 15, 16-28, 17,
23-24, 29-30, 37, 46, 52-53, 56, 61-66, 69,
73, 72, 79-81, 87-89, 95-96, 98, 101-102,
109, 114-115, 116
Psilocybe semperviva, 16
Psilocybe serbica, 29
Psilocybe stuntzii, 31, 61-62, 77, 80, 119
Psilocybe subaeruginosa, 84-86
Psilocybe subcaerulipes, 94
Psilocybe subcubensis, 100-101
Psilocybe tampanensis, 72, 117
Psilocybe yungensis, 52
Psilocybe zapotecorum, 69
Psilocybin, 7, 9, 10-13, 20, 27, 29, 31, 34-38,

 41-42,

43, 45-46, 49-50, 52-56, 58-59, 63-65,
79-81, 84-85,  87-90, 93-94,  102-105,
108-112, 114-115

Psychedelic therapy, 102-105, 108-112
Psychedelics, 103, 112
Psychiatry, 89,108
Psychoactivity, 11, 26, 27, 31, 51, 103
Psychoanalysis, 109
Psychodysleptica, 103
Psycholytic experience, 35, 102-105, 110-111
Psycholytic therapy, 35, 102-105, 108-112
Psychosynthesis, 109
Psychotherapy, 26, 102-105, 108-112
Receptors (in the brain), 102
Rhizomorphs, 31, 32, 66, 75
Ricken, A., 18, 20, 58
Robbins, T., 79
Roquet, S., 110
Samorini, G., 10, 95, 114
Sandoz Pharmaceuticals, 13, 43

Acknowledgments

I am particularly grateful to Claudia Taake. Without her translation, her technical support and
our stimulating, creative discussions, the publication of this book in its present form would not have been
possible.

I want to thank Scott Bradbury for his contribution of original artwork on both covers and on

page 1, and for assisting with cover design and layout.

I am grateful to several individuals who introduced me to mycology; special thanks are due

those who have provided me with a number of extremely rare mushroom samples for my research. I am
most grateful to Gerhard Drewitz of Caputh (Berlin) for his helpful observations on the taxonomy and
toxicology of the Inocybe species. For more than 10 years, he has furnished me with rare mushroom
specimens for chemical analyses. I am thankful for our many joint excursions into the world of
mushrooms.

Gerd K. Muller (Leipzig, Germany) has deepened my understanding of the mushrooms's purpose
and  position  in  the  natural  world.  It  was  our  collaboration  at  the  University  of  Leipzig,  and  an
opportunity to deposit mushroom material at the Leipzig Herbarium that resulted in the discovery of new
frontiers in mycological research.

For  contributing  valuable  data  on  natural  products  chemistry,  taxonomy  and  medical
applications for psychedelics, I am indebted to the late Marta Semerdzieva, who died in 1994, as well as
to Milan Hausner and Josef Herink in the Czech Republic. I cherish the memories of our collaboration
and our joint field research expeditions.

I want to thank John W. Allen (Hawaii) for generously sharing many photographs and his expert
knowledge of the mycofloras in North America, Hawaii and Asia. I sincerely wish to thank my friends in
Switzerland, Rita C. Zengaffmen and Udo Kinzel, for all their contributions. I want to thank Michael W.
Smith (Pietermaritzburg, South Africa) for our collaborative field research in South Africa in January,
1994. I am grateful to Paul Stamets (Olympia, WA) for his contribution of mushroom photographs. For
their expertise and for providing valuable information I also wish to thank Albert Hofmann, who
discovered psilocybin and psilocin (Burg, Switzerland); as well as Jonathan Ott (Xalapa, Mexico);
Hanscarl Leuner (Gottingen, Germany); Christian Ratsch (Hamburg, Germany); Alexander T. Shulgin
(Lafayette, CA); and Giorgio Samorini (Bologna, Italy).

Finally, my heartfelt gratitude goes to Irmgard Richter, for her years of support and for enduring

my unbridled mycophilia.

LIS Publications wishes to thank the following individuals and businesses who have helped make this book
possible:  Brad  Falk,  Scott  Bradbury,  Angelica  Biddle, Ronda  Flanzbaum,  Tim  Matthews,  David  Cronk,  Kerstin
Taake, FS Books, Knockabout Comics, Mind Books and Rosetta Books.

PHOTO AND ILLUSTRATION CREDITS (listed by Figure #)

2, 4, 24, 29, 39, 54, 56, 72: Photographs by John W. Allen.

5, 55, 59: Courtesy of Giorgio Samorini.

20, 23, 38: Courtesy of German J. Krieglsteiner.

34: Photograph by Gerhard Drewitz.

36: Photograph by Paul Stamets.

61: Illustration by Claudia Taake.

64, 70: Courtesy of Albert Hofmann.

65: Courtesy of Marta Semerdzieva.

68: Photograph by Gerd K. Miller.

Front Cover by Scott Bradbury

Back cover photograph by Michael T. Smith.

Drawing on page 2 by Scott Bradbury.

All other photographs and illustrations by the author.

