Introduction to Mushroom Culture/1

CHAPTER  I

INTRODUCTION TO

MUSHROOM  CULTURE

Figure  0  Wall  of Pleurotus ostreatus fruitbodies.

2/The Mushroom Cultivator

MOUND

BED!  CULTURE

Figure  1  Diagram  illustrating  overview  of  general  techniques  for  the  cultivation  of
mushrooms.

Introduction  to  Mushroom  Culture/3

AN OVERVIEW OF TECHNIQUES
FOR  MUSHROOM  CULTIVATION

Techniques  for  cultivating  mushrooms,  whatever  the  species,  follow  the  same  basic  pattern.

Whereas two  species may differ  in  temperature  requirements,  pH  preferences or the substrate
on which they grow, the steps leading to fruiting are essentially the same. They can be summarized
as follows:

1.  Preparation  and  pouring  of agar  media  into  petri  dishes.

2.  Germination  of  spores  and  isolation  of  pure  mushroom  mycelium.

3.  Expansion  of  mycelial  mass  on  agar  media.

4.  Preparation  of  grain  media.

5. 

Inoculation  of  grain  media  with  pure  mycelium  grown  on  agar  media.

6. 

Incubation  of  inoculated  grain  media  (spawn).

7.  A.  Laying  out  grain  spawn  onto  trays,

or
B.  Inoculation  of grain  spawn  into  bulk  substrates.

8.  Casing—covering  of substrate with  a  moist mixture of peat and  other materials.

9. 

Initiation—lowering  temperature,  increasing  humidity  to  95%,  increasing air circulation,
decreasing carbon dioxide and/or introducing light.

10.  Cropping—maintaining  temperature,  lowering  humidity  to  85-92%,  maintaining  air  cir-

culation,  carbon dioxide and/or light levels.

With many species moderate crops can be produced on cased grain cultures. Or, the cultivator
can  go one step further and inoculate compost,  straw or wood.  In either case, the fruiting of mush-
rooms  requires  a  high  humidity  environment that can  be  readily  controlled.  Without  proper  mois-
ture,  mushrooms  don't  grow.

In the subsequent chapters standard  methods for germinating spores are discussed, followed by
Techniques for growing  mycelium  on  agar,  producing  grain  and/or  bran  "spawn",  preparing  com-
posted and non-composted substrates, spawn running, casing and pinhead formation. With this last
step the methods for fruiting various species diverge and techniques specific to each mushroom are
individually outlined. A trouble-shooting guide helps cultivators identify and solve problems that are
commonly encountered. This is followed by a thorough analysis of the contaminants and pests of
mushroom culture and a  chapter explaining the  nature of mushroom genetics.  In  all,  the book  is a
system  of  knowledge  that  integrates  the  various  techniques  developed  by  commercial  growers
worldwide  and  makes the  cultivation  of  mushrooms  at  home  a  practical  endeavor.

4/The Mushroom Cultivator

MUSHROOMS  AND  MUSHROOM  CULTURE

Mushrooms  inspire  awe  in  those  encountering  them.  They  seem  different.  Neither  plant-like
nor animal-like, mushrooms have a texture, appearance and manner of growth all their own. Mush-
rooms represent a small branch in the evolution of the fungal kingdom Eumycota and are common-
ly known as the "fleshy fungi".  In fact, fungi are non-photosynthetic organisms that evolved from
algae. The primary role of fungi in the ecosystem is decomposition,  one organism in a succession
of  microbes that  break  down  dead  organic  matter.  And  although  tens  of thousands  of fungi  are
know,  mushrooms constitute only a small fraction,  amounting to a few thousand species.

Regardless of the species, several steps are universal to the cultivation of all mushrooms. Not

surprisingly, these initial steps directly reflect the life cycle of the mushroom.  The role of the culti-
vator is to isolate a particular mushroom species from the highly competitive natural world and im-
plant  it  in  an  environment  that  gives  the  mushroom  plant  a  distinct  advantage  over  competing
organisms. The three major steps in the growing of mushrooms parallel three phases in their life cy-
cle. They are:

1.  Spore  collection,  spore  germination  and  isolation  of  mycelium;  or tissue  cloning.
2.  Preparation  of inoculum  by the expansion  of mycelial  mass on  enriched agar media and
then on grain. Implantation of grain spawn into composted and uncomposted substrates or
the use of grain as a fruiting substrate.

3.  Fruitbody  (mushroom)  initiation  and  development.

Having  a  basic  understanding  of the  mushroom  life  cycle  greatly  aids the  learning  of techniques
essential  to  cultivation.

Mushrooms are the fruit of the mushroom plant, the mycelium. A mycelium is a vast network
of interconnected cells that permeates the ground and lives perenially. This resident mycelium only
produces fruitbodies,  what are  commonly called  mushrooms,  under optimum  conditions of tem-
perature,  humidity and  nutrition.  For the  most part,  the parent mycelium  has but one recourse for
insuring  the survival of the  species:  to  release enormous  numbers of spores. This is accomplished
through  the  generation  of  mushrooms.

In the life cycle of the mushroom plant, the fruitbody occurs briefly. The mycelial network can
sit dormant for months, sometimes years and may only produce a single flush of mushrooms. Dur-
ing those few weeks of fruiting,  the  mycelium  is in a frenzied state of growth,  amassing nutrients and
forming dense  ball-like  masses called  primorida that eventually enlarge into the towering  mush-
room  structure.  The  gills  first  develop  from  the  tissue  on  the  underside  of the  cap,  appearing  as
folds, then becoming blunt ridges and eventually extending into flat, vertically aligned plates. These
efficiently arranged symmetrical gills are populated with spore producing cells called  basidia.

From a structural point of view, the mushroom is an efficient reproductive body. The cap acts
as a domed shield protecting the underlying gills from the damaging effects of rain, wind and sun.
Covering the gills in  many species is a well developed layer of tissue called the  partial veil which
extends from the cap margin to the stem. Spores start falling from the gills just before the partial veil
tears. After the partial veil has fallen, spores are projected from the gills in ever increasing numbers.

Introduction To Mushroom Culture/5

HVPHAL  KNOT

PINHEAD

PRIMORDIUM

FRUITBODY

Figure 2  The  Mushroom  Life  Cycle.

6/The Mushroom Cultivator

The cap is supported by a  pillar-like stem  That elevates the gills above ground where the spores can
be  carried  off  by  the  slightest wind  currents.  Clearly,  every  part  of the  mushroom  fruitbody  is  de-
signed to give the spores the  best opportunity to  mature and spread  in  an  external environment that
is  often  harsh  and  drastically fluctuating.

As  the  mushroom  matures,  spore  production  slows  and  eventually  stops.  At  this  time  mush-
rooms are  in  their  last  hours  of life.  Soon  decay from  bacteria  and  other fungi  sets in,  reducing the
once  majestic  mushroom  into  a  soggy  mass  of  fetid  tissue  that  melts  into  the  ground  from  which  it
sprung.

THE  MUSHROOM  LIFE  CYCLE

Cultivating  mushrooms  is  one  of  The  best  ways  to  observe  the  entirety  of  the  Mushroom  Life
Cycle.  The  life cycle first starts with  a spore which  produces a primary  mycelium.  When the myce-
lium originating from two spores mates, a secondary mycelium is produced. This mycelium con-
tinues  to  grow  vegetatively.  When  vegetative  mycelium  has  matured,  its  cells  are  capable  of  a
phenomenal  rate of reproduction which culminates in The erection of mushroom fruitbody. This
represents the last functional change and it has become,  in effect, tertiary mycelium. These Types of
mycelia  represent The Three major phases in The progression of The mushroom  life cycle.

Most  mushrooms  produce  spores  that  are  uninucleate  and  genetically  haploid  (1N).  This
means  each  spore  contains  one  nucleus  and  has  half the  complement  of chromosomes  for the
species.  Thus spores have a  "sex"  in  that each  has to mate with  mycelia from another spore  Type to
be ferTile for producing offspring. When spores are first released they are fully inflated "moist" cells
that can easily germinate.  Soon they dehydrate,  collapsing at their centers and in this phase they can
sit dormant Through  long periods of dry weaTher or severe drought. When weather conditions pro-

Figure  3  Scanning  electron  micrograph
of Russula spores.

Figure  4  Scanning  electron  micrograph
of Entoloma  spores.

Introduction  to Mushroom  Culture/7

vide a sufficiently moist environment, the spores rehydrate and fully inflate. Only then is germination
possible.

Spores within  an  individual species are fairly constant in  their shape and structure.  However,
many  mushroom  species  differ  remarkably  in  their  spore  types.  Some  are  smooth  and  lemon
shaped  (in  the  genus  Copelandia,  for  instance);  many  are  ellipsoid  (as  in  the  genus  Psilocybe);
while others are highly ornamented and irregularly shaped (such as (hose in Lactarius or Entoloma}.
A feature common  to the  spores of many  mushrooms,  particularly the psilocybian  species,  is the
formation  of an  apical  germ  pore.

The germ  pore,  a  circular depression  at one  end  of the spore,  is the site of germination  from
which  a  haploid  strand  of  mycelium  called  a  hypha  emanates.  This  hypha  continues  to  grow,
branches and becomes a  mycelial network. When two sexually complementary hyphal networks
intercept one another and make contact, cell walls separating the two hyphal systems dissolve and
cytoplasmic and  genetic  materials are  exchanged.  Erotic or not,  this  is  "mushroom  sex".  Hence-
forth,  all  resulting  mycelium  is  binucleate  and  dikaryotic.  This  means  each  cell  has  two  nuclei
and  a  full  complement of chromosomes.  With  few exceptions,  only  mated  (dikaryotic)  mycelia  is
fertile and capable of producing fruitbodies. Typically,  dikaryotic mycelia is faster running and  more

1 Oi^BHMHiMiH^K 

..^^JIMHBHM^BBM

Figure  5  High  resolution  scanning  electron  micrograph  showing  germ  pores  of
Psilocybe pelliculosa  spores.

8/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figure 6  Scanning  electron  micrograph of a Psilocybe baeocystis spore germinating.

vigorous  than  unmated,  monokaryotic  mycelia.  Once  a  mycelium  has  entered  into  the  dikaryo-
phase, fruiting can occur shortly thereafter.  In Psilocybe cubensis, the time between spore germina-
tion  and  fruitbody  initials can  be as  brief as two weeks;  in  some  Panaeolus  species only a  week
transpires  before  mushrooms appear.  Most  mushroom  species,  however,  take  several  weeks or
months  before  mushrooms  can  be  generated  from  the  time  of spore  germination.

Cultivators interested in developing new strains by crossing single spore isolates take advantage
of  the  occurrence  of  clamp  connections  to  tell  whether  or  not  mating  has  taken  place.  Clamp
connections are microscopic bridges that protrude from  one adjoining cell  to anothei  and are only
found  in  dikaryotic  mycelia.  Clamps  can  be  readily  seen  with  a  light  microscope  at  100-400X
magnification.  Not all  species form  clamp connections.  (Agaricus  brunnescens does not;  most all
Psilocybe  and  Panaeolus  species  do).  In  contrast,  mycelia  resulting  from  haploid  spores  lack
clamps. This feature is an invaluable tool for the researcher developing new strains. (For more infor-
mation  on  breeding  strategies,  see Chapter XV.)

Two dikaryotic mycelial networks can also grow together, exchange genetic material and form
a new strain. Such an encounter, where two hyphal systems fuse, is known as anastomosis. When
two  incompatible  colonies  of mycelia  meet,  a  zone  of  inhibited  growth  frequently forms.  On  agar
media,  this zone of incompatibility  is visible to the  unaided  eye.

Introduction  To  Mushroom  Culture/9

Figure 7  Scanning electron micrograph of hyphae emanating from a bed of germinat-
ing  Psilocybe  cubensis  spores.

When a mycelium produces mushrooms, several radical changes in its metabolism occurs. Up
to this point, the mycelium has been growing vegetatively. In the vegetative state, hyphal cells are
amassing  nutrients.  Curiously,  there is a gradual  increase  in the number of nuclei  per cell,  some-
times to as many as ten just prior to the formation  of mushrooms.  Immediately  before fruitbodies
form, new cell walls divide the nuclei, reducing Their number per cell to an average of Two. The high
number of nuclei per cell in pre-generative mycelia seems to be a prerequisite for fruiting in many
mushroom  species.

As the gills mature, basidia cells emerge in ever increasing numbers, first appearing as small
bubble-like  cells and  resembling  cobblestones on  a  street.  The  basidia  are  the focal  point in  the  re-
productive phase of the mushroom  life cycle. The basidia,  however,  do not mature all at once.  In
the  genus  Panaeolus  for  instance,  the  basidia  cells  mature  regionally,  giving  the  gill  surface  a
spotted look. The cells giving rise to the basidia are Typically binucleate, each  nucleus is haploid
(1N) and the cell is said to be dikaryotic. The composition of the young basidia cells are similar. At a
specific point in time, the Two nuclei in The basidium migrate towards one another and merge into a
single diploid (2N) nucleus. This event is known as karyogamy. Soon thereafter, the diploid nu-
cleus  undergoes  meiosis  and  typically  produces  four  haploid  daughter  cells.

10/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figure 8,  9,  &  10  Scanning electron  micrographs of the  mycelial  network of Psilocybe
cubensis.  Note hyphal  crossings and  clamp connections.

Introduction  to  Mushroom  Culture/11

On  the  surface  of the  basidia,  arm-like  projections  called  sterigmatae  arise  through  which
these  nuclei  then  migrate.  In  most  species four  spores  form  at  the  tips  of these  projections.  The
spores continue to develop until they are forcefully liberated from the basidia and propelled into free
space. The mechanism for spore release has not yet been  proven.  But,  the model most widely ac-
cepted within  the  mycological  community is one where a  "gas bubble" forms at the junction  of the
spore and the sterigmata. This gas bubble inflates, violently explodes and jettisons the spore into the
cavity  between  the  gills where  it is  taken  away  by air currents.  Most commonly,  sets of opposing
spores are released  in this manner.  With spore release, the life cycle is completed.

Not  all  mushroom  species  have  basidia 

that  produce  four  haploid  spores.  Agaricus
brunnescens  (=  Agaricus  bisporus),  the  common  button  mushroom,  has  basidia  with  two  diploid
(2N)  spores.  This  means each  spore can  evolve into a  mycelium  that is fully  capable  of producing
mushrooms. Agaricus brunnescens is one example of a diploid bipolar species. Some Copelandian
Panaeoli  (the  strongly  bluing  species  in  the  genus  Panaeolus)  are  two  spored  and  have  mating
properties  similar  to  Agaricus  brunnescens.  Other  mushrooom  species  have  exclusively  three
spored  basidia;  some  have five  spored  basidia;  and a few,  like the common  Chantarelle,  have as
many as eight spores per basidium!

An  awareness of the  life cycle will  greatly  aid  beginning  cultivators  in  their initial attempts to
cultivate mushrooms.  Once a  basic understanding of mushroom culture and the life processes of
these organisms is achieved, cultivators can progress to more advanced subjects like genetics, strain
selection  and  breeding.  This wholistic  approach  increases  the  depth  of  one's  understanding  and
facilitates development of innovative approaches to mushroom cultivation.

Figure  11,  12  &  13  Scanning  electron  micrographs  showing  the development ot the

and  spores  in  Ramaria  longispora,  a  coral  fungus.

12/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figure  14  Scanning  electron  micrograph  of  mature  basidium  in  Panaeofus  foenisecii.

Figure  15a,  15b  Scanning  electron  micrographs  showing  basidium  of  Psilocybe
pelliculosa.  Note spore/sterigmata junction.

Introduction to Mushroom Culture/13

Figure 16  Scanning electron micrograph of two spored basidium of an as yet unpub-
lished  species  closely  related  to  Copelandia  cyanescens.  Note  "shadow"  nuclei  visible
within each spore.

Figure  17  Scanning  electron  micrograph  of the gill  surface of  Cantharellus cibarius.
Note  six  and  eight spored  basidia.

Sterile Technique and Agar Culture/15

CHAPTER  II

STERILE TECHNIQUE
AND  AGAR  CULTURE

Figure  18  A  home  cultivator's  pantry  converted  into  a  sterile  laboratory.

16/The Mushroom Cultivator

The air we breathe is a living sea of microscopic organisms that ebbs and flows with the slightest

wind currents.  Fungi, bacteria, viruses and plants use the atmosphere to carry their offspring to
new  environments.  These  microscopic  particles  can  make  sterile  technique  difficult  unless  proper
precautions are taken,  [f one can eliminate or reduce the  movement of these organisms  in  the air,
however, success in sterile technique is assured.

There  are  five  primary  sources  of contamination  in  mushroom  culture  work:
1.  The  immediate  external  environment
2.  The  culture  medium
3.  The  culturing  equipment
4.  The  cultivator  and  his  or  her  clothes
5.  The  mushroom  spores  or  the  mycelium
Mushrooms—and all  living organisms—are in  constant competition for available nutrients.  In
creating  a  sterile  environment,  the  cultivator  seeks  to  give  advantage  to  the  mushroom  over  the
myriad  legions of other competitors.  Before culture work can  begin,  the first step is the construction
of  an  inoculation  chamber  or  sterile  laboratory.

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF

A  STERILE  LABORATORY

The  majority  of cultivators fail  because they  do  not take the time to construct a  laboratory for
sterile work. An afternoon's work is usually all that is required to convert a walk-in closet, a pantry or
a  small  storage  room  into  a  workable  inoculation  chamber.

Begin  by  removing  all  rugs,  curtains  and  other  cloth-like  material  that can  harbor  dust  and

spores.  Thoroughly  clean  the  floors,  walls  and  ceiling  with  a  mild  disinfectant.  Painting  the  room
with  a  high  gloss  white  enamel  will  make  future  cleaning  easier.  Cover  windows  or  any  other
sources of potential air leaks with plastic sheeting. On either side of the room's entrance, using plas-
tic sheeting or other materials, construct an antechamber which serves as an airlock. This acts as a
protective  buffer between  the  laboratory and the outside environment.  The chamber should  be de-
signed so that the sterile room door is closed while the anteroom is entered. Equip the lab with these
items:

1.  a chair and a sturdy table with a smooth  surface
2.  a  propane  torch,  an  alcohol  lamp,  a  bunsen  burner  or  a  butane  lighter.
3.  a  clearly  marked  spray  bottle  containing  a  10%  bleach  solution.
4.  sterile  petri  dishes  and  test  tube  "slants".
5.  stick-on  labels,  notebook,  ballpoint  pen  and  a  permanent  marking  pen.
6.  an  agar  knife  and  inoculating  loop.
All  these  items  should  remain  in  the  laboratory.  If any  equipment  is  removed,  make  sure  it is

absolutely  clean  before  being  returned  to  the  room.

Sterile  Technique  and  Agar  Culture/17

A  sernisterile  environment  can  be  established  in  the  laboratory  through  simple  maintenance
depending on  the  frequency  of  use.  The  amount  of  cleaning  necessary  will  be  a  function  of the

snore  load  in  the  external  environment.  In  winter  the  number of free  spores  drastically  decreases
while  in  the  spring  and  summer  months  one  sees  a  remarkable  increase.  Consequently,  more
cleaning  is  necessary during  these peak  contamination  periods.  More  importantly,  all contaminated
jars and  petri  dishes  should  be  disposed  of  in  a  fashion  that  poses  no  risk  to  the  sterile  lab.

Once the sterile work room  has been constructed, follow a strict and unwavering regimen of
hygiene.  The  room  should  be  cleaned with  a  disinfectant,  the  floors  mopped  and  lastly  the  room's
air washed with a fine  mist of  10%  bleach solution. After spraying,  the  laboratory should not be  re-
entered  for  a  minimum  of  15  minutes  until  the  suspended  particles  have  settled.  A  regimen  of
cleaning MUST precede every set of inoculations. As a rule, contamination is easier to prevent than
to eliminate  after  it  occurs.

Before going further,  a few words of caution  are required.  Sterile work demands concentration,

attention to detail and a steady hand. Work for reasonable periods of time and not to the point of ex-
haustion.  Never leave a lit alcohol lamp or butane torch unattended and be conscious of the fact that
in  an  airtight  space  oxygen  can  soon  be  depleted.

Some cultivators wage war on contamination  to an  unhealthy and unnecessary extreme. They
Tend  to "overkill"  their  laboratory with  toxic  fungicides and  bacteriocides,  exposing  themselves  to
dangerously  mutagenic  chemical  agents.  In  one  incident  a  worker  entered  a  room  that  had  just
been  heavily sprayed with a phenol based germicide.  Because of congestion he could not sense the
danger and minutes later experienced extreme shortness of breath, numbness of the extremities and
convulsions. These symptoms persisted for hours and he did not recover for several days.  In yet an-
other instance,  a person mounted a short wave ultraviolet light in a glove box and conducted trans-
fers  over a  period  of  months  with  no  protection  and  unaware  of the  danger.  This  type  of  light can
cause  skin  cancer  after  prolonged  exposure.  Other  alternatives,  posing  little  or  no  health  hazard,
can just as effectively eliminate  contaminants,  sometimes  more so.

If despite one's best efforts a high contamination rate persists, several additional measures can

be implemented. The first is inexpensive and simple, utilizing a colloidal suspension of light oil into
the  laboratory's  atmosphere;  the  second  involves  the  construction  of  a  still  air  chamber  called  a
glove  box;  and  the  Third  is  moderately  expensive,  employing  high  efficiency  micron  filters.

1 -  By asperating  sterile  oil,  a cloud of highly viscous droplets  is created.  As the droplets des-
cend they trap airborne contaminant particles. This technique uses triethylene glycol that is
vaporized through a heated wick.  Finer and more volatile than mineral oil. triethylene glycol
leaves  little or  no noticeable film  layer.  However a daily schedule of hygiene  maintenance  is
still  recommended.  (A German  Firm  sells a  product called an  "aero-disinfector"  that utilizes
the  low  boiling  point  of  Triethylene  glycol.  For  information  write:  Chemische  Fabrik  Bruno
Vogelmann  &  Co.,  Postfach  440,  718  Crailsheim,  West  Germany.  The  unit sells  for  less
Than  $50.00).

2.  A  glovebox  is an  airtight chamber that  provides a  sernisterile  still  air environment  in  which
to conduct transfers. Typically,  it is constructed of wood,  with  a sneeze window for viewing

18/The Mushroom Cultivator

and  is sometimes  equipped  with  rubber gloves into which  The cultivator inserts  his  hands.
Often, in place of gloves, the front face is covered with a removable cotton cloth that is peri-
odically sterilized. The main advantage of a glove box is that it provides an inexpensive, eas-
ily cleaned area where culture work can Take place with  little or no air movement.

3.  Modern  laboratories  solve  the  problem  of  airborne  contamination  by  installing  High  Effi-
ciency  Particulate  Air  (HEPA)  filters.  These  filters  screen  out  all  particulates  exceeding
0.1 -0.3 microns in diameter, smaller than the spores of all  fungi and  practically all bacteria.
HEPA  filters are  built  into  what  is  commonly  known  as  a  laminar flow  hood.  Some  sterile
laboratories have an entire wall or ceiling constructed of HEPA filters through which pres-
surized air is forced from the outside.  In effect, a positive pressure, sterile environment is
created.  Specific  data  regarding  the  building  and  design  of  laminar  flow  systems  is  dis-
cussed  in  greater detail  in Appendix  IV.

Some cultivators  have few  problems with  contaminants while working  in  what seems  like the
most primitive conditions.  Others encounter pronounced contamination  levels and have to  invest in
high  technology  controls.  Each  circumstance  dictates  an  appropriate  counter-measure.  Whether
one is a  home cultivator or a  spawn  maker in  a commercial  laboratory,  the problems encountered
are  similar,  differing  not  in  kind,  but  in  degree.

Figure  19  Aero-disinfector  for  reducing  Figure  20  Laminar  flow  hood,
contaminant  spore  load  in  laboratory.

Sterile  Technique  and  Agar  Culture/19

PREPARATION  OF  AGAR  MEDIA

Once the sterile  laboratory is completed,  the  next step is the preparation of nutrified agar me-
dia  Derived  from  seaweed,  agar  is  a  solidifying  agent  similar to  but  more  effective than  gelatin.
There  are  many  recipes  for  producing  enriched  agar  media  suitable  for  mushroom  culture.  The
standard formulas have been  Potato  Dextrose Agar (PDA)  and  Malt  Extract Agar (MEA)  to which
yeast  is  often  added  as  a  nutritional  supplement.  Many  of  the  mycological journals  list  agar  media
containing  peptone  or  neopeptone,  two  easily  accessed  sources  of  protein  for  mushroom  myce-
lium.  Another type  of agar  media that the  authors  recommend  is a  broth  made  from  boiling  wheat
or  rye  kernels  which  is  then  supplemented  with  malt  sugar.

If a  high  rate  of contamination  from  bacteria  is  experienced,  the addition  of antibiotics  to the
culture media will prevent their growth.  Most antibiotics,  like streptomycin, are not autoclavable and
must be added to the agar media after sterilization while it is still molten. One antibiotic, gentamycin
sulphate, survives autoclaving and is effective against a broad range of bacteria. Antibiotics should be
used sparingly and only as a temporary control until the sources of bacteria can be eliminated. The
mycelia  of some  mushroom  species are adversely affected  by antibiotics.

Dozens  of  enriched  agar  media  have  been  used  successfully  in  the  cultivation  of fungi  and
every cultivator develops distinct preferences based on experience.  Regardless of the type of agar
medium employed, a  major consideration  is its pH,  a logarithmic scale denoting the level of acidity
or alkalinity in  a  range from  0  (highly acidic) to  1 4  (highly  basic)  with  7  being  neutral.  Species of
Psilocybe  thrive  in  media  balanced  between  6.0-7.0  whereas  Agaricus  brunnescens  and  allies
grow better in  near neutral  media.  Most mycelia are fairly tolerant and grow well  in the 5.5-7.5 pH

Figure  21
Standard
glove  box.

20/The Mushroom Cultivator

range.  One needs to be concerned with exact pH  levels only if spores fail to germinate or if mycelial
growth  is  unusually  slow.

What follows  are  several  formulas for the  preparation  of nutritionally balanced enriched agar
media,  any  one  of  which  is  highly  suited  for  the  growth  of  Agaricus,  Pleurotus,  Lentinus,
Stropharia,  Lepisia,  Flammulina,  Volvariella,  Panaeolus  and  Psilocybe  mycelia.  Of  these  the
authors have two preferences:  PDY (Potato Dextrose Yeast) and MPG (Malt Peptone Grain) agar
media.  The addition  of ground  rye  grain  or grain  extract to whatever  media  is chosen  clearly  pro-
motes  the  growth  of  strandy  mycelium,  the  kind  that  is  generally  preferred  for  its  fast  growth.

Choose one formula, mix the ingredients in dry form,  place into a flask and add water until one

liter  of  medium  is  made.
PDY  (Potato  Dextrose  Yeast)  Agar 

the filtered,  extracted  broth  from  boiling 
300  grams  of sliced  potatoes  in  1  liter  of 
water for  1  hour 20 grams agar
10  grams  dextrose  sugar
20 
2 

grams 

grams 
yeast 

MEA  {Malt  Extract  Agar)

20  grams  tan  malt
2  grams  yeast

Avoid dark  brewer's malts which  have
become  carmellized.  The  malt that
should be  used  is a  light tan  brewer's

agaru
(optional)

form.MPG  (Malt  Peptone  Grain)  Agar
malt which is powdery, not sticky in

20  grams  tan  malt

5  grams  ground  rye  grain
5  grams  peptone  or  neopeptone
2  grams yeast  (optional)

20  grams  agar

For controlling  bacteria,  0.10  grams of 60-80%  pure gentamycin sulphate can  be added to each

liter  of media  prior  to  sterilization.  (See  Resources  in  Appendix.)

Water quality—its pH and mineral content—varies from region to region.  If living in an area of
questionable water purity, the use of distilled water is advisable.  For all practical purposes, however,
tap water can be  used without harm  to the mushroom  mycelium. A time may come when  balancing
pH  is  important—especially  at  spore  germination  or  in  the  culture  of  exotic  species.  The  pH  of
media  can  be  altered  by  adding  a  drop  at  a  time  of  1  molar  concentration  of  hydrochloric  acid
(HCL)  or sodium  hydroxide  (NaOH).  The  medium  is thoroughly  mixed  and  then  measured  using  a
pH  rneter  or  pH  papers.  (One  molar  HCL  has a  pH  of 0;  one  molar  NaOH  has  a  pH  of  1 2;  and
distilled water  has  a  pH  of 7).

After thoroughly mixing these ingredients, sterilize the medium in a pressure cooker for 30 min-

utes  at  1 5  psi.  (Pressure  cookers  are  a  safe  and  effective  means  of  sterilizing  media  provided  they
are  operated  according  to  the  manufacturer's  instructions).  A  small  mouthed  vessel  is  recom-
mended for holding the agar media.  If not using a flask specifically manufactured for pouring media,
any  narrow  necked  glass bottle will  suffice.  Be sure to  plug  its opening with  cotton and cover with

Sterile  Technique  and  Agar  Culture/21

aluminum  foil  before  inserting  into  the  pressure  cooker.  The  media  container should  be filled  onk,
to  2/3  to %  of  its  capacity.

Place the media filled container into the pressure cooker along with an  adequate amount o
water for generating  steam.  (Usually  a  V2  inch  layer of water at the  bottom will  do).  Seal  the cookei
according  to  the  manufacturer's  directions.  Place  the  pressure  cooker  on  a  burner  and  heat  unti
ample  steam  is  being  generated.  Allow  the  steam  to  vent  for  4-5  minutes  before  closing  the  stop
cock.  Slowly bring the pressure up to  15  psi and  maintain for  !/2  hour.  Do not let the temperature o
the  cooker  exceed  250 °F.  or  else  the  sugar  in  the  media  will  caramelize.  Media  with  caramelize(
sugar  inhibits  mycelial  growth  and  promotes  genetic  mutations.

A  sterilized  pot  holder  or  newly  laundered  cloth  should  be  handy  in  the  sterile  lab  to aid  in  re-
moving the  media flask from the pressure cooker.  While the  media  is being sterilized,  immaculately
clean  the  laboratory.

The time  necessary for sterilization varies at different altitudes. At a constant volume,  pressure
and  temperature  directly  correspond  (a  relationship  known  as  Boyle's  Law).  When  a  certain  pres-
sure (=  temperature) is recommended,  it is based on a sea level standard. Those cultivating at high-
er elevations must cook at higher pressures To achieve the same sterilization effect. Here are two ab-
breviated charts showing the  relationships between  Temperature and  pressure and the changes ir
the  boiling  point  of  water  at  various  elevations.  Increase  the  amount  of  pressure  over  the  recom-
mended amount based on the difference of the boiling  point at sea  level and one's own  altitude.  Foi
example,  at  5000  feet  the  difference  in  the  boiling  point  of  water  is  approximately  10°  F.  This
means  that  the  pressure  must  be  increased  to  20  psi,  5  psi  above  the  recommended  15  psi  see
level  standard,  to correspond To a  "10°  F.  increase"  in  temperature.  (Actually temperature remains
the  same;  it  is pressure that differs).

22/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

Figure  22  &  23 
petri  dishes.  At  left,  vertical  stack  technique.

Pouring  agar  media  into  sterile

manufacturer's recommendations. And some extra time must be allowed for adequate penetration
of steam, especially in densely packed,  large autoclaves.

Once sterilized,  place the cooker in  the  laboratory or in a semisterile room and allow the pres-
sure to  return  to  1  psi  before  opening.  One  liter of agar media  can  generously fill  thirty  100 x  15
mm. petri dishes. Techniques for pouring vary with the cultivator.  If only one or two sleeves of petri
dishes are being prepared, the plates should be laid out side by side on the working surface. If more
Than two sleeves are being poured or table space is limited, pouring the sterile petri dishes in a verti-
cal  stack  is  usually  more  convenient.

Before pouring, vigorously shake the molten media to evenly distribute its ingredients.  Experi-
enced cultivators fill the plates rhythmically and without interruption.  Allow the agar media to cool
and solidify before using. Condensation often forms on The inside surface of The upper lid of a petri
dish when the agar media being poured is still at a high temperature. To reduce condensation, one
can wait a period of time before pouring.  If the pressure cooker sits for 45  minutes after reaching  1
psi,  a  liter  of  liquid  media  can  be  poured  with  little  discomfort  To  unprotected  hands.

Two types of culTures can be obTained from a selected mushroom: one from its spores and The
oTher from  living  tissue of a  mushroom.  Either Type can  produce a  viable strain  of mycelia.  Each
has  advantages  and  disadvantages.

Sterile  Technique  and  Agar  Culture/23

STARTING A CULTURE FROM SPORES

A  mushroom  culture  can  be  started  in  one  of  two  ways.  Most  growers  start  a  culture  from
spores.  The advantage of  using  spores is that they are viable for weeks to  months after the  mush-
room  has decomposed.  The other way of obtaining a culture  is to cut a  piece of interior tissue from
a  live  specimen,  in  effect a  clone.  Tissue cultures must be taken within  a day or two from  the time
the mushroom  has been  picked,  after which a healthy clone becomes increasingly difficult to estab-
lish.

Taking a Spore Print

To collect spores,  sever the cap from  the stem of a fresh,  well  cleaned mushroom and place it
gills down on  a  piece of clean  white  paper or a  clean glass surface such as a microscope slide.  If a
specimen  is  partially  dried,  add  a  drop  or  two  of water  to  the  cap  surface  to  aid  in  the  release  of
spores.  To  lessen  evaporation  and  disturbance  from  air  currents,  place  a  cup  or  glass  over  the
mushroom cap. After a few hours, the spores will have fallen according to the radiating symmetry of
the gills.  If the spore print has been taken  on  paper,  cut it out,  fold it in  half,  seal  in an airtight con-
tainer  and  label  the  print  with  the  date,  species  and  collection  number.  When  using  microscope
slides,  the  spores  can  be  sandwiched  between  two  pieces  of  glass  and  taped  along  the  edges  to
prevent the  entry  of  contaminant  spores.  A  spore  print  carelessly taken  or  stored  can  easily  become
contaminated,  decreasing  the  chance  of  acquiring  a  pure  culture.

Figure24a  Taking  a  spore  print on  typing  paper.

24/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figure 24b  Taking a spore print on a sterile petri
dish  and  on  glass  microscope  slides.

Figure  25  Sterilizing 
agar  transfer  technique.

two  scalpels  speeds  up

Agaricus  brunnescens,  Psilocybe  cubensis  and  many  other  mushroom  species  have  a  partial
veil—a Thin layer of tissue extending from the cap margin To the stem. This veil can be an aid in The
procurement of nearly contaminant-free spores.  The veil  seals the  gill from  the outside,  creating a
semi-sterile  chamber  from  which  spores  can  be  removed  with  little  danger  of  contamination.  By
choosing  a  healthy,  young  specimen  with  the  veil  intact,  and  then  by  carefully  removing  the  veil
tissue under aseptic conditions,  a  nearly pure spore print is obtained.  This is the ideal way to start a
multispore  culture.

Techniques  for  Spore  Germination

Once  a  spore  print  is  obtained,  mushroom  culture  can  begin.  Sterilize  an  inoculating  loop  or
scalpel by holding it over the flame of an alcohol  lamp or butane torch for five or ten seconds until it
is red  hot.  (If a  butane torch  is used,  turn  it down  to the  lowest possible setting  to  minimize air dis-
turbance).  Cool the tip by inserting it into the sterile media in  a  petri dish and scrape some spores off
the print. Transfer the spores by streaking the Tip of the transfer tool across the agar surface, A simi-
lar method calls for scraping the spore print above an  opened petri dish and allowing them  to free-
fall onto the  medium.  When  starting a  new culture from spores,  it is best to inoculate at  least three
media  dishes  to  improve  the  chances  of getting  a  successful  germination.  Mycelium  started  in  this
manner  is called  a  multispore culture.

When first  produced,  spores are  rnoist,  inflated cells with  a  relatively high  rate of germination.
As time  passes,  they  dry,  collapse  at their centers and  can  not easily  germinate.  The  probability  of
germinating dehydrated spores increases  by soaking  them  in  sterilized water.  For 30  minutes at  15
psi,  sterilize  an  eye  dropper  or  similar  device  (syringe  or  pipette)  and  a  water  filled  test  tube  or

Sterile Technique and Agar Culture/25

25-250  ml.  Erlenmeyer flask stopped with cotton and covered with aluminum foil.  Carefully touch
~ 
spores  onto  a  scalpel  and  insert  into  sterile  water.  Tightly  seal  and  let  stand  for 6-12  hours.
After this  period  draw  up  several  milliters  of this spore  solution  with  the  eye dropper,  syringe or
pipette and  inoculate several  plates with  one  or  two drops.  Keep  in  mind  that  if the  original  spore
print was taken under unsanitary conditions, this technique just as likely favors contaminant spores
as the spores of mushrooms.

Characteristics  of  the  Mushroom  Mycelium

With either method of inoculation,  spore germination and any initial stages of contamination
should be evident in three to seven days. Germinating spores are thread-like strands of cells emanat-
ing from a central point of origin. These mycelial strands appear grayish and diffuse at first and soon
become  whitish  as more  hyphae divide,  grow and spread through  the  medium.

The  mycelia  of  most  species,  particularly  Agaricus,  Coprinus,  Lentinus,  Panaeolus  and
Psilocybe  are  grayish  to  whitish  in  color.  Other  mushroom  species  have  variously  pigrnented  my-
celia. Lepisfa nuda can have a remarkable purplish blue mycelium; Psilocybe tampanensis is often
multi-colored with brownish hues.  Keep in  mind,  however, that color varies with The strain and the
media upon which the mycelium is grown. Another aspect of the mycelial appearance is its type of
growth, whether it is aerial or appressed, cottony or rhizomorphic. Aerial mycelium can be species
related  or often  it  is a function  of high  humidity.  Appressed  mycelium  can  also  be a species specific
character  or  it  can  be  the  result  of dry  conditions.  The  subject  of  mycelial types is discussed  in
greater detail under the sub-chapter Sectoring,  (See Color Photos  1 -4).

Once  the  mushroom  mycelium  has  been  identified,  sites  of  germinating  spores  should  be
transferred To new media dishes. In this way the cultivator is selectively isolating mushroom mycelia
and  will  soon  establish  a  pure  culture  free  of contamination.  If contamination  appears  at  the  same
time,  cut out segments of the  emerging  mushroom  mycelia  away from  the contaminant colonies.
Since many of the common contaminants are sporulating molds, be careful not to jolt The culture or
to do anything that might spread their spores. And be sure the scalpel is cool before cutting into the
agar media.  A  hot scalpel  causes an  explosive burst of vapor which  in  the  microcosm  of the  petri
dish easily liberates spores of neighboring molds.

Ramifications  of  Multispore  Culture

Multispore culture is the least difficult method of obtaining a viable if not absolutely pure strain.
the  germination  of such  a  multitude of spores,  one in fact creates many strains,  some incompati-

ble with others and each potentially different in the manner and degree to which they fruit under

a

r

t

i

f

i

c

i

al conditions. This mixture of strains c an have a limiting effect on total yields, with t he less pro-

ductive  strains inhibiting the activity of more productive ones. In general, strains created from spores
have a  high  probability of  resembling their parents.  If those  parents have been  domesticated and
fruit well under laboratory conditions, their progeny can be expected to behave similarly. In contrast,

26/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figure  26  Stropharia  rugoso-annulata  spores  germinating.

Figure 27  Psilocybe cubensis mycelium growing from  agar wedge, transferred from a
multispore  germination.  Note  two  types  of  mycelial  growth.

Sterile  Technique  and  Agar  Culture/27

Cultures  from wild specimens may fruit very poorly in  an  artificial  environment. Just as with wild
plants, strains of wild mushrooms must be selectively developed.

Of the many newly created strains  intrinsic to multispore germination,  some  may be only capa-
ble of vegetative growth. Such mycelia can assimilate nutrients but can  not form a mushroom fruit-
body (the  product of generative growth}.  A  network of ceils coming from  a single spore is called a
monokaryon.  As  a  rule,  rnonokaryons  are  not  capable  of  producing  fertile  spore-bearing  mush-
rooms.  When two compatible  monokaryons encounter one another and  mate,  cytopiasmic and ge-
netic  material  is  exchanged.  The  resultant  mycelium  is  a  dikaryon  that  can  produce  fertile  off-
spring  in  the  form  of  mushrooms.  Branching  or  networking  between  different dikaryotic strains  is
known  as anastomosis. This process of recombination can occur at any stage of the cultivation
process: on agar; on grain; or on bulk substrates. The crossing of different mushroom strains is ana-
logous to the creation of hybrids in  horticulture.

Another method for starting cultures is the creation of single spore isolates and is accomplished
by diluting spores in a volume of sterile water. This spore solution is further diluted into larger vol-
umes of sterile water which is in Turn used to inoculate media dishes. In this way, cultivators can ob-

Figure 28  Four strains of Psilocybe cubensis mycelium: (clockwise, upper right) Matias

Romero; Misantla; Amazonian; and Palenque.

28/The Mushroom Cultivator

serve individual monokaryons and in a controlled manner institute a mating schedule for the devel-
opment of high yielding strains.  For cultivators interested solely  in  obtaining a viable culture,  this
technique is  unnecessary  and  multispore  germinations generally suffice.  But for those interested in
crossing monokaryotic strains and studying  mating characteristics,  this method is of great value.
Keep  in  mind that for every one  hundred spores,  only an  average of one to five germinate.  For a
more detailed explanation of strains and strain  genetics,  see Chapter XV.

The greatest danger of doing concentrated multispore germinations is the increased possibility
of contamination, especially from bacteria. Some bacteria parasitize the cell walls of the mycelium,
while others stimulate spore germination only to be carried upon and to slowly digest the resulting
mycelia. Hence, some strains are inherently unhealthy and tend to be associated with a high percen-
tage of contamination. These infected spores,  increase the likelihood of disease spreading To neigh-
boring  spores when  germination  is attempted  in  such  high  numbers.

Many fungi,  however,  have developed  a  unique  symbiotic  relationship with  other  microorgan-
isms. Some bacteria and yeasts actually stimulate spore germination in mushrooms that otherwise
are difficult to grow in sterile culture.  The spores of Cantharellus cibarius, the common and highly
prized Chantrelle, do not germinate under artificial conditions,  resisting the efforts of world's most
experienced mycologists. Recenfly, Nils Fries (1979), a Swedish mycologist, discovered that when
activated charcoal and a red yeast, Rhodotorula glutinis (Fres.) Harrison, were added to the media,
spore  germination  soon  followed.  (Activated  charcoal  is  recommended for  any  mushroom  whose
spores do  not easily germinate.)

Figure  29 

Psilocybe  cubensis  spores  infected  with  rod  shaped  bacteria.

Sterile  Technique  and  Agar  Culture/29

Manv growers have reported that certain cultures flourish when a  bacterium  accidentally con-
taminates or is purposely introduced into a culture.  Pseudomonas putida. Bacillus  megaterium,
Azotobacter vinelandii and others have all been shown To have stimulatory effects on various mush-
room species—either  in  the  germination  of spores,  the  growth  of  mycelia  or the  formation  of

t

-

u

f
utilizing these  bacteria  are  discussed  in  Appendix  III.  However,  most  of  the  contaminants  one
encounters in mushroom cultivation, whether they are airborne or intrinsic to the culture, are not
helpful.  Bacteria  can  be the  most pernicious of all  competitors.  A diligent regimen  of hygiene,  the
use of high  efficiency particulate  air  (HEPA)  filters  and  good  laboratory Technique  all  but eliminate
these  costly  contaminants.

d

b

o

r

i

i

es (Curto a nd Favelli, 1972;Hayes et al.,l969;Eger,1 972;Urayama, 1 961).Techniques

STARTING A CULTURE FROM LIVE TISSUE

Tissue culture is an assured method of preserving the exact genetic character of a living mush-
room.  In  tissue  culture a  living  specimen  is cloned whereas  in  multispore  culture  new strains are
created.  Tissue  cultures  must be taken  from  mushrooms within  Twenfy-four to forty-eight  hours  of
being picked.  If the specimens are several days old, too dry or too mature, a pure culture will be dif-
ficult to  isolate.  Spores,  on  the other  hand,  can  be  saved  over  long  periods  of time.

Since  the  entire  mushroom  is  composed  of compressed  mycelia,  a  viable  culture  can  be  ob-
tained from  any part of the  mushroom  fruitbody.  The cap,  the  upper region  of the stem  and/or the
area where the gill plate joins the underside of the cap are the best locations for excising clean tissue.
Some mushrooms have a thick cuticle overlaying the cap. This skin can be peeled back and a tissue
culture  can  be taken from  the flesh  underlying  it.  Wipe the surface of the  mushroom with  a cotton
swab soaked in alcohol and remove any dirt or damaged external tissue.  Break the mushroom cap
or stem, exposing the interior hyphae. Immediately flame a scalpel until red-hot and cool in a media
filled petri dish.  Now cut into the flesh removing a small fragment of tissue. Transfer the tissue frag-
ment to the center of the nutrient filled petri dish as quickly as possible, exposing the tissue and agar
to  the  open  air  for  a  minimal  time.  Repeat  this  technique  into  at  least  three,  preferably  five  more
dishes.  Label each dish with  the species,  date,  type of culture (tissue) and kind of agar medium.  If
successful, mycelial growth will be evident in three to seven days.

An overall contamination rate of a  10%  is one most cultivators can tolerate.  In primary cultures
however, especially those isolated from wild specimens, it is not unusual to have a 25% contamina-
tion rate.  Diverse and colorful  contaminants often  appear near to the  point of transfer.  Their num-
bers  depend on the cleanliness of the tissue or spores transferred and the hygienic state of the labor-
atory where the Transfers were conducted. In tissue culture, The most commonly encountered con-

taminants are bacteria.

Contamination is a fact of life for every cultivator. Contaminants become a problem when their

populations  spiral above tolerable levels, an indication of impending disaster in the laboratory.

30/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

Figure  30  Splitting
the mushroom stem
to expose interior
tissue.

Figure 31  Cutting
into mushroom flesh
with a cooled, flame
sterilized scalpel.

Figure 32  Excising
a piece of tissue for
transfer into a petri
dish.

Sterile  Technique  and  Agar  Culture/3T

Once the tissue shows signs of growth, it should be transferred to yet another media dish.  If no
signs of contamination are evident, early transfer is not critical. If sporulating colonies of mold devel-
op adjacent to the growing mycelium, the culture should be promptly isolated. Continue transfer-
ring the mycelium away from the contaminants until a pure strain is established. Obviously, isolating
mycelia  from a partially contaminated culture is more difficult than transferring from a pure one. The
attempt  of  isolating  mycelia  away  from  a  nearby  contaminant  is  fraught  with  the  danger of

spreading its spores. Although undetectable to us, when the rim of a petri dish is lifted external air
rapidly enters and spores become airborne.  Therefore,  The sooner The cultivator  is no longer depen-
dent  upon  a  partially contaminated culture dish,  the easier it will  be to  maintain  pure cultures.  Keep
in  mind  that  a  strain  isolated  from  a  contaminated  media  dish  can  harbor  spores  although  to  the
unaided eye the culture  may appear pure.  Only when this contaminant laden  mycelium  is inocu-
lated into sterile grain will these inherent bacteria and molds become evident.

To minimize contamination in the laboratory there are many measures one can undertake. The

physical ones such as the use of HEPA filters, asperated oil and glove boxes have already been dis-
cussed.  One's attitude towards contamination  and cleanliness  is  perhaps  more  important than  the
installation  of any  piece  of equipment.  The  authors  have seen  laboratories  with  high  contamination
rates and closets that have  had very little.  Here are two general guidelines That should help  many
first-time cultivators.

1.  Give the first attempt  at sterile culture the best effort.  Everything should be clean:  the lab;

clothes;  tools;  and  especially  the  cultivator.

2.  Once  a  pure  culture  has  been  established,  make  every  attempt  To  preserve  its  puriTy.  Save
only  the  cultures  that show  no  signs  of  mold  and  bacteria.  Throw  away  all  contaminated
dishes,  even  though  they  may  only  be  partially  infected.

If failure greets one's first attempts at mushroom culture, do not despair.  Only through  practice

and  experience  will  sterile  culture  techniques  become  fluent.

Agar culture is but one in a series of steps in the cultivation of mushrooms.  By itself,  agar media
is impractical for the production of mushrooms. The advantage of its use in  mushroom culture is
that mycelial  mass  can  be  rapidly multiplied  using  the smallest fragments of tissue.  Since  contami-
nants can  be  readily observed on  the flat Two dimensional  surface of a  media  filled petri  dish,  it is
fairly easy to recognize and maintain pure cultures.

SECTORING: STRAIN SELECTION

AND DEVELOPMENT

As mycelium  grows out on a nutrient agar,  it can display a  remarkable diversity of forms.  Some
mycelia  are fairly uniform in appearance; others can be polymorphous at first and then suddenly de-
velop into a homogeneous looking mycelia. This is the nature of mushroom mycelia—to constantly

change  and  evolve.

When a mycelium grows from a single inoculation site and several divergent Types appear, iT is

32/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

Figure  33  Bacteria  growing  from  con-  Figure  34  Rhizomorphic  mycelium,
taminated mushroom mycelium. 

Note divergent ropey strands.

Figure 35 
lium.  Note 
strands  (Psilocybe  cyanescens  mycelium). 

longitudinally  radial 

Intermediate linear type myce-  Figure 36  Rhizomorphic mycelia with to-
fine  mentose  (cottony)  sector  (of  Agaricus

brunnescens).

Sterile  Technique  and  Agar  Culture/33

said  to  be  sectoring.  A  sector  is  defined  solely  in  contrast  to  the  surrounding,  predominant
mycelia.  There  are  two  major  classes  of  mycelial  sectors:  rhizomorphic  (strandy)  and  tomentose
(cottony).  Also,  an  intermediate type of mycelium  occurs which grows linearly (longitudinally  radial)
hut  does  not  have  twisted  strands  of  interwoven  hyphae  that  characterize  the  rhizomorphic  kind.
Rhizomorphic  mycelium  is  more  apt to  produce  primordia.  Linear  mycelium  can  also  produce
abundant primordia but this usually occurs soon after it forms rhizomorphs. Keep in mind, however,
that characteristics of fruiting mycelium are often species specific and may not conform precisely to
the  categories  outlined  here.

In a dish That is largely covered with a cottony mycelia, a fan of strandy myceiia would be called
a rhizomorphic sector, and vice versa. Sectors are common in mushroom culture and although little
is known as to their cause or function, it is clear that genetics, nutrition and age of the mycelium play
important  roles.

According to Stoller (1962) the growth of fluffy sectors is encouraged by broken and exploded
kernels  which  increase  the  availability  of  starch  in  the  spawn  media.  Working  with  Agaricus
brunnescens,  Stoller  noted  that although  mycelial  growth  is faster at  high  pH  levels (7.5)  than  at
slightly acid pH levels (6.5), sectoring is more frequent. He found that sectors on grain could be re-

Figure  37  Psilocybe  cubensis  mycelia  with  cottony  and  rhizomorphic  sectors.  Note

that primordia  form  abundantly  on  rhizomorphic  mycelium  but not on the cottony type.

34/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figure 38  Hyphal aggregates of Agaricus bitorquis forming on  malt agar media.

Figure 39  Primordia of Psilocybe cubensis forming on malt agar media.

Sterile  Technique  and  Agar  Culture/35

duced by avoiding  exploded grains (a consequence of excessive water) and buffering the pH  to 6.5

using a combination  of chalk  (precipitated calcium  carbonate)  and  gypsum  (calcium  sulfate),

Commercial Agaricus cultivators  have  long  noted  that the  slower  growing  cottony  mycelium  is
inferior to the faster growing  rhizomorphic  mycelium.  There  is an  apparent correlation  between  cot-
mycelia  on  agar and the  later occurrence of "stroma",  a  dense  mat-like  growth  of mycelia  on
the  casing  which  rarely  produces  mushrooms.  Furthermore,  primordia  frequently  form  along  gen-
eratively  oriented  rhizomorphs  but rarely on  somatically disposed cottony  mycelia.  It is of interest to
mention  that,  under  a  microscope,  the  hyphae  of  a  rhizomorphic  mycelial  network  are  larger  and
branch  less frequently  than  those  of the  cottony  network.

Rhizomorphic  mycelia  run  faster,  form  more  primordia  and  in  the  final  analysis  yield  more
mushrooms  than  cottony  mycelia.  One  example  of this  is  illustrated  in  Fig.  37.  A  single  wedge  of
mycelium  was  transferred  to a  petri  dish  and  two  distinct  mycelial  types  grew from  it.  The stringy
sector  formed  abundant  primordia  while  the  cottony  sector  did  not,  an  event  common  in  agar
culture.

When  a  mycelium  grows old  it  is said to  be  senescing.  Senescent  mycelium,  like any aged  plant
or  animal,  is  far  less  vigorous  and  fertile  than  its  counterpart.  In  general,  a  change  from  rhizo-
morphic  to  cottony  looking  mycelium  should  be  a  warning  that  strain  degeneration  has  begun.

If at first a culture  is predominantly  rhizomorphic,  and then  it begins to sector,  there are several
measures that can  be  undertaken to  promote rhizomorphism and prevent the strain's degeneration.

1.  Propagate  only  rhizomorphic  sectors  and  avoid  cottony  ones.
2.  Alter  the  media  regularly  using  the  formulas  described  herein.  Growing  a  strain  on  the
same agar formula  is not recommended  because the  nutritional  composition  of the  medium
exerts an  selective  influence on  the ability of the  mushroom  mycelium  To produce digestive
enzymes.  By varying the media,  the strain's enzyme system  remains broadly based and the
mycelium  is  better  suited  for  survival.  Species  vary  greatly  in  their  preferences.  Unless
specific  data  is  available,  trial  and  error  is  the  only  recourse.

3.  Only  grow  out the  amount of  mycelium  needed for  spawn  production  and  return  the  strain
to storage when  not in  use.  Do not expect mycelium that has been  grown over several years
at  optimum  temperatures  to  resemble  the  primary  culture  from  which  it  came.  After  so
many cell  divisions and continual transfers,  a sub-strain  is likely to have been selected out,
one that  may distantly  resemble the original  in  both  vitality,  mycelial  appearance and fruit-
ing  potential.

4.If efforts to preserve a vital strain fail, re-isolate new substrains from multispore germina-
tions.

5.Another alternative is to continuously experiment with the creation of hybrid strains that are
forrned  from 
the  mating  of  dikaryotic  mycelia  of  Two  genetically  distinct  parents.
(experiments with  Agaricus  brunnescens  have  shown,  however,  that  most  hybrids  yield
less than  both  or  one  of the  contributing  strains.  A  minority  of the  hybrids  resulted  in  more
productive strains.)

36/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

Home cultivators can selectively develop mushroom strains by rating mycelia according to sev-

eral characteristics. These characteristics are:

1.  Rhizomorphism—fast growing  vegetative  mycelium.
2.  Purity  of the  strain—lack  of cottony  sectors.
3.  Cleanliness of the myceiia—lack of associated competitor organisms (bacteria, molds and

mites).

4.  Response  time  to  primodia  formation  conditions.
5.  Number  of  primordia  formed.
6.  Proportion  of  primordia  formed  that  grow  to  maturity.
7.  Size,  shape  and/or  color  of  fruitbodies.
8.  Total  yield.
9.  Disease  resistance.
10.  C02  tolerance/sensitivity.
11.  Temperature  limits.
12.  Ease  of  harvesting.
Using these characteristics, mushroom breeders can qualitatively judge strains and select ones

over a  period  of  time  according  to  how well  they  conform  to a  grower's  preferences.

Figure  40  Mature
stand  of  Psilocybe
cubensis  on  malt
agar  media.

Sterile  Technique  and Agar  Culture/37

STOCK CULTURES: METHODS FOR
PRESERVING MUSHROOM STRAINS

Once a pure strain has been created and isolated, saving it in the form of a "stock culture" is
Stock  cultures—or  "slants"  as  they  are  commonly  called—are  media  filled  glass  test  tubes
which are sterilized and then inoculated with mushroom mycelium. A suitable size for a culture tube
20 mm  x 100 mm. with a screw cap.  Every experienced cultivator maintains a collection of stock
iltures  known as a "species bank". The species bank is an integral part of the cultivation process.

With  it,  a  cultivator may preserve  strains for years.

To  prepare slants,  first mix any of the agar media formulas discussed earlier in this chapter. Fill
test tubes one third of the way, plug with cotton and cover with aluminum foil or simply screw on the
cap  if the tubes  are  of this type.  Sterilize  in  a  pressure cooker for 30  minutes at  15  psi.  Allow the
cooker to  return  to atmospheric pressure and then  take  it  into the sterile  room  before opening.  Re-
move the slants,  gently shake them to distribute the liquified media and lay them at a  15-30 degree
angle  to  cool  and  solidify.

When  ready,  inoculate  the  slants  with  a  fragment  of  mushroom  mycelium.  Label  each  tube
with the date, type of agar, species and strain.  Make at least three slants per strain to insure against
loss.  Incubate for one week at 75 °  F.  (24 ° C.J.  Once the  mycelia  has covered a  major portion  of
the agar's surface and appears to be free of contamination, store at 35-40 ° F. (2-4 ° C). At these
temperatures,  the  metabolic activity of most mycelia  is lowered to a  level where growth  and  nutrient
absorbtion virtually stops. Ideally one should check the vitality of stored cultures every six months by
removing  fragments  of  mycelium  and  inoculating  more  petri  dishes.  Once  the  mycelium  has
colonized two-thirds  of the  media dish,  select for strandy  growth  (rhizomorphism)  and  reinoculate
more slants.  Label and store until needed. Often,  growing out minicultures is a good way to check a
stored  strain's  vitality and  fruiting  ability.

An  excellent  method  to  save  cultures  is  by  the  buddy  system:  passing  duplicates  of  each
species or of strains to a cultivator friend.  Mushroom strains are more easily lost than one might ex-
pect.  Once  lost,  they may never be  recovered.

In most cases, the method described above safely preserves cultures. Avid cultivators, however,
can easily acquire fifty to a  hundred strains and having to regularly revitalize them  becomes tedious
and time consuming. When a library of cultures has expanded to this point, there are several addi-
tional  measures that further extend  the  life  span  of stock  cultures.

A simple method for preserving cultures over long periods of time calls for the application of a
thin layer of sterile mineral oil over the live mycelium once it has been established in a test tube. The
mineral  oil is non-toxic to the mycelium, greatly reduces the mycelium's metabolism and inhibits
water evaporation from the agar base. The culture is then stored at 37-41 ° F. until needed. In a re-
cent study (Perrin,  1979), all of the 30 wood inhabiting species stored under mineral oil for 27
years produced a viable culture. To reactivate the strains, slants were first inverted upside down so
the oil would drain off and then incubated at 77 ° F. Within three weeks each slant showed renewed
signs of growth and when subcultured onto agar plates they yielded uncontaminafed cultures.

38/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figure 41  Filling  test tubes with liquid  agar media prior to sterilization  in a  pressure
cooker.

Figure 42 

Inoculating a test tube slant with  a  piece of mycelium.

Sterile  Technique  and  Agar  Culture/39

Although  a  strain  may  be  preserved  over the  long term  using  this  method,  will  it be as produc-
tive as  when  it  was  first  stored?  Other  studies  have  concluded  that  strains  saved  for  more  than  5
ears  under  mineral  oil  showed  distinct signs of degeneration  while  these  same strains were just as
productive  at  21/2  years  as  the  day  they  were  preserved.  Nevertheless,  it  is  not  unreasonable  to
presurne,  based  on  these  studies,  that  cultures  can  be  stored  up  to  two  years  without  serious
impairment  to  their  vitality.

Four other methods of preservation include: the immersion of slants into liquid nitrogen (an ex-

pensive  procedure);  the  inoculation  of  washed  sterilized  horse  manure/straw  compost  that  is  then
kept at 36-38 °  F.  (See Chapter V on  compost  preparation);  the  inoculation  of sawdust/bran  media
for  wood  decomposers  (see  section  in  Chapter  III  on  alternative  spawn  media);  or  saving  spores
aceptically  under  refrigerated  conditions—perhaps  the  simplest  method  for  home  cultivators.

Whatever  method  is  used,  remember  that  the  mushroom's  nature  is  to  fruit,  sporulate  and
evolve.  Cultivation  techniques should  evolve with  the  mushroom  and  the  cultivator  must selectively
isolate and  maintain  promising  strains as they  develop.  So  don't be too surprised  if five years down
the  line  a  stored  strain  poorly  resembles  the  original  in  its  fruiting  potential  or  form.

Figure  43  Culture  slant  of  healthy  mycelium
ready for cool  storage.

Grain Culture/41

CHAPTER  III

GRAIN CULTURE

Figure 44  Half gallon spawn jars at 3 and 8 days after inoculation

42/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GRAIN  SPAWN

Mushroom spawn is used to inoculate prepared substrates. This inoculum consists of a carrier

material  fully  colonized  by  mushroom  mycelium.  The  type  of carrier varies  according  Jo the
mushroom species cultivated,  although  rye grain  is the choice of most spawn makers. The history
of  the  development  of  mushroom  spawn  for Agaricus  brunnescens  culture  illustrates  how  spawn
production  has  progressed  in  the  last  hundred  years.

During the 1800's Agaricus growers obtained spawn by gathering concentrations of mycelium
from  its  natural  habitat.  To  further  encourage  mycelial  growth  this  "virgin  spawn"  was  supple-
mented with  materials similar to those occurring  naturally,  in this case horse  manure.  Spent com-
post from  prior crops was also  used as spawn.  This  kind of spawn,  however,  contained many con-
taminants  and  pests,  and  yielded  few  mushrooms.  Before  serious  commercal  cultivation  could
begin,  methods guaranteeing The quality and  mass production of the mushroom  mycelium  had to
be developed.

With  the  advent  of  pure  culture  techniques,  propagation  of  mushroom  mycelium  by  spore
germination or by living tissue completely superseded virgin spawn. Now the grower was assured of
not only a clean  inoculum  but also a degree of certainty as to the strain  itself.  Strain selection and de-
velopment was possible for the first time  in the  history of mushroom  culture  because  high yielding
strains could be preserved on a medium of precise composition. Sterilized, chopped, washed com-
post became the preferred medium for original pure culture spawn and was for years the standard of
the  Agaricus  industry.

In  1932, Dr. James Sinden patented a new spawn making process using cereal grain as the
mycelial  carrier.  Since  then  rye  has  been  the  most common  grain  employed  although  millet,  milo
and wheat  have also  been  used.  Sinden's  novel  approach  set a  new  standard for spawn  making and
forms the basis for most modern spawn  production. The distinct advantage of grain spawn is the  in-
creased  number  of  inoculation  sites.  Each  individual  kernel  becomes one  such  point from  which
mycelium  can  spread.  Thus,  a  liter of rye grain  spawn  that contains approximately 25,000  kernels
represents a  vast improvement over inocula transmitted by coarser materials.

Listed below are cereal grains that can be used to produce spawn.  Immediately following this

list  is a  chart  illustrating  some  of the  physical  properties  important  to  the  spawn  maker.

RICE:  Utilized  by few cultivators.  Even  when  it is balanced to recommended  moisture  levels,

the  kernels tend to clump together owing  to the sticky nature  of the outer coat.

MILLET: Although  having a higher number of inoculation  points than  rye,  it is more difficult to
formulate as spawn. Amycel, a commercial spawn-making company, has successfully devel-
oped  a  formula  and  process  utilizing  millet  as  their  primary  spawn  medium.

SORGHUM: Has spherical kernels and works relatively well as a spawn  medium but it can be

difficult To obtain. Milo, a Type of sorghum, has been used for years by the Stoller Spawn
Company.

Grain  Culture/43

VA/HEAT:  Works  equally  well  as  rye  for  spawn  making  and  fruitbody  production.
U/HEAT GRASS and  RYE GRASS SEED:  Both  have  many more kernels per gram than
arain  The disadvantage of seed is the tendency to lose its moisture and its inability to sepa-
rate into individual kernels, making it difficult to shake. (Rye grass and wheat grass seed are
widely  used  to  promote  sclerotia  formation  in  Psilocybe tampanensis,  Psilocybe mexicana
and Psilocybe armandii.  Perennial  or annual  can  be  used although annual  is far cheaper.
See the  species parameters for these  species in  Chapter XI.)

RYE:  Its  availability,  low  cost  and  ability  to  separate  into  individual  kernels  are  all  features

recommending  its  use  as a  spawn  and  fruiting  medium.

THE  CEREAL  GRAINS  AND  THEIR  PHYSICAL  PROPERTIES

(Tests  run  by  the  authors)

KERNELS/CRAM 

TYPE 
COMMERCIAL 
FEED  RYE
COMMERCIAL 
MUSHROOM RYE
ORGANIC 
CO-OP  RYE
ORGANIC WHEAT 
SHORT GRAIN 
BROWN  RICE
LONG  GRAIN 
BROWN  RICE

SORGHUM  (MILO) 
PERENNIAL WHEAT 
GRASS SEED

PERENNIAL  RYE 
GRASS SEED

MILLET 

GRAMS/100 

ML  % MOISTURE

30 

40 

55 

34 
39 

45 

33 
450 

415 

166 

75 

72 

76 

90 
100 

86 

93 
43 

39 

83 

15%

13%

11%

10%
26%

15%

15%
16%

12%

13%

is  an  estimated  cell  count  of
In  a  single  gram  of  commercial  rye,  Secale  cereale, 
50,000-100,000 bacteria, more than 200.000 actinomyces, 12,000 fungi and a large number of

there 

of  grain, 

and  with  the  addition  of  water,  the  cell  population  soars  to  astronomical  figures.

yeasts. To sterilize one gram of grain would require, in effect, the destructionof more
than 300,000 contaminants! In a spawn jar containing in excess of a hundred grams

Of all teh groups of these organisms,  bacteria  are  the  most  pernicious.  Bacteria  can  divide
every twenty or so minutes at room temperature. At this rate, a single bacterium multiplies  into

44/The Mushroom Cultivator

more  than  a  million  cells  in  less than  ten  hours.  In  another  ten  hours,  each  one  of these  bacteria
beget another million ceils.  If only a small fraction of one percent of these contaminants survive the
sterilization  process,  they can  render grain  spawn  useless within  only a few days.

Most microorganisms are  killed  in  the  sterilization  process.  For  liquids,  the standard time and
pressure for steam sterilization is 25 minutes at  15 psi (250 ° F}.  For solids such as rye, the sterili-
zation  time must be  increased to insure that the steam sufficiently  penetrates the small air pockets
and structural cavities in the grain.  Within these cavities bacteria and other thermo-resistant organ-
isms,  partially protected from the effects of steam,  have a better chance of enduring a shorter sterili-
zation  period than a  longer one.  Hence, a full  hour at  15 psi  is The minimum time recommended to
sterilize jars of rye grain.

Some shipments of grain  contain  extraordinarily high  levels of bacteria and fungi.  Correspond-
ingly  the  contamination  rate  on  these  grains  are  higher,  even  after  autoclaving  and  prior  to
inoculation.  Such  grain  should  be  discarded  outright and  replaced  with  grain  of  known  quality.

Once the grain  has been sterilized,  it is presumed all  competitors  have been  neutralized, The
next most probable source of contamination is the air immediately surrounding the jars. As hot jars
cool,  they  suck  in  air  along  with  airborne  contaminants.  If the  external  spore  load  is  excessively
high,  many of these contaminants will  be introduced into the grain even  before conducting a single
inoculation! In an average room, there are 10,000 particulates exceeding .3 microns (dust, spores,
etc.) per cubic foot while in a "sterile" laboratory there are less than  100 per cubic foot. With these
facts in mind, two procedures will lessen the chance of contamination after the spawn jars have been
autoclaved.

1. 

If autoclaving grain media outside The laboratory in an unsterile environment (a kitchen, for
instance),  be  sure  to  clean  the  outside  of the  pressure  cooker  before  bringing  it  into  the
sterile inoculating  room.

2.  Inoculate  the  jars  as  soon  as  they  have  cooled  to  room  temperature.  Although  many
cultivators leave  uninoculated jars sitting  in  pressure cookers overnight,  this is not recom-
mended.

The amount of water added to the  grain  is an  important factor contributing  to the  reproduction
of contaminants.  Excessive water in a spawn jar favors the growth of bacteria and other competitors.
In  wet  grain  the  mushroom  mycelium  grows  denser  and  slower.  Oversaturated  grain  kernels
explode  during  the  sterilization  process,  and  with  their  interiors  exposed,  the  grain  is  even  more
susceptible to contamination.  In addition, wet grain permeated with mycelium is difficult to break up
into individual kernels. When such grain comes in contact with a non-sterile medium such as casing
soil  or  compost,  it  frequently  becomes  contaminated.  Spawn  made  with  a  balanced  moisture
content has none of these problems.  It easily breaks apart into individual mycelium covered kernels,
insuring  a  maximum  number of  inoculation  points  from  which  mycelial  strands  can  emerge.

Determining  the exact  moisture content of grain  is not difficult.  Once done,  the cultivator can
easily calculate a specific  moisture content that is optimal for use as spawn.  Commercial  rye grain,
available through  co-ops and feed companies,  is  11 %  water by mass,  plus or minus 2%. The pre-
cise amount of water locked  up  in  grain  can  be  determined  by weighing a  sample of  100  grams.

Grain  Culture/45

eweiqh  the same grain  after it has been dried  in an oven (250°  F.  for 3  hours) and subtract
PW weight from the original  100 grams. The resultant figure is the percentage of moisture nat-

urally  bound  within  the  grain.

PREPARATION  OF  GRAIN  SPAWN

The optimum  moisture content for grain in the production of spawn  is between 49-54%. The
following  formulas  are  based  on  cereal  rye  grain,  Secale  cereale,  which  usually  has  a  moisture
content  of  11%.  Some  variation  should  be  expected  depending  on  the  brand,  kernel  size,  geo-
graphical origin  and the way the grain  has been  stored.

The  standard  spawn  container  for  the  home  cultivator  is  the  quart  mason  jar  while  the
commercial  spawn  maker  prefers the  gallon jar.  Wide  mouth  mason jars  have  been  extensively
used by home cultivators because of several books popularizing fruitbody production in these jars.
Wide mouth jars have been preferred because mushrooms grown in them are easier to harvest Than
those  in  narrow  mouth  ones.  Not  only  is  this  method  of  growing  mushrooms  outdated,  but wide
mouth jars  have  several  disadvantages  for  spawn  production  and  hence  are  not  recommended.
Narrow  mouthed  containers  have  less chance of contaminating  from  airborne spores because of
their smaller  openings  and  are  more  suited  to  use  with  synthetic  filter  discs.  The  purpose  of  the
spawn container is to temporarily house the incubating mycelium before it is laid out in trays or used
to inoculate bulk substrates. Jars are not well suited as a fruiting container.

Most commercial spawn  makers cap their spawn  bottles with synthetic filter discs which allow
air penetration  and  gaseous  exchange  but  not  the  free  passage  of  contaminating  spores.  Home
cultivators, on the other hand, have used inverted mason lids which imperfectly seal and allow some

Figure 45 Two Jars
before and after
autoclaving using the
above formulas
of grain media,

46/The Mushroom Cultivator

air exchange.  This method works fine under sterile conditions although the degree of filtration is not
guaranteed.  The  best  combination  uses  filter  discs  in  conjunction  with  one  piece  screw  top lids
having a 3/8-1/2 inch diameter hole drilled into its center and fitting a narrow mouthed autoclavable
container. The authors personally find the  regular  mouthed  1/2  gallon  mason jar to be ideal.  (Note:
These  '/2  gallon jars are inoculated from quart masters,  a technique soon to  be discussed).  Using
only filter discs on  wide  mouth jars is not recommended due to the excessive evaporation from the
grain  medium.

To produce grain spawn of 48-52%  moisture use the formulas outlined below and autoclave in
a pressure cooker for 1  hour at 15-18 psi. Note that considerable variation exists between measur-
ing cups,  differing  as  much  as  10%  in  their volumes.  Check the measuring cup with a graduated
cylinder.  Once standardized,  fashion a  "grain  scoop"  and  a  "water scoop" from  a  plastic container
to  the  proportions  specified  below.

Spawn  Formulas

QUART  JARS
1  cup rye grain
2/3-3/4cup water

240  ml.  grain
170-200 ml.

or

(approximately)

1/2 GALLON  JARS
3  cups  rye  grain
1 3/4 cups water

600  ml.  rye  grain
water  400-460  ml.water

Figure  46
Commercial  spawn
maker's  autoclave.

Grain  Culture/47

Figure  47
vator.

Pressure  cooker  of  home  culti-

Figure 48  The rubber tire is a helpful
tool for the spawn laboratory. It is used
to  loosen  grain  spawn.

The above formulas fill a quart or a half gallon jar to nearly  2/3 of its capacity after autoclaving.  In all
these formulas,  chalk (CaC03} and gypsum  (CaS04) can  be added at a rate of  1-3 parts by weight
per  100  parts  of  grain  (dry  weight).  The  ratio  of  chalk  to  gypsum  is  1:4.  The  addition  of these
elements to spawn is optional for most species but necessary when growing Agaricus brunnescens.
When these calcium  buffers are used,  add  10%  more water than  that listed above.

Once the grain filled jars have been autoclaved, they should be placed in the sterile room and
allowed to cool.  Prior to this point,  the room and  its air should be disinfected,  either through  the use
of traditional  cleaning  methods,  HEPA filters  or  both.

Upon removing the warm jars from the pressure cooker or autoclave, shake them to loosen the
grain and to evenly distribute wet and dry kernels.  Shaking also prevents the kernels at the bottom
of  the jar  from  clumping.

An  excellent tool to help  in this procedure is a bald car tire or padded chair.  Having been care-
fully cleaned and disinfected, the tire should be mounted in an upright and stable position. The tire
has a perfect surface against which to shake the jars, minimizing discomfort to the hands and reduc-
ing the risk of injury from breakage. The tire will be used at another stage in grain culture, so it
should be cleaned  regularly.  Paint shakers are  employed  by commercial spawn  makers for this
same  purpose  but they are  inappropriate for the  home cultivator.  CAUTION: ALWAYS  INSPECT

-  JARS  FOR  CRACKS  BEFORE  SHAKING.
When  the  grain jars  have  returned to room  temperature,  agar to  grain  inoculations can  com-

48/The Mushroom Cultivator

mence.  Once again,  good hygiene is of the upmost importance. When transferring mycelium from
agar to grain, another dimension is added in which contaminants can replicate.  In agar culture, the
mycelium grows over a flat, two dimensional surface.  If contamination is present, it is easily seen  In
grain  culture,  however,  the  added dimension  of depth  comes into  play and contaminants become
more elusive, often escaping detection from the most discerning eye.  If not noticed, contamination
will  be  spread when this spawn  is used to inoculate more sterilized  grain.

Before conducting transfers, take precautions to insure the sterile quality of the inoculation en-
vironment. After cleaning the room, do not jeopardize its cleanliness by wearing soiled clothes. Few
cultivators take into consideration that they are a major source of contamination. In fact, the human
body is in itself a habitat crawling with bacteria,  microscopic mites, and resplendent with spores of
plants  and  fungi.

When  satisfied  that  all  these  preparatory  conditions  are  in  force,  the  making  of spawn  can

begin.
Inoculation  of  Sterilized  Grain  from  Agar  Media

Select a vigorously growing culture whose mycelium covers no more than  34 of the agar's sur-
face.  Cultures  that  have  entirely  overrun  the  petri  dish  should  be  avoided  because  contaminants
often  enter along the margin of the petri dish.  If that outer edge is grown over with mycelium, these
invaders can  go  undetected.  Since this peripheral  mycelium  can  become  laden  with  contaminant
spores,  any  grain  inoculated with  it would  become  spoiled.

Flame sterilize a  scalpel and cut out a  triangular wedge  of mycelium  covered agar  using the
technique described for doing agar-to-agar transfers.  With  careful,  deliberate  movements quickly
transfer the wedge  to an  awaiting jar,  exposing  the  grain  for a  minimal  amount of time.  For each
transfer, flame sterilize the scalpel and inoculate wedges of mycelium into as many jars as desired. A
petri dish two thirds covered with mycelium should amply inoculate 6-8 quart jars of grain. (A maxi-
mum  of  10-12 jars is possible). The  more  mycelia transferred,  the faster the colonization and the
less chance of contamination. Since these jars become the "master cultures", do everything possi-
ble to guarantee the  highest standard of purity.

The  authors  recommend  a  "double  wedge"  transfer  technique  whereby  a  single  triangular
wedge of mycelium  is cut in  half,  both  pieces are speared and then  inserted into an awaiting jar ot
sterilized grain. Jars inoculated with this method grow out far faster than the single wedge transfer
technique.

Loosening the lids prior to inoculation facilitates speedy transfers. As each agar-to-grain transter
is completed, replace the lid and continue to the next inoculation. Once the set is finished, tightly «
cure the lids and shake each jar thoroughly to evenly distribute the mycelial wedges. In the course
shaking, each wedge travels throughout the grain media leaving mycelial fragments adhering to
grain kernels. If a wedge sticks to the glass, distribution is hampered and spawn running is inhibi
This  problem  is  usually  an  indication  of  agar  media  that  has  been  too thinly  poured  or  has  D'
allowed to dehydrate. Once shaken, incubate the spawn jars at The appopriate temperature. (A -
ond shaking may be necessary on Day 4 or Day 5).  In general, the grain should be fully coloni
with  mycelium  in  seven to ten days.

Grain  Culture/49

culation  of  Grain  from  Grain  Masters
Once fully colonized,  these  grain  masters  are  now  used  for  the  further  production  of  grain
spawn in quart or '/2 gallon containers. Masters must be transferred within a few days of Their full col-
otherwise the  myceliated  kernels do  nof break apart easily.  A step by step description  of

the  grain  to-grain transfer  technique  follows.

1  Carefully scrutinize each jar for any signs of contamination.  Look for such abnormalities as:
heavy growth;  regions of sparse,  inhibited growth;  slimy or wet looking  kernels (an  indica-
tion  of  bacteria);  exploded  kernels  with  pallid,  irregular  margins;  and  any  unusual  colora-
tions.  If  in  doubt  lift the  lid  and  smell  the  spawn—a  sour  "rotten  apple"  or otherwise  pun-
qent odor is usually an indication of contamination by bacteria. Jars having this scent should
be  discarded.  (Sometimes  spawn  partially  contaminated  with  bacteria  can  be  cased  and
fruited).  Do  NOT  use  any jar  with  a  suspect  appearance for  subsequent  inoculations.

2.  After choosing  the  best  looking  spawn  masters,  break  up The  grain  in  each jar  by shaking
the jars  against  a  tire  or slamming  them  against  the  palm  of the  hand.  The  grain  should
break easily into individual  kernels. 'Shake as many masters as needed knowing That each
jar can amply inoculaTe ten To twelve quart jars or seven To nine  half gallon jars.

Once  completed,  SET  THE  SPAWN  JARS  ON  A  SEPARATE  SHELF  AND  WAIT
TWELVE TO TWENTY-FOUR HOURS BEFORE USING. This waiTing period is impor-
tanT because some of The spawn  may not recover,  suffering usually from  bacterial contami-
nation.  Had these jars been used, the contamination rate would  have been multiplied by a
factor  of  ten.

3.  Inspect the jars again for signs of contamination. After twelve to TwenTy-four hours.  The my-

celium  shows  signs  of  renewed  growth.

4.  If the  masters  had  been  shaken  the  night before,  the  inoculations can  begin  the following
morning or as soon as the receiving jars (G-2) have cooled. Again, wash the lab, be person-
ally clean  and wear  newly  laundered  clothes.

Place  10 sterilized grain-filled jars on the work-bench in the sterile room. Loosen each
of  the  lids  so  they  can  be  removed  with  one  hand.  Gently  shake  the  master jar  until  the
grain spawn  separates into individual kernels.  Hold the master in your preferred hand.  Re-
move the master's lid and then with the other hand open the first jar to be inoculated. With a
rolling of the  wrist,  pour one  tenth  of  the  master's contents  into  the first jar,  replace  its  lid
and continue to The second, third, fourth jars, until The set is completed. When this first set is
done,  firmly secure the lids. Replace the lid on the now empty spawn master jar and put it

aside. Take each newly inoculated jar, and with a combination of rolling and shaking, dis-
tribute the mycelium covered kernels evenly throughout.

5.Incubate at the temperature appropriate for the species being cultivated. In a week the
mycelium should totaly permiate the grain. Designated G-2, these jars can be used for fur-
ther inoculations, as spawn for the inoculation of bulk substrates, or as a fruiting medium.
Some species are less aggressive than others. Agaricus brunnescens, for instance, can take up

50/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

Figure  49  Flaming
the scalpel.

Figure  50  Cutting
two  wedges  of
mycelium  colonized
agar.

Figure  51
Inoculating  sterilized
grain.

Grain  Culture/51

and a  half weeks to colonize  grain  while  Psilocybe cubensis grows through  in  a week to ten
Here again, the use of the tire as a striking surface can be an aid to shaking.  For slower grow-
snecies,  a  common  shaking  schedule  is on  the 5th and 9th days after inoculation.  The cultures
hould  be  incubated  in  a  semi-sterile  environment  at  the  temperature  most  appropriate  for  the
species  being  cultivated.  (See  Chapter XI).

After transferring  mycelium from agar to grain, further transfers can  be conducted from these
arain  cultures to  even  more  grain  filled jars.  A schedule of successive  transfers from  the first  inocu-
lated  grain jar,  designated  G-1,  through  two  more  "generations"  of transfers  (G-2,  G-3  respective-
ly)  will  result in  an  exponential  expansion  of mycelial  mass.  If for instance,  10 jars were  inoculated
from  an  agar  grown  culture  (G-1),  they  could  further  inoculate  100 jars  (G-2)  which  in  turn  could
qo into 1000 jars (G-3). As one can  see,  it is of critical  importance that the first set of spawn  masters
be  absolutely  pure  for  it  may  ultimately  inoculate as  many  as  1,000 jars!  Inoculations  beyond the
third generation of transfers are not recommended.  Indeed, if a contamination rate above 10% is ex-
perienced at the second generation of transfers, then consider G-2 a terminal stage. These cultures
can  inoculate  bulk  substrates  or be  laid  out in  trays,  cased and fruited.

Grain-to-grain transfers are one of the most efficient methods of spawn making. This method is
preferred  by most commercial  spawn  laboratories specializing  in Agaricus culture.  They in  turn sell
grain  spawn  that  is a second  or third  transfer to Agaricus farmers who  use this to  impregnate their
compost. For the creation of large quantities of spawn, the grain-to-grain technique is far superior to
agar-to-grain  for both  its  ease  and  speed.  However,  every  cultivator  must ultimately  return  to  agar
culture  in  order  to  maintain  the  purity  of  the  strain.

ready  for  transfer.

Spawn master

Figure 52b  Spawn  master
after  shaking.

Figure  52c 
Inoculating
sterilized  grain from spawn
master.

52/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

Figure 53  Spawn jar contaminated with Wet Spot bacteria, giving the grain a greasy
appearance and emitting a sour odor.

Figure 54  Spawn ja
with  Heavy Growth,
undesirable
characteristic arising
from  cottony  sectors-

Grain  Culture/53

Figure 55  Diagramatic expansion of mycelial mass using grain-to-grain transfer fech-
nique. One petri dish can inoculate  10 spawn jars (G-1) which in turn can be used to
inoculate 100 more jars (G-2) and eventually 1000 jars of spawn (G-3) provided the cul-
ture remains pure.

54/The Mushroom Cultivator

ALTERNATIVE  SPAWN  MEDIA

Some  mushroom species do  not grow well on  grain  and are better suited to alternative spawn
media.  Other  mushrooms  are  grown  on  substrates  incompatible  with  grain  spawn.  For  example
sawdust and bran are the preferred spawn  materials for the cultivations of wood inhabitors such as
Lentinus edodes and Flammulina velutipes.  Another spawn  media  has a  perlite bran base.  Perlite is
vitreous  rock,  heated  to  1000°F.  and  exploded  like  popcorn.  The  thin  flakes  of  bran  are  readiiu
sterilized while  the  perlife gives the  medium  its structure.  The  recipes are:

Sawdust/Bran  Spawn

Perlite  Spawn

4  parts  sawdust  (hardwood)
1  part bran  (rice or wheat)
Soak  the  sawdust  in  water  for  a  least
twenty  four  hours,  allow  to  drain  and  then
thoroughly mix in the bran.  If the mixture has
the  proper  moisture  content,  a  firm  squeeze
results in a few drops between the fingers. Fill
the  material  firmly  to  the  neck  of  the  spawn
container  (wide  mouth).  Japanese  spawn
makers  bore  a  Yz  inch  diameter  hole  down
the  center  of  the  media  into  which  they  later
insert their  inoculum.  Sterilize  for  60-90  min-
utes  at  15  psi.  Once  cooled,  inoculate  from
agar  media,  liguid  emulsion,  or  grain.  A  fully
grown  bottle of sawdust bran  spawn can  also
be  used  for  further  inoculations.

120  milliliters water
40  grams  perlite
50  grams  wheat  bran
6  grams  gypsum  (calcium  sulfate)
1.5  grams  calcium  carbonate
Screen  the  perlite  To  remove  the  fine
powder  and  particulates.  Fill  the  container
(small  mouth)  with  the  dry  ingredients  and
mix well.  Add  the water and continue  mixing
until  the  ingredients  are  thoroughly  mois-
tened. Sterilize for one hour at 15 psi. Inocu-
late  from  agar  media  or  liquid  emulsion.

Figure 56 Mycelium running
through sawdust/bran spawn.

Grain  Culture/55

LIQUID INOCULATION TECHNIQUES

A  highly  effective  technique for  inoculating  grain  utilizes the  suspension  of fragmented  mush-
mycelia  in  sterile  water.  This  mycelium  enriched  solution,  containing  hundreds  of  minute

pllular chains,  is then  injected into a jar of sterilized grain. As this water seeps down through the

in  mycelial fragments are evenly distributed,  each one of which becomes a point of inoculation.
For several days little or no sign of growth may be apparent.  On the fourth to fifth day after injection,
aiven  optimum  incubation  temperatures,  sites  of actively  growing  mycelium  become  visible.  In  a
matter  of  hours,  these  zones  enlarge  and  the  grain  soon  becomes  engulfed  with  mycelium.  Using
the liquid  inoculation  Technique eliminates the  need for  repeated shaking,  and a single  plate of
mycelium can  inoculate up to  100 jars, more than ten times the number inoculated by the tradition-
al  transfer  method.  There  are  several  ways  to  suspend  mycelium  in  water,  two  of  which  are  de-
scribed here.

The first method  is quite  simple.  Using  an  autoclaved  glass syringe,  inject 3O-5O  ml.  of steri-

lized water into a healthy culture. Then scrape the surface of the mycelial mat, drawing up as many
fragments of mycelium as possible.  As little as 5  ml.  of mycelial suspension adequately inoculates a
quart jar of grain.

The  second  method  incoporates  a  blender  with  an  autoclavable  container-stirrer  assembly.
(Several companies sell aluminum and stainless steel units specifically manufactured for liquid cul-
ture techniques—refer to the sources listed in the Appendix). Fill with water until two thirds to three
quarters full, cover with aluminum foil  (if a Tight fitting metal top is not handy), sterilize and allow to
cool  to  room  temperature.

Under  aseptic  conditions,  insert an  entire  agar culture  of vigorously  grown  mycelium  into  the
sterilized  stirrer by  cutting  it  into four quadrants or into  narrow strips.  Because  many contaminants
appear along  the  outer  periphery of a  culture  dish,  it  is  recommended  that these  regions  not be
used.  Place all four quadrants or mycelial strips into the liquid. Turn on the blender at high speed for
no  longer than  5  seconds.  (Longer stirring times  result not in the fragmentation of cell  chains but in
The fracturing  of individual  cells.  Such  suspensions are inviable).  Draw  up 5-10  ml.  of the  mycelium
concentrate and inoculate an awaiting grain jar.

A further improvement on this technique calls for a 10:1  dilution of the concentrated mycelial
solution.  Inject  50  ml.  of  mycelial  suspension  into  four  vessels  containing  450  ml.  of  sterilized
water.  Narrow mouth quart mason jars are well suited to this technique.  Gently shaking each jar will
help evenly distribute the mycelium. Next incoluate the grain jars with 10-15 millilitersof the diluted
solufion. This method results in an exponential increase of liquid inoculum with the water acting as a
vehicle  for  carrying  the  mycelial  fragments  deep  into  the  grain  filled jar.  This  is  only one  technique
using water suspended fragments of mycelium.  Undoubtedly, there will be further improvements as
^ycophiles  experiment  and  develop  their  own  techniques.

When using metal lids a small 1-2 mm. hole can be drilled and then covered with tape. When
fhe sterilized containers are to be inoculated,  remove the tape,  insert the needle of syringe, inject the
Suspension of mycelia and replace the tape.  In this way. the aperture through which the inoculation

56/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

Figure  57  Drawing  up  mycelium  from  culture  dish  with  syringe.
Figure  58  Syringe  inoculation  of  sterilized  grain.
Figure  59  Eberbach  container  manufactured  for  liquid  culture.  Note  bolt  covering
inoculation  hole.
Figure 60  Drawing  up  liquid  inoculum.

Grain  Culture/57

takes place is of minimal size and is exposed for a only second or two. The chance of airborne con-

tamination  is  minimized.

The liquid inoculation technique works well provided the cultures selected are free from foreign
spores; otherwise the entire set of jars inoculated from that dish will  be lost. The disadvantage with
this method is that there is no opportunity to avoid suspect zones on the culture dish—the water sus-
pends contaminant spores and mycelia alike.  If a culture dish  is contaminated in one region, a few
jars  may  be  lost  via  the  traditional  inoculation  method  while  with  the  liquid  inoculation  technique
whole  sets  of  up  to  one  hundred  spawn  jars would  be  made  useless.

Although  mycelial  suspensions created  in  this  manner work for  many species,  the mycelia  of

some  mushrooms  do  not  survive  the  stirring  process.

INCUBATION  OF  SPAWN

With each step in the cultivation process, the mycelial mass and its host substrate increases.  In

seven  days to two weeks after inoculation,  the spawn jars should  be fully colonized with  mushroom
mycelia. The danger here is that, if contamination goes undetected, that mold or bacterium will like-
wise be  produced  in  iarge quantities.  Hence,  as time  goes  by the  importance  of clean  masters be-
comes  paramount.  By  balancing  environmental  parameters  during 
incubation,  especially
temperature,  the  mycelium  is favored.

Once the jars  have  been  inoculated,  store  them  on  shelves  in  a  sernisterile room whose tem-
perature can  be easily controlled.  Light and  humidity are not important at this time as a sealed jar
should retain its moisture. Air circulation is important only if the incubating jars overheat.  In  packing
a room tightly with spawn jars,  overheating is a danger.  Many thermophilic fungi that are inactive at
room  temperature  flourish  at  temperatures  too  high  for  mushrooms.  Herein  lies  one  of  the  major
problems  with  rooms  having  a  high  density  of  incubating  spawn jars.  If possible,  some  provisions
should  be  made  Jo  prevent temperature  stratification  in  the  incubation  environment.

The major factor influencing the rate of mycelial growth is temperature.  For every species there
is an optimum temperature at which the rate of mycelial growth is maximized. As a general  rule, the
best temperature for vegetative (spawn) growth is several degrees higher than the one most stimula-
tory  for  fruiting.  In  Chapter  XI.  these  optimum  temperatures  and  other  parameters  are  listed  for
more than a dozen cultivated mushrooms. Yet another factor affecting both growth rate and suscep-
tibility  to  contamination  is  moisture  content,  a  subject  covered  in  the  previous  chapter  on  grain
culture.

Every  day  or  so  inspect  the jars  and  check  for  the  slightest  sign  of  contamination.  The  most
common  are the  green  molds Penicillium and Aspergiltus.  If contamination  is detected,  sea  the lid
and  remove the  infected culture from  the  laboratory and  growing facility.  If a jar is suspected to be
contaminated,  mark  it for future  inspection.

Not  all  discolorations  of  the  grain  are  de  facto  contaminants.  Mushroom  mycelium  exudes  a
yellowish  liquid  metabolite  that collects  as  droplets  around  the  myceliated  kernels  of  grain.  As  the
culture ages and the kernels are digested, more metabolic wastes are secreted. Although this secre-

58/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

Figure 61  Half gallon jars of spawn incu- 
bating  in  sernisterile  environment. 

Figure 62  Gallon jars incubating  in semi-
sterile  environment.

tion  is  mostly  composed  of alcohols  (ethanol  and  acetone),  in  time acids are  produced that cause
the lowering of The substrate's pH. These waste products are favorable to the propagation of bacteria
that  thrive  in  aqueous  environments.  Small  amounts  of  this  fluid  do  not  endanger  the  culture;
excessive waste fluids (where the culture takes on a yellowish hue) are definitely detrimental.  If this
fluid collects in quantities, the mycelium sickens and eventually dies in its own wastes. Such exces-
sive  "sweating"  is  indicative  of  one  or  a  combination  of the  following  conditions:

1.  Incubation at too high a temperature for the species being cultivated. Note that the tempera-

ture  within  a  spawn  jar  is  several  degrees  higher  than  the  surrounding  air  temperature.

2.  Over-aging  of  the  cultures;  too  lengthy  an  incubation  period.
3.  Lack  of  gas  exchange,  encouraging  anaerobic  contamination.
Contaminated jars should be sterilized on a weekly basis.  Do not dig out moldy cultures unless
they  have been  autoclaved or if the  identity of the contaminant in  question  is known  to be  benign.
Several contaminants in  mushroom culture are pathogenic to humans,  causing a variety of skin dis-
eases  and  respiratory  ailments.  (See  Chapter  XIII  on  the  contmaninants  of  mushroom  culture).
Autoclave contaminated jars for 30  minutes at  1 5  psi and clean soon  after.  Many autoclaved jars,
once contaminated, re-contaminate within only a few days if their contents have been not discarded.

Grain Culture/59

Figure  63  Chart  showing  influence  of  temperature  on  the  rate  of  mycelial  growth  in
Psilocybe  cubensis  and  Psilocybe  mexicana.  (Adapted  from  Ames  et  al.,  1958).

If an exceptionally high contamination rate persists, review the possible sources of contamina-
tion, particularly the quality of the master spawn cultures (such as the moisture content of the grain)
and the general hygiene of the immediate environment. Once the cultures have grown through with
mycelium and are of known purity, this spawn can be used to inoculate bulk substrates or can be
layed  out  in  trays,  cased  and  fruited.

The  Mushroom  Growing  Room/61

CHAPTER  IV

THE  MUSHROOM
GROWING  ROOM

Figure 64  Small growing room utilizing shelves.

62/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

STRUCTURE AND GROWING SYSTEMS

Mushroom  cultivation  was  originally  an  outdoor  activity  dependent  on  seasonal  conditions

Substrates  were  prepared  and  spawned  when  outside  temperatures  and  humidity  were
favorable.  This  is  still  the  case  with  many  small  scale  growers of  Volvariella  volvacea,  Stropharia
rugoso-annulata  and  Lentinus  edodes.

Agaricus cultivators grow solely indoors.  Initially, Agaricus growers in  France adapted the lime-
stone  mines  near  Paris and  in  the  Loire  valley to  meet the  necessary  cultural  requirements of that
mushroom.  These "caves" were well suited because of their constant temperature and  high  humid-
ity, essential requirements for mushroom growing. When the first houses designed solely for mush-
rooms were built in the early  1 900's, temperature and  humidity control were the main factors guid-
ing  their  construction.

For the  home  cultivator,  a  growing  room  should  be  scaled  according  to the scope of the proj-
ect.  The following  guidelines supply the  information to properly design  and eguip a  growing cham-
ber,  basement  growing  room,  outdoor  shed  or  garage.

Figure  65  An 

insulated  plastic  greenhouse  suitable  for  mushroom  growing.

The  Mushroom  Growing  Room/63

Structure

The  basic  structure  of a  mushroom  house  is  made  of wood  or  concrete  block  with  a  cement
floor  Because  water collects  on  the floor during  the  cropping  cycle,  provisions  should  be  made  for
drainage.  A wood floor can  be  covered  with  a  heavy guage  plastic.  Interior walls,  ceilings and ex-
nosed wood surfaces should  be treated  with  a  marine enamel  or epoxy-plasTic  based  paint.  A white

color enhances lighting  and  exposes  any  conlaminating  molds.

The most important feature of a growing room  is the ability to maintain a constant temperature.
In this respect, insulation is critical. The walls should be insulated with R = 11  or R = 19 and the ceil-
ing  with  R = 30  insulating  materials.  Fiberglass  or  styrofoam  work  well  but  should  be  protected
from  the  high  humidities of the  growing  room  to  prevent water from  saturating  them.  For  This  pur-
pose,  a  2-4  mil.  plastic  vapor  barrier  is  placed  between  The  insulation  and  the  interior wall.

An  airtight  room  is  an  essential  feature  of  the  mushroom  growing  environment,  preventing  in-
sects and spores from entering as well as giving  the cultivator full control  over the fresh air supply.
During The construction or modification of The room, all cracks, seams and joints should be carefully
sealed.

Many  growers  modify  existing  rooms  in  their  own  homes  or  basements.  The  main  considera-
tion  for this  approach  is to  protect the  house  strucTure  (normally wood)  from  water damage  and  to
make  the  growing  chamber airtight.  This  is accomplished  by  plastic  sheets stapled  or taped  to  the
walls, ceiling and floor, with the seams and adjoining pieces well sealed. If the room is adjacent to an
exterior  house wall  where  a  wide  temperature  fluctuation  occurs,  condensation  may form  between
the plastic and The wall.  Within these  larger structures,  a  plastic  TenT or envelope room can  be con-

Figure 66  Cultivation of mushrooms in an aquarium.

64/The Mushroom Cultivator

structed.  Such  a  structure  can  be framed with  2"  PVC  pipe.  The  pipe  forms a  box frame  to which
the plastic is attached.  This type of growing  room  should  not need  insulation  because of the air buf-
fer  between  it  and  the  larger  room.

Porches,  basements and garages can  all be modified  in the ways just mentioned. These areas
can  also  be  used  with  little  additional  change  if  the  climate  of  the  region  is  compatible  with  the
mushroom  species  being  grown.  For  example,  Lentinus  edodes,  the  shiitake  mushroom,  readily
fruits  at  50-60  degrees  F.  in  a  garage  or  basement  environment.

The  newest  innovation  in  mushroom  growing  structures  is  the  insulated  plastic  greenhouse.
The  framework  is  made  of  galvinized  metal  pipe  bent  into  a  semi-circular  shape  and  mounted  at
ground  level  or on  a 3.5 foot side wall.  The  ends  of the walls and the  doors are framed with wood.
Heavy  plastic  (5-6  mil)  is stretched over the  metal  framework to form  the  inner skin  of the  room.  A
layer of wire  mesh  is  laid  over the  plastic and functions to  hold 3-6  inches of fiberglass insulation  in
place.  A  second  plastic  sheet  covers  the  insulation  and  protects  it  from  the  weather.  The  plastic
should be stretched tight and anchored well. These layers are held in place by structural cable span-
ning the top and secured at each side.  (See Figure 65}. This type of structure,  plastic coverings and
plastic  fasteners  are  all  available at nursery  supply companies.  Remember,  the  design  of a  mush-
room  growing  room  strives  to  minimize  heat  gain  and  loss.

For  people  with  little  or  no  available  space,  "mini-culture"  in  small  environmental  chambers
may be the most appropriate way to grow mushrooms. Styrofoarn ice chests, aquariums and plastic
lined wood  or cardboard  boxes  can  all  be  used  successfully.  Because  of the  small  volume  of sub-
strates  contained  in  one  of  these  chambers,  air  exchange  requirements  are  minimal.  Usually,
enough  air is exchanged  in opening the  chamber for a daily or twice daily misting.  Clear,  perforated
plastic covering  the  opening  maintains  the  necessary  humidity and  the  heat can  be  supplied  by the
outer room.  Larger chambers can  be equipped with  heating  coils or a  light bulb  on  a  rheostat.  Both
should be mounted at the base of the chamber.  Mini-culture is an excellent and proven way To grow
small quantities of mushrooms for those not having the time or resources to erect larger,  more con-
trolled  environments.

Shelves

The most common  indoor cultivation  method is the shelf system.  In this system,  shelves form a
platform  upon  which  the  mushroom  growing  substrate  is  placed.  The  shelf  framework  consists  of
upright posts with  cross bars at each  level to support the shelf boards. This fixed framework is con-
structed of wood  or non-corrosive tubular metal.  The shelves should  be a  preservative-treated soft-
wood. The bottom  boards are  commonly six inches wide with one inch  spaces  between  them.  Side
boards are  6-8  inches high  depending on the depth  of fill.  A standardized design  is shown  in  Figure
67.  All  shelf  boards  are  placed  unattached  thereby  allowing  easy  filling,  emptying  and  cleaning.
Agaricus growers fill the shelf house from  the  bottom  up. The shelf boards are stacked at the side of
the  room  and  put  into  place  after  each  level  is  completed.

The  center  pole  design  (shown  in  Figure  67)  is  a  simple  variation  that  is  less  restrictive  and
ideally suited for growing in  plastic bags. Another alternative is to use metal storage shelves. These

The Mushroom Growing Room/65

Figure  67  Double  support  and  centerpole  design  shelves.  Both  shelves  are firmly  at-
tached  to the floor and the ceiling.

units  come  in  a  variety of widths and  lengths and  have the  distinct advantage of being  impervious to
disease  growth.  Their  use  is  particularly  appropriate  for  cropping  on  sterilized  substrates  in  small
containers.

Trays

The  development of the  tray system  in Agaricus culture  is  largely  due to the work  of  Dr.  James
Sinden.  In direct contrast to anchored static shelves, trays are individual  cropping units that have the
distinct advantage  of being  mobile.  This  mobility  has  made  mechanization  of commercial  cutlivation
possible.  Automated  tray  lines  are  capable  of filling,  spawning  and  casing  in  less  time,  with  fewer
people  and  with  better  quality  management.

Whereas in the shelf system all stages of the cultural cycle occur in the same room, The tray sys-
tem  utilizes  a  separate  room  for  Phase  II  composting.  On  a  commercial  tray  farm  only  the  Phase  II
room  is equipped for steaming and high velocity air movement.

A  Sinden  system  tray  design  is  shown  in  Figure  68.  This tray  has short  legs  in  the  up-position.
During  Phase  II  and  spawn  running  these trays are  stacked  1 5  cm.  apart and  tightly  placed  within
to fully  utilize compost  heat.  After  casing,  a  wooden  spacer  is  inserted  between  the  trays
theroom 
forcrop  management,  increasing  the space to 25-35 cm.  Other tray designs  have  longer legs in the
down position  and  higher  sideboards  to  accomodate  more  compost.  These  trays  are  similarly
spaced  throughout  the  cycle.  In  the  growing  room,  trays  can  be  stacked  3-6  high  in  evenly  spaced
rows.  The  main  considerations  for  the  home  cultivator  are  that  the  trays  can  be  easily  handled  and
that  they  fit  the  floor  space  of  the  room.

The real advantage of the tray system  is the ability to fill, spawn and case single units in an unre-

66/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figure  68  Sinden  system
tray.  The  tray  can  be  con-
structed of  1  x 6 or 2 x 6 inch
lumber  for  bottom  and  side
boards and  4 x4  inch  corner
posts. (1  x 8 or 2 x 8 inch side
boards 
for
deep  fills).

are  suggested 

stricled  environment  outside  the  actual  growing  room.  The  tray  system  also  gives  the  cultivator
more  control  over  hygiene  and  improves the  efficiency of the operation.  Moving  trays from  room  to
room  does  present  contamination  possibilities;  therefore,  the  operations  room  must  also  be  clean
and fly tight for spawning and casing.  Because there is no fixed framework in the growing room,  it is
easily  cleaned  and  disinfected.

The tray  method  has  many  distinct advantages  over the  mason jar  method  for  home  cultivators
preferring  to  fruit  mushrooms  on  sterilized  grain.  These  advantages  are:  fewer  necessary  spawn
containers;  fewer  aborts  due  to  uncontrolled  primordia  formation  between  the  glass/grain  interface;
ease  of  picking  and  watering;  better  ratio  of  surface  area  to  grain  depth;  and  comparatively  higher
yields on  the first and second flushes.  An  inexpensive tray  is the  3-4 inch  deep  plant propagation flat
commonly  sold  for  staring  seedlings.  An  example  of  such  a  tray  is  pictured  in  Fig.  69.

THE  ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL SYSTEM

The  mushroom  growing  room  is designed  to  maintain  a selected temperature  range at  high  rel-
ative  humidities.  This  is  accomplished  Through  adequate  insulation  and  an  environmental  control
system  with  provisions  for  heating,  cooling,  humidification  and  air  handling.

In  the  original  shelf  houses  the  environment  was  controlled  by  a  combination  of  active  and
passive  means.  Fresh  air was  introduced  through  adjustable  vents  running the  length  of the  ceiling
above  the  center  aisle.  Heat was  supplied  by  a  hot water  pipe  along  The  side walls,  a  foot above
ground  level.  And  humidity  was controlled  by similarly  placed  piping  carrying  live steam.  The warm
air rising up the walls in combination with the cool fresh air falling down the center aisle created con-
vection  currents  for  air  circulation.  Although  no  longer  in  general  use  by  Agaricus  growers,  air
movement  based  on  convection  can  be  similarly  designed  for  small  growth  chambers where  me-
chanical  means  are  inappropriate.

Present  day  Agaricus  farms  integrate  heating,  cooling  and  humidification  equipment  into  the
air  handling  system  and  in  this way are able to achieve  balanced conditions throughout the  growing
room.  Figure  73  shows  an  example  of  this  type  of  system.

Fresh  Air

Filtered fresh  air enters  the  room  at  the  mixing  box where  it  is  proportionally  regulated  with  re-

The  Mushroom  Growing  Room/67

Figure  69  Psilocybe  cubensis fruiting  on
cased  grain  in  a tray.
Figure  70  Psilocybe  cubensis  fruiting  in
pint  and  a  half jars.
Figure  71
pint  jars.
Figure  72 Psilocybe  cubensis  fruiting  in

Psilocybe  cubensis  fruiting  in

plastic  lined  box.

68/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figure 73  Standard  ventilation  system  used  by Agaricus growers.  (After Vedder)

circulated  air  by  a  single  damper.  To  prevent  leakage  during  spawn  running  and  pre-pinning, the
damper fits tightly  against  the  fresh  air  inlet.  This  allows  full  recirculation  of  room  air to  maintain
even  conditions,  thereby  counteracting  temperature and C02  stratification.  When  fresh  air is re-
quired, the damper can be adjusted to any setting, including complete closure of the recirculation in-
let. As fresh air is introduced, room air is displaced and evacuated through an exhaust vent or cracks
around the door.  Because fresh air is generally at a different temperature than the one required for
the  growing  room,  it  must  be  used judiciously  in  order to  avoid  disrupting  the  growing  room  envi-
ronment  or  overworking  the  heating,  cooling  and  humidication  systems.  By  properly  mixing  the
fresh  outside  air and the  room  air,  a  balance  can  be  achieved  and  optimum  conditions for mush-
room  growth  prevail.

Fresh air serves many important functions in mushroom culture, primarily by supplying oxygen

to the growing mushrooms and carrying away C02.  Fresh air also facilitates moisture evaporation
from  the  cropping  surface.  To  determine the  exact amount of air needed  in  a  given  situation, a
knowledge of the C02  requirements for the species being  grown  is  necessary.  (See Chapter XI on
growing parameters for various species). The fresh air can also be measured in terms of air changes
per  hour,  a  common  way  mushroom  growers  size  the  fan  in  the  growing  room.

Fans

Axial flow and centrifugal fans are the two most commonly used in mushroom houses, Both
fans operate well against high static  pressure,  which is a  measure of the  resistance to forced air.
Static pressure is measured in inches of water gauge—the height in inches to which the pressure lifts
a column of water—and is caused by filters, heating and cooling coils or other obstructions to the
free flow of air.  Fans are rated in terms of their output, a measurement of cubic feet per minute
(CFM) at varying static pressures (S.P.). When choosing a fan, these two factors must be considered
for  proper  sizing.

The Mushroom Growing Room/69

Agaricus growers  use  fans capable of 4-6 changes  per  hour,  or O.5  CFM  per  square foot of
cropping surface.  For most small growing  rooms,  an axial  flow fan,  6-1O  inches in  diameter and
delivering  between  1OO-500  CFM  at up to O.5 inches of static pressure,  should meet general
arowing requirements. The addition of a variable speed motor control allows precise air velocity ad-
justment during different phases of the  cultural  cycle. This is especially important if the static pres-
sure increases from spore build-up in the filter. A convenient method of testing air circulation is by
blowing a small amount of cigarette smoke onto the cropping surface: the smoke should dissipate
within  twenty  seconds.

The  minimum  fan  output for a  given  room  can  be  determined  through  knowledge  of the  air
changes  per  hour  required  by  the  mushroom  species.  First  calculate  the  volume  of the  room  in
cubic feet (height x width x length) and substract from this The volume occupied by trays, shelves,
substrate and other fixtures. This figure is the free air space in the room. By dividing the CFM (cubic
feet per minute) of the fan into the cubic feet of free air space, the time in minutes it takes for one air
change is determined. This number is then divided into 60 minutes to calculate the air changes per
hour.  Another  method  to determine  the  CFM  of the  fan  needed  is  described  below.

Let X  =  the desired  net CFM  of a  high  pressure fan  pushing through  a filter.
Let  Y  =  the  total  cubic  feet  of  FREE  air  space  in  the  growing  room.
A  maximum  number  of  air  exchanges/hour  for Agaricus  brunnescens  is  4-6.
A  maximum  number  of  air  exchanges/hour  for  Psilocybe  cubensis  is  2-3.

Another factor of importance for proper ventilation  is the air-to-bed ratio, which is the cubic feet
of  free air space divided  by square feet of cropping surface. Agaricus growers have found a ratio of
5:1 to be optimum and this serves as a useful guideline when cropping other mushrooms on bulk

70/The Mushroom Cultivator

substrates. The reason this ratio is so  important is that increased amounts of substrate can  generat
heat  and  carbon  dioxide  beyond  the  handling  capacity  of  the  ventilation  system.  A  large  free air
space acts to buffer these changes.  Ostensibly,  a ventilation  system  could be matched with a room
having a 3:1  air-to-bed ratio, but it would have to move such a volume of air that evaporation off the
sensitive  cropping  surface  would  be  uncontrollable  and  excessive.  Growing  mushrooms  on  thin
layers of grain  (1 -3  inches),  however,  produces less C02 than  growing on 8  inches of compost and
consequently  would  emit  a  lower  air-to-bed  ratio.

Air Ducting

Ducting for the air system is standard inflatable polyethylene tubing, sized to conform to the fan
diameter.  If  ducting  is  not  available  in  the  correct  size,  PVC  pipe  can  be  substituted.  Figures  74
75  and  76  show  different  air  distribution  arrangements  and  their flow  patterns.  The  ducts  run  the
length  of the  room  at ceiling  level.  One  is  centrally  mounted  and  discharges towards  both walls or
directly  down  the center aisle,  whereas the  other is wall  mounted and  is directed across the width of
the room.

The outlet  holes in  the  duct are designed  to discharge air at such  a  velocity that the airstream
reaches the walls and  passes down  to (he floor without directly  hitting the top containers.  The  holes
are spaced so that the boundaries of the adjacent jets meet just before reaching the wall or floor. This
effectively eliminates dead-air pockets. To size and space the outlet holes exactly, two guidelines are
used:

1.  The total surface area of the holes is equal to the cross section of the duct. (The area of a cir-

cle  is 22/7 times  (he  radius  squared,  A= pi(r)2).

2.  The space between the  holes  is equal  to a  quarter of the  distance  between  the duct and the

wall  or  floor.

The  discharge  of  air  at  velocities  sufficient  to  draw  in  surrounding  room  air  is  called  entrain-
ment,  a  phenomenon that enhances the capacity of the air circulation system.  A flow pattern of even
air is  (hen  reached  that  directly  benefits  the  growing  mushrooms.  The  entrainment of air  is the  goal
of air management  in  the  growing  room.

Filters

Fresh air filters are an important part of the ventilation system and contribute to the health ot

crop. Their function is to screen out atmospheric dust particles like smoke, silica, soot and decayed
biological matter. Atmospheric dust also contains spores, bacteria and plant pollen, some of which
are detrimental to mushroom culture.  Furthermore,  spores and microorganisms originating within
the cropping  room  can  also be spread  by air movement. To counteract this danger,  some mush-
room  farms  filter  recirculated  air  as  well.

Agaricus growers commonly use high efficiency, extended surface, dry filters. These filters are
of pleated or deep fold design which gives them much more surface area than their frame opening
They  filter  out  0.3  micron  particles  with  90-95%  efficiency  and  5.0  micron  particles  with  an  effi-

The Mushroom Growing Room/71

Figure 74  Central aisle
outward flow air
circulation pattern.

Figure  75  Central  aisle
downflow air circulation
pattern with wall
mounted  baseboard
heating.

Figure  76  Wall
mounted  duct directing
airflow across the width
or down  the sidewall  of
the room.

72/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

Figure 77  Schematic of mixing box and controlled  recirculation  system in the growing
room.

ciency  of  99%  at  an  initial  resistance  of  0.10  to  0.50  inches  of  static  pressure.

High  efficiency  Particulate  air  (HEPA)  filters  are  even  more  efficient  than  those just  described
and are  cost effective for the  home cultivator.  They screen  out particulates down to 0.1-0.3  microns
with  a  rated  99.96%  to  99.99%  efficiency  and  have a  resistance  of .75-1.00  inches  of static  pres-
sure.  HEPA filters are  made  of a  variety  of  materials,  depending  on  their intended application.  Most
HEPA  filters  operate  in  environments  of  up  to  807o  humidity  without disintegration.  Special  "water-
proof"  filters  operable  in  1 00%  humidity  environments  can  also  be  purchased  at  little  or  no  extra
expense.  These  "waterproof"  filters  are  especially  appropriate for use with  systems that push  recir-
culated air through the filter. This type of system is illustrated in Figure 77. To protect the filters and
prolong their usefulness,  a one inch  prefilter of open  celled foam or fiberglass (of the furnace type)  is
installed  to  remove  large  particulates.

Exhaust Vents

Exhaust vents are designed to relieve overpressure within the growing room caused by the in-
troduction of fresh air. Without an exit for the air, a back pressure is created that increases resistance
and  reduces  the  CFM  of  the  fan.  Small  rooms  operating  with  low  fresh  air  requirements  can  forgo
special  exhaust  vents  and  allow  the  air  to  escape  around  the  seals  of  the  room  entrance,  in  effect
creating  a  positive  pressure  environment.  Positive  pressure  within  a  room  can  also  be  created  by

The  Mushroom  Growing  Room/73

undersizing the exhaust vent, which should be no larger than half the size of the fresh air inlet. Free
nainq  dampers  operating  on  overpressure  are  widely  employed  in  the  mushroom  growing  in-

dustry.  The  outlet  should  be  screened  from  the  inside  to  prevent  the  entry  of  flies.

Heating

Heating  systems  for  cropping  rooms  can  be  based  on  either  dry  heat  or  live  steam.  Dry  heat
refers  to  a  heating  source  that  lowers  the  moisture  content  of  the  air  as  it  raises  the  temperature.
These  systems  utilize  either  hot  water  or  steam  circulating  through  a  closed  system  of  pipes  or
radiator  coils.  Heating  systems  can  also  be  simple  resistance  coils  or  baseboard  electric  heaters.
Heat coils are placed in the air circulation system ahead of the fan as shown  in  Figure 73.  Small  por-
table space heaters can also be attached To the mixing box or placed on the wall under it. Otherwise,
baseboard  heaters can  be  installed along the  length  of the side walls and  matched with  the air circu-
lation  design  shown  in  Figure  75.

Heat  supplied  by  live  steam  has  the  advantage  of  keeping  the  humidity  high  while  raising  the
temperature of the room.  If regulated correctly,  steam  can  maintain the temperature and relative hu-
midity within  the  required  ranges without drawing  upon  other sources.  Nevertheless,  a  backup  heat
source  is  advantageous  in  the  event  humidity  levels  become  Too  high.  For steam  heat  to  function
properly  it should  be  controlled  volumetrically  by  adjusting  a  hand  valve  (rather  Than  simply  on  and
off).  Vaporizers well  suifed  for small  growing  rooms are available  in  varying  capacities,  and  can  be
fitted  with  a  duct  that  connects  with  the  air system  downstream  from  the  fan  and  filter.

To  avoid  high  energy  consumption  and  the  expense  associated  with  equipment  purchase,
operation and maintenance, The growing room should be designed To Take full advantage of The heaT
generating  capabilities of the substrate.  This is done by matching the air-to-bed ratio to the type of
substrate.  Growing  on  thin  layers of grain  can  be done with  a  ratio  of 4:1  (or less) whereas compost
demands  5:1.  The  influence  of  the  outside  climate  and  its  capacity  for  cooling  the  growing  room
should  also  be  considered.  All  these  factors  must be  evaluated  before  a  growing  environment with
efficient  temperature  control  can  be  constructed.

Cooling

Commercial  farms  use  cooling  coils  with  cold  water  or  glycol  circulating  through  them.  The
coils are  placed  before the fan  as shown  in  Figure  73  and are supplied by a  central chiller or under-
ground  tank  and  well.  Other  systems  use  home  or  industrial  refrigeration  or  air  conditioning  units
that  operate  with  a  compressor and  liquid  coolant  filled  coils.  These  units  are  positioned  to  draw  in
recirculated as well as fresh air. All  these systems share the common  trait of drawing warm  air over a
colder surface.  In  doing  so,  moisture  condenses  out  of the  air  and  in  effect dehumidifies  the  room.
The oldest and  most widely  practiced  method of cooling  is through  the  use  of fresh  air.  Cooling
with  fresh air depends upon  the weather and the temperature requirements of the species being cul-
tivated. Howe'ver,  its  use  is  the  most  practical  means  available  to  the  home  cultivator.  In  climates
with  high  daily  temperatures,  fresh  air can  be shut off or  reduced  to  a  minimum  during  the  day and

74/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

then  fully opened  at night when  temperatures are at their  lowest.

Humid ification

Most mushroom growers use steam as the principal means of humidification. The steam is in-
jected  into the  air system  duct on  the  downstream  side of the fan  and filter.  Household  vaporizers
are well suited for small growing rooms. They are available in various capacities and can be fined
with a duct running to the air system. The vaporizer can also be positioned under the mixing box for
steam  uptake with the recirculated air.  Keep in  mind that cold fresh air has much  less capacity for
moisture  absorbtion  and  therefore does  not  mix well  with  large volumes of steam.

Another  method  of  humidification  uses  atomizing  nozzles  to  project  a  fine  mist  into  the  air
stream.  Large systems have a separate mixing chamber with nozzles mounted to spray the passing
air.  In a small room, a single nozzle can be mounted in the center of the duct and aimed to flow with
the air as it exits the fan. (See Figure 77), An appropriately sized nozzle emits 0.5-1.0 gallons per
hour  at  20-30  psi.  To  prevent  the  nozzle  from  plugging  up,  filters  should  be  incorporated  in  the
water supply  line.

In a third method, air passes through a coarse mesh absorbant material that is saturated with
water.  This  system  is  widely  used  for  cooling  at  nurseries.  It  is  similar  in  principle  to  a  "swamp
cooler". In this system (and the water atomizing system), the temperature of the supply water can be
regulated to provide a measure of heating and cooling.  Both systems also produce some free water
so provisions must be made for drainage.

Thermostats  and  Humidistats

In general, thermostats and humidistats are designed to open and close valves in response to
pre-set  temperature  or  humidity  limits.  The  instrument sensors are  placed  in  a  moving  air stream
representative  of room  conditions,  usually  in  or  near the  recirculation  inlet.  Because these  instru-
ments are programmed for either on or off,  heat and humidity come in surges.  Often this results in
uneven  and  fluctuating  conditions  within  the  room.

The  ideal  in  environmental  control  is to supply just enough  heat and  humidity to make  up for
losses from the room and to compensate for differences in the fresh air. Modulating thermostats do
this by supplying heat continously in proportion to the deviation from the desired temperature. Posi-
tive  control  of  this  sort  can  also  be  accomplished  by  hand  valves,  alone  or  in  conjunction  with
on/off instruments.  Supply line volume is thereby  regulated  in order to attain an equilibrium. With a
thermostat,  this means keeping the supply volume just below the cut-off point.

Lighting

Many cultivated mushrooms require  light for pinhead  initiation and  proper development of the
fruitbody.  In fact,  such phototropic mushrooms actually twist and turn towards a light source, espe-
cially if it is dim  and distant in an otherwise darkened  room.  Consequently,  it is important to equip

The  Mushroom  Growing  Room/75

Figures  78,  79  &  80  Charts
showing 
the  proportions  of
spectra  in  incandescent,  fluores-
cent and  natural  lighting.
—

76/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

Figure  81  An 
measuring  relative  humidity.

inexpensive  hygrometer  for

the  growing  room  with  a  lighting  system  that  provides  even  illumination  to  all  areas  and  levels,

Flourescent light fixtures are the most practical and give the broadest coverage. These fixtures
should be evenly spaced and mounted vertically on the side walls of the room or horizontally on the
ceiling  above The  center  isle.  An  alternative  is to  mount the  lights on  the  underside of each tier of
shelf or tray,  at least  18  inches above the cropping  surface.  To eliminate the  heat and consequent
drying  action  caused  by the  fixture  ballasts.  These  can  be  removed  and  placed  outside  the  room.
The  best type  of light tube  is one which  most closely resembles natural outdoor light:  i.e.  one
that  has  at  least  140  microwatts  per  10  nanometer  per  lumen  of  blue  spectra  (440-495  nm).  In
contrast,  warm-white  fluorescent  light  has  only  40-50  microwatts/nm/lum.  and  cool-white  has
100-110  microwatts/nm/lum.  Commercial 
lights  meeting  the  photo-requirements  of  species
mentioned  in  this  book  are  the  "Daylite  65"  kind  manufactured  by  the  Durotest  Corporation  and
having a "color Temperature" of 6500 ° K and the 'Vita-Lite" fluorescent at 5500 ° K. These color
temperatures  provide  The  proper  amount  of  blue  light  for  promoting  primordia  formation  in
Pleurotus  ostreatus,  Psilocybe  cubensis  and  in  other  photosensitive  species.

Environmental  Monitoring  Equipment

Few organisms are as sensitive to fluctuations in the environment as mushrooms. A matter of a
few degrees in temperature or humidity can dramatically influence the progression of fruiting and af-
fect  overall  yields.  To  adequately  monitor the  growing  environment,  quality  equipment  is  essential
for  accurate  readings.  This  equipment  should  include  maximum-minimum  thermometers  to  gauge
temperature fluctuations and a hygrometer or a  sling  psychrometer for measuring  humidity.  Hygro-
meters should  be  periodically calibrated with a  sling  psychrometer to insure accuracy.  Thermome-
ters also should be checked as there are occasional irregularities. Other more advanced, expensive
but  not  absolutely  essential  equipment  helpful  to  mushroom  growers  include:  CO2  detectors;
moisture  meters;  anemometers;  and  light  measuring  devices.

Compost Preparation/77

CHAPTER  V

COMPOST  PREPARATION

Figure  82  Compost  pile  in  a  standard  configuration.

78/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

The  purpose of composting  is to  prepare  a  nutritious  medium  of such  characteristics that the

growth  of  mushroom  mycelium  is  promoted  to  The  practical  exclusion  of  competitor  organ-

isms. Specifically this means:

1.  To  create  a  physically  and  chemically  homogeneous  substrate.
2.  To  create  a  selective  substrate,  one  in  which  the  mushroom  mycelium  thrives  better than

competitor  microorganisms.

3.  To concentrate nutrients for use by the mushroom plant and to exhaust nutrients favored by

competitors.

4.  To  remove  the  heat generating  capabilities of the substrate.
Mushroom  mycelium  grows  on  a  wide  variety  of  plant  matter  and  animal  manures.  These
materials occur naturally in various combinations and in varying stages of decomposition.  Physically
and chemically they are a  heterogeneous mixture containing a wide variety of insects,  microorgan-
isms and  nematodes.  Many of these organisms directly compete with  the  mushroom  mycelium  for
the available nutrients and inhibit its growth.  By composting,  nutrients favored by competitors grad-
ually diminish while nutrients available to the mushroom mycelium are accumulated. With time, the
substrate  becomes  specific for the  growth  of  mushrooms.

The  composting  process  is  divided  into  two  stages,  commonly  called  Phase  I  and  Phase  II.

Each  stage  is designed to accomplish  specific  ends,  these  being:

Phase  I: Termed outdoor composting,  this stage involves the  mixing  and  primary decomposi-
tion  of the  raw materials.
Phase  II:  Carried  out  indoors  in  specially  designed  rooms,  the  compost  is  pasteurized  and
conditioned  within  strict temperature  zones.

PHASE  I  COMPOSTING

Basic  Raw Materials

The basic raw material used for composting is cereal straw from wheat, rye, oat, barley and rye
grass.  Of these,  wheat straw  is  preferred  due  to  its  more  resilient  nature.  This  characteristic  helps
provide structure to the compost. Other straw types, oat and barley in particular, tend To flatten out
and waterlog,  leading to anaerobic conditions within  a compost pile.  Rye grass straw is more resis-
tant to decomposition, taking longer to compost. Given these factors and with proper management,
all  straw  Types  can  be  used  successfully.

Straw  provides  a  compost  with  carbohydrates,  the  basic  food  stuffs  of  mushroom  nutrition.
Wheat straw is 36%  cellulose, 25%  pentosan and  1 6%  lignin.  Cellulose and pentosan are carbo-
hydrates which upon break down yield simple sugars. These sugars supply the energy for microbial
growth.  Lignin, a highly resistant material also found in the heartwood of trees,  is changed during
composting to a "Nitrogen-rich-lignin-hurnus-complex", a source of protein. In essence, straw is a
material  with  the  structural  and chemical  properties  ideal  for making  a  mushroom  compost.

When cereal straw is gathered from  horse stables,  it is called "horse manure". Although culti-
vators  call  it  by this  name,  the  material  is actually  90%  straw and  10%  manure.  This  "horse  ma-
nure"  includes the  droppings,  urine and  straw that  has been  bedding  material.  The  qualiTy of this

Compost  Preparation/79

material  depends  on  the  proportions  of  urine  and  droppings  present,  the  essential  elements  nitro-
gen,  phosphorous and potassium  being  contained therein.  The reason  horse manure is favored for
making  compost  is the fact that fully  30-40%  of the droppings are comprised of living  microorgan-
isms.  These  microorganisms  accelerate  the  composting  process,  thereby  giving  horse  manure  a
decided  advantage  over other raw materials.

Horse manure used by commercial mushroom farms generally comes from  race tracks. The
bedding  straw  is  changed  frequently,  producing  a  material  that  is  light  in  urine  and  droppings.  On
the other hand, boarding stables change The bedding less, generating a heavier material.  If sawdust
or shavings are used in place of straw for bedding, The material should be regarded as a supplement
and  not  as  a  basic  starting  ingredient.

When  horse  manure  is  used  as  the  basic  starting  ingredient,  the  compost  is  considered  a
"horse  manure  compost"  whereas  "synthetic  compost"  refers  to  a  compost  using  no  horse  ma-
nure. Straw, sometimes mixed with hay, is the base ingredient in synthetic composts.  Because straw
is low in  potassium and  phosphorus,  these elements must be  provided  by supplementation and for
this reason chicken  manure is the standard additive for synthetic composts.  No composts are made
exclusively of hay because of its high cost and small fiber. In fact, mushroom growers have tradition-
ally  used waste  products  because they are  both  cheap and  readily available.

By  themselves  horse  manure  or straw are  insufficient for  producing  a  nutritious compost.  Nor
do  they  decompose  rapidly.  They  must  be  fortified  by  specific  materials  called  supplements.  In
order to determine  how much supplementation  is  necessary for a given  amount of horse manure or
straw based synthetic,  a special formula is used.  This formula insures the correct proportion of initial
ingredients,  which  largely determines  the  course of the composting  process.  The  formula  is  based
on the Total niTrogen present in each ingredient as determined by the Kjeldhal method. By using this
formula and certain  composting  principles,  the carbon:nitrogen  ratio for optimum  microbial decom-
positions  is  assured.  In  turn,  maximum  nutritional  value  will  be  achieved.

Supplements

Composting  is  a  process  of  microbial  decomposition.  The  microbes  are  already  presenT  in
large numbers in The compost ingredients and need only the addition of water to become active. To
stimulate  microbial  activity  and  enhance  their growth,  nutrient supplements are  added to the  bulk
starting  materials.  These supplements are designed to provide protein  (nitrogen) and carbohydrates
to feed the ever  increasing  microbia!  populations.  Microbes can  use almost any  nitrogen  source as
long as sufficient carbohydrates are readily available to supply energy for The niTrogen utilization. Be-
cause of the tough  nature of cellulose,  the carbohydrates  in  straw are  not initially  usable and  must
come  from  another  source.  A  balanced  supplement  is  therefore  highly  desirable.  It should  contain
not only  nitrogen but also sufficient organic matter to supply these essential carbohydrates.  For this
reason  certain  manures  and  animal  feed  meals  are  widely  used  for  composting.

The  following  is  a  list  of  possible  compost  ingredients  or  supplements,  grouped  according  to
nitrogen  content.  Their  use  by  commercial  growers  is  largely  determined  by  availability  and  cost.
This  list  is  not  all  inclusive  and  similar  materials  can  be  substituted.  (See  Appendix).

80/The Mushroom Cultivator

Group I: High nitrogen, no organic matter

Ammonium  sulfate—21%  N
Ammonium  nitrate—26%  N
Urea-46% N
Maximum  rate—25  Ibs/dry  ton  of starting  materials

These  are  inorganic  compounds  that  supply  a  rapid  burst  of  ammonia.  They  are  frequently
used for initial straw softening in synthetic composts. When used, care should be taken that they are
applied evenly.  If ammonium sulfate is used, calcium carbonate must also be added at a rate of 3
parts CaCO3 to  1, to neutralize sulfuric acid groups. These supplements are not recommended for
horse  manure  composts.

Group II: 10-14% N

Blood Meal-13.5% N
Fish Meal-10.5% N

These  materials consist  mainly  of proteins  but because  of their  high  cost are  rarely  used.

Group III: 3-7% N
Malt  sprouts—4%  N
Brewers' grains—3-5%  IN
Cottonseed  meal—6.5%  N
Peanut  meal—6.5%  N
Chicken  manure—3-6%  N
This group contains the  materials  most widely  used  by  commercial  growers and  is character-
ized by a favorable carbon:nitrogen balance.  Dried chicken manure from broilers mixed with saw-
dust  is  commonly  used  and  easy  to  handle.

Group IV:  Low nitrogen, high  carbohydrate

Grape  pomace—1.5%  N
Sugar  beet pulp—1.5%  N
Potato  pulp—1%  N
Apple  pomace—0.7%  N
Molasses  -  0.5%  N
Cottonseed  hulls—1%  N

These  materials  are  excellent  temperature  boosters  and  for  this reason  are  a  recommended
additive to all  composts.  They can  be added to any compost formula at a rate of 250 Ibs per dry to
of ingredients. Cottonseed hulls are an excellent structural additive.

Group V: Animal  manures
Cow  manure—0.5  %  N
Pig manure-0.3-0.8% N

These  manures  are  rarely  used  for  composting,  except  in  areas without  horses  or  chickens.
They have been  used with  success and should  be considered supplements to a synthetic blend.

Compost  Preparation/81

Group VI:  Hay

Alfalfa-2.0-2.57o  N
Clover-2% N

Hay is useful for boosting initial temperatures in synthetic composts. Hay contains substantial
quantities of carbohydrates which help build the microbial population. Yet another advantage is the
relatively high nitrogen content in alfalfa and clover. Use at a rate of 20% of the basic starting mate-
rial  (dry  weight).

Group  VII:  Minerals

Gypsum—Calcium  sulfate

Gypsum is an essential element for all composts.  Its action,  largely chemical in  nature, facili-

tates proper composting.  Its effects are:

1.  To improve the physical structure of the compost by causing aggregation of colloidal parti-
cles. This produces a more granular,  open structure which results in  larger air spaces and
improved aeration.

2.  To increase the water holding capacity, while decreasing the danger of over-wetting. Loose

water is  bound to  the  straw by  colloidal  particles.

3.  To counteract harmfully high concentrations of the elements K, Mg, P and Na should they

occur,  thereby  preventing  a  greasy condition  in  the  compost.
4.  To  supply  the  calcium  necessary  for  mushroom  metabolism.
Gypsurn should be added at a rate of 50-100 Ibs per dry ton of ingredients. When supplement-

ing with chicken  manure,  it is advisable to use The high rate.

Limestone  flour—Calcium  carbonate
Limestone is used when one or more supplements are very acidic and need to be buffered. A
good example of this is grape pomace, which has a pH of 4. Because it is added in large quantities,
grape  pomace  could  affect the  composting  process which  normally occurs  under alkaline  condi-
tions.

Group VIII:  Starting  materials
Horse manure-0.9-1.2% N
Straw, all types-0.5-0.7%  N

Compost  Formulas

The following formulas for high yield compost are commercially proven.  If an ingredient is not
available  locally,  substitute one that is.  The aim  of the formula  is to achieve a  nitrogen  content of
1.5-1.7%  at the  initial  make-up  of the  compost  pile.

In  order for these formulas to be effective,  the moisture content and nitrogen content must be
correct. Moisture level is determined by weighing  1 00 grams of the material, drying it in an oven at
200° F. for several hours,  and then reweighing it. The difference is the percent moisture.  Be sure
the sample  is  representative.  The  nitrogen  content  (protein  divided  by  6.25)  is  always  listed  with

82/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

commercial  materials  because  they  are  priced  according  to  percentage  of  protein.  On  the  other
hand,  barnyard materials vary considerably with age. The more a material breaks down, the more
nitrogen it loses.  Most compost supplements are purchased dry and added dry,  helping even distri-
bution as well as enabling easy storage. It is also important that the raw materials used for compost-
ing be as fresh as possible. This insures maximum utilization of their properties.  Baled straw stored
for a year and kept dry is fine.  If the straw has gotten wet, moldy or otherwise started to decompose,
it should  not be  used.

Formula  1

Ingredient 
Horse  manure 
Cottonseed  meal 
Gypsum 

Wet  wt. 
2,000 
30 
50 

%H2O 
50 
10 

%N 
1.0 
6.5 

Dry  wt. 
1,000 
117 
50
1,167 

Ibs.
10
8

18

This  formula  makes  approximately  2800  pounds  of  compost  at  a  70%  moisture  content.

Formula  II
Ingredient 

Wheat straw 
Chicken  manure 
Gypsum 

Wet wt. 

%H20 

Dry wt. 

2,000 
2,000 
1 25 

10 
20 
— 

1,800 
1,600 
25 
1 
3,525 

%N 

0.5 
3.00 

Ibs.N

9
48
—
57

This  formula  make  approximately  7,000  pounds  of  compost  at  a  71%  moisture  content.
Although 7,000 pounds of compost seems like a large quantity, at a fill  level of 20 pounds per
sq. ft., this will fill only 350 sq. ft. of beds or trays. Keep in mind that during the composting process
there is a gradual reduction in the the total volume of raw materials.  Fully 20-30% of the dry matter
is consumed during Phase I and another 10-15% during Phase  IE.  In total, approximately 40%
of the dry matter is reduced  by microbial and  chemical  processes.  This  loss of potential  nu-
trients can  not be  avoided and demonstrates the  importance  of composting  no  longer than  neces-
sary.
Ammonia

The production of ammonia is essential to the composting process. Just as the carbohydrates

must  be  in  a form  that  microbes  can  utilize,  so  must the  nitrogen.

1.  Ammonia  supplies  nitrogen  for  microbia!  use.
2.  Ammonia  is produced by microbes acting  upon  the protein  contained  in the supplements.
With  the  energy  supplied  by  readily  available  carbohydrates,  microbes  use  the  ammonia  to

Compost  Preparation/83

form  body tissues.  A  microbial  succession  of generations  is established,  with  each  new generation
decomposing the  remains of the  previous one.  Microbial  action  also fixes a  certain  amount of the
ammonia, forming the "nitrogen-rich-lignin-hurnus-cornplex". Unused ammonia volatilizes into the
atmosphere.  The smell of ammonia should  be evident throughout  Phase  I,  reaching a  peak at fill-
ing.

CarborrNitrogen Ratio

The importance of a carbon:nitrogen balance cannot be underestimated. A well balanced com-
post holds an optimum  nutritional  level for microbial growth. An  imbalance slows and impedes this
growth.  It  is  the  compost  formula  that  enables  the  grower  to  achieve  the  correct  C:N  balance.  Be-
cause  organic  matter  is  reduced  during  composting,  the  C:N  ratio  gradually decreases.  Approxi-
mate  values are: 3O:1  at make-up;  2O:1  at filling;  and  1 7:1  at spawning.

1.  Over-supplementation with  nitrogen  results in  prolonged ammonia  release.
2.  Over-supplementation  with  carbohydrates  results  in  residual  carbon  compounds.
Prolonged  ammonia  release  from  an  over-supplemented compost  necessitates  longer com-
posting  times.  If composting  continues too  long,  the  physical  structure and  nutritional  qualities are
negatively affected.  If the ammonia  persists, the compost becomes unsuitable for mycelial growth.

Readily available carbohydrates which are  not consumed by the  microbes during composting
can  become  food  for  competitors.  It  is  therefore  important  that  these  compounds  are  no  longer
present when  composting  is  finished.

Water  and  Air

Water  is the  most important component  in  the composting  process.  To a  large degree water

governs the level of microbial activity. In turn, this activity determines the amount of heat generated
within  the  compost  pile  because  The  microorganisms  can  only  take  up  nutrients  in  solution.  Not
only do the microorganisms need water To thrive, but they also need oxygen. Years of practice and
research have established a basic relationship between the amount of water added and the aeration
of  the  compost.  An  inverse  relationship  exists  between  the  amount  of  water  and  the
amount  of  oxygen  in  a  compost  pile.

1.  Too  much  water  =  too  little  air

Moisture  content  75%  or  above.
2.  Too  little  water  =  too  much  air
Moisture  content  67%  or  below

Overwefting a compost causes the air spaces to fill with water.  Oxygen is unable to penetrate,
causing an  anaerobic condition.  In  contrast,  insufficient water results in a compost that is too airy.
Beneficial  high  temperatures are  never reached  because the  heat generated  is quickly convected
away.

84/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figure  83  Pre-wetted  raw  materials  in  a  windrow.

Compost  microorganisms can  be  divided  into two  classes according To their oxygen  require-
ments.  Those  needing  oxygen  to  live  and  grow  are  called  Aerobes while those  living  in  the ab-
sence of oxygen are called Anaerobes.  Each class has well defined characteristics.

1.  Aerobes decompose organic matter rapidly and completely with a corresponding produc-

tion  of CO2,  water and  heat.  This  heat generation  is  called  Thermogenesis.

2.  Anaerobes  partially  decompose  organic  matter,  producing  not  only  CO2  and  water,  but
also certain organic acids and several types of gases such as hydrogen sulfide and methane.
Anaerobes  generate  less  heat  than  aerobes.

Examination of anaerobic areas of the compost reveals a yellowish,  under-composted material
that smells like rotten eggs. These areas in a compost pile are noticeably cooler and generally water-
logged.  Anaerobic  compost  is  unsuitable  for  mushroom  growth.

Since neither fresh horse manure nor straw based synthetics have the correct moisture content,
water  must  be  added  to  these  materials.  The  recommended  levels  for optimum  composting  are:

Horse manure:  69-71 % 

Synthetic:  71-73%

Pre-wetting

As  long as the composting  ingredients remain  dry,  the microorganisms lie dormant and corn-
posting  does not take  place.  The first step  in the composting  process is the initial watering of the
starting  materials.  The  purpose  of this  pre-composting  or  pre-wetting  is to  activate  the  microbes.

Compost  Preparation/85

Once activated, the  microbes begin to attack the straw and decompose the waxy film which  encases
the straw fibers.  Until this film  is degraded, water will not penetrate (he straw and its nutrients will  re-
main  unavailable.  As  the  process  progresses,  the  fibers  become  increasingly  receptive  to  water,
which  rather than  being free  or on The  surface,  penetrates and  is absorbed into the  straw.

There are many methods for pre-wetting.  These include:  dipping or dunking the material  into a
tank  of water;  spraying  it  with  a  hose;  or spreading  it out  in  a  flat  pile  2-3  feet  high  and  running  a
sprinkler  over  it.  Regardless  of the  method  used,  the  result should  be the  same—a  homogeneous
evenly  wetted  pile.

Horse manure needs less time for pre-wetting due to the nature of the bedding straw.  This straw
has been  trampled  upon,  opening the straw fiber and damaging the waxy film.  The  urine and drop-
pings have also begun to soften  it.  This is not the case with a synthetic compost in which the baled
straw  is  still  fresh  and  tough.  To  stimulate  microbial  action  in  synthetics,  some  supplements  are
added  at  pre-wetting.  Suitable  supplements  include  any  from  group  1,  4,  5  or  chicken  manure.
The  length  of time needed for pre-wetting varies according to the condition  of the starting  mate-

rials.  Generally  3  days for horse manure and 5-12  days for a  synthetic compost is sufficient.  The
pre-wetting time for a synthetic compost can  be shortened if the straw is mechanically chopped,  but
care  should  be  taken  that  the  fibers  do  not  become  too  short.

The wetted materials are then piled in a large rounded heap called a windrow. During this peri-

od the windrow can  be turned  and  re-wetted  as needed,  usually  1 -3  times.

Building  the  Pile

Building  the  compost pile  is called stacking,  ricking  or  "make-up".  At this time  the  pre-wetted
starting  materials and the nitrogenous supplements are evenly mixed,  watered and assembled into a
pile.  The  size,  shape  and  specific  physical  properties  of  this  pile  are  very  important  for  optimum
composting.  These  are:

1.  Pile dimensions should be 5-6 feet wide by 4-6 feet high. The shape should be rectangular

or square.

2.  The side of the pile should be vertical and compressed from  the outside by 3-6 inches. The

internal  section  should  be  less  dense  than  the  outer  section.

3.  The  pile  is  such  that  any  further  increase  in  size  would  result  in  an  anaerobic  core.
Throughout the composting  process,  the size of the pile varies depending on  the physical con-
dition  of the  straw,  which  provides the  pile's  basic structure.  The  structure of the  compost  refers to
the physical interaction of raw materials, especially the straw fibers. As the straw degrades and The ti-
bers flatten  out,  the  structure  becomes  more  dense  and  the  airflow  is  restricted.  The  pile  becomes
more  compact and its size is reduced accordingly.  Initially the fresh straw allows for generous air
penetrarion which convects away  heat and slows microbial action.  To counteract this heat loss,  the
pile should be,of maximum size and optimum moisture content at make-up,

Figure 85  illustrates air penetration  of a compost pile.  Air enters the pile from  the sides.  As the

86/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

Figure  84  Ricking  the  compost  pile.

Figure  85  Chimney  effect  in  a  compost
pile.

Compost  Preparation/87

oXygen  is  used by microorganisms,  heat is set free and the air temperature rises.  The warm air cur-
rent created rises to the top of the pile. This is called the chimney effect. The factors that affect the
rate of internal air flow are pile size and structure, moisture content and the differential between am-
bient air and internal pile temperatures.

Turning

A well built compost pile runs out of oxygen in 48 to 96 hours and then enters an anaerobic

state.  To prevent this,  the pile should  be disassembled and then  reassembled.  The purposes of this
turning procedure are:

1.  To aerate the pile,  preventing anaerobic composting.
2.  To add water  lost through  evaporation.
3.  To  mix in  supplements as  required.
4.  To  fully  mix  the  compost,  preventing  uneven  decomposition.
As a consequence of microbial decomposition, the compost pife begins to shrink and becomes
more compact. Coupled with loose water gravitating downward and water generated by microbes in
the inner active areas,  this compaction  closes the air spaces and stifles aerobic action,  particularly in
the  core  at the  bottom  center.  Through  the  use  of a  long  stemmed  thermometer  reaching  to the
center of The pile, the time of oxygen depletion can be monitored by watching temperature. When
the temperature begins to drop, indicating a slowing of microbial action, it is time to turn the com-
post.

Figure 86  Turning the compost pile  using  wire  mesh  pile formers.

88/The Mushroom Cultivator

In the early stages the temperature stratification in the pile is quite pronounced. Outer areas are
cool and dry from the air flowing inward and the accompanying evaporation. These outer areas are
watered during turning and moved to the center of the newly built pile and the center areas are relo-
cated to the outside. Being aware of the varied rate of decomposition in a stratified pile and compen-
sating  during  turning  maintains the  important  homogeneous character of the  pile.

Supplements deleted at make-up should be added during the turning cycle. Gypsum is normal-
ly added at the second turn. Adding gypsum any earlier is believed to depress ammonia production.
Until  some  decomposition  has  occurred,  the  beneficial  action  of gypsum  will  not  be  realized.  As
with  other supplements,  gypsum  is mixed  in  as evenly as possible.

Temperature

Environmental conditions in the compost are specifically designed to facilitate growth of benefi-
cial aerobic microorganisms. Given the proper balance of raw materials, air and water, a continuous
succession of microbial populations produces temperatures up to 180°F. These microbes can be
divided  into two groups according to their temperature requirements.  Mesophiles are active  under
90 °F.  and thermophiles are active from 90-160 °F.  The action  of these  microbial  groups during
the composting  process is summarized in the following  paragraphs.

During pre-composting mesophilic bacteria and fungi, utilizing available carbohydrates, attack

Figure  87  Standard  temperature zonation  in  a compost pile.

Compost  Preparation/89

the nitrogenous compounds thereby releasing ammonia.  This ammonia is then  utilized by succes-
sive microbial populations and the temperature rises.

After make-up, the mesophiles remain in the cool outer zones while The thermophilic fungi, ac-
tinomycetes and bacteria dominate the inside of the pile. The actinomycetes are clearly visible as
whitish flecks forming a distinct ring around the hot center.  Bacteria dominate this center area and
continue to decompose the nitrogenous supplements,  liberating  more ammonia.  At this point The
carbohydrates in the straw are ready for microbial use.

At temperatures over 150°F., microbial action slows and chemical processes begin.  BeTween
150-165 °F. microbial and chemical actions occur simultaneously. From  165-180°F. decomposi-
tion  is mainly due to the chemical reactions of humification and caramellization,  the  latter Taking
place  under conditions of high  temperature,  high  pH  (8.5)  and  in  the  presence  of ammonia  and
oxygen.  Many  of  the  dark  compounds  produced  during  composting  are  believed  to  result  from
these chemical reactions. Decomposition proceeds rapidly at these high temperatures, and if They
can be mainTained Throughout the process, composting time will be greatly reduced.

Figure 87 shows the temperature zonation commonly found in a compost pile. Studies by Dr.
E.B. Lambert in the 1930's showed that compost taken from zone 2 produced the highest yielding
crops.  Based on this research, growers always subject their compost to zone 2 conditions prior to
spawning. This normally occurs during Phase II in specially designed rooms. However, if a Phase II
room can  not be built, zone 2 conditions can  be achieved by an alternate method known as Long
Composting,  developed  by  C.  Riber  Rasmussen  of  Denmark.

Long  Composting

Long composting is designed to carry out the complete composting process outdoors (exclud-
ing pasteurization). The method is characterized by the avoidance of high temperature chemical de-
composition  and a  reliance on  purely microbial action.  Specifically this procedure is designed to
promote the growth of actinomycetes and rid the compost of all ammonia by the time of filling. The
temperature zonation desired in this method is illustrated in Figure 88. An outline of the Long Com-
posting  procedure  follows.

90/The Mushroom Cultivator

Once finished, this compost is normally pasteurized at  1 35 °F. for four hours.  If pasteurization
is impossible, discard the cool outer shell and utilize the areas showing strong actinomycete activity.
Although these areas will  not be free from all  pests and competitors, they should provide a reas-
onably productive substrate.  The aspect and characteristics of a properly prepared Long Compost
should  conform  to  the  guidelines for  compost after  Phase  II.  (See  Aspect of the  Finished  Compost
on  page  105  and  Color  Plate  8).

Short  Composting

Commercial Agaricus growers uniformly base Their composting procedures on the methodolo-

gy developed by Dr. James Sinden, who called his technique "Short Composting" in reference to
the short period of time involved.  Dr.  Sinden's process is centered around the fast acting chemical
reactions occurring in zone 3.  Besides the shorter preparation time, this process also results in a
greater preservation of dry matter, thus retaining valuable nutrients. Figure 89 illustrates the zona-
tion  during  short  composting.

Without  commercial  composting  equipment,  approximating  the  temperature  conditions  of
Short Composting is very difficult.  However,  it does provide a model for optimum composting and
can  be approached by adhering to the basic principles discussed in this chapter. The Short Com-
posting  procedure  is outlined  below.

Compost Preparation/91

The procedures for making a synthetic compost by the short composting method are outlined
below, with minor modifications for the home cultivator. Note the longer period of pre-composting
to condition the straw.

Figure  88  Temperature  zonation  during  Figure  89  Temperature  zonation  during
Long  Composting. 

Short  Composting.

92/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figure 90  Commercial  compost turning  machine.

Composting  Tools

Since commercial growers work with many Tons of compost, a bucket loader is essential. They
also use a specially designed machine for turning the piles. This compost turner can travel through
a 200 foot pile in a little over one hour,  mixing in supplements and adding water.  Small scale culti-
vators can make compost without these machines. The following is a list of tools and facilities that
are basic to compost preparation.

1.  A cement floor.  Not absolutely necessary but highly desirable,  a cement floor is easy to
work on,  prevents migration of water to the earth and prevents soil and unwanted soil or-
ganisms  from  contaminating  the  pile.  Water  leaching  from  the  pile,  a  good  indicator  of
compost moistures, is quite evident on a cement floor.  If a cement floor is not available, a
sheet of heavy plastic can be used.

2.  Bobcat  or  small  tractor  loader  with  3/4-1  yard  bucket  with  fork.  If  producing  large
amounts of compost, one of these machines saves time and labor.  Not only do they make

Compost Preparation 793

Figure 91  Pile formers in use.

pre-wetting,  supplementing  and  pile  building easier,  they can  be  used to turn  The  pile.

3.  Pile  formers.  These  are  constructed  from  2  x  4's  and  plywood  or  planks to  The  dimen-

sions desired for the compost pile One for each side is necessary. Standard size would be
4-5  feet  high  by  8  feet  long.  An  alternative  to  pile  formers  is  a  three  sided  bin.

4.  Long  handled  pitchfork with  4 or 5  prongs. The basic tool  in  a compost yard, all com-
post  piles  were  Turned  wiTh  pitchforks  before  the  adv/ent  of  compost  turners  and  bucket
loaders.

5.  Flat  bladed  shovel.  Used  for  handling  supplements.
6.  Hose with  spray nozzle,  or sprinkler.
7.  Thermometers.  Although  pile  temperatures  can  be  guaged  by  touch,  a  long  stemmed

thermometer gives  accurate  readings.

Characteristics of the Compost at Filling

The composting materials undergo very distinct changes during Phase I. A judgment as to the
suitability  of the  compost for filling  is  based  on  color,  texture and  odor.  Gradual  darkening  of the
straw and the pronounced scent of ammonia are the most obvious features. These and other char-
acteristics  provide  important  guidelines  for judging  the  right  time  for  filling  the  compost.  (Note:
these guideslines do not apply for a compost prepared by the Long  Composting  methods.)

The  compost  is  ready  for  filling  if:
1.  Compost  is  uniformly  deep  brown.
2.  Straw is still long and fibrous, but can be sheared with some resistance.
3.  When  the  compost  is  firmly  squeezed,  liquid  appears  between  the  fingers.

94/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figure 92, 93  Compost at
filling  can  be sheared  with
moderate  resisance.
Figure 94  Compost at fill-
ing  should  release  some
moisture  when 
firmly
squeezed.

Compost  Preparation/95

4.  Compost  has  a  strong  smell  of  ammonia,  pH  of  8.0-8.5.
5.  Compost is lightly flecked with whitish colonies of actinomycetes.
6.  Kjeldahl  nitrogen  is  1.5%  for  horse  manure  and  1.7%  for  synthetic  composts.

Supplementation at Filling

The key to a successful  Phase II, whether in trays, shelves or a bulk room,  lies in the heat gen-
erating capabilities of the  completed  Phase  I  compost.  To this end  the  compost should  be biologi-
cally "active," a term that describes a compost with sufficient food reserves to sustain a high level of
microbial  activity.  Whereas  the  Sinden  Short  Compost  is a  model  of a  vitally  active compost,  the
Rasmussen  Long  Compost  is  considered  biologically  "dead"  because  these  food  reserves  have
been deliberately exhausted  during  Phase  I.  In  this same sense,  a compost  having completed the
Phase  II  is also considered  a  dead  compost.

A method  that  insures a  high  level  of  microbial  activity during the  Phase  II  is supplementation
with  highly soluble carbohydrates during  Phase  I or with vegetable oils  (fats)  at filling.  The purpose
of these supplements is to provide  readily available  nutrients which  stimulate the  growth  of the mi-
crobial  populations.  The  effect  of carbohydrates  or oil  supplementation  on  the  Phase  II  is:

1.  Accelerated thermogenesis—The nutrients provided by the supplements act as a "super-
charger"  for  the  microbial  populations.  Consequently  their  increased  activity  generates
more heat. Specifically, supplementation with vegetable oil (cottonseed oil} increased popu-
lations of actinomycetes and thermophilic fungi  (Schisler and  Patton,  1 970) while  soluble
carbohydrates  (molasses)  enhanced  bacterial  populations  (Hayes  and  Randle.  1968).

2.  Better  compost  ventilation—Heightened  thermogenesis  within  the  compost  requires  lower
air temperatures within  the  Phase  II  room.  The  greater the compost to air temperature dif-
ferential,  the  better the air  movement through  the compost.  In  this respect a  dead compost
requires a high room temperature and is difficult to condition because of its low microbial
activity.

3.  Rapid reduction of free ammonia—The increased ventilation and microbial activity give rise
to  a  rapid  fixation  of ammonia.  As a  result,  the  Phase  II  period  is  reduced  by as  much  as
three days. The advantage of this reduced time period is that dry matter and hence nutrients
for  mushroom  growth  are  conserved.

4.  Reduced  spawn  running period—Oil  supplemented  composts show increased  mycelial  ac-
tivity  and  therefore  higher  temperatures  during  the  spawn  running  period.  As  a  result  the
colonization  period  is shortened by three to five days.
Increased  yields—Yield  increases of 0.4-0.5  Ibs/ft2  are common  for Agaricus growers  us-
ing  vegetable  oil  at  filling.  Similar  increases are  reported  for  molasses.

5. 

Compost supplementation with soluble carbohydrates is an effective way to prepare an active com-
post. These materials are  listed earlier in the chapter as Group  IV supplements. They are added to a
synthetic  compost  during  pre-composting  (50%)  and  at  third  turn  (50%)  and  to  a  horse  manure
compost at make-up and at third turn.  Molasses is added at make-up at a rate of 10 ml per pound of

96/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

compost wet weight and is diluted  1:2 with water for easy application.  Vegetable oil is sprayed onto
the compost the day of fill at a rate of 10  ml  per pound of compost wet weight.  Even application  is
important  to  avoid  creating  hot  spots.

Compost  supplementation  with  soluble  carbohydrates  or  vegetable  oils  is  highly  recom-
mended,  especially for those  planning  a  Phase  II  without stearn  or with  only  limited supplemental
heating.  Hence,  this  type  of  supplementation  is  particularly  appropriate  for  the  home  cultivator.

PHASE  II  COMPOSTING

While Phase I is a combination of biological and chemical processes, Phase II is purely biologi-
cal,  In fact,  Phase I! can be considered a process of microbial husbandry.  By bringing the compost
indoors into specially designed rooms, the environmental factors of temperature, humidity and fresh
air can  be controlled to such  a  degree that conditions for growth  of select microbial  groups can  be
maximized.  These  thermophilic and  thermotolerant groups  and  their Temperature  ranges  are:

Bacteria:  100-170°F.  Different species of bacteria are active throughout this range so an op-
timum can not be given. At temperatures above  130°F.  bacteria dominate and are responsible for
the ammonification that occurs at these temperatures. The most common bacteria found by resear-
chers are Pseudomonas species.

Actinomycetes:  115-140°F.  with  an  optimum  temperature  range of  125-132°F.  The  most
common  species  are  found  in  the  genera  Streptomyces  and  Thermomonospora.  Work  done  by
Stanek  (1971)  has  shown  that  actinomycetes  and  bacteria  are  mutually  stimulatory,  resulting  in
greater  efficiency  when  working  together.

Fungi:  110-130°F.  with  an  optimum  temperature  of  118-122°F.  Common  genera  are
Humicola and  Torula.  Recent research indicates that these fungi are the most efficient de-ammoni-
fiers,  which  has  led  to  a  more  general  use  of their temperature  range  for  Phase  II  conditioning.
The basic function of these microorganisms is to utilize and thereby exhaust the readily availa-
ble carbohydrates and the free ammonia.  Ammonia  in  particular must  be  completely removed  be-

Figure 95  Temperature vs.
ammonia  utilization  by
microbial  populations.
(After  Ross,  1978)

Compost  Preparation/97

cause of its inhibitory effect on the growth  of mushroom  mycelium.  The result of this miccrobial ac-
tion  is a build-up of cell substance or "biomass" which contains vitamins, fats and proteins. What
the  mushroom  mycelium  uses for a  large  portion  of  its  nutrition  then,  is the  concentrated  bodies
forming the microbial biomass. This biomass constitutes part of the brown layer coating the partially
decomposed  straw  fibers.

Many growers consider Phase II to be the most important stage in the growing cycle and rightly

so.  An  improperly prepared  substrate  yields few  if any mushrooms.  It  is critical,  therefore,  that the
environmental conditions required during Phase II be carefully maintained.  Phase II can be sepa-
rated  into two distinct parts,  each serving a specific function. These are:

1.  PASTEURIZATION: The air and compost temperature are held at  135-140  °F.  for 2-6
hours.  The  purpose of pasteurization  is to  kill  or neutralize  all  harmful  organisms  in  the
compost, compost container and the room. These are mainly nematodes, eggs and larvae
of flies, mites, harmful fungi and their spores. The length of time needed generally depends
on the depth of fill.  Deeper compost layers require more time than shallow ones.  In gener-
al, two hours at 140°F. is sufficient. Compost temperatures above 140°F. must be avoid-
ed because they inactivate fungi and actinomycetes while at the same time stimulating the
ammonifying  bacteria.  If temperatures  do  go  above  140°F.,  be  sure  there  is  a  generous
supply of fresh  air.

2.  CONDITIONING: The compost temperature is held at 118-130 °F. Once the pasteuriza-
tion is completed, the compost temperature should be lowered gradually over 24 hours to
the temperature zone favored by actinomycetes and fungi. The exact temperature varies ac-
cording  to the depth  of fill.  At depths  up to 8  inches,  122 °F.  as  measured  in the  center of
the  compost  is  most  frequently  used.  At  depths  over  8  inches,  temperature  stratification
becomes more  pronounced,  making a higher core temperature of 128 °F.advantageous. A
common procedure is to bring the compost Temperature down in steps, dropping the core
temperature 2°per day, from 130° to 122°F. This temperature is then held until all traces
of ammonia  are  gone.

Basic  Air  Requirements

Phase  II  is purely a process of aerobic fermentation and as such  a constant supply of fresh air is
essential.  To insure this supply, a  minimum fresh air setting is established on the air intake damper.
A standard minimum setting is 8-10% of the intake opening. The oxygen level can be checked in a
practical manner by lighting a match in the Phase II room. If a flame can be maintained, the oxygen
level  is  sufficient.  Lack  of  oxygen  stimulates  the  growth  of  Chaetomium,  the  Olive  Green  Mold,
which will spoil the compost. (See Chapter XIII).

Compost temperatures follow the air temperature of the room.  Fresh air not only supplies oxy-

gen,  but is also used to  keep the compost within the correct temperature zone. To drop the com-
post temperature, more fresh air is introduced and vice versa. Oversupply of fresh air is only a prob-
lem  if it leads to rapid cooling of the compost.  In  this regard, changes in the fresh air setting should

98/The Mushroom Cultivator

be  slow  and  deliberate.  Only when  the  compost threatens to overheat should  maximum  fresh  air be
introduced.  This  is  particularly  common  directly  after  pasteurization.

Peak  microbia!  activity  normally  occurs  24-48  hours  after  pasteurization.  As  Phase  II  pro-
gresses  and  the  food  supply  diminishes,  this  activity  begins to  slow.  Compost  temperatures  should
begin to drop on their own, As they drop, the fresh air supply should be decreased, thus slowly rais-
ing  the  air  temperature  as  the  compost  reaches  the  required  temperature  zones.  If  the  fresh  air
minimum  is  reached  and  the  compost  temperatures  are  still  dropping,  a  supplemental  heat  source
must  be  installed.

Phase  II  Room  Design

The  Phase  II room can  be a special room  set aside solely for this purpose (the norm  on  Tray

farms)  or  it can  be  in  the  same  room  where  cropping  occurs.  Design  features are  critical  for  its suc-
cess  and  should  be  strictly  adhered  to.  These  features  are:

1.  Adequate  insulation:  Insulate  to  a  R  value  of  19  for walls  and  a  minimum  of  30  for the  ceil-
ing.  A vapor  barrier  is  needed  to  protect the  insulation.  (A  layer of  polyethylene  is cheap  and
effective.)

2.  The  room  must  be  functionally  airtight.  The  door  should  form  a  tight  seal.  Any  cracks  or

openings allow The passage of flies.

3.  The  ventilation  system  uses  a  backward-curved  centrifugal  fan  driven  by  pulleys  and  belts,
and whose  speed  can  be varied.  The fan  should be  capable of moving air at  1  cubic foot per
minute (CFM) per square foot of compost surface area. A perforated polythene duct runs the
length  of  the  room  and  directs  the  air  either  straight  down  the  center aisle  or across  the  ceil-
ing  to  the  side  walls.  High  velociTy  airflow  is  necessary  To  mainfain  even  Temperafures
Throughout  as  well  as  to  keep  The  room  under  positive  pressure.

4.  A  fresh  air  vent  is  located  before  the  fan.  This  damper  also  regulates  recirculated  air.  (See

Fig.  73).

5.  Filters  are  placed  before  the  fresh  air  inlet.  These  filters  are  important  as  protection  against

flies, dust and spores. High efficiency spore filters are commonly used for the incoming fresh
air.  A pre-filter placed  upstream  of the  main  filter will  increase  its  life.  Recirculated  air should
never  be  filtered  during  Phase  II  because  of  its  high  moisture  content.

6. At the opposite end of the room from the fresh air vent are exhaust louvers operating on air

pressure.  This  exhaust  air  outlet  must  be  screened  from  the  inside.

7.  If steam  is  used for  boosting  temperature,  pipes can  be  run  the  length  of the floor along the
side walls  discharging  oufwards.  Steam  can  also  be  discharged  directly  into the  air duct after
the  fan.  High  output  electric  space  heaters  can  also  be  used.

Filling Procedures

Depending  on  the  growing  system  chosen,  the  compost  is  loaded  into  trays,  shelves  or  a  bulk

Compost  Preparation/99

Figure 96  Small  Phase II  room  designed for  trays or bulk fill.

room.  Certain  basic  principles should  be adhered  to when  filling.  These are:

1. Fill the room  as quickly as possible to minimize heaf loss from The compost.
2.  Compress  a  long  strawy  compost  and  fill  loosely  a  short  dense  compost.
3. If the compost appears dry, water lightly and evenly during filling. If water streams out when a

handful  is squeezed,  don't fill.  Add again  as  much  gypsum,  turn  and wait a few days,

4.  Fill all shelves and trays evenly and to the  same depth.  Avoid creating pockets of compact

compost.  Keep all  compost within  the container.  No compost should  hang over the sides.

5. Once  finished,  the  floor  should  be  cleaned  of all  loose  compost,  then  washed  with  water.

Depth of Fill

Up to a point there exists a direct relationship between  the amount of compost filled per square
foot and yield.  In a fixed sheif system,  the amount of compost filled is usually the amount available
for cropping. This normally holds true for trays, although some systems empty the trays at spawning
and  then  refill  25%  fewer  trays  than  the  number that was  originally  filled.  This  results  in  high  dry
weight efficiencies without the complications of deep compost layers during  Phase II.  As a  general
rule, a fill depth of 8 inches will provide sufficient nutrients as well as contribute to the ease of Phase
II- At depths over 8  inches temperature stratification will lead to varying conditions wifhin the com-

100/The Mushroom Cultivator

post,  complicating  the  Phase  II  program.  Ar  depths  under  5  inches  there  is  insufficient  mass  for
proper  heat  generation  and  large  quantities of steam  may  be  needed.

An  important consideration  is the ratio of cubic feet of compost filled to cubic feet of air space in
the  room.  This  ratio  largely  determines  whether  a  supplementary  heating  source  is  necessary.
Clearly,  greater  volumes  of  compost  require  less  additional  heating.  To  maximize  compost  heat
generation,  some  tray  systems stack  trays  no  more than  3-4  inches  apart during  Phase  II.  These
trays are later distributed to two cropping rooms with a spacer inserted between the trays to facilitate
picking.

PAY 
0 

PHASE  II  PROCEDURE:  TRAYS  OR  SHELVES
The  house  is filled and  cleaned.  Thermometers are  placed  in  the center of at  least four
containers,  and  one  in  the  middle  of  the  room  for  reading  air  temperature.  Shut  the

Figure  97 

Phase  II  temperature  profile  for  trays  or  shelves.

Compost Preparation/101

door, turn on the fan and close the fresh air vent. Air and compost temperatures should
rise from microbial activity. If not, additional heat should be supplied. Once The compost
reaches 120°F., The fresh air vent should be opened and regulated to maintain compost
temperatures  in  the  125-130°F.  range.  From  this  point on,  the  fresh  air vent should
never  be  less  than  the  minimum  setting  of  10%.
A  temperature  chart  should  be  kept,  noting  air  and  compost  as  well  as  fresh  air  and
steam  settings.  Temperatures  should  be  read  every 4-6  hours.  Compost temperatures
should be in the 125-130°F. range for the first 48 hours after fill. After this period, pas-
teurization should commence. The air temperature is boosted to 140°F.  and held long
enough  to subject the  compost to  140°F.  for 2  hours.  If 140° can  not  be  reached,  a
compost  and  air  temperature  of  135°  for  four  hours  is  sufficient.  The  temperatures
should be monitored closely to be sure pasteurization is complete. A long stemmed ther-
mometer can be pushed through a drilled opening in the door, or a remote reading ther-
mocouple can  be  used.  After  pasteurization,  full  fresh  air is  introduced  to  stop  rising
compost temperatures.  Once the compost temperature begins to drop,  adjust the fresh
air setting  To stop the compost in  the temperature zone  required,  128-130°F.
Starting  at  128°F.,  use  fresh  air  to  lower  the  compost  temperature  gradually,  2°  per
day, until 122 ° is reached. Hold The composf at that temperature until it is free of ammo-
nia.  Throughout this conditioning process,  a compost to air differential of  10-30°F.  is
normal. This differential is important for The passage of air through The compost. Little or
no  differential  is  undesirable  and  indicates  over-composting  or  under-supplementation.
During  the  conditioning  period  definite  changes in the compost  become apparent.  The
compost becomes well flecked with  whitish  actinomycetes,  and on  the surface whitish
grey aerial rnycelia of Humicola species appear. Both are indicators of proper microbial
conversion.
Once the compost is free of ammonia, full fresh air is introduced, dropping the compost
temperature  rapidly to spawning temperatures  in  the 76-80 °F.  range.

1-2 

2-10 

5-10 

Phase  II  in  Bulk

For many people,  equipping a standard  Phase II room for trays or shelves may be inappropri-
ate,  especially  if steam  is  used.  The  recent development of the  bulk system  now gives the  home
grower the ability to perform the Phase II without steam. This system utilizes compost heat more ef-
ficiently  by  loading  the compost in  mass,  five feet deep,  into a small well  insulated  room  with  a
slatted floor.  Instead of air diffusing through the compost by convection, air is blown under the floor
and forced up through the compost. The wide compost to air temperature differential so essenfial to
conventional Phase II processes is eliminated; compost and air temperatures are now no more Than
5°F. apart. This narrow differenTial is in part relaTed To a reduced compost-to-air volume ratio, which
in a bulk  room  is  1:1  or  1:%. This reduction of air space,  coupled with the airtight, well  insulated
room, results in full utilization of compost heat generation. A large measure of control over compost

102/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

temperatures  becomes possible and optimum  temperatures within  the  mass can  be tightly regu-
lated.

Bulk  Room  Design  Features

The size of the bulk room  varies according to individual  needs,  but should be  large enough that

there  is sufficient compost mass to  supply  heat.

1.  At a  fill  depth  of 4-5  feet,  one ton  of compost  requires approximately  8-10  sq.  ft.  of floor

space.

2.  Bulk rooms are well insulated. The walls and door are  R-19; the ceiling is R-30 mini-

mum.  A  vapor  barrier  should  protect  all  insulation.

3.  The  room  has  a  double  floor.  The  bottom  floor  is  concrete,  insulated  to  R-19  with  styro-
foam  or  other  water  impervious  material,  and  covered  with  tar  or  temperature  resistant
plastic as a  vapor  barrier.  The  compost floor is  12-18  inches above the  bottom floor,  and
is made of 4 x 4's with spacers in  between to leave 20% air space. This floor is removable
to  permit  periodic  cleaning.

4.  The  interior  walls  and  ceiling  are  made  of  exterior  grade  plywood,  treated  with  a  wood
preservative  or  marine  epoxy.  Allow  14  inch  for  expansion.  Caulk  or  seal  with  fiberglass
(ape.

5.  The  room  must  be  airtight.  Caulk  all  cracks  and  corners.
6.  The  access  door  runs  the  width  of the  room  for  easy  loading  and  unloading.  An  airtight

sea! is essential.

7.  A wood  plank  wall  is  inserted  before  the  access  door to  prevent the  compost from  press-

ing  against  it.  The  plank  wall  is  held  in  place  by  runners  on  either  wall.

8.  The  ventilation  system  is  powered  by  a  centrifugal,  high  pressure  belt driven  blower,  with
a capacity of 90-120 CFM  per ton of compost at a static pressure of up to 4 inches of wa-
ter  gauge.  The  recirculation  duct  comes  out  on  the  top  of  the  back  wall  and  down  to  the
fan.  The  supply  duct  goes  from  the  fan  to  the  air  chamber  under the  compost  floor.  All
ductwork should be insulated.

9.  The fresh  air inlet and  damper are  located  before  the fan.  This damper also regulates  the

recirculated  air.  The  fresh  air  should  be  filtered.

10.  The exhaust outlet is located on the access door. This is a free swinging damper that oper-

ates  on  room  pressure.  This  outlet  is  covered  by  a  coarse  filter.

1  1.  Standard  inside  dimensions  are  6-12  feet  wide  by  8-10  feet  high.
1 2.  For better temperature control the bulk room should be built inside a larger building, like a
garage,  where temperaure differences are less extreme. The introduction  of cold fresh air
hampers  the  process  by  neutralizing  the  compost  heat.

A simple variation of this bulk room is a well insulated bin.1 The bin is constructed using the

principles just outlined. Rather than a mechanical air system, fresh air is admitted through adjustable
vents at floor level and exits through similar vents in the ceiling. Because air passage is by convec-
tion,  the compost should  be filled  loosely and  to a  depth  of no greater than  four feet.

Compost  Preparation/103

Figure 98  Bulk  pasteurization  room.  Ventilation  system  on  end  wall. (Design—Vedder)

Figure  99  Bulk  pasteurization  room.  Ventilation  system  on  side  wall.  (Design—Claron)

104/The Mushroom Cultivator

Bulk  Room  Filling  Procedures

1.  Fill  as  quickly  as  possible  to  minimize  heat  loss.
2.  Compost should  have good structure and optimum  moisture content.  Do not fill a dense,

overwet  compost.

3.  Fill  evenly.  Compost  density  is  important.  Avoid  localized  compaction  as  well  as  gaps.
Gaps or  holes  in  the  compost  become  air channels to the  detriment  of the  surrounding
material.  Be  sure  the  compost  presses firmly  and  evenly  against  all  sides of the  room.
4.  Before filling the  last three feet,  put the  inside board wall  in  place.  Now fill the remaining

area.  The  compost should  press  firmly  against the  board  wall.

Testing  for Ammonia

The basic ammonia detection test has always been The sense of smell. The odor of ammonia
must be completely gone from The compost before it can be spawned. Odors are always good indi-
cators  of compost  suitability.  However,  to  be  absolutely  certain,  other  methods  are  also  used.

1.  Cresyl  Orange and filter paper:  Pre-cut strips of white filter paper are saturated with  a few
drops  of  cresyl  orange  liguid  which  turns the  white  paper  yellow.  Expose  the  paper to the
inside of the  Phase  II  room  or to the exhaust air of the  bulk  room. The  paper can  also be

Compost  Preparation/105

placed  into  small  holes  dug  into the  compost.  The  presence  of ammonia  turns the  paper
varying  shades  of  red.  Purple  indicates  the  highest  concentration,  while  pink  indicates  a
lower one.  When  the yellow paper remains  unchanged  in  color,  free ammonia  is absent.
2.  Air samplers using gas detection tubes: These tubes are filled with chemicals that change
color as air samples are drawn into them. The tubes are calibrated in parts per million (ppm)
and  give  accurate  readings  down  to  1  ppm.  The  air  samplers  are  manufactured  by  Mine
Safety  Co.  and  the  Draeger  Corp.  Individual  tubes  cost from  $2.00-$4.00  in  lots of ten.
(See sources in Appendix).

Aspect  of the  Finished  Compost

The following  guidelines can  be  used to determine whether a  compost is ready for spawning.

(See Color Photographs 5-8).

Figure  100  Bulk  room  Phase  II  temperature  profile,  (Dutch  procedure)

106/The Mushroom  Cultivator

1.  The  raw  pungent  odor  is  gone;  the  odor  is  now  light  and  pleasant,  even  slightly  sweet.
2.  The ammonia  odor  is completely gone.  The cresyl  orange test shows no  reaction.  Detector

tubes read 10  ppm  or  less.

3.  The  pH  is  below  7.8,  preferably  7.5.
4.  Straws  appear dull  and  uniformly  chocolate  brown,  speckled  with  whitish  actinomycetes.
5.  The  compost  is soft and  pliable and  can  be  sheared  easily.
6.  When  squeezed  the  compost  holds  its  form.  No  water  appears  and  the  hand  remains

relatively clean.

7.  Moisture  content  is  64-66%  for  horse  manure  and  67-68%  for  synthetics.
8.  Nitrogen  content  is 2.0-23%;  the  C:N  ratio  is  17:1.

ALTERNATIVE COMPOSTS AND
COMPOSTING PROCEDURES

Sugar  Cane  Bagasse  Compost

Sugar  cane  bagasse  is  the  cellulosic  by-product  of  sugar  cane  after  most  of the  sugars  have
been removed.  It is generally a short fibrous material with a high moisture holding capacity. Total ni-
trogen amounts to 0.1 8%. In  1 960, Dr. Kneebone of Pennsylvania State University reported grow-
ing  Psilocybe aziecorum on a  bagasse  based compost.  He  later reported  in  more detail  on  experi-
ments using bagasse compost for growing Agaricus brunnescens.  Bagasse used as stable bedding
produced  yields  comparable  to the  horse  manure  based  control.  Bagasse  supplemented with  a
commercial  activator  ("Acto  88")  yielded  poorly.

Dr.  Kneebone's composts were prepared using the standard techniques elucidated in this chap-
ter  with  a  turn  schedule  on  days  O-2-5-7-9.  The  supplemented  bagasse  was  composted  3  days
longer and all bagasse based composts had moisture contents ranging from 75-83%. Significantly,
the bagasse compost with the lowest moisture content had the highest yield. All bagasse composts
had  larger  mushrooms  than  the  control.

This work by Kneebone demonstrates the value of bagasse as a mushroom growing  substrate.
Using the compost formula format,  composts can  be devised to meet the needs of the two species
named  and  many  others.  A  good  supplement would  be  horse  droppings on  wood  shavings.  If the
bagasse  compost  becomes  too  short or  wet,  the  gypsum  can  be  increased  from  5%  to  8%  of the
dry  weight.

The  5-Day  Express  Composting  Method

During  the  past  20  years  compost  research  has  been  directed towards  shortening  the  overall
preparation  period. The goal  is to reduce  handling and further conserve the nutrient base (dry mat-

Compost Preparation/107

ter). But so far, no one has been able to consistently produce a high yielding compost by rapid prep-
aration methods.  However, a recent article by Kaj Bech (1978) of the Mushroom Research Lab in
Denmark  reports the  most promising  method to date.  According to  Bech,  total  dry matter  loss  is
held to 20-25%  with  a  composting  time of 8-10 days  (5 day  Phase  I  and  3-5  day Phase  II).  His
method and materials follow:
DAY 

PROCEDURE

-2 

0 

2 

3 

Take one ton wheat straw based horse manure (moisture content 50%,  nitrogen content
of  1.0-1.1)  Homogenize well  and  make  up  the  pile  using  standard  dimensions.
1st turn:  Add  ammonia  sulfate,  (NH4)2S04.  11.25  kg.  Wet thoroughly with  approxi-
mately  450  liters  of water.
2nd  turn:  add calcium  carbonate  (CaC03)  33.75  kg.  Add  approximately  1 80  liters of
water.
Mix  well  and  fill  Trays,  shelves  or  tunnel  for  standard  Phase  II.

Non-Composted  Subtrafes/109

CHAPTER  VI

NON-COMPOSTED SUBSTRATES

Figure  101  Psilocybe  cyanescens  fruiting  outdoors  in  a  bed  of fresh  alder  chips.

110/The Mushroom Cultivator

The  use  of non-composted and  semi-composted  materials as mushroom  growing  substrates is

common  among  commercial  growers  of  Pleurotus,  Volvariella,  Flammulina  and  Stropharia.
Because  of the simplicity and  ease  by which  they are  produced,  these substrates are  ideal for the
home cultivator. The advantages of these substrates are the rapid preparation times and the easily
standardized  mixtures  formulated  from  readily  available  raw  materials.  These  substrates  can  be
treated  by  sterilization,  pasteurization  or  used  untreated  in  their  natural  state.

NATURAL CULTURE

For  most  people  mushroom  cultivation  implies  an  indoor  process  employing  sterile  culture
techniques and  a  controlled  growing  environment.  Although  this  has  been  the  natural  progression
of  events  for  commercial  cultivators  and  is  the  only  way  to  consistently  grow  year  round  crops,  it
need not be the sole method available to the home cultivator.  For hundreds of years home growers
have  made  up  outdoor  beds  and  have  enjoyed  harvesting  seasonal  crops of  mushrooms.  In  fact,
most  mushrooms  now  being  grown  commercially were  originally  grown  using  natural  culture tech-
niques.

By  observing  wild  mushrooms  fruiting  in  their  natural  habitats,  one  can  begin  to  understand
their growth requirements. To fully illustrate how this methodology works, the development of natu-
ral culture for Psilocybe cyanescens will be used as an example.  Psilocybe cyanescens grows along
fence lines and hedge rows, in tall rank grass, in berry thickets, in well mulched rhododendron beds,
in  piles  of  wood  chips  and  shavings  and  in  ecologically  disturbed  areas.  In  many  instances,  the
mushrooms are  found  growing  in  soil,  but  upon  close examination  of the  underlying  mycelial  net-
work,  it  is  apparent  that  they  are  feeding  on  wood  or other  similar  cellulosic  material.  Due  to  the
thick  strandy  mycelium  of  Psilocybe  cyanescens,  it  is  relatively  easy  to  locate  and  gather  colonized

Figure  102  Virgin  spawn:  Psilocybe  cyanescens  mycelium  on  a  wood  chip.

Non-Composted  Subtrates/111

pieces  of  substrate.  These  pieces are  considered  virgin  spawn  and  are  used  to  inoculate  similar
materials.  Freshly  cut  chips  of  alder,  maple  and  fir  all  support  healthy  mycelial  growth.  Because
alder  is  high  in  sugar content,  without  resins and  abundant  in  northwestern  North  America,  it  has
been selected as the primary substrate material.

Even though  such a virgin spawn  is not absolutely clean,  Psilocybe cyanescens mycelium col-
onizes fresh  substrate  pieces so  rapidly that there  is  little  risk of contamination.  In  order to  prepare
inoculum  for the following  year,  the  newly  inoculated  chips are  kept  indoors  in  gallon jars or other
protective  containers.  With  sufficient  moisture,  minimal  air exchange  and  normal  indoor tempera-
tures,  the  mycelium  soon  spreads  throughout  the  fresh  chips.  For  the  best  results  a  1:5  ratio  of
virgin spawn to fresh chips is recommended. As one jar becomes fully permeated,  it can be used to
produce more spawn.

In the spring freshly cut wood branches are chipped, then mixed with the fully colonized inocu-

lum and made into a ridge bed directly on the ground.  Experience has shown that irregular chips
approximately 1 -3 inches long give better results than finely ground material such as sawdust. Fresh
chips not only provide a greater nutrient and water reservoir,  but also have substantial  surface area
for  primordia  formation.  Strong  mycelial  growth  can  be  sustained  on  wood  chips  for  a  prolonged
period of time.  (Mycelial  growth  on fresh  sawdust  is at first rapid and  rhizomorphic  but soon  slows
and  loses  its  vitality).

The  ridge  beds should  be  made 4-6  inches  deep and 2  feet wide.  To  insure  a  humid  microcli-
mate for mushroom  development the bed should be made  under rhododendrons or other leafy or-
namentals,  along  a  fence  or  hedge  row,  or on  grass which  is allowed  to grow  up  through  the  bed.

Figure  103  Chipping  freshly  cut  alder
branches.

112/The Mushroom Cultivator

The bed must never be placed where it is exposed to direct sunlight but it should not be so well pro-
tected  that rainfall  can  not reach  it.

During  the  spring  and  summer  the  mycelium  colonizes  The  fresh  substrate  which  should  be
covered  with  plastic or cardboard to  prevent drying.  A weekly watering  helps to  keep The  moisture
content high. In the fall the bed is uncovered and given a heavy watering Twice a week, buf with care
not  to flood  it.  When  the  mushrooms  begin  to fruit,  watering  should  be  gauged  according  to  envi-
ronmental conditions and natural precipitation. As long as the temperature stays above freezing the
mushrooms will grow continuously. If a freeze is expected, the beds can be protected with a plastic
covering.  Extended  freezing  weather  ends  outdoor  cropping  until  the  following  year.

Throughout the winter the  beds can  be  protected  by a  layer of straw,  cardboard  or new chips
topped with  plastic. This is particularly  important for harsh  climates. Other possibilities include mak-
ing  the  bed inside a cold frame or plastic greenhouse.  Certain  regions of the country like the  North-
west are better suited to natural culture than others.  In this respect it is desirable to use a local strain
adapted to local conditions. In climates unsuited To ouTdoor culTivation, the wood chips can be filled
into  trays  and  brought  inside.

Once  the  primary  bed  has  been  established  outdoors,  it  can  be  likened  To  a  perennial  planT,
which  is  The  nature of mushroom  mycelium.  Indoor spawn  preparation  and  incubation  become un-
necessary. With each successive year chips can be drawn from the original bed and used as inocu-
lum.  This  means  ThaT the  total  bed  area  can  be  multiplied  by five on  an  annual  basis.  (See  Figure
164  of  Psilocybe  cyanescens  fruiting  indoors  in  tray  of  alder  chips).

Figure  104  Oak  dowels  before  and  after  colonization  by
shiitake  (Lentinus  edodes)  mycelium.

Non-Composted Subtrates/113

Figure  105  Shiitake  plug
inserted  into  oak  log.

Figure  106  Stacked  ar-
rangement of shiitake logs in
a greenhouse.

Figure  107  Shiitake  cul-
ture  outdoors  under  shade
cloth.

114/The Mushroom Cultivator

SEMI-STERILE  AND  STERILE
WOOD  BASED  SUBSTRATES

Mushrooms  that  grow  on  wood  or  wood  wastes  are  termed  lignicolous  due  to  their  abililty  to
utilize  lignin,  a  microbial  resistant substance that constitutes the  heart wood of trees.  The  main  com-
ponents of wood,  however,  are cellulose and  hemicellulose, which are also nutrients available to lig-
nin  degrading  mushroom  mycelium.  The chart appearing  below shows a typical  analysis of different
wood  and  straw  types.  This  table  not  only  illustrates  the  similarities  between  wood  and  straw,  but
also  the  important  differences  between  coniferous  and  broad  leaf trees.  The  high  concentrations  of
resins,  turpentine  and  tanins  make  conifers  less  suitable  for  mushroom  growing.  Conifers  are  used
on occasion, but they are mixed one to one with hardwood sawdust. In general, the wood of broad
leaf  or  hardwood  species  have  proven  to  be  the  best  mushroom  growing  substrates.  Specifically
these  tree  types  are:  oak;  elm;  chestnut;  beech;  maple;  and  alder.

Type

Spruce
(Picea  excelsa)
Pine
(Pinus  silvestris)
Beech
(Fagus  silvatica)
Birch
(Betula  verrucosa)
Wheat  Straw
(Triticum  sativum)

Resin
2.30

N

0.08

P-2 0-5
0.02

K20
0.10

Hemi-
cell.

11,30

Cell.
57.84

Lignin
28.29

3.45

0.06

0.02

0.09

11.02

54.25

26.25

1.78

0.13

0.02

0.21

24.86

53.46

22.46

1.80

—

—

—

27.07

45.30

19.56

0.00

0.60

0.30

1.10

—

36.15

16.15

Table  of  the  analyses  of  various  types  of  wood  and  straw.  Figures  are  percent  of  dry  weight.

(Adapted from  H.  Rempe (1953)).

The  most  notable  commercial  species  grown  on  wood  is Lentinus  edodes.  the  shiitake  mush-
room.  Traditional  methods  use oak  logs,  3-6  inches in diameter and three feet  long,  cut between  fall
and  spring  when  the  sap content is the  highest.  Special  care  should  be  taken  not to  injure the  bark
layer when cutting and handling the logs. The bark is of critical importance for fruiting and is one of
the  key factors  considered  by commercial  growers when  selecting  tree species.  The  logs should  be
scraped  clean  of  lichens  and  fungi  and  then  drilled  with  four  longitudinal  rows  of  one  inch  deep
holes  spaced  eight  inches  apart.  Next,  these  holes  are  plugged  with  spawn  and  covered  with  wax.
After  9  to  1 5  months  of  incubation  the  logs  begin  to  fruit.  {See  the  species  parameter  section  in
Chapter XI.)  The  use  of freshly  cut  logs  provides a  semi-sterile substrate with  no  special  treatment
and  is  a  very  effective  method  for  the  home  cultivator.

Commercial  growers  of  lignicolous  mushrooms  are  turning  increasingly  to  sawdust  based
substrates.  Such  substrates  have  been  developed  in  Japan  for growing Pleurotus,  Flammulina and

Non-Composted  Subtrates/115

Auricularia.  They are also being utilized with some modifications by commercial shiitake growers in
the United States. The development of these mushroom specific substrates follows certain well de-
fined  guidelines.

The basic raw material  is cellulose,  a major constituent of sawdust,  straw,  cardboard or paper
wastes,  wood  chips,  or  other  natural  plant  fibers.  Any  of  these  materials  should  be  chopped  or
shredded,  but never so finely as to eliminate their inherent structural qualities. This cellulosic base
comprises  approximately  80%  of the  total  substrate  mixture.

To these basic substrate materials are added various nutrient supplements and growth stimula-
tors in meal or flour form.  By supplying proteins, carbohydrates, vitamins and minerals, the supple-
ments serve to enhance the yield capabilities of the substrate base. Protein sources include concen-
trates like soya meal or soya flour, wheat germ and brewer's yeast. The most suitable carbohydrate
sources are starchy  materials such  as rice,  potatoes,  corn  and wheat.  Some supplements are well
balanced and  provide both carbohydrates and proteins.  Examples of these are bran,  oatmeal and
grains  of  all  types.  The  number  of  possible  supplements  is  extensive  and  need  not  be  limited  to
those  listed.  The supplements comprise approximately 8-25%  of the total dry weight.  The addition
of gypsum at a rate of 5%  of the dry weight can  improve the structure and porosity.  It should be
considered  an  optional  ingredient.

Japanese  growers  of  Flammulina  velutipes,  Auricularia  auricula  and  allies,  and  Pleurotus
ostreatus have a standard substrate formula consisting of 4 parts sawdust and  1  part bran, The saw-

Figure  108  Photograph  of shiitake  mushrooms  growing  on  a  sawdust  block.

116/The Mushroom Cultivator

dust can be aged up to one year, which is said To improve its moisture holding capacity. Presoaking
the sawdust prior to mixing in the bran is an effective way to achieve the required 60% moisture op-
timum. A firm squeeze of the mixture should produce only a few drops of water between the fingers,
if the mixture has too much moisture, loose water collects in the bottom of the substrate container, a
condition  predisposing  the  culture  to  contamination.

The substrate can be filled into a number of different containers.  Mason jars,  polypropylene jars
or  high  density,  heat-resistant  polyethylene  bags  are  commonly  employed.  The  containers  are
closed and sealed with  a microporous filter. They are sterilized at  1 5  psi for 60-90  minutes. After
sterilization the containers are cooled to ambient temperature and inoculated. The inoculum can  be
either grain spawn or sawdust-bran spawn.

During  incubation  substrate  filled  plastic  bags  can  be  molded  to  the  desired  cropping  form.
Common  shapes  are  round  mini-logs  or  rectangular  blocks.  Some  Pleurotus  growers  mold  the

Figure  109  Flammulina  velutipes,  the
Enoke  Mushroom,  fruiting  in  mason  jar
containing  sawdust  mixture.

Figure  110  Autoclavable  plastic  bag  and
microporous 
the
Orient as the  Space  Bag.

filter  disc,  known 

in 

Non-Composted  Subtrates/117

sawdust substrate into a cylindrical shape. 6-8 inches long and 4-5 inches in diameter. The fully col-
onized "logs" are stacked together on  their sides with the ends exposed as the cropping  surfaces.
An alternative is to slit the bag lengthwise in four places, exposing the substrate to air while retaining
the plastic as a humidity hood.  If growing in jars, Flammulina and Pleurotus fruit from the exposed
surface  at  the  mouth  of  the  jars.

GROWING  ON  PASTEURIZED  STRAW

In  commercial  mushroom  production  one  of the  most  frequently  used  substrate  materials  is
cereal straw. Not only does straw form the basis for mushroom composts, but it is also used uncom-
posted  as the  sole  ingredient for the  growth  of various  mushroom  species.  Although  all  types of
straw are more or less suitable, most growers use wheat because of its coarse fiber and its availabili-
ty.  The straw should be clean,  free from  molds and  unspoiled  by any preliminary decomposition.
Preparation simply involves chopping or shredding the dry straw into  1 -3 inch  pieces. This can be
done with a wood chipper, a garden compost shredder or a power mower. The shredding increases
moisture absorption by expanding the available surface area. Shredding also increases the density of
the substrate mass.

Figure  111  Equipment needed for pasteurization of straw: 55 gallon drum; gas burn-
er; shredder; hardware cloth basket and straw.

118/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figure  112  Shredding the straw.
Figure  113  Filling  the  shredded  straw  into  the
wire basket.
Figure  114  Checking the water temperature.
Figure  115  Draining  the  pasteurized  straw.

Non-Composted Subtrates/119

The  chopped  straw  is treated  by  pasteurization  which  can  be  carried out with  live steam  or hot
water.  Presoaked to approximately  75%  water,  the straw is filled  into a tunnel or steam  room as de-
scribed in the composting chapter.  It is steamed for 2-4 hours at 140-150°F., then cooled To 80 °F.
and  spawned.  An  alternative  program  calls  for  12-24  hours  at  122°F.  after the  high  temperature
pasteurization.  This  program  is  designed  to  promote  beneficial  microbial  growth  giving  the  straw  a
higher  degree  of  selectivity  for  mushroom  mycelium.

The  method  best suited to the home cultivator is the  hot water bath.  Figure  111  illustrates a
simple  system  utilizing  a  55  gallon  drum  and  a  propane  burner.  The  drum  is  half filled  with  water
that  is  then  heated  to  160-170 °F.  Chopped  dry  straw  is  placed  into  the  wire  mesh  basket  and  sub-
merged  in  the  hot water.  (A  weight  is  needed  to  keep  The  straw  underwater.}  After 30-45  minutes
the  straw  is  removed  from  the  water  and  allowed  to  drain.  It  is  very  important  to  let  all  loose  water
run  off.

Once drained,  the straw is spread out on a clean surface and allowed to cool to 80 °  F.  (or less),
at which point it can be spawned. The straw is evenly mixed with spawn and filled into trays, shelves
or plastic  bags.  Some  compression  of the  straw  into the container  is  desirable  because the  cropping
efficiency  will  be  increased.

The use of plastic bags is a simple and efficient way to handle straw substrates. A five gallon bag
(1 -2  mils  thick)  is well  suited  to  most situations.  Two  dozen  nail  sized  holes  equally  spaced  around
the  bags  provide  aeration.  Upon  full  colonization,  the  mycelia  of  species  like  Pleurotus  ostreatus

Figure  116 
cooled  pasteurized straw.

Inoculating  grain  spawn  onto  the

120/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figure  117  Pasteurized  straw stuffed  into  plastic  bags which  are then  perforated  with
nail  size  holes.

and  Psilocybe cubensis actually  hold the straw together,  at which  time the  bag  can  be completely
removed. Another alternative is to perforate or strip the bag from the top or side to allow easy crop-
ping.

Wheat straw prepared and pasteurized in this manner can be used to grow Pleurotus ostreatus.
Stropharia rugoso-annulata,  Panaeolus cyanescens and Psilocybe cubensis.  It is quite possible that
other species can  utilize this substrate or a modification  of it.  Studies with  Pleurotus ostreatus have
demonstrated yield increases with the addition  of 20%  grass meal  prior to substrate pasteurization.
Supplementation  of  the  straw  after  a  full  spawn  run  is  another  method  of  boosting  yields  (See
Chapter VII.)  Bono  (1978)  obtained  a  yield  increase  of 85%  with  Pleurotus  flabellatus  by  adding
cottonseed meal to the fully colonized straw. The optimum  rate of addition was 132 grams per kilo-
gram  of dry straw (approximately 22  grams crude protein  per kilogram straw).  Bono also found that
supplementation  increased  the  protein  content  and  intensified  the  flavor  of  the  mushrooms.

Spawning and Spawn  Running  in  Bulk Subtrates/121

CHAPTER  VII

SPAWNING  AND  SPAWN

RUNNING IN BULK SUBSTRATES

Figure  118  Mycelium  running through  compost.

122/The Mushroom Cultivator

The inoculation  of compost or bulk substrates is called spawning. The colonization of these

substrates by the mushroom mycelium is known as spawn running. At spawning and during
spawn running there are several factors that must be considered if yields are to be maximized. These
factors are:

1.  Moisture content of the substrate.
2.  Temperature  of  the  substrate.
3.  Dry weight of the substrate per square foot of cropping surface.
4.  Duration  of  spawn  running.

Moisture  Content

Mushroom  mycelium does not grow in a substrate that is either too dry or too wet. A dry sub-
strate produces a fine wispy mycelial growth and poor mushroom formation because the water es-
sential for the transport and assimilation of nutrients is lacking. On the other hand, an over-wet sub-
strate  inhibits  mycelial  growth  and  produces overly stringy  mycelia.  Controlled  experiments with
Agaricus brunnescens grown on horse manure composts have shown yield depressions when the
moisture content deviates more than 2% from the optimum.  Deviations greater than 5%  generally
result in a spawn run that does not support fruitbody production. A dry compost at spawning should
be lightly watered and mixed well to guard against the formation of wet spots. For an over-wet com-
post the  common  procedure  is to add  gypsum  unti!  the  loose water  is bound.

Substrate  Temperature

Since  mushroom  mycelium  grows  within  the  substrate,  the  substrate  temperature  must  be
monitored closely. Thermometers are placed both in the center of the substrate—the hottest region
—and in the room's atmosphere. These two thermometers establish a temperature differential. If the
hottest point in the substrate is 80 ° F. and the air is 70 ° F. then the temperature of the total mass
•must lie within this range.

The  optimum  temperature  for  mycelial  growth  varies  depending  on  the  mushroom  species.
Agaricus brunnescens grows fastest at 77 °F. whereas Psilocybe cubensis prefers 86 °F. Tempera-
tures  higher  or  lower  simply  slow  mycelial  growth.  The  growth  curve  shown  in  Figure  119  illus-
trates the effect of temperature on the growth of Agaricus brunnescens mycelium.  Note that growth
slows at a faster rate as the temperature rises above the optimum. Therefore the object during spawn
running is to keep the substrate within the temperature range that is optimal for the fastest growth of
mycelium.

Dry  Weight  of  Substrate

Other factors aside, the dry weight of substrate per square foot of cropping surface largely deter-
mines total yield.  Commercial Agaricus growers aim for at least five pounds of dry weight of com-
post  per square foot and sometimes compress  up to eight pounds per sq. ft.  into their containers.
Cropping efficiencies are calculated by dividing total yield per square foot into the dry weight of one

Spawning and Spawn  Running  in  Bulk Subtrates/123

square foot of the  substrate.  Thus a  yield  of four  pounds  per sq.  ft.  of freshly  picked  mushrooms di-
vided  by  five  pounds  dry  weight  of  substrate  equals  an  80%  cropping  efficiency.  Efficiencies  of
80-100%  are  considered  to  be  close  to  the  maximum  yield  potential  of Agahcus  brunnescens.
The actua  amount of substrate that can  be compacted into one square foot of growing area and
managed depends upon the cooling capabilities of the control system  as well  as the outside temper-
ature.  Experiments using Tracer elements in  mushroom  beds three feet deep  have shown that nutri-
ents from  the farthest  point  are transported  to The  growing  mushrooms.  Yields  per sq.  ft.  increased
although  at a  lower substrate  efficiency.

During  spawn  running  the  metabolism  of the  growing  mycelium  generates tremendous  quanti-
ties of heat.  Substrate temperatures normally reach  a  peak on the  7th-9th  days after spawning and
can easily reach  90 °F.  At this temperature thermophilic microorganisms become active, thereby in-
creasing the possibilities of further heat generation. The substrate can easily soar above 100 °F, and
a  compost  can  actually  rise  again  to  conditioning  temperatures.  Temperatures  between  95-110°F.
can  kill  The  mycelium  of  many  mushrooms.  Even  if the  mycelium  is  not  completely  killed,  these
temperatures do irreversible harm to mycelial vitality and fruiting potential. These elevated tempera-
tures also stimulate the activity of competitor molds and may  render the substrate  unsuitable for fur-
ther mushroom growth.  Because of the enhanced heat generating capabilities of deeply filled beds.
Agaricus  growers  rarely  fill  more  than  1 2  inches  of  compost  into  the  beds.

igure  119  Growth  curve  of Agaricus  brunnescens  on  compost.

15 

20

COMPOST  TEMPERATURE

124/The Mushroom Cultivator

The  decision  on  how  deep to  fill  the  spawned substrate  is an  important one.  Here again, the
ratio of substrate to free air space in the growing  room is significant.  (See Chapter IV). An efficient
method of spawn  running is to The fill trays 6-8 inches deep with compost and stack them closely to-
gether in the room.  In this manner the heat generated within each tray remains controllable, while at
the same time the total compost heat will be sufficient to heat The room. Outside air temperature as
well as the capacity of the  heating and cooling  equipment should determine  how many substrate
filled containers can be placed within a given space.  Fresh air is generally used to provide cooling
except when  it  is  warmer than  the  room  temperature.

Duration of Spawn  Run

Once colonization is complete, the substrate should be cased, or if casing is not used, it should
be  switched to  a  fruiting  mode.  If spawn  running  is  continued  beyond this  point,  valuable  nutrients
that could be utilized for production of fruitbodies will  be consumed by further vegetative growth.  If
for some reason the cropping cycle must be delayed, the substrate should be cooled until a more
opportune  time.

Spawning  Methods

Spawning methods,  like spawn  itself,  have evolved over the years. As late as  1 950 Agaricus
brunnescens growers customarily planted walnut sized pieces of manure spawn or kernels of grain
spawn in holes poked into the compost at regular intervals.  Using this method spawn running was
slow,  and areas far from the inoculum were more susceptible to invasion  by competitors. The full
potential of grain  spawn was not realized until the development of "mixed spawning". The principle
of mixed  spawning  is  the  complete  and  thorough  mixing  of the  grain  kernels  throughout the sub-
strate.  In this manner all parts of the substrate are equally inoculated, resulting in the most rapid and
complete  colonization  possible.

The  standard  spawning  rate  used  by Agaricus growers  is seven  liters/Ton  of compost or one
quart/8 sq.  ft.  If spawn  is readily available and cheap,  it is advantageous to  use  high spawning rates
which lead to more rapid colonization. It is also advantageous to break up the grain spawn into indi-
vidual  kernels the  day  before  spawning.  If the  spawn  is fresh,  the  grain  should  break  apart  easily.  If
the  spawn  can  not  be  used  when  fresh,  it should  be  refrigerated  at  38°F.

The basic principle of spawn running is the same regardless of the type of mushroom or sub-
strate.  COLONIZATION  MUST  PROCEED  AS  RAPIDLY  AS  POSSIBLE  TO  PREVENT
OTHER  ORGANISMS  FROM  BECOMING  ESTABLISHED.  Once  the  mushroom  mycelium  be-
comes dominant,  natural antibiotics secreted into the substrate inhibit competitors. To prevent inva-
sion by competitors it is important that spawning take place under carefully controlled hygienic con-
ditions.  Fungus gnats in particular must be excluded, and for this purpose a tight, well sealed work-
ing area is best. This area and all tools should be disinfected one day prior to spawning with  a  10%
bleach  solution.  When  using  disinfectants be sure your skin  is protected and avoid breathing  any
fumes.

Spawning  and  Spawn  Running  in  Bulk  Subtrates/125

Figure  120  Psilocybe  semilanceata  mycelium  running  through  pasteurized  wheat
straw.

If the substrate has been filled into shelves, the spawn is broadcast over the surface and mixed in
with a pitchfork or by hand. With trays, a similar method can be used, or alternatively, the substrate
can be dumped out on a clean surface, mixed with spawn and then replaced in the trays. Substrates
from  a  bulk  room  are  removed,  mixed  with  spawn  and  then  placed  into  the  chosen  container.

It is common procedure to level and compress the substrate to avoid dehydration caused by ex-

cessive air penetration.  The degree of compression  depends upon substrate structure.  Long, airy
materials  can  be  compacted  more  than  short,  dense  ones.  Commercial  tray growers  compact the
compost into the trays with a hydraulic press so that the compost surface resembles a table top. This
enables the application  of an  even casing  layer.

Environmental  Conditions

The required environmental conditions for spawn  running are very specific and must be closely
monitored.  Substrate temperatures  are  controlled  by  careful  manipulation  of the  surrounding  air
temperature.  Heating and cooling equipment are helpful but not absolutely essential unless the out-
side climate is extreme. A well insulated room with provisions for fresh air entrance and exhaust air
exit  should  be  adequate  for  most  situations.  The  steady  or  periodic  recirculation  of  room  air  by
means of a small fan helps to keep an even temperature throughout the room and guards against lo-
calized over-heating, especially in the uppermost containers.  Humidity is extremely important at this
time and must be held at 90-100%.  If the humidity falls below this level, water evaporates from the
Jbstrate surface to the detriment of the growing mycelium.  Humidification can be accomplished by
steam humidifiers or by cold water misters.  If steam is used, care must be taken that the increase in
r temperature  does  not drive the  substrate temperature  above the optimal  range.  One  common

126/The Mushroom Cultivator

method of counteracting drying  is to cover the substrate with  plastic.  Be  ready to remove the cover-
ing  during  the  period  of  peak  activity  if temperatures  rise  too  quickly.

During  spawn  run  the  mushroom  mycelium  generates  large  quantities  of  carbon  dioxide.  In
fact,  it has been  demonstrated that mushroom  mycelium  is capable of C02 fixation.  Because of this
ability to absorb CO2. room concentrations of 10,000-15,000 ppm are considered beneficial and
desirable.  A C02  level  high  enough  to stop  growth  is  uncommon  under  normal  circumstances.  Be-
ing  heavier than air, C02  settles at the bottom of the room, which  is yet another reason for even air
circulation  within  the  growing  environment.

Super  Spawning

Super  spawning  is  also  called  "active  mycelium  spawning"  vis  a  vis  the  Hunke-Till  process.
Essentially,  a  set  amount of substrate  is  inoculated  and  colonized  in  the  normal  manner.  The fully
run  substrate  is  then  used  as  inoculum  to  spawn  increased  amounts  of  a  similar  substrate.  One
could  theoretically  pyramid  a  small  quantity  of  inoculum  into  a  considerable  amount  of fully  colo-
nized  substrate.  This  technique  requires  the  primary  substrate  to  be  contaminant  free;  otherwise
contamination,  not  mycelium,  will  be  propagated.  The  possibilities  inherent  in  this  method  may  be
of  greater  application  when  transferring  naturally  occurring  mycelial  colonies  to  non-sterile  yet
mushroom  specific  substrates.  An  excellent  example  of  this  is  the  propagation  of  Psilocybe
cyanescens  on  wood  chips.  (See  Chapter  VI.)

Supplementation  at  Spawning

One of the newest advances in Agaricus culture is the development of delayed release  nutrients
added to The compost at spawning. These supplements are specially formulated nutrients encapsu-
lated  in  a  denatured  protein  coat.  They  are  designed  to  become  available  to  the  growing  mush-
rooms during the  first three flushes.  The  application  rate  is 5-7%  of the dry weight of the substrate.
Yield increases of '/2 to  1  Ib/sq. ft. are normal.  Here again, complete and thorough  mixing is essen-
tial  to  success.  Caution:  these  materials enrich  the  substrate,  making  it  more  suitable to  contami-
nants  if factors  predisposing  to their growth  are  present.  (For suppliers of delayed  release  nutrients,
refer To  the  resource  section  in  the  Appendix).

Supplementation  at  Casing  (S.A.C.)

SACing  is another  method  used to  boost the  nutritional  content of the substrate.  The  materials
used are soy bean  meal,  cottonseed  meal,  and/or ground  rye,  wheat or kafir corn  grains.  The fully
colonized substrate is thoroughly mixed with  any one of these materials at a rate of  1070  of the dry
weight of the substrate.  The  substrate and the supplements must both  be clean  and free from  con-
taminants; otherwise contamination will spread and threaten the entire culture.  High substrate tem-
peratures should  be anticipated on  the second to third day after supplementation.  With this type of
nutrient enhancement  yield  increases of  '/2-2  Ibs/sq.  ft.  are  possible.

The Casing Layer/127

CHAPTER VIII

THE  CASING  LAYER

Figure  121  Panaeolus  cyanescens  fruiting  in  tray  of  pasteurized  straw.  Note
mushrooms formed only on cased  half.

128/The Mushroom Cultivator

Covering the substrate surface with a layer of moist material having specific structural character-

istics  is  called  casing.  This  practice  was  developed  by  Agaricus  growers  who  found  that
mushroom formation was stimulated by covering their compost with such a layer. A casing layer en-
courages  fruiting  and  enhances yield  potential  in  many,  but  not all,  cultivated  mushrooms.

at 

us 

CASING 

OPTIONAL 

•

•

•
•

com 

SPECIES 
Ag.  brunnescens 
Ag.  bitorquis 
C. 
Fl.  velutipes 
Lentinus  edodes 
Lepista  nuda 
PI,  ostreatus 
PI.  ostreatus

(Florida  variety) 
Pan.  cyanescens 
Pan.  subbalteatus 
Ps.  cubensis 
Ps.  cyanescens 
Ps.  mexicana 
Ps.  tampanensis 
S.  rugoso-annulata 
I/,  volvacea 

CASING 

CASING

REQUIRED  NOT  REQUIRED

•
•

•

•
•
•

•
•

•

•

•

•

In all species where the use of a casing has been  indicated as optional, yields are clearly en-
hanced  with  the  application  of  one.  The  chart  above  refers  to  the  practical  cultivation  of mush-
rooms in quantity.  It excludes fruitings on nutrified agar media or on other substrates that produce
but a few mushrooms.  Consequently,  casing  has become an  integral  part of the mushroom  grow-
ing  methodology.

Functions

The  basic  functions  of the  casing  layer  are:
1.  To  protect  the  colonized  substrate  from  drying  out.

Mushroom  mycelium  is  extremely  sensitive  to  dry  air.  Although  a  fully  colonized  sub-
strate  is primarily  protected from  dehydration  by its container (the tray, jar or plastic  bag},
the  cropping  surface  remains  exposed.  Should  the  exposed  surface  dry out,  the  myceli-
um  dies  and  forms  a  hardened  mat of  cells.  By  covering  the  surface with  a  moist casing
layer, the mycelium is protected from the damaging effects of drying.  Moisture loss from
the  substrate  is  also  reduced.

The Casing Layer/129

2.  To provide a humid microclimate for primordia formation and development.
The casing is a layer of material in which the mushroom  mycelium can  develop an exten-
sive,  healthy  network.  The  mycelium  within  the  casing  zone  becomes  a  platform  that
supports  formation  of  primordia  and  their  consequent  growth  into  mushrooms.  It  is  the
moist  humid  microclimate  in  the  casing  that  sustains  and  nurtures  mycelial  growth  and
primordia  formation.

3.  To  provide  a  water  reservoir  for  the  maturing  mushrooms.

The  enlargement of a  pinhead  into  a  fully  mature  mushroom  is  strongly  influenced  by
available water,  without  which  a  mushroom  remains  small  and  stunted.  With  the  casing
layer functioning as a water reservoir, mushrooms can reach full size. This is particularly
important for  heavy  flushes  when  mushrooms  are  competing  for water  reserves.

4.  To  support  the  growth  of  fructification  enhancing  microorganisms.

Many  ecological  factors  influence  the  formation  of  mushroom  primordia.  One  of these
factors  is  the  action  of  select  groups  of  microorganisms  present  in  the  casing.  A  casing
prepared with  the correct materials and  managed according to the guidelines outlined  in
this  chapter  supports  the  growth  of  beneficial  microflora.

Properties

The  casing  layer  must  maintain  mycelial  growth,  stimulate  fruiting  and  support  continual
flushes of mushrooms.  In  preparing the casing, the materials must be carefully chosen according
to  their  chemical  and  physical  properties.  These  properties  are:

1.  Water  Retention:  The  casing  must  have  the  capacity  to  both  absorb  and  release  sub-
stantial quantities of water. Not only does the casing sustain vegetative growth, but it also
must supply  sufficient  moisture for successive  generations of fruitbodies.

2.  Structure:  The structure of the  casing  surface must be  porous and open,  and  remain  so
despite repeated waterings. Within this porous surface are small moist cavities that protect
developing primordia and allow metabolic gases to diffuse from the substrate into the air.
If this surface  microclimate  becomes closed,  gases  build  up  and  inhibit  primordia  forma-
tion.  A  closed  surface  also  reduces  the  structural  cavities  in  which  primordia  form.  For
these  reasons,  the  retention  of  surface  structure  directly  affects  a  casing's  capability  to
form  primordia  and  sustain  fruitbody  production.

3.  Microflora:  Recent  studies  have  demonstrated  the  importance of beneficial  bacteria  in
the casing  layer.  High  levels of bacteria such  as Pseudomonas putida result in  increased
primordia  formation,  earlier  cropping  and  higher  yields.  During  the  casing  colonization
period These beneficial bacteria are stimulated by metabolic gases that build up in the sub-
strate and diffuse through the casing. In fact, dense casing layers and deep casing layers
generally yield  more  mushrooms  because they slow diffusion.  It  is desirable therefore to
build-up  CO2  and  other  gases  prior to  primordia  formation.  (For a  further  discussion  on
the  influence  of  bacteria  on  primordia  formation,  see  Appendix  II.)

The selection of specific microbial groups by mycelial metabolites is an excellent ex-

130/The Mushroom Cultivator

ample of symbiosis.  These  same  bacteria  give the  casing a  natural  resistance to  competi-
tors.  In  this  respect,  a  sterilized  casing  lacks  beneficial  microorganisms and  has little resis-
tance To contaminants.

4.  Nutritive  Value:  The casing  is  not designed to  provide  nutrients To  developing  mush-
rooms  and should  have  low  nutritional  value  compared to the  substrate.  A nutritive  casing
supports  a  broader  range  of  competitor  molds.  Wood  fragments  and  other  undecom-
posed  plant  matter  are  prime  sites  for  mold  growth  and  should  be  carefully  screened  out
of  a  well  formulated  casing.

5.  pH:  The  pH  of  the  casing  must  be  within  certain  limits  for  strong  mycelial  growth.  An
overly acidic or aklaline casing mixture depresses mycelial growth and supports competi-
tors.  Agaricus  brunnescens  prefers  a  casing  with  pH  values  between  7.0-7.5.  Even
though  the  casing  has  a  pH  of  7.5  when  first  applied,  it  gradually  falls  to  a  pH  of  nearly
6.0  by  the  end  of  cropping  due  to  acids  secreted  by  the  mushroom  mycelium.  Buffering
the  casing  with  limestone  flour  is  an  effective  means to counter this gradual  acidification.
The optimum pH  range varies according To the species. (See the growing parameters for
each  species  in  Chapter  XI.)

6.  Hygienic Quality: The casing  must  be free of pests,  pathogens and  extraneous debris.

Of  particular  importance,  the  casing  must  not  harbor  nematodes  or  insect  larvae.

Materials

To  better  understand  how  a  casing  layer functions requires a  basic  understanding  of soil  com-
ponents  and  their  specific  structural  and  textural  characteristics.  When  combined  properly,  the
soil  components  create  a  casing  layer  that  is  both  water  retentive  and  porous.

1.  Sand:  Characterized  by  large  individual  particles with  large air spaces  in  between,  sandy
soils are well aerated. Their structure is considered "open".  Sandy soils are heavy,  hold
little  water  and  release  it  quickly.

2.  Clay:  Having  minute  individual  particles  bound  together  in  aggregations,  clay  soils  have
few  air  pockets  and  are  structurally  "closed".  Water  is  more  easily  bound  by  clay  soils.
3.  Loam:  Loam  is  a  loose  soil  composed  of  varying  proportions  of  sand  and  clay,  and  is

ch'aracterized by a high  humus content.

Agaricus  growers  found  that  the  best  type  of  soil  for  mushroom  growing  was  a  clay/!oam.
The  humus  and  sand  in  a  clay/loam  soil  open  up  the  clay  which  is  typically  dense  and  closed.
The  casing's  structure  is  improved  while  the  property  of  particle  aggregation  is  retained.  The
humus/clay  combination  holds  moisture  well  and  forms  a  crumbly,  well  aerated  casing.

There are two  basic  problems with  using  soils for casing—the  increased contamination  risk
from  fungi  and  nematodes,  and  the  loss  of structure  after  repeated waterings.  Cultivators  can  re-
duce the  risk  of contamination  by  pasteurization,  a  process whereby  the  moistened  casing  soil  is
thoroughly  and  evenly  steamed  for  twohours  aT  160°  F.  An  alternative  method  is  to  bake  the
moist  soil  in  an  oven  for  Two  hours  aT  1 60 °  F.

The Casing Layer/131

Figure  122  Sphagnum  peat  and  lime-
stone  flour  needed  for  casing.

The  development  of  casings  based  on  peat  moss  has  practically eliminated  the  use  of soil  in
mushroom  culture.  Peat  is  highly  decomposed  plant  matter  and  has  a  pH  in  the  3.5-4.5  range.
Since this acidic condition  precludes many contaminants from  colonizing  it as a  substrate,  peat  is
considered  to  be  a  fairly  "clean"  starting  material.  Peat  based casings  rarely  require  pasteuriza-
tion.  But  because  peat  is  too  acidic  for  most  mushrooms,  the  addition  of  some  form  of  calcium
buffering agent like limestone is essential. "Liming" also causes the aggregation of the peat parti-
cles,  giving  peat a structure similar to  a clay/loam  soil.  A coarse fibrous peat  is preferred  because
it  holds  its structure  better than  a fine  peat.  In  essence,  the  properties of sphagnum  peat conform
to  al!  the  guidelines  of  a  good  casing  layer.

Buffering agents are used To counter the acidic effects of peat and other casing materials. Cal-
cium  carbonate  (CaC03)  is  most commonly  used  and comes  in  different forms,  some  more  desir-
able Than others.

1.  Chalk:  Used extensively  in  Europe,  chalk  is soft  in  texture and  holds water well.  Chunks
of  chalk,  ranging  from  one  inch  thick  to  dust,  improve  casing  structure  and  continuously
leach  into  the  casing,  giving  long  lasting  buffering  action.

2.  Limestone  Flour:  Limestone  flour  is  calcitic  limestone  mined  from  rock  quarries  and
ground  to  a  fine  powder.  It  is  the  buffering  agent  most widely  used  by Agaricus  growers
in  the  United  States.  Limestone  flour  is  97%  CaC03  with  less  than  2%  magnesium.

132/The Mushroom Cultivator

3.  Limestone  Grit:  Produced  in  a  fashion  similar  to  limestone  flour,  limestone  grit  is  rated
according  to  particle  size  after  being  screened  through  varying  meshes.  Limestone grit  is
an  excellent  structural  additive  but  has  low  buffering  abilities.  A  number  9  grit  is  recom-
mended.

4.  Dolomitic  Limestone:  This  limestone  is  rarely  used  by  Agaricus  growers  due  to  its  high
magnesium  content.  Some  researchers  have  reported  depressed  mycelial  growth  in  cas-
ings  high  in  magnesium.

5.  Marl:  Dredged  from  dry  lake  bottoms,  marl  is a soft  lime similar to chalk  but  has the con-
sistency  of  clay.  It  is  a  composite  of clay  and  calcium  carbonate with  good  water  holding
capacity.

6.  Oyster  Shell:  Comprised  of  calcium  carbonate,  ground  up  oyster  shell  is similar to  lime-
stone  grit  in  its  buffering  action  and  its  structural  contribution  to  the  casing  layer.  But
oyster shell  should  not be  used as the sole  buffering  agent  because of its low solubility in

Table Comparing Casing Soil Components

Absorption  Potential
milliliters  water/gram 

%  Water  at  Saturation

Material 
84%
Vermiculite 
79%
Peat 
76%
Potting  Soil 
25%
Loam 
37%
Chalk 
15%
Limestone  Grit 
18%
Sand 
Values  vary  according  to  source  and  quality  of  material  used.  Tests  run  by  the  authors.)

5.0 
2.5 
0.7 
0.3 
0.6 
0.2 
0.2 

Casing  Formulas and  Preparation

The following  casing  formulas are widely  used  in Agaricus culture.  With  pH  adjustments they
can  be  used  with  most  mushroom  species  that  require  a  casing.  Measurement  of  materials  is  by
volume.

FORMULA  1 

Coarse  peat:  4  parts 
Limestone  flour:  1  part 
Limestone  grit:  1/2  part 
Water:  Approximately  2-2 1/4 parts

FORMULA  2

Coarse  peat:  2  parts
Chalk  or  Marl:  1  part
Water:  Approximately  1-1 1/4 parts

One  half to one  part  coarse vermiculite  can  be  added  to  improve the  water  retaining  capacity
of these casing  mixtures and can  be an aid if fruiting on thinly laid substrates.  When  used,  it must

The Casing Layer/133

be  presoaked  to  saturation  before  being  mixed  with  the  other  listed  ingredients.

An  important reference  point for cultivators is the moisture saturation  level of the casing. To
determine  this  level,  completely  saturate  a  sample  of the  casing  and  allow  it  to  drain.  Cover  and
wait  for  one  half hour.  Now weigh  out  100  grams of it  and  dry  in  an  oven  at 200°F.  for two to
three hours or until dry.  Reweigh the sample and the difference in weight is the percent moisture
at saturation.  This  percentage  can  be  used  to  compare  moisture  levels at any  point  in  the  crop-
ping  cycle.  Optimum  moisture  content  is  normally  2-4%  below  saturation.  Typically,  peat  based
casings  are  balanced  to  a  70-75%  moisture  content.

Application

To  prepare  a  casing,  assemble  and  mix  the  components  while  in  a  dry  or  semi-dry  state.
Even  distribution  of the  limestone  buffer is important with  a thoroughly homogeneous mixture be-
ing  the  goal.  When  these  materials  have  been  sufficiently  mixed,  add  water  slowly and  evenly,
bringing  the  moisture  content  up to  90%  of  its saturation  level.  There  is an  easy  method  for pre-
paring  a  casing  of  proper  moisture  content.  Remove  10-20%  of  the  volume  of the  dry  mix  and
then  saturate  the  remaining  80-90%.  Then  add  the  remaining  dry  material.  This  method  brings
the moisture content to the near optimum.  (Some  growers prefer to  let the casing sit for 24 hours
and fully absorb water.  Prior to its application, the casing  is then thoroughly mixed again for even
moisture  distribution).

At this point apply the casing to the fully run substrate.  Use a pre-measured container to con-

sistently add the same volume to each  cropping  unit.

1.  Depth:  The  correct  depth  to  apply the  casing  layer  is directly  related  to  the  depth  of the
substrate.  Greater  amounts  of substrate  increase  yield  potential  which  in  turn  puts more
stress on  the  casing  layer.  Prolific  first and  second  flushes  can  remove  a  thin  casing  or
damage  its surface  structure,  thereby  limiting  future  mushroom  production.  A thin  casing
layer also  lacks the  body and  moisture  holding  capacity to  support  large flushes.  AS A
GENERAL RULE, THE MORE MUSHROOMS EXPECTED PER SQUARE FOOT OF
SURFACE  AREA,  THE  DEEPER  THE  CASING  LAYER.

Agaricus  growers  use  a  minimum  of one  inch  and  a  maximum  of two  inches  of cas-
ing  on  their  beds.  Substrate  depths  of  six  to  eight  inches  are  cased  1 1/4 to  11/2  inches
deep. Substrates deeper than 8  inches are cased  1 1/2 to 2  inches deep.  Nevertheless,  ex-
periments  in  Holland  using  casing  depths  of  1  inch  and  2  inches  demonstrated  that  the
deep casing  layer supported  higher  levels of microorganisms and  produced  more  mush-
rooms.  (See Visscher,  1 975). To gain the full benefits of a casing layer, an absolute mini-
mum  depth  on  bulk substrates is  1  inch.  For fruiting on  sterilized  grain,  the casing  need
not  be  as  deep  as  for  fruitings  on  bulk  substrates.  Shallow  layers  of  grain  are  commonly
cased 3/i  to  1  inch  deep.

2.  Evenness: The  casing  layer should be applied as evenly as possible on a  level substrate
surface.  An  uneven  casing  depth  is  undesirable  for two  reasons:  shallower  regions  can

134/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figures  123,  124  &
125  Casing  a  tray  of
grain spawn.  First the
fully  colonized  grain  is
carefully  broken  up  and
evenly  distributed  into
the tray. As an option, a
layer  of  partially
moistened  vermiculite
can  be placed  along the
bottom  of the tray to
absorb excess water. If
the grain appears to
have  uncolonized
kernels, cover the
container with  plastic
and  let  the  spawn
recover for 24  hours
before casing.
Otherwise, casing can
proceed  immediately
after the  spawn  has
been  laid  out.

The  Casing  Layer/135

easily  be  overwatered,  thereby  stifling  mycelial  growth;  and  secondly,  the  mycelium
breaks  through  the  surface  at  different  times,  resulting  in  irregular  pinhead  formation.
When  applying  the casing to  large areas,  "depth  rings"  can  be an  effective  means to  in-
sure  evenness.  These  rings  are  fabricated  out  of flat  metal  or six  inch  PVC  pipe,  cut to
any depth.  They are  placed on  the substrate and covered with the casing, which  is then
leveled  using  the  rings as a  guide.  Once the  casing  is  level  and even,  the  rings are  re-
moved.

Although  the  casing  layer  must  be  even,  the  surface  of  The  casing  should  remain
rough  and  porous,  with  small  "mountains  and  valleys".  The surface structure  is a  key to
optimum  pinhead formation and will be discussed in more detail in the next chapter.

Casing  Colonization

Environmental  conditions after casing should be the same as during spawn  running.  Substrate
temperatures  are  maintained  within  the  optimum  range  for  mycelial  growth;  relative  humidity  is
90-100%;  and fresh  air is kept to a  minimum.  (Fresh  air should only be introduced to offset over-
heating).  The build-up of CO2  in  the room  is  beneficial  to mycelial  growth  and is controlled  by an
airtight room and tightly sealed fresh air damper.  If the entrance of fresh air cannot be controlled, a

Figure  126  Depth  rings  used for even  casing  application  on  bulk substrates.

136/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figure  127  Mycelial  growth  (Agaricus  brunnescens)  into  casing  with  optimum
moisture.

sheet of plastic should be placed over the casing. This plastic sheet also prevents moisture loss from
the  casing.

Soon  after  casing,  substrate  temperatures  surge  upward  due  to  the  hampered  diffusion  of
metabolic gases which would normally conduct heat away.  This surge is an  indication of mycelial
vitality and is a positive sign  if the room temperature can  be controlled. This temperature  rise can
be anticipated  by  lowering  either the temperature of the substrate prior to casing or  lowering The
air temperature  of the  room  after  casing.

Within three days of application, the mycelium  should be growing into the casing  layer.  Once
mycelial  growth  is firmly established, the casing  is gradually watered  up to  its optimum  moisture
holding  capacity.  This  is accomplished  by  a  series  of  light waterings with  a  misting  nozzle  over a
two  to  four  day  period  (depending  upon  the  depth  of  the  casing).  Deeper  casings  require  more
waterings.  Optimum  moisture  capacity should  be  achieved at least two days before the  mycelium
reaches  the  surface. 
IT  IS  EXTREMELY  IMPORTANT  THAT  THE  WATERINGS  DO  NOT
DAMAGE  THE  SURFACE  STRUCTURE  OF  THE  CASING.  Heavy  direct  watering  can  "pan"
the casing  surface,  closing  all the  pore spaces and effectively sealing  it.  The growing  mycelium  is
then  trapped within  the  casing  layer and  may  not  break through  it at all.  The  ultimate example  of
panning  is  a  soil  turned  to  mud.

To  repair  a  casing  surface  damaged  by watering,  the top  14  inch  can  be  reopened  by  a  tech-
nique  called  "scratching".  The tool  used  is  simply  a  1  x  2  x  24  inch  board with  parallel  rows of

The Casing Layer/137

Figure 128  Mycelial growth (Psilocybe cubensis)
into  casing  with  optimum  moisture.

nails (6 penny) slightly offset relative to one another.  With this "scratching stick", the casing is
lightly ruffled prior to the mycelium breaking through to the surface. After The surface has been
scratched,  the  casing  should  be  given  its final  waterings  prior to  pinning.

A modified application of this technique is "deep scratching". When the mycelium is midway
through the casing, the entire layer is thoroughly ruffled down to the bulk substrate. The agitated
and broken mycelium rapidly reestablishes itself and within three to four days it completely colo-
nizes the casing.  The result  is an  early,  even  and  prolific  pinhead formation.  Before  using this
technique, the grower must be certain that the substrate and casing are free of competitor molds
and nematodes.

Casing Moisture and Mycelial Appearance

Moisture within the casing layer has a direct effect on the diameter and degree of branching
in growing mycelium. These characteristics are indicators of moisture content and can be used as
a guide to  proper watering.

I-  Optimum  Casing  Moisture:  Mushroom  mycelium  thrives  in  a  moist  humid  casing,
sending  out  minute  branching  networks.  These  networks  expand  and  grow,  absorbing
water, C02 and oxygen from the near saturated casing. This mycelial growth is character-
ized  by  many thick,  white  rhizomorphic  strands that  branch  into  mycelia  of smaller dia-
meters  and  correspondingly  smaller,  finer  capillaries.  The  overall  aspect  is  lush  and

138/The Mushroom Cultivator

dense.  When  a  section  of  casing  is  examined,  it  is  held  firmly  together  by  the  mycelial
network  but will  separate with  little  effort.  The  casing  itself remains  soft  and  pliable.

2.  Overly  dry  casing:  In  a  dry  casing,  the  mycelium  is  characterized  by  a  lack  of  rhizo-
morphs and an abundance of fine capillary type mycelia. This fine growth can totally per-
meate the casing layer, which then becomes hard, compact and unreceptive to water.  It is
common  for puddles to form  on  a dry casing that has just been  watered.  Also,  a dry cas-
ing rarely permits primordia formation because of its arid microclimate and is susceptible
to  "overlay".  Mushrooms,  if  they  occur,  frequently  form  along  the  edges  of  the  tray.

Overlay is a dense mycelial growth that covers the casing surface and shows little or
no inclination  to form  pinheads.  Overlay directly results from  a dry casing,  high  levels of
C02  and/or  low  humidity.  (See  Chapter  IX  on  pinhead  initiation).

3.  Overly Wet Casing:  In a saturated casing, the mycelium grows coarse and stringy, with
very little branching  and few capillaries.  Mycelial  growth  is slow and sparse which  leaves
the casing  largely uncolonized.  Often the saturated casing  leaches onto the substrate sur-
face  which  then  becomes waterlogged,  inhibiting  further growth  and  promoting  contami-
nation.  Subsequent  drying  may  eventually  reactivate  the  mycelium,  but  a  reduction  in
yield  is to  be  expected.

Strategies for Mushroom Formation/139

CHAPTER IX

STRATEGIES FOR

MUSHROOM  FORMATION

(PINHEAD INITIATION)

t  r\— 
I yu  c

__^ti
canning electron micrograph of Psilocybe cubensis primordia.

".»—™  ^m  mil -».-mm^mmmfmrnm•••>••».<'•»& .". i.  'j*  <ak 

».  -  1  - 

140/The Mushroom Cultivator

The change from the vegetative state of mycelial growth to the generative one of primordia for-

mation is called pinning, pin setting, pinhead initiation or fructification. Primordia or pinheads
are knots of mycelium that precede development into small mushrooms. All species require a set of
environmental conditions for pinning that are quite different from the conditions for mycelial growth.
By understanding the factors that regulate this change in the mushroom life cycle, the cultivator can
control  the  pinning  process.

In  nature  primordia  formation  is  primarily  influenced  by seasonal  changes in  environmental
conditions. In temperate climates most mushrooms fruit during the cool, wet fall whereas in tropical
and subtropical climates mushrooms fruit during the rainy season. The fruiting period ends when
the season  changes and environmental conditions become too hot, too cold or too dry. The myce-
lium  then  lies  dormant  or  grows  slowly,  reactivated  only  by  the  warming  of spring  and  summer.
These seasons are times for the  mycelium  to  expand  its network,  absorb  nutrients and  rebuild  its
energy reserves. Once the cool wet conditions of fall return, these reserves are used to support an-
other crop of  mushrooms.

Basic  Pinning  Strategy

Mushrooms fruit indoors  in  response  to  much  the same  conditions that trigger fruiting  in  the
wild. Several environmental factors, working in combination, provide an ideal environment in which
mushrooms flourish.  Most, if not all cultivated mushrooms fruit at lower temperatures than the opti-
mum for the growth of mycelium.  Usually,  a drop in temperature is accompanied by rain or an in-
crease in humidity. Water is essential for the absorption of nutrients by the mycelium. And vaporous
water creates the humid microclimate That is so critical for the developing primordia.  Primordia have
a low tolerance to C02 and need ample fresh air.  And while the mycelium  has no requirement for
light,  many species need  light to  initiate pinheads and to  mature into  healthy  mushrooms.  Mush-
rooms form only when there is a coincidence of all these factors. Cultivators create an artificial envi-
ronment that prolongs these optimum conditions so that mushrooms are given The best possible en-
vironment  in  which  to  grow.

Primordia formation strategies are well defined for species now under cultivation. These proce-
dures are similar in their approach and differ only in certain environmental requirements. Given that
the substrate has sufficient nutrients, the interaction of water, humidity, temperature, fresh air, C02
and light all play determining roles in the fructification process. (In some cases, specific microorgan-
isms must be present before fruiting can  occur).  The modification of any one of these factors be-
yond the fruiting requirements can inhibit or stop the process. Hence, the cultivator must have pre-
cise control  over conditions within  the  growing  room  if this critical  phase  is to  be  carried out suc-
cessfully.

Strategies  for  Mushroom  Formation/141

PRIMORDIA FORMATION  PROCEDURES

Agaricus brunnescens culture illustrates the interplay of environmental factors in pinhead initia-
tion.  It serves as a  useful  model for setting  primordia  in many species,  especially those using a cas-
ing  layer.  In  each  of  the  following  stages,  the  main  considerations  are  highlighted  and  fhen  dis-
cussed  in  detail.  Although  Agaricus  does  not  require  light,  and  since  most  cultivated  mushrooms
do,  this  requirement  has  been  listed  as  the  last  parameter.

Stage I: Preparation

Following  its  application,  the  casing  is  conditioned  to  allow  even  mycelial  growth  info  it.  Once
mycelial  growth  is well  established,  the  casing  layer  microclimate  and the  growing  room  are  careful-
ly  managed  to  meet  the  following  requirements.

1.  The  casing  layer  is  at  optimum  moisture  capacity.
2.  The  casing  layer  surface  is  rough  and  porous.
3.  The  relative  humidity  of  the  growing  room's  air  is  95%.
4.  The  substrate  is  incubated  in  total  darkness.
During  the  casing  colonization  period,  the  casing  layer  is  being  conditioned  for  pinhead  initia-
tion.  Gradually,  the  moisture  content  is  brought  up  to  the  optimum  and  a  microclimate  with  high
relative humidify is carefully maintained. Water in the casing moves by capillary action to the surface
where  it is drawn  into the air by evaporation.  This constant movement slowly depletes the casing of
the moisture needed to protect pinhead development. Therefore, in conjunction with an optimum
casing  moisture  level,  the  relative  humidity  of  the  room  must  be  held  at  95%.  Lower  humidities
must be accompanied by  light but regular waterings. The  higher the humidity (rH).  the  less water
will  be  lost  to  evaporation.

Given  optimum  moisture  conditions  in  and  directly  above  the  casing  layer,  the  next  step  is to
prepare the casing surface. Whether by initial application or by ruffling at a later time, the casing sur-
face  should  be  rough  and  open—with  minute  mountains  and  valleys.  A  rough  open  casing  has
more surface area where pinheads can  form,  provides a  humid environment conducive to that for-
mation  and  allows  the  diffusion  of  metabolic  gases.

Stage II: Environmental Transition—The Prelude to Setting Primordia
Pinhead  initiation  techniques  should  begin  when  the  mycelium  reaches  the  valleys  of  the  cas-
ing surface. Once the mycelium is clearly established in the valleys, the cultivator can begin the first
steps  leading  to  the  setting  of  pinheads.  Within  this  one  to  two  day  period,  the

1.  Substrate  and  air  temperatures  are  lowered  to  the  fruiting  range.
2.  The  humidity  is  maintained  at  the  95%  level.
3.  The carbon dioxide content of the room  is reduced by the introduction  of fresh  air.
4.  The room  is  lighted  on  a  12  hour on/off cycle.

142/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figure  130  Overlay.

Mycelium breaking through the casing surface early should be lightly sprinkled with moist cas-
ing.  Uneven  growth  through  the  casing  layer  is  usually  an  indication  of  a  casing  with  irregular
depths,  By "patching" shallow areas, an even mycelial spread is assured.  Note that the more even
the  distribution  of the  mycelium  in  the  valleys  of the  casing's  surface,  the  more  even  the
pin-set  and  the  greater  the  first  and  second  flushes.

The exact time for initiation varies with the strain and according to the experience of the individ-
ual  grower.  Some  strains  continue  to  grow  vegetatively  for  a  period  after  the  initial  temperature
shock whereas others stop  immediately.  For this reason,  some cultivators initiate when 20%  of the
valleys show mycelial  growth while others wait until  90%  are run through with  mycelium.  Normally
within  12-48  hours from the time the mycelium is first visible in the valleys, the initiation sequence
is started.

The first step in the pinhead initiation process is to lower the substrate and air temperature from
the  mycelial  growth  optimum  to the  fruiting  range.  This temperature  "shock"  is  accomplished  by
ventilation with a large volume of cool fresh air,  thereby lowering the room's temperature to a point
5-20 °  below the  optimum  for spawn  running.  (For Agaricus  brunnescens,  this would  mean  drop-
ping air temperature from  70 °F.  to 64 °F.).  Whatever the air temperature  may be, the bed tempera-
ture is normally several  degrees warmer.  The length of time needed to affect this change  is deter-
mined  by the total  volume  of substrate  and the  temperature  of the  air being  introduced.  Within  48
hours, the substrate temperature should fall to fruiting temperatures, effectively slowing vegetative
growth.  This change  signals to  the  mycelium  that  it  is time  to fruit.

Strategies  for  Mushroom  Formation/143

Figure 131  Cased grain culture of Agaricus brunnescens showing overlay and stroma.

Fresh air also removes high concentrations of carbon dioxide and other metabolic gases from
the  room.  Since  Agaricus  brunnescens  does  not  pin  properly  at C02  concentrations  above  2000
ppm, lowering the carbon dioxide content of The room's air to under 2000 ppm is critical. The in-
hibitory  effect  of carbon  dioxide on  mushroom  formation  gives Agaricus growers a  high  degree  of
control over the pinning process.  Not until carbon dioxide is removed will pinheads form.  If carbon
dioxide  levels  remain  high,  the  mycelium  will  totally  cover the  casing  surface,  a  condition  called
overlay.

The mycelial  mat formed  by overlay  makes the casing  impervious to water and  produces few
pinheads. Overlay also occurs if the casing surface is too dry, the humidity (rH) is too low or the air
temperature remains Too high.  Overlay can  be counteracted  by patching,  but the cause must be
diagnosed and carefully corrected if the culture is to be revived. Few flushes will be as great from a
casing  with  overlay as from  a  casing  properly managed.

Stage  III:  Primordia  Formation  (Knotting)

Once substrate temperatures have been lowered and C02 levels have been reduced, prirnordia

will  begin  to  form.  Maintain:

1.  A  constant fresh  air  supply to  remove  metabolic  gases,  and C02  at  levels less than  1000

ppm.

2.  A  constant  temperature  in  the  growing  room  that  is within  the fruiting  range-

144/The Mushroom Cultivator

3.  A  relative  humidity  of  95%.
4.  A  12  hour on/off light cycle.
The  combination  of  temperature  drop,  high  humidity  and  reduction  of  metabolic  gases  by  a
constant supply of fresh air now provides an environment conducive to pinhead formation. These
parameters should be held constant until the pins are set. Any abrupt changes in temperature or hu-
midity will be harmful to primordial growth. Pinhead initials form in the humid valleys of the casing
layer and are visible as small knots of mycelium. This is the earliest stage of fruiting. Within five days
these  knots enlarge into small  mounds or buttons that soon differentiate into mushrooms.

Due to slowed mycelial growth in the cooled substrate, carbon dioxide evolution is greatly re-
duced.  Consequently,  the  fresh  air  supply  can  be  moderated  to  the  minimum  level  necessary  to
maintain 1000 ppm of carbon dioxide. At this time, oversupply of fresh air can lead to high evapo-
ration  rates and  excessive  drying.  The  humidity  should  never be allowed to fall  below 90%.  If dry
air becomes a problem, a light misting of the casing surface, two to five times daily, should keep the
microclimate  moist.  In  fact,  some  growers  knock  down  the  mycelium  with  a  forceful  watering  on
the first day of initiation. Others mist daily as a standard practice. However, once pinning has begun,
any forceful watering will kill a number of developing pins, and damage others. Given sufficient cas-
ing  moisture and  a  high  humidity,  these watering  practices  become  unnecessary.

Stage  IV:  Pinhead  Development

After the pinheads have grown to pea size (3-5 mm.), their further development is primarily de-
pendent  on  air  temperature  and  relative  humidity.  To  insure  That  they  mature  into  healthy  mush-
rooms, the

1.  Air temperature is held constant within the fruiting range.
2.  Relative  humidity  is  lowered  to  85-92%.
3.  A constant fresh  air  supply with C02  below 2000  ppm.
4.  A  12  hour  on/off  light  cycle.
The humidity is lowered to 85-92%, thereby increasing the evaporation  rate,  an  essential re-
quirement for pinhead maturation.  If humidity remains too high, pinhead development will be re-
tarded. The easiest way to reduce humidity is to raise the air temperature by 1 -2 °F. or to increase air
movement within  the room.  Under no circumstances should pockets of stagnant air be allowed to
form. Evaporation is negligible in stagnant air pockets which are also excellent breeding grounds for
mushroom  pathogens.

At  This  time,  a  slightly  higher  level  of  carbon  dioxide  is  desirable  (in  the  1500-2000  ppm
range)  and  fresh  air  can  be  cut  back  accordingly.  Given  proper CO2  levels,  and  sufficient  evapora-
tion,  the pins continue to develop.  The exact rate of growth depends on  the air temperature in the
room.  Work done by Lambert (1938)  has shown that a pinhead of Agaricus brunnescens with a di-
ameter of 2 millimeters fully develops into a mature mushroom in twenty-two days at 50 °F.,  in ten
days at 60°F. and in six days at 70°F. Although mushrooms develop more quickly at 70°F., over-
all  yields  diminish.  Optimum  temperature  for  cropping  in  Agaricus  brunnescens  is  62-64°F.

Strategies for Mushroom Formation/145

Figure  132,  133 &
134  Three day
pinhead development
sequence in Agaricus
brunnescens.
Change-over from
Stage  III  to  Stage  IV
occurs within this
tirne frame.

146/The Mushroom Cultivator

THE  RELATIONSHIP  BETWEEN

PRIMORDIA FORMATION AND YIELD

The importance of the primordia formation  period can  not be over-emphasized.  For maximum
yields an  optimum  number of pinheads must be set,  matured and brought to  harvest.  Certain  rela-
tionships exist  between  the  pinning  process and  yields.  These are:

1.  During the primordia formation  period,  pinheads for the first and second flush
are being generated. The second flush primordia are present as thickened mycelial knots
which develop after the first flush is harvested. Once the first flush is off the beds, the second
set of primordia begin to enlarge and within days attain button size. Because 60-75% of the
total yield is normally harvested from the first two flushes, the few days of pinhead initiation
are  the  most critical  in  the growing of mushrooms.  Hence,  all  environmental factors must
be  carefully  monitored  to  insure  the  best  possible  pin-set.

Figure  135  Three  pinheads  of  Coprinus comatus forming  on  cased  section  of com-
post.  Note  mycelial  knot in  upper  center.

Strategies for Mushroom  Formation/147

9  The greater the number of pins set for the first flush, the higher the yield,  provided
sufficient  nutrients  are  available  to  support  their  growth.  However,  with  more  pinheads
competing for the same nutrient base, the smaller are the mushrooms arising from it. Fewer
pinheads result  in  larger mushrooms,  but  lower total  yields.

3  The  substrate  will  only  support  the  development  of  a  certain  number  of  primor-
dia  per  flush.  Under  normal  circumstances with  an  even  pin-set,  pinheads  may  "abort"
because of insufficient nutrients or  late formation.

4  Pins that form early delay the growth of neighboring primordia. Good examples of
this can be found in shallow areas or along the borders of the substrate container.  Remov-
ing these relatively few "volunteers" before they develop is advantageous to the remaining
primordia that constitute the first flush.

THE INFLUENCE OF LIGHT
ON PINHEAD INITIATION

Mushroom  species requiring  light for primordia formation  are said to be  photosensitive. Al-
though light is not necessary to induce fructification in all mushrooms (i.e. Agaricus brunnescens),
certain spectra have proven to be stimulatory to pinhead initiation and are critical for the normal de-
velopment of the fruitbody. Psilocybe cubensis and Pleurofus ostreatus are two such photosensitive
species.

A thorough investigation on the photosensitivity of Psilocybe cubensis can be found in a mas-
ter's thesis by E.R. Badham (1 979). His work reinforces the conclusions of other researchers work-
ing with the Basidiomycetes:  more pinheads are initiated upon exposure to blue and ultra-violet light
with  distinct  peaks  at  370,  440  and  460  nanometers.  Badham  showed  that  light  stimulation  at
these wavelengths for as little as half a millisecond per day caused primordia to form.  In  contrast,
red, infra-red and green light having wavelengths greater than 510 nanometers were ineffective.
With this knowledge, the cultivator of photosensitive species can develop initiation strategies
incorporating  the  influence  of  light.  Ideally  a  fully  colonized  substrate  should  be  incubated  in  total
darkness and exposed to light only after the mycelium first shows through the casing layer.  If the
cultivator wants to check the culture without the chance  of  premature  pinning,  red  light  is  recom-

mended (The proper location and type of light is discussed in more detail in Chapter IV).

Environmental  Factors/149

CHAPTER X

ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS:

SUSTAINING  THE
MUSHROOM  CROP

Figure 136 Wild strainn of Agaricus brunnescens fruiting in bag of cased compost

150/The Mushroom  Cultivator

For the  home cultivator the onset of cropping  is a time of excitement and anticipation.  It is also a

time for  increased  attention  to the finer details of environmental  control.  Temperature,  humidi-
ty,  light  and  airflow  in  the  growing  room  all  play vital  roles which  together determine the  nature  of
further  mushroom  development.

Temperature

During  the  vegetative  growth  period,  the  substrate  was  held  in  the  optimum  range  by  careful
manipulation of the air temperature.  But once the change to generative growth  is initiated,  the sub-
strate  temperature  becomes  less  important  and  air  temperature  becomes  the  controlling  factor.

The time  it takes button  sized  mushrooms to mature is influenced  primarily by the air temper-
ature  of  the  growing  chamber.  Each  species  has  an  optimum  temperature  for  fruitbody  develop-
ment that  lies within  a  broader  growing  range.  Knowing  the  temperature  parameters as outlined  in
Chapter XI,  the  cultivator can  speed or slow development depending  on  which  end of the  cropping
range  is  chosen.  Lower  temperatures  can  be  used  to  postpone  or  lengthen  the  harvesting  period
and  allow for maximum  quality control.  High  temperatures serve to shorten  the cropping  period by
promoting  rapid,  intense  flushes.  However,  the  dangers  of  high  temperatures  include  the  risk  of
heat building up in the substrate and consequent C02 generation, as well as the ability of insects and
contaminants  to  grow  and  reproduce  at  faster  rates.  Commericial  Agaricus  growers  commonly
lower the air temperature by 2 °F.  48  hours prior to the peak of the first and second flushes.  Further
flushes are then  run  hotter to speed  the crop to completion.  It is important that the cultivator evalu-
ate the heat generating capabilities of the crop and  insure that the environmental control system is
capable  of  handling  them.

Flushing  Pattern

The  mushroom  crop  grows  in  cycles called flushes or  "breaks".  Depending  on  the species be-
ing grown these flushes normally come in seven to ten day intervals with each successive flush bear-
ing fewer mushrooms.  The  manner in which these flushes appear is determined during the pin  initi-
ation period.  Even  pinning sets up a uniform  pattern of flushing that continues throughout the crop-
ping  cycle.  Uneven  flushing creates difficult situations for proper watering  and environmental con-
trol.  To encourage even flushing,  early forming  pinheads are picked off as buttons unless it appears
that these pins constitute the flush itself. Poor first flushes are indicative of faulty pinning procedures
and  lead to lower total yields and a longer cropping  period as the cultivator tries to maximize yields
from the following flushes.  But keep in  mind that many times it is the progressive build-up of com-
peting contaminant organisms that eventually bring mushroom  growth to a  halt.  For this reason, the
goal  is to maximize yields in  the early flushes.

To  further  increase the flushing  speed the  actual  harvest period  in  each  flush  should  be  kept
short and concise.  Late developing  mushrooms are  removed with  or on  the day after peak  produc-
tion. The sooner the flush is completely removed the quicker the next one will appear and the short-

Environmental Factors/151

Figure  137  Agaricus  brunnescens  af-
fected  by  high  CO2  concentration.  Note
long stems and underdeveloped caps.
Figure  138  The  effect  of  dry  air  on
Psilocybe  cubensis  caps,  a  condition
known as "scaling".

152/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figure  139  Rosecomb  on  Psilocybe
cubensis,  an  abnormality  caused  by  con-
tact  with  chemicals,  especially  those  that
are  petroleum  based.

Figure  140  Fruitbody  abnormality  occa-
sionally  seen  in  Psilocybe  cubensis.

er the overall cropping cycle. Stunted undeveloped mushrooms are also cleared from the cropping
surface between breaks with care not to disturb The casing. Small dead pinheads should be left in
place and cause little harm. (As a rule, an aborted mushroom can be removed as long as the casing
is not touched in the process.) At no time should the casing be over-handled in an attempt to clean.
Such handling can spread disease spores and damage subsequent pin formation.

Air  Movement

Air movement in the growing room is designed to create an even flow across all levels of crop-
ping surface. This even airflow counteracts temperature stratification and dead air pockets by equal-
izing the environment of the room. In this manner the crop can be managed as a whole, giving the
grower greater control over the cropping cycle.

During the pin initiation period fresh air is introduced into the room to remove metabolic gases
produced  by  the  mushroom  mycelium.  Although  gas  production  is  reduced  once this  vegetative

Environmental Factors/153

Figure 141  Bacteria! blotch parasitizing Agaricus
brunnescens.

Figure  142  Characteristic  phototropic  response
of  Psilocybe  cubensis  toward  light.

growth  has  been  slowed,  the  maturing  mushrooms  create  more  carbon  dioxide,  the  removal  of
which requires a continuous supply of fresh air. The number of these air changes varies depending
upon  the air/bed  ratio  and  the C02  reguirement of the  mushroom  species  being  grown.  Agaricus
bitorquis  needs only  half the  amount  of fresh  air  required  by Agaricus  brunnescens.  A  common
rate  for  Agaricus  brunnescens  is  4-6  changes  per  hour.  For  more  C02  tolerant  species  such  as
Psilocybe cubensis, 2-3 changes per hour is sufficient. (The most accurate method for determining
fresh air requirements employs the multiple gas detector. This instrument measures C02 content of
the  air  in  parts  per  million  (ppm),  from  300  (natural  level)  up to  20.000  ppm.  See Appendix  for
sources.)

Because  many  mushrooms are  sensitive to  carbon  dioxide,  the  physical development of the
mushroom can also be used as a guide.  High C02 environments produce long stems and small un-
derdeveloped  caps  in  Agaricus  brunnescens  and  Pleurotus  ostreatus.  Pleurotus  exhibits  similar
symptoms  in  conditions  of  low light  intensity.

In  general,  too much  fresh air is preferable to insufficient air supply.  However,  fresh  air dis-
places the existing room air which is then exhausted from the room. Unless this fresh air is precon-
ditioned To meet the requirements of the species, one will be constantly disrupting the growing envi-
ronment and thereby over-working the  heating and humidification systems.  For this reason the air
circulation system should be designed to recirculate the room air. This is accomplished by a mixing
box with an adjustable damper that proportions fresh and recirculated air. In this regard, C02 toler-
ant species give the grower a  distinct advantage  in  maintaining  the  correct environment  because
they  need  less  fresh  air for  growth.

An important effect of air circulation and fresh air supply is the evaporation of moisture from the
cropping  surface.  Excessive  humidity  without  adequate  air  movement  and  evaporation  retards
mushroom development. Saturated stagnant air pockets are also breeding areas for contaminants

154/The Mushroom Cultivator

like  the  Forest  Green  Mold  (Trichoderma) and  Bacterial  Blotch  (Pseudomonas).  As  stated  in  the
previous chapter on  pinhead  initiation,  once the  primordia  are set,  the  relative  humidity should  be
lowered to 85-92%  and  held  constant within  this range throughout cropping.  Besides the creation
of a cool surface by "evaporative cooling", evaporation aids in the transport of nutrients (in solution)
from  the substrate to the growing  mushrooms.  If The evaporation  rate is too  high  and the humidity
falls  below  85%,  excessive  drying  occurs,  causing  small  stunted  mushrooms  and  cracked  scaly
caps. A dry cropping surface further reduces yields and is difficult to recondition.  In this respect, it is
critical for the grower to reach a balance between air circulation, fresh air and humidification. This is
but  one  aspect  of  the  "Art"  of  mushroom  culture.

Watering

Maturing  mushrooms  have water requirements that must be met if maximum  yields are to  be
achieved. Mushrooms grown on uncased substrates draw their moisture from the substrate, where-
as those  grown  with  a  casing  draw equally from  both.  Uncased substrates are  more  susceptible  to
dry air and therefore  require  a  relative  humidity  of 90-95%  as well  as  periodic  misting  of the  crop-
ping surface.  If the cropping surface dries and forms a dead mycelial mat, it can be reopened to fur-
ther flushing by raking or scratching. This technique is often used by Pleurotus growers to stimulate
later flushes.

The advantages of using a casing  layer are many.  Protected from  atmospheric drying,  the sub-
strate  moisture  is channeled  solely to the mushroom  crop.  And,  the water reservoir provided  by the
casing not only supplies the mushroom flushes but also serves To keep a high humidiTy in the crop-
ping surface microclimate.  In order to sustain these benefits, the grower must learn to gauge casing
moisture  and  know when  to water.

Other than  light mistings, any substantial waterings before the burton stage can result in dam-
aged pins.  But once the mushrooms have reached button size, it is time to begin building the casing
moisture back up to the peak reached at pre-pinning. The aim is to reach capacity just prior to the
main  harvest. This is accomplished by a series of daily,  light to moderate waterings with a fine mist-
ing nozzle. Commercial Agaricus growers have traditionally used a rose-nozzle but many have now
switched to nozzles with  finer sprays and variable volume outputs.  This enables the grower to add
moisture without damaging the casing surface. In this regard, high water pressures and close nozzle
proximity  to  the  casing  should  be  avoided.

The goal  is to keep the surface of the casing  open  and porous throughout the cropping cycle.
Puffing  on too much water at once is the  most common  cause of panning.  By watering 2-4 times/
day  rather  than just  once,  the  casing  can  slowly  absorb  the  water without  damage  to  the  surface.
After the first flush is harvested the casing should be kept moist with light mistings until the next
flush reaches the button stage. The casing moisture is then built up again.  Each new flush is treated
in this manner, although  later flushes will  have fewer mushrooms and therefore require less water.
At  no  time  should  the  casing  be  allowed  to  dry  out.  Mushrooms  pulled  from  a  dried  casing  carry
large chunks of casing with them, creating gaps in the cropping surface and at times exposing the

substrate to possible colonization by contaminants. If the substrate is exposed during

Environmental Factors/155

One of  the  common  contaminants  in  mushroom  growing  is  Bacterial  Blotch  (see  Chapter
XIII). Blotch results from mushroom caps that remain wet for extended periods of time. Agaricus
growers attempt to dry recently watered mushroom caps as quickly as possible by lowering the hu-
midity of the room. This is accomplished by increasing air circulation and introducing more fresh air
or by raising the air temperature 1 -2 ° F. Agaricus growers also stop watering once the mushroom
cap has reached adolescence because wet mushroom caps become prime sites for disease. Small
scale growers may be able to water around maturing mushrooms without directly hitting the caps.  If
Bacterial Blotch or other diseases appear on the mushrooms or the casing soil, these areas should
not be watered. Watering contaminated regions will spread the infection further. A common strategy
for serious disease outbreaks is to lower the relative humidity and run the casing drier than normal.
Agaricus cultivators also  use slightly chlorinated water (150  ppm).

Harvesting

The way an individual picks mushrooms can dramatically affect future flushes.  Damage to rest-
ing pinheads and disturbance of the casing soil must be minimized during picking. Often times pin-
heads are in close proximity to developing mushrooms and enlarge directly after the mature ones
are picked.  Should any pinhead  be harmed,  the grower will  have  lost a  potential fruitbody.  More-
over, these damaged pinheads are easily parasitized by fly larvae and other contaminants. The best
pickers are meticulous,  unhurried,  and above  all treat the  mushrooms with  care.  Carelessness in
picking, when multiplied by hundreds of cultures, can be costly indeed.

The  most  important  factor  in  harvesting  mushrooms  is  timing.  Agaricus  brunnescens  should
be picked before the veil breaks and the stem elongates. Psilocybe cubensis is morphologically dis-
tinct from Agaricus species, having a longer stem, a less fleshy cap and a more delicate veil. It is
both natural and desirable to have tall stands of Psilocybe mushrooms while this is not the case with
.Agaricus. Cultivators of these two species, however, share many things in common. One particular
problem is the massive release of spores from the mature mushrooms. These spores often times
cover the casing layer and can inhibit further pinhead development. High spore loads can also
cause allergic reactions amongst workers. For these reasons, one should pick the mushrooms at the

stage when the veil begins to tear or soon thereafter.

The  nature  of  the  crop  determines  how  the  mushrooms  should  be  picked.  Flushes  with  mush-
room in varying stages of development are  more  difficult to  harvest.  This  is  especially true  if the
promordia formation period was interrupted by fluctuations in the environment.  One example is a
phenomenon common to Psilocybe cubensis culture  in  mason jars.  Mushrooms sometimes form
between the casing and the glass. Thes "border breaks" are due to high humidity pockets and pre-
mature light stimulation. In  tray  culture  where  mycelium  is  not  exposed  to  side  light  and  proper
moisture is easily managed border breaks are uncommon. Mushrooms then grow uniformly from

the surface of the casing layer where they can be easily picked.

156/The Mushroom Cultivator

Harvesting  techniques:
1.  Equipped with a basket and short bladed paring knife,  grasp the base of the stem,  and with
a  twisting  motion,  pull  the  mushroom  from  the  casing  layer  being  careful  not  to  disturb
neighboring  pinheads.

2.  Trim the stem base,  removing only flesh to which the casing or substrate is attached.  Mush-
rooms having thin  stems are best cleaned using a knife in a downward scraping motion. All
trimmings should be placed in a sealed plastic bag and removed from the cropping area.
3.  Mushrooms growing in clumps or clusters should be broken apart and harvested individual-
ly  when  possible.  Special  care  must  be  taken  with  those  clumps  containing  both  mature
and  immature  mushrooms.  Leave  immature  mushrooms  attached  to  the  casing  layer or
substrate  to  insure  continued  growth.

Preserving Mushrooms

If not served within four days, mushrooms can be preserved by drying,' freezing or canning. Air
drying  of mushrooms  is the  method  most widely  used  by  home  cultivators and field  hunters.  Since
most mushrooms are  90%  water,  they  must be dried within  a few hours or fly  larvae and  bacteria
will consume them.  Provided mushrooms are placed in a flow of warm,  dry air,  this large fraction of
water soon evaporates into the air. Dried mushrooms are smaller, lighter and less fragrant than fresh
ones.  Once  dried,  they  are  sealed  in  airtight  moisture  proof  plastic  containers  and  refrigerated.
Mushrooms will be preserved for years in this manner. When needed, simply rehydrate them in wa-
ter  before  cooking.  They  will  regain  much  of  their  original  size  and  flavor.

Commercially available food dehydrators are well  suited for drying  mushrooms.  Their only dis-
advantage is that the trays are often too close together, necessitating the cuffing of large mushrooms
into  thin  slices.  Or,  one  can  build a  dehydrator  solely designed  for this function  and  customized to
an  individual's particular needs.  A good dryer should be able to dry the mushrooms in 24-48  hours
by passing warm  air no hotter than  110 °F. Open air drying at room temperature is also feasible us-
ing  dehumidifiers  in  combination  with  air  circulation  fans.  "Flash"  drying  at  high  temperatures
should be avoided since the mushrooms lose much of their nutritive value and, as the case may be,
much  of  their  psilocybin  content.

Freezing  is  another  method  of  preserving  mushrooms.  But  unless  the  mushrooms  are  first
dried, frozen mushrooms are soggy and unappealing upon thawing. In freezing, the water constitut-
ing  90%  of a  mushroom's  mass becomes crystallized.  Frozen  mushrooms are  held together more
by  ice crystals  rather than  their own  cellular structure.  Since ice expands upon  crystallization,  cells
break under the stress. Because frozen mushrooms disintegrate into a formless mass when thawed,
they are  mostly  used  in  soups or stews.

The  best of both  drying  and freezing  is  freeze  drying.  This  is the  ideal  method for  preserving
the flavor,  nutrition,  form  and/or psilocybian  content of mushrooms.  Because of the expense,  only
a  few commercial  mushrooms,  such  as shiitake  (Lentinus  edodes)  are  freeze  dried.

Environmental  Factors/157

Freeze dryers operate on  the  principle of first flash  freezing  fresh  mushrooms which  are then
placed  onto  heated  trays  in  a  cooled,  high  vacuum  chamber.  The  frozen  water within  the  mush-
rooms  begins to  melt from  the  heat generated from  the trays.  But instead of becoming a  liquid,  the
water is immediately transformed into a vapor that is pumped out of the freeze drier.  Freeze drying
preserves  much  of the  original  cell  structure  and  hence  mushrooms  dried  in  this  manner are often
life-like  in  appearance.  Since  commercial  freeze  driers  are  prohibitively  expensive,  few  home
cultivators  can  afford  them.  Many  people  have  discovered,  however,  that  mushrooms  placed  in  a
frost-free  refrigerator are  almost as well  preserved.

Canning is another method for storing mushrooms.  Mushrooms preserved by canning must be
carefully cleaned beforehand,  precooked for 3 or 4 minutes in  boiling water, then  inserted into glass
jars with a small amount of vinegar and sterilized in a pressure cooker.  (Sterilization for mushrooms
is  usually  30-40  minutes  at  10  psi.  Consult  a  book  on  mushroom  cookery  for  further  information
on  canning  mushrooms).  Canned  mushrooms,  especially  those  that  have  been  pickled,  are  pre-
ferred  by  many epicureans To those  preserved  by  other means.

No matter what the technique, fresh mushrooms are undoubtedly better tasting Than preserved
mushrooms.  If one  chooses to  dry,  freeze  or  can,  young  mushrooms  should  be  selected  over old
ones.  Label  each  container  with  the  species,  the  name  of who  grew  or  identified  the  mushrooms,
the date and the  place  of origin.  (One general  rule  recommended  by all  mycologists is:  when  eating
wild mushrooms for the first time, always leave one or two small specimens aside in case illness en-
sues and a mycologist or a doctor needs To be consulTed.)

Growing Parameters for Various Mushroom Species/159

CHAPTER  XI

GROWING  PARAMETERS  FOR
VARIOUS  MUSHROOM  SPECIES

Figure  143  Stropharia  rugoso-annulata  fruiting  in  a  bed  of wood  chips.

160/The Mushroom Cultivator

Growing  parameters  for  mushrooms  vary  with  every  species.  Through  time  spent  in

countless trials  and  from  observations  by  both  home  and  commercial  cultivators,  specific

cultural  requirements  have  been  ascertained.

Mushrooms  fruit  in  response  to  unique  sets  of  conditions  involving  nutrition  (substrate),
temperature,  pH,  relative  humidity,  light  and  carbon  dioxide.  What  follows  are  outlines  pin-
pointing  the optimal  environmental  ranges for each  stage in  the mushroom's life  cycle.  By  ad-
hering  to  these  optima,  a  cultivator can  maximize fruitbody  production  in  a  precise  and  delib-
erate fashion.

Crowing Parameters for Various Mushroom Species/161

SPECIES:  Agaricus  bitorquis  (Quel.)  Saccardo

=  Agaricus  rodmanii  Peck
=  Agaricus  campestris  var.  edulis Vitt.
= Agaricus edulis (Vitt.) Moller and Schaeff.

Figure  144  Linear (longitudinally  radial)  mycelium  of Agaricus bitorquis.

STRAINS: Horst B30 (The first commercial strain to be developed by Gerda Fritsche at the Dutch
Mushroom  Research  Center in  Horst,  Holland).

Horst K26,  K32  (These are two second generation  strains from  Horst B30  and are distinctive
from it  in  that  they  fruit  earlier,  give  higher  yields  and  have  slightly  longer  stems.  Spawn  of this
species is now available from Amycel.)
COMMON  NAME:  Rodman's  Agaricus
GREEK  ROOT: Agaricus  comes from  the  greek word  "agarikon"  which  scholars  believed origi-
nated with a Scythian people called Agari who were well versed in the use of medicinal plants and
employed a fungus called "agaricum",  probably a polypore in the genus Fomes. The species epi-
thet bitorquis means having two rings, for the double annulus that so distinguishes this species from
close  relatives  like  Agaricus  campestris,  the  Meadow  Mushroom.

162/The Mushroom Cultivator

GENERAL  DESCRIPTION:  Cap  smooth,  white,  thick  fleshed,  convex  to  broadly  convex  to  plane
with  age.  The  cap  margin  is  incurved  at first  but soon  decurves.  The  gills are  pinkish  at first,  soon
darkening  to  chocolate  brown  with  spore  maturity.  The  stem  is thick,  relatively  short  and  adorned
with  a  double  membranous  annulus.  (The  lower  ring  is  often  a  thin  annular  zone).  Its  spores  are
dark  chocolate  brown  in  mass.
NATURAL  HABITAT:  Naturally  found  in  lawns,  gardens,  roadside  areas,  pastures,  in  enriched
grounds  and  on  hard  packed  soil.  A  temperate  species,  widely  distributed,  A.  bitorquis  fruits  pri-
marily  in  the  spring  and  To  a  lesser  degree  in  the  fall.

GROWTH PARAMETERS

Mycelial  Types:  Rhizornorphic  to  linear;  whitish  to  pale  whitish  in  color.
Spawn  Medium:  Rye  grain  buffered  with  calcium  carbonate  and/or calcium  sulfate.  See  Chapter
III.
Fruiting  Substrate:  Nitrogen  enriched  wheat  straw  and/or  horse  manure  based  compost  bal-
anced  to  71-74%  moisture  content.
Method  of  Preparation:  See  Chapter  V  on  compost  preparation.  Pasteurization  achieved
through  exposure  to  live  steam  for 2  hours  at  140 °  F.  throughout  the  substrate.  Compost should
be  filled  to  a  depth  of  6-12  inches.
Spawn  Run:

Relative Humidify: 90-100%.
Substrate  Temperature: 84-86 °F.  Thermal  death  limits have  been  established at 93 °  F.  over
prolonged  period  of  time.
Duration:  2  weeks.
CO2: 5,000-10,000 ppm.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  0  per  hour.

Type of Casing:  After fully  run,  cover with  the  standard  casing whose  preparation  is described  in
Chapter VIII.  Layer to  a  depth  of  1 -2  inches.  The  casing  should  be  balanced to  a  pH  of  7.2-7.5.
Post  Casing/Prepinning:

Relative Humidity: 90-100%.
Bed Temperature: 84-86 °F.
Duration  of  Case  Run:  10-12  days.
CO2: 5000-10,000 ppm.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  0  per  hour.

Primordia  Formation:

Relative  Humidify: 95-100%.
Bed Temperature: 77-80 °F.
Air Temperature: 75-77 °F.

Growing Parameters for Various Mushroom Species/163

Lighting:  None  required.
C02:  less than  2000  ppm.
Fresh  Air Exchanges:  2-4  per  hour.
Watering: Regular misting (once to twice daily) of the beds stimulates primordia formation.

Cropping:

Relative  Humidity:  85-92%.
Air  Temperature:  75-77 °F.
CO2:  less  than  3000  ppm.
Fresh  Air Exchanges:  2-4  per  hour.
Flushing Interval:  Every  8-9  days.
Harvest Stage: Directly before the partial veil stretches.

Yield  Potential: Average commercial yields are reported at 3 Ibs/sq.ft. over a 5 week cropping
period.  Maximum  yields are 4  Ibs  per square foot.
Moisture Content of  Mushrooms:  92%  water;  8%  dry  matter.
Nutritional  Content:  Thought  to  be  similar  to Agaricus  brunnescens.
Comments: The development of Agaricus bitorquis has given commercial growers greater flexi-
bility,  especially those  in  warmer climates where  elevated  temperatures  have  been  a  limiting  factor.
An  advantage  of  this  mushroom  is  its  resistance  to  virus  (a  devastating  disease  that  attacks  A.
brunnescens) and its tolerance of high CO2 levels. A disadvantage of growing this warmth-loving
Agaricus  is  the  higher  incidence  of disease  endemic  to  the  temperature  range  in  which  this  species
flourishes. Agaricus bitorquis is coarser, firmer, more strongly flavored and has a longer shelf life
than its close relative, A. brunnescens.
Genetic Characteristics: Basidia retrapolar (4-spored), forming haploid spores, heterothallic. The
mating of compatible monokaryons can result in fruiting strains. Clamp connections absent. See
Chapter XV.
For further information  consult:

P.J.C.  Vedder  1978,  "Modern  Mushroom  Crowing",  Educaboek,  Culemborg,  Netherlands.

(English edition available from Swiss American Spawn Company,  Inc.,  Madisonville, Texas.)

P.J.C.  Vedder  1978,  "The  Cultivation  of Agaricus  bitorquis"in  The Biology and Cultivation

of Edible Mushrooms ed.  by Chang  and  Hayes.  Academic  Press,  New York.

Darmycel  LTD.  Spawn  Lab  Bulletin  1978,  "A  Guide  to  Darlington  and  Somycel  Spawn

Strains".

164/The Mushroom Cultivator

SPECIES:  Agaricus  brunnescens  Peck

=  Agaricus bisporus (Lge.)  Sing.

Figure  145  Agaricus  brunnescens fruiting  in  trays  of compost.

STRAINS:  Type  or  Brown  Variety  (var.  bisporus)

White  Variety  (var.  albidus)
Cream  Variety  (var.  avellaneous)
COMMON NAME: The Button Mushroom.
GREEK  ROOT:  Agaricus  comes  from  the  greek  word  "agarikon"  which  scholars  believed  origi-
nated with a Scythian  people called Agari who were well versed in the use of medicinal plants and
employed a fungus called "agaricum", probably a polypore in the genus Fomes. The species epi-
thet brunnescens comes from the latin "brunneus" or brown.  Literally, the name means the fungus
that becomes brown,  probably referring to the color change of the flesh upon bruising. Also called
Agaricus  bisporus  for  the  two  spored  basidia  populating  the  gill  faces.
GENERAL  DESCRIPTION:  A  robust,  thick  fleshed Agaricus species,  with  thin  gills that  are  pink-
ish when young, and darkening to sepia and then chocolate brown in age. The cap is characteristi-
cally brownish,  whitish or cream colored. The cap surface is smooth to appressed squamulose and
dry.  This species  has a  short,  thick stern  which  is adorned  with  a  persistent  membranous annulus
from a well  developed  partial  veil.  Its spores are  chocolate brown  in  mass.

Growing  Parameters for Various Mushroom Species/165

NATURAL HABITAT:  Naturally found in soils enriched with dung,  on  compost piles and in  horse
stables.  A temperate species,  widely distributed, A.  brunnescens fruits from  May  until  November
over  much  of the  northern  hemisphere  outside  the  tropical  zone.

GROWTH  PARAMETERS

Mycelial  Types:  Moderately  rhizomorphic;  dingy  white,  sometimes  with  brownish  hues.
Spawn  Medium:  Rye grain  buffered with  calcium  carbonate and/or calcium  sulfate.  See Chapter
III.
Fruiting  Substrate:  Nitrogen  enriched  wheat  straw  and/or  horse  manure  based  compost  bal-
anced to 71-74%  moisture content. This species also fruits well on rye grain covered with an un-
sterilized peat based casing layer.
Method  of  Preparation:  See  Chapter  V  on  compost  preparation.  Pasteurization  achieved
through exposure to live steam for 2 hours at 140 °F. throughout the substrate. Compost should be
filled to a depth  of 6-12  inches.

Figure  145a  Agaricus  brunnescens
fruiting  on  cased  rye  grain  spawn.

Figure  145b  Characteristic  Agaricus
brunnescens  mycelium.

166/The Mushroom Cultivator

Spawn  Run:

Relative  Humidify:  90-100%.
Substrate  Temperature:  76-78 °F.  Thermal  death  limits  have  been  established  at 96 °F.  but
damage  can  occur as  low as 90 °F.
Duration:  2  weeks.
CO2:  5000-10,000  ppm.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  0  per  hour.

Type of Casing: After fully run,  cover with the standard casing whose preparation is described in
Chapter VIII.  Layer to a  depth  of  1-2  inches.  The casing  should  be  balanced to a  pH  of 7.0-7.5.
Post  Casing/Prepinning:

Relative Humidity: 90-100%.
Bed Temperature: 76-80 °F.
Duration  of Case  Run:  8-12  days.
CO2: 5000-10,000 ppm.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  0  per  hour.

Primordia  Formation:

Relative Humidify: 95-100%.
Compost Temperature:  65-70 °F.
Air  Temperature:  62-65 °F.
CO2:  less  than  1000  ppm.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  4  per  hour.
Light:  None  required.

Cropping:

Relative  Humidify:  85-92%.
Air  Temperature:  62-65  °F.
CO2-  less  than  1000  ppm.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  4  per  hour.
Flushing  Interval:  7-10  days.
Harvest Stage:  Directly  before  the  partial  veil  stretches.
Light:  None  required.

Yield  Potential:  Average  commercial yields are  3  Ibs/sq.ft.  over a  5 week cropping  period.  Maxi-
mum  yield  is  6  Ibs.  per  square  foot.

Moisture  Content  of  Mushrooms:  92%  water;  8%  dry  matter.

Nutritional  Content:  24-44%  protein  (dry  weight);  56  milligrams  of  niacin  per  100  grams  dry
weight.

Growing Parameters for Various Mushroom Species/167

Comments: Historically, this species and/or its close relatives were the first mushrooms to be culti-
vated  in  Europe  during  the  late  1 700's.  It  remains the  most widely  cultivated  mushroom  in  the
world Today, A broad range of commercially available strains exist, many of which have been geneti-
cally selected for certain advantageous characteristics, especially yield, color and stature.

This species does not form pinheads on agar media unless activated charcoal or select bacteria
are present. A species sensitive to high levels of carbon dioxide, Agaricus brunnescens fruits only
within  narrow environmental  parameters. As a secondary decomposer, this species fruits best on
substrates  that  have  been  transformed  by  a  succession  of  specific  microorganisms.

The  common  button  mushroom  is  the  mainstay  of  the  mushroom  growing  industry  in  this

country.
Genetic  Characteristics:  Basidia  bipolar  (2-spored),  forming  diploid  spores;  secondarily  homo-
thallic. The mating of compatible dikaryons typically results in strains both more vigorous and high-
er yielding.  Clamp  connections  absent.  See  Chapter  XV.
For  further  information  consult:

P.J.C.  Vedder  1978,  "Modern  Mushroom  Crowing",  Educaboek,  Culemborg,  Netherlands.

(English edition  available from Swiss American Spawn  Company,  Inc..  Madisonville,  Texas).

Fred Atkins,  1973,  "Mushroom  Crowing  Today",  MacMillan  Publishing  Co.,  New York.

168/The Mushroom Cultivator

SPECIES:  Coprinus comatus (Mull,  ex  Fr.)  Gray

Figure  146  Fully  mature  Coprinus comatus fruiting  in  a  tray  of compost.

STRAINS: On deposit at the American Type Culture Collection and available through various cul-
ture  banks,  both  commercial  and  private.
COMMON  NAME:  The  Shaggy  Mane.
GREEK AND LATIN ROOTS: Coprinus comes from the Greek word "kopros" meaning dung
and  comatus  from  the  Latin  "coma"  meaning  shaggy  or  adorned  with  hair  tufts.  The  genus
Coprinus is noted for the several species that grow on dung and for deliquescing gills. The species
epithet describes the shaggy texture of the cap's surface.
GENERAL  DESCRIPTION:  Cap  medium  to  large  in  size,  whitish,  ovoid when  young,  soon  elon-
gating  upwards and becoming  parabolic.  As the  mushroom  matures and spores are  produced,  the
cap begins to disintegrate from the margin's edge by an autodigestive process known as deliques-
cence.  The disintegrating  portions progressively darken  and eventually  liquify.  The cap surface is

Growing Parameters for Various Mushroom Species/169

Figures  147-150  Four day developmental sequence of Coprinus comatus fruiting in a
tray of compost.

170/The Mushroom Cultivator

smooth at The disc, scaly below, soon gray, darkening with maturity until black and thin fleshed. The
gills are very crowded, whitish at first, soon gray,  darkening with age to black. The partial veil mem-
branous,  often leaving a fugacious,  membranous (collar-like) annulus that can be moved over the
stem.  The  spore  deposit  is  black.
NATURAL  HABITAT:  Common  along  roadsides,  near  debris  piles,  in  lawns  and  in  barnyards
during  the  late  summer  and  fall.

GROWTH  PARAMETERS

Mycelial  Types:  Linear  to  cottony,  zonate-cottony  mycelia;  whitish  in  color.
Spawn  Medium:  Rye  grain.  See  Chapter  III.
Fruiting  Substrate:  Composted  wheat  straw  enriched  with  horse  and/or  chicken  manure,  ad-
justed  to  70%  moisture  content.  Also,  pasteurized  chopped  wheat  straw  supports  fruitings  of this
species.  Garcha  et  al.  (1979)  reported  that  composts  having  The  distinct scent  of ammonia  after
Phase  II  supported  the  greatest fruitings of Coprinus  comatus.
Method of Preparation: See Chapters V & VI on the preparation of compost and straw.  Pasteuri-
zation  achieved through  exposure to  live steam  for 2  hours at  140°F.  Compost or straw should  be
filled  to  a  depth  of  6-12  inches.
Spawn  Run:

Relative  Humidity: 90-10070.
Substrate  Temperature:  76-80 °F.
Duration:  8-12  days.
CO2: 5000-10,000 ppm.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  0-1  per  hour.

Type of Casing:  After fully run,  cover with the standard casing whose preparation  is described  in
Chapter  VIII.  Layer to  a  depth  of  1-2  inches.  The  casing  should  be  balanced  to  a  pH  of  7.0-7.5.

Post  Casing/Prepinning:

Relative Humidity: 90-100%.
Bed Temperature: 76-80 °F.
Duration  of Case  Run:  10-12  days.
C02: 5000-10,000 ppm.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  0-1  per  hour.

Primordia  Formation:

Relative Humidity:  95-100%.
Bed Temperature: 65-67 °F.
Air  Temperature:  62-65 °F.
CO2:  less  than  1000  ppm.

Growing  Parameters for Various  Mushroom  Species/171

Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  4  per  hour.
Light:  Natural  daylight  or  grow-light  recommended  on  a  1 2  hour  on/off  cycle.

Cropping:

Relative  Humidity:  85-927o.
Air  Temperature:  62-65°F.
C02:  less  than  1000  ppm.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  4  per  hour.
Flushing  Interval:  7-10  days.
Harvest Stage:  Directly  before  the  gills  begin  to  deliquesce.
Light:  Natural  daylight  or  grow-light  on  a  12  hour  cycle  on/off  cycle.

Yield  Potential:  Average  commercial  yields  are  2-3  Ibs/sq.ft.  over  a  4  week  cropping  period.
Maximum  yield  potential  has  not  yet  been  established.
Moisture  Content  of  Mushrooms:  92-94%  water;  6-8%  dry  matter.
Nutritional  Content:  25.4  %  protein  (dry  weight).
Comments:  Like  many  other  species  in  this  genus,  Coprinus  comatus  is  a  Thermotolerant
mesophile  that  often  appears  in  compost  piles.  This  mushroom  was  first  grown  in  quantity  at  the
Dutch  Mushroom  Research  Station  using the same compost,  casing and environmental  parameters
as  for  the  cultivation  of Agaricus  brunnescens.  The  authors  have  grown  this  species  on  compost
prepared for Agaricus and on  straw alone,  although fruitings appear more substantial on the former.
Coprinus comatus is edible and choice.  However,  the crops are difficult to keep because of the
early  onset  of  deliquescence.  By  submerging  mushrooms  in  water,  deliquescence  is  slowed  and
mushrooms  remain  in  good  condition  for  several  days  after  picking.

Extracts  from  fresh  specimens  of  this  species  has  been  shown  to  have  antibiotic  properties,

similar  to  Those  from  Lentinus  edodes.
Genetic  Characteristics:  Basidia  tetrapolar  (4-spored),  forming  haploid  spores;  heterothallic.
Clamp  connections  present.  See  Chapter  XV.
For further information  consult:

P.J.C.  Vedder  1978,  "Modern  Mushroom  Crowing",  Educaboek,  Culemborg,  Netherlands.

(English  edition  available  from  Swiss  American  Spawn  Company,  Inc.,  Madisonville,  Texas).

172/The Mushroom Cultivator

SPECIES:  Flammulina  velutipes (Curt,  ex  Fr.)  Sing.
=  Collybia  velutipes  (Curt,  ex  Fr.)  Kumm,

Figure  151  Flammulina  velutipes fruiting  in  tray.

STRAINS:  Many wild and  domesticated  strains  of F.  velutipes are  available from  commercial  and
private stocks.  (See Appendix).  The Japanese  have remained at The forefront of Enoke cultivation
with  two  popular  commercial  strains,  "Maruei"  and  "Ebios".
COMMON  NAME:  Enoke;  Winter  Mushroom;  or Velvet Stem.
LATIN  ROOT:  Flammulina  comes  from  the  latin  word  "flammeus"  or  flame  colored  for  the  yel-
lowish orange to reddish orange color of the cap. The species epithet velutipes is the conjunction of
two  latin  words,  the adjective  "velutinus"  meaning  covered with fine  hairs and the  noun  "pes"  or
foot.

GENERAL  DESCRIPTION:  Caps  typically  small,  reddish  orange  to  reddish  brown,  at first  hemis-
pherical,  soon plane. The cap margin  is often  irregularly shaped. The gills are yellowish tinged.  In
wild  collections,  the  stem  is  densely  fibrillose,  velvety,  short  and  tough.  In  culture,  however,  the
stems are  long  and  smooth.  A  partial  veil  is absent.  Its spores are whitish  in  mass.

Growing  Parameters for Various  Mushroom Species/173

NATURAL  HABITAT:  Common  across  the  North  American  continent  and  in  other  temperate  to
boreal  regions of the world.  Thriving  on  woody tissue,  especially living trees and  considered a  cold
weather  mushroom.

GROWTH  PARAMETERS

Mycelial Types:  Linear to  cottony  mycelia,  sometimes aerial.
Spawn  Medium:  Sawdust/bran.  One  liter  (1000  ml.}  bottle  of  spawn  inoculates  50-160  (800
ml.)  containers.  See  Chapter  III.
Fruiting  Substrate:  A  80-90%  hardwood  sawdust  and  10-20%  rice  bran  medium.  Newly
chipped  sawdust  holds  moisture  poorly  and  some  Japanese  growers  age  the  sawdust  for  several
years  before  using.  Standard  fruiting  containers  are  quart  mason  jars  or  800  ml.  small  mouthed
plastic bottles. Some growers are currently experimenting with the cultivation of this species on bulk
substrates  in  trays.  Adjust  moisture  content  of substrate  to  58-60%.
Method  of  Preparation:  See  Chapter  III  for the  preparation  of  sawdust/bran  media.  A 4:1  volu-
metric ratio of sawdust to bran (equivalent to a mass ratio of 10:1  sawdust to bran) is recommended.
Sterilize for  1-2  hours at 250°F.  (15 psi).
Spawn  Run:

Relative  Humidify:  90-100%.
Substrate  Temperature:  72-77 °F.
Duration:  20-30  days  using standard  methods;  12-13  days using  in  vitro  inoculation  methods.
CO2:  5000-10,000  ppm.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  0  per  hour.

Type  of  Casing:  None  required.
Primordia  Formation:

Relative  Humidity:  85%.
Air  Temperature:  50-55 °F.
C02:  less  than  1000  ppm.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  4  per  hour.
Light:  None  needed.

Cropping:

Relative  Humidify:  85%
Air  Temperature:  50-55 °F.
Duration:  2-3  weeks.
C02:  less than  1000  ppm.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  4  per  hour.
Light:  Natural  daylight  or  grow-light  on  a  12  hour  cycle  on/off  cycle.
Flushing  Interval:  1 0  days.

174/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figure  152  Developing  pinheads  of Flammulina  velutipes.

Yield  Potential:  Average  commercial  yields  are  160-220  grams  per  800  ml.  bottle.  Maximum
yields  are  nearly  600  grams  per  800  ml.  bottle.
Moisture  Content  of  Mushrooms:  92%  water;  8%  dry  matter.
Nutritional  Content:  Reports  vary from  18%  to  31%  protein  (dry weight};  107  milligrams of nia-
cin  per  100  grams dry  weight.  F.  Zadrazil  (1979) found that colonization  of straw by this species
decreases  its  digestibility  for  use  as  fodder.  This  contrasts  with  the  effects  of  Pleurotus  and
Stropharia rugoso-annulata whose presence on straw markedly increases its digestibility. Like many
wood degrading fungi,  an anti-tumor antibiotic has been  isolated from  F.  velutipes and is appropri-
ately  called  flammulin.
Comments:  F.  velutipes  tends  to form  mycelial  "pellets"  soon  after  colonizing  a  substrate.  This
phenomenon  makes  liquid  culture  techniques  more  difficult.  Japanese  researchers  found  that  the
addition  of 5%  corn starch and 2%  malt to a liquid solution  inhibits the formation  of these trouble-
some pellets. Curiously, fruitings on sawdust/bran beds can be precipitated when pieces of a fruit-
body are added to this solution.  Shiio et al.  (1974} found that one could induce the early formation

Growing Parameters for Various Mushroom Species/175

Figure  153  Flammulina  velutipes  fruiting  in  plastic
jar.

of fruitbodies with a technique whereby fresh  pieces of Flammulina velutipes are mixed directly into
liquid spawn and then introduced into the sawdust/bran medium. Not only was The fruiting process
accelerated, the spawning period was cut in half and yield was nearly quadrupled over a year's time.
Using this same technique with Pleurotus ostreatus, yields were increased over and above the norm
by a factor of three. Total production  in either case, equalled as much as 14 of the substrate on a dry
weight basis. An analogous technique was developed by Urayama (1972) who discovered that cell-
free  extracts  of  fresh  F.  velutipes  mushrooms  introduced  to  cultures  of  distantly  related  species
caused fruitbody formation.
Genetic Characteristics:  Basidia Tetrapolar (4-spored),  forming  haploid spores;  bifactorially het-
erothallic.  Single spore isolates capable of producing sterile fruitbodies.  Dikaryons are faster grow-
ing and characterized by clamp connections.  Mycelium can  produce oidia,  self sectioning chains of
cells with  similar functions  as spores.  See  Chapter  XV.
For  further  information  consult:

H.  Tonomura,  1974. 

"F/ammulina  velutipes"  in  The  Biology  and  Cultivation  of  Edible

Mushrooms.  Academic  Press,  New  York.

176/The Mushroom Cultivator

SPECIES:  Lentinus  edodes  (Berk.)  Sing.

Figure  154  Lentinus edodes,  the  shiitake  mushroom, fruiting  on
oak  logs.

Growing Parameters for Various Mushroom Species/177

STRAINS:  Numerous  strains  of  Lentinus  edodes  are  available  from  commercial  and  private
stocks.  The  American  Type  Culture  Collection,  which  sells  cultures  to  educational  organizations
and research facilities, has stock cultures of several wild and domesticated strains. Strains are often
distinguished  by  their  preferences for fruiting  in  colder or  warmer temperature  zones.
COMMON  NAMES:  The  Shiitake  Mushroom;  The  Japanese  Black  Mushroom:  and  The  Chinese
Black  Mushroom.  (The  name  shiitake  comes  from  the  association  of  this  mushroom  to  the  shiia
tree,  a  member  of the  genus  Pasania).
LATIN AND GREEK ROOTS: Lentinus comes from "lentis" or lens-shaped for the form of the
cap  and  edodes signifies  the  edibility of this species.
GENERAL  DESCRIPTION:  Cap  pale  to  dark  reddish  brown,  convex,  becoming  broadly  convex
to nearly plane in age. The cap margin is typically inrolled when young. The cap surface is covered
with whitish veil remnants, especially along the margin. The flesh is firm, pliant, easily drying and re-
constituting. The gills are whitish, close to crowded, often with serrated edges. The stem is centrally
attached to The cap,  short, very tough and adorned with scattered fibrillose remnants of the partial
veil.  Its  spores  are  whitish  in  mass.
NATURAL  HABITAT:  A  wood  decomposer,  typically  saprophytic.  Lentinus species are  common
on the dead tissue of deciduous trees, mainly Fagaceae (oak, chestnut, shiia [Pasania] and beech).
In nature, they particularly prefer oaks. Fruiting in the fall, early winter and spring, this species is in-
digenous  to  Japan,  China  and  other  countries  in  the  temperate  zone  of the  Indo-China  region.

GROWTH  PARAMETERS

Mycelial  Types:  Rhizomorphic  to  linear.
Spawn Medium:  Pre-soaked wooden  dowels or a  4:1  sawdust/bran  mixture.  See  Chapter  III.
Fruiting  Substrate  and  Method  of  Preparation:  Oak  or alder  logs,  4-6  inches  in  diameter,  are
sawed into 3 foot lengths. These  logs should be cut in the spring or fall to maximize sap content and
can be inoculated immediately. (Some growers prefer to season their logs in shaded, open air stacks
for  one  month  prior  to  inoculation}.  Before  inoculating,  logs  should  be  cleaned  of  any  lichen  or
fungal  growths.

Alternative fruiting substrates include alder or oak sawdust and bran mixed 4:1  with a moisture
content of 60% and sterilized at 15 psi for 1 -1  Yz hours. Fortified rye grass straw has also been used
as a sterile fruiting  medium.  (See Chapter III).
Spawn  Run:

Relative  Humidity:  60-75%  for  logs;  90%  for  sawdust.
Substrate Temperature: Fast growth at 77°F. (Temperatures above 95°F. and below 41 °F.
stop  mycelial  growth).
Duration:  6-12  months  for  cut  logs;  30-60  days  for  sawdust  blocks.
CO2:  None established;  no controls needed  using these  methods.

178/The Mushroom Cultivator

Fresh Air Exchanges: Stacks in  open  air sufficient.  (Recent  innovations show that  logs stacked
in  a  vertical  configuration  and  covered  with  straw  and  plastic  to  maintain  even  temperatures
result in faster spawn running in an outdoor environment. Within a controlled greenhouse, the
logs  need not  be covered.  The  contact between the log  surfaces  should be  minimized to pre-
vent  competitor  molds  and  lichens  from  forming).
pH  Optima:  5-6.
Light: None required.

Type of Casing: None needed.
Pinhead  Initiation:

Initiation  Technique: Submerge logs and blocks in cold water for 24-72 hours.
Relative  Humidity:  95%.
Air Temperature: 59-68°F.
Duration: 7-14 days after soaking.
CO2:  Not applicable.
Fresh Air Exchanges: If within a greenhouse, 2-4 per hour.
Light: Ambient natural  light or optimally  10  lux  in  the  370-420  nanometer range.

Cropping:

Relative  Humidity:  85-90%.
Air Temperature: 59-68 °F.
CO2:  less than  1000  ppm.
Fresh  Air Exchanges:  2-4  per  hour or sufficient to meet  CO2  and/or  cooling  requirements.
Duration:  3-5  years  on  oak  logs;  2-3  years  on  alder.
Harvest Stage:  Directly  before the  incurved  margin  straightens and the cap  expands to plane.
Flushing Interval: Outdoor methods generate 2 flushes per year (fall and spring); indoor meth-
ods can  produce  up to 4 flushes depending on the soaking/initiation  schedule.
Light: Same as above.

Yield  Potential:  Average  commercial yields  are  2-3  Ibs  (fresh  weight)  of  mushrooms  per  log.

Moisture Content of Mushrooms: 85% water;  1 5% dry matter.

Nutritional Content: 10.0-17.5% crude protein (dry weight) and 55 milligrams of niacin per 100
grams  dry weight.

Comments: Compounds in this mushroom have anti-cholesterol effects. Chihara (1979) reported
that lentinan, a water soluble polysacharide in L edodes. was "found to almost completely regress
the solid type tumors of sarcoma-180  and several  kind  (sic)  of tumors.  .  .".  The work  of others
(Cochran, 1978; Tokita et al., 1972; Tokuda and Kaneda,  1979) have similarly described the ben-
eficial  properties  of this fungus.  (See Appendix  111).

Although the standard method of cultivation involves oak logs, recent experiments employing

Growing  Parameters for Various  Mushroom  Species/179

sawdust or rye  grass  based  "synthetic"  mixtures  have  proved  that Lentinus edodes can  be grown
on a variety of substrates.  In a recent article,  Han et alia (1981) report the results of growth experi-
ments  with  shiitake  mini-logs  composed  of  90%  broadleaf  sawdust,  10%  rice  bran  and  0.2%
CaCO3.  Supplements  that  increased  mycelial  growth  more  than  rice  bran  were  yeast  powder
(2.0%),  soybean  meal  (5.0%),  milk  powder  (2.0%)  and  molasses  (1.5%).  The  fastest  mycelial
growth occurred when the moisture content of the logs was balanced to 50-60%.  In tests on fruiting
and  yield  the  following  data  were  compiled:

Once mycelial growth is complete, highest yields were achieved if the vegetative cycle was pro-
longed  4-12  weeks,  with  the  maximum  yield  at  12  weeks.
At pin  initiation,  water  bath  periods  of 48-72  hours  increased  the  moisture  content of the  logs
by  5-1 5%  and  yields  by  50%.
Cooling  the  logs for  eight days at 60-62 DF.  following  48  hours  of soaking  gave  the  highest
yields.
Using 0.1 %  N  hydrochloride to adjust the pH  of the water bath from 4.5-7.0, a pH  of 5.0 pro-
duced  the  most  primorida  and  mature  mushrooms.
At  a  light  intensity  of  550  lux,  yields  were  highest.
The  addition  of  the  hormones  NAA  (5ppm),  gibberellin  (10ppm),  ethylene  chlorohydrin
(2000x)  and  colchicine  (8000x)  as well  as  yeast  powder  (0.1 %)  to  the water bath  increased
yields.
Nevertheless,  the  traditional  log  method  remains  the  most  commercially  feasible  at  this  time

and  the  one  best  suited  to  home  cultivation.
Genetic Characteristics:  Basidia tetrapolar,  forming four haploid spores;  heterothallic.  Dikaryons
with  clamp  connections.  See  Chapter  XV.

For  more  information  consult:

H.  Akiyama  et  al.,  1974.  "The  Cultivation  of  Shii-ta-ke  in  a  Short  Period".  Mushroom

Science  IX,  pp.  423-433.

T. 

Ito,  1978. 

''Cultivation  of  Lentinus  edodes"  in  The  Biology  and  Cultivation  of  Edible

Mushrooms  Ed.  by  ST.  Chang,  pp.  461-473.

R.  Kerrigan,  1982.  "/s  Shiitake  Farming  for  You?"  Far  West  Fungi,  Santa  Cruz.

Y.H.  Han,  W.T.  Veng  and  S.  Cheng,  1981.  "Physiology and Ecology of Lentinus  edodes

(Berk.)  Sing, "  Mushroom  Science  XI,  Melbourne.

ISO/The Mushroom Cultivator

SPECIES:  Lepista  nuda  (Bull,  ex  Fr.)  Cooke

=  Clitocybe  nuda  (Fr.)  Bigelow  and  Smith
=  Tricholoma  nudum  (Fr.)  Kummer

Figure  155  Mycelium  of Lepista  nuda.

STRAINS: Available from  commercial and private slocks.  The American Type Culture Collection
has several strains. Although few spawn companies sell strains of L nuda, tissue and spore cultures
are  easily  obtained  from  wild  specimens.  Nevertheless,  there  are  a  limited  number of productive
strains currently in circulation.
COMMON  NAME:  The  Blewit.
LATIN  AND GREEK  ROOTS:  Lepista comes from  the  greek  "lepis" which  means scale.  On  the
other hand, the species epithet nuda comes from "nudus"  or naked.  The name Lepista nuda con-
stitutes a  contradition  of terms,  literally translating  as the scaly smooth  mushroom.
GENERAL  DESCRIPTION:  Cap  typically  violet  when  fresh,  becoming  buff  brown  in  drying;
smooth, without hairs; dry;  convex or broadly convex to plane in age. The cap margin is inrolled or
incurved when young and simply decurved at maturity. The gills are a pale violet color,  sometimes
developing brownish hues in age and are adnexed or ascending in their attachment to the stem. The
stem is equal overall but bulbous at the base and covered with fine fibrils over much of its surface.

Growing Parameters for Various Mushroom Species/181

Fruitbodies can be moderately large when mature. A partial veil is absent. The spore deposit is pale
pinkish  Tan.
NATURAL  HABITAT:  Commonly  occurring  in  the  summer to  late fall  across  much  of the tem-
perate  regions  of  North  America  and  Europe.  This  species  is  found  in  and  around  decomposing
piles of sawdust,  in  conifer duff,  amongst  leaves and  in  mature compost piles.

GROWTH  PARAMETERS

Mycelial  Types:  Linear  to  cottony  and  usually  with  purplish  to  violet  hues.  (See  Color  Photo  3).
Spawn  Medium:  A  4:1  sawdust/bran  mixture  or  rye  grain  spawn.  See  Chapter  III.
Fruiting Substrates:  Horse manure/straw compost mixed with  10% fresh straw at spawning; leaf
mulch/sawdust mixtures.
Spawn  Run:

Relative  Humidity:  90 + %.
Substrate  Temperature: Fastest growth at 70-75 °F. Temperature maxima and minima: 40 DF.
and 86 °F.  respectively.
Duration:  25-60  days  for  complete  colonization.
C02:  5000-10,000  ppm.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  0  per  hour.
Light:  Incubation  in total darkness.

Type of Casing:  Standard  peat  based  casing.  An  option  is  the addition  of shredded  leaf material
and  activated charcoal  to  10%  of total  mass.  Balance  to a  pH  of 7.0.
Pinhead  Initiation:

Relative  Humidity:  95%.
Air Temperature: 55-65 °F.
Duration:  7-14  days.

C02:  less  than  1000  ppm
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  2-4  per  hour.
Light:  Ambient  natural  light  or  optimally  10  lux  in  the  370-420  nanometer  range.  (Light  re-
quirements have not yet been established for this species, and until that time, light stimulation
should be presumed as a prerequisite for fruiting.)

Cropping:

Relative  Humidity:  85-907o.
Air  Temperature:  55-65 °F.
Duration:  24-52  weeks.
CO2: 
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  2-4  per  hour.

less  than  1000  ppm.

182/The Mushroom Cultivator

Harvest Stage:  While  the  mushroom  caps  remain  convex.
Flushing  Interval:  10-14  days.
Light:  Same  as  above.

Yield  Potential:  Data very  limited.  Yields of one and a quarter pounds per square foot in  14 weeks
have been reported by Visscher (1 981}. (Recent studies show that yields can be increased substan-
tially, although  no maxima  have yet been established.)

Moisture  Content  of  Mushrooms:  88-90%  water;  10-12%  dry  matter.
Nutritional  Content:  No  data  available.
Comments:  Several  contraditions  about  the  fruiting  requirements  for  this  species  are  appar-
ent.  Although  Wright  and  Hayes  (1979)  reported  that  immature  horse  manure/straw  composts
supported  the  most  vigorous  mycelial  growth,  the  work  of  previous  researchers  indicates  that  the
best fruitings occurred on  "spent"  compost that  has been  colonized for a year or more.  Fruitbodies
also form on spawned leaf mulch mixed with sawdust. The fruiting mechanism may, in part, be con-
trolled  by  bacterial  flora associated with  leaf mulch  and  the  decomposition  process.

Singer  (1963)  reported  that  mycelium  implanted  in  beds  of  horse  manure/straw  compost  for
7-14 months produced  mushrooms directly after the appearance of rhizomorphs. J.  Garbaye et al.
(1 979) published data indicating that the supplementation of natural patches with a INPKCa mineral
fertilization  induced  large fruitings of L  nuda  as well  as  Boletus  edulis  and  Lepiota  rachodes,  two
unrelated  species  of  culinary  distinction.

Alexander Smith  (1980)  remarks that this  mushroom  should  not be eaten  raw,  but only after
cooking.  European  books  have  reported  that  this  mushroom  contains  thermobile  hemolysin,  a
compound that degenerates red blood cells. Although this mushroom has been responsible for scat-
tered  poisonings when  quantities  have  been  eaten,  the  effects  have  been  relatively  minor and  the
toxin  is  easily  destroyed  by  cooking  or  parboiling.  Lepista  nuda  is,  however,  a  mushroom  with
many  positive  attributes.  Its  striking  color,  firm  texture  and  good  taste  recommend this species as
one  of  high  culinary  appeal.

Some  commercial  production  of L  nuda is  ongoing  in  Europe.  Nevertheless,  this  mushroom
is not,  as of yet,  a  species with yields substantial  enough  to warrant commercial  production  in  this
country.  It  is a  mushroom  more suited to the  interests of home cultivators  and  natural  culture tech-
niques.
Genetic  Characteristics:  Basidia  tetrapolar,  forming  four  haploid  spores;  heterothallic.  Dikaryons
with  clamp  connections.  See  Chapter  XV.
For  more information  consult:

S.H.  Wright  and  W.A.  Hayes,  1  979.  "Nutrition  and  Fruitbody  Formation  of Lepista  Nuda

(Bull,  ex Fr.) Cooke",  pp.  873-884 in  Mushroom Science  X,  Part I.  Bordeaux.

J.  Garbaye  et  alia,  1979.  "Production  De  Champignons  Comestibles  En  Foret  Par Fertilisa-
tion Minerale-Premiers Resultats Sur Rhodopaxillus Nudus".  pp.81  1 -81 6  in  Mushroom  Science
X,  Part  I.  Bordeaux.

M.  Vaandrager and  H.R.  Visscher,  1 981.  Experiments on the Cultivation of Lepista Nuda,  the

Wood Blewit",  pp.  749-759  in  Mushroom  Science  XI,  Australia.

Crowing Parameters for Various Mushroom Species/183

SPECIES:  Panaeolus  cyanescens  Berkeley  and  Broome
=  Copelandia  cyanescens (Berk.  &  Br.)  Sing.

Figure  156  Panaeolus  cyanescens  fruiting  on  cased  straw.

184/The Mushroom Cultivator

STRAINS:  Hawaiian.
Mexican.

COMMON  NAME:  Pan  cyan.
GREEK  ROOT:  Panaeolus is Greek for "all  variegated",  in  reference to the spotted appearance of
the  gills.  The  species  name  cyanescens comes from  "cyaneus"  or  blue for the  color the  flesh  be-
comes  upon  bruising.
GENERAL  DESCRIPTION:  Cap  15-40  mm.  broad.  Hemispheric  to  campanulate  to  convex  or
broadly convex at maturity. The margin is initially shortly translucent striate when wet, opaque when
dry.  The cap  is  light  brown  at first,  becoming  pallid  grey  in  drying,  eventually  pallid  to white,  often
covered with spores. The gills are adnexed in their attachment, close, thin, with two or three tiers of
intermediate  gills  and  mottled  grayish  black  at  with  spore  maturity.  The  stem  is  85-120  long  x
15-30 mm. thick and equal to bulbous at the base, tubular, often grayish towards the apex, pale yel-
lowish  overall,  and  flesh  colored  to  light  brown  towards  the  base.  The  flesh  readily  turns  bluish
where  bruised.  A  partial  veil  is absent.  Its spores are dark violet-black.
NATURAL  HABITAT:  Scattered  to  numerous  on  dung,  in  well  manured  grounds,  grassy  areas,
meadows,  or  pastures.  Known  from  Hawaii  and  Mexico.  Two  other  Panaeoli,  close  to  P.
cyanescens  macroscopically  and  microscopically,  grow  in  western  Washington  and  in  Florida.

GROWTH  PARAMETERS

Mycelial Types:  Linear to cottony mycelia; white to off-white,  sometimes bruising bluish where in-
jured.
Spawn  Medium:  Rye grain. See Chapter III.
Fruiting  substrate:  Pasteurized  wheat  straw;  horse  manure/straw  compost.
Method  of  Preparation:  Chopped wheat straw pasteurized in a hot water bath  at  160 ° for 20-30
minutes,  cooled  and  spawned  or  horse  manure/straw  compost  prepared  according  methods  out-
lined  in  Chapter  V.
Spawn  Run:

Relative  Humidity:  90 + %.
Substrate  Temperature:  79-84°  F.
Duration:  7-12  days.
C02:  10,000  ppm  or higher.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  0  per  hour.

Type of Casing: Standard peat based casing whose preparation is described in Chapter VIII. Layer
to  a  depth  of  1/2-1  inch.
Post  Casing/Pre-pinning:

Relative  Humidify:  90 + %.
Substrate  Temperature:  79-84 °F.

Growing  Parameters for Various Mushroom  Species/185

C02- 10,000 ppm or above.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  0  per  hour.
Light:  Incubation  in  darkness.

Primordia  Formation:

Relative  Humidity:  95 + %.
Air Temperature: 75-80 °  F.
C02:  5,000  ppm or below.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  2  per  hour.
Light  requirements:  Diffuse  natural  or  fluorescent  grow-iights.

Cropping:

Relative  Humidity:  85-92%.
Air  Temperature:  75-80 °  F.
COz'. 5,000  ppm or below.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  2  per  hour.
Harvest Stage:  When  the  caps  are  convex.
Flushing  Interval:  5-7  days.
Light:  Diffuse  natural  or  grow-lights.

Yield Potential: Not yet established.
Moisture  Content:  90-92%  water;  8-10%  dry  matter.
Comments: This rapidly growing species fruits readily on pasteurized straw provided a thin  layer of
casing is applied  (Yz  inch).  No more than one week passes from the time of casing to the first flush.
Although  the fruitbodies  are  small,  the flushes are typically  abundant.  The degree  of bluing  seems to
vary with The strain and substrate.

186/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

SPECIES:  Panaeolus  subbalteatus  Berkeley  and  Broome

=  Panaeolus venenosus Murrill

Figure  157 
Panaeolus  subbalteatus  fruiting
outdoors  on  horse  manure-wood  chip  compost.

STRAINS: Fruiting strains are easily obtained from wild specimens.
COMMON  NAME: The  Belted  Cap  Panaeolus.
GREEK ROOT: Panaeolus is Greek for "all variegated" in reference to the spotted appearance of
the gills. The species name subbalteatus comes from the conjunction of the prefix "sub-" meaning
almost  or  somewhat  and  "balteatus"  or  belt-like,  for  the  characteristic  color  zonation  that  forms
along the margin of the cap in drying.

Growing  Parameters for Various Mushroom Species/187

GENERAL  DESCRIPTION:  Cap  35-50  mm.  broad  at  maturity.  The  cap  is  convex  to  campanu-
late, then broadly convex and finally expanding to nearly plane with a broad umbo. The color is cin-
namon  brown  to  orangish  cinnamon  brown,  fading  to  tan  in  drying  with  a  dark  brown  encircling
zone along the cap margin. The gills are attached to the stem, broader at the center and with three
tiers of intermediate gills  inserted.  The  gill  color  is brownish  and  spotted,  with  the edges remaining
whitish,  becoming  blackish  overall from  spore  maturity.  The  stem  is  50-60  mm.  long  by 4  mm.
thick at maturity and  is brittle,  hollow,  fibrous,  and enlarges towards the base.  The color is reddish
toned  beneath  a  fine  sheath  of  minute  whitish  fibrils,  darkening  downwards  or when  touched.  The
stem  base often  bruises  bluish.  On  the  cap,  bluing  is  rarely seen.
NATURAL  HABITAT:  Scattered  to  numerous  on  stable  leavings  from  horses;  in  horse  dung;  or
in  well  manured  grounds.  This  species  is widely  distributed  across the  North  American  continent
and  throughout  temperate  regions  of  the  world.

GROWTH  PARAMETERS

Mycelial Type: Cottony mycelia noted; whitish to off-white in color.
Spawn Medium: Rye grain.
Fruiting  Substrate:  Horse  manure  compost,  pasteurized  wheat  straw.
Method  of  Preparation:  Horse  manure/straw  compost  or  pasteurized  wheat  straw  prepared  ac-
cording  to  methods  outlined  in  Chapters  V  &  VI  respectively.
Spawn  Run:

Relative  Humidity:  90  +%.
Substrate  Temperature:  80-86 °F.
Duration:  7-12  days.
CO2:  10,000  ppm  or  higher.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  0  per  hour.

Type of Casing: Casing optional.  If used,  make up a standard peat based casing whose prepara-
tion  is described  in  Chapter VIII.  Layer to  a  depth  of  '/2  to  1  inch.

Post  Casing/Pre-pinning:
Relative  Humidity:  90%.
Substrate Temperature: 80-86 °F.
CO2:  10.000  ppm  or  above.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  0  per  hour.
Light:  Incubate  in  darkness.

Primordia  Formation:

Relative  Humidify:  95 + %.
Air  Temperature: 75-80 °F.
CO2: 5,000 ppm or below.

188/The Mushroom Cultivator

Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  2  per  hour.
Light:  Diffuse  natural  or  grow-lights.

Cropping

Relative  Humidity:  85-92%.
Air  Temperature: 75-80 °F.
C02'  5,000  ppm  or  below.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  2  per  hour.
Harvest Stage: When  the caps  have expanded  to  nearly plane.
Light:  Diffuse  natural  or  grow-lights.

Yield  Potential:  Not  yet  established.
Moisture  Content:  90-92%  water;  8-10%  dry  matter.
Comments:  Panaeolus subbalteatus  is a  fast  running  and  an  early fruiting  mushroom  that easily
grows  in  controlled  environments.  Possessing  low  levels  of  psilocybin  and/or  psitocin,  the  fruit-
bodies are small  compared to other cultivated mushrooms.  Hence,  it has not been  as popular with
home cultivators as for instance,  Psilocybe cubensis.

Given  the  fact that Panaeolus cyanescens fruits well  on  pasteurized  wheat straw,  Panaeolus
subbalteatus is likely to fruit on that substrate as well.  Pollock (1977) fruited this species on cased
crimped  oat spawn.  Undoubtedly,  Panaeolus subbalteatus can  be  grown  on  a  wide  variety of sub-
strates.

Short  term  "natural  culture"  of this  mushroom  is  also  possible  although  yields  are  much  lower
than  those  attained  in  a  controlled  indoor growing  environment.  Horse  manure/straw compost ar-
ranged  in outdoor beds can  be inoculated with  mycelium from wild patches or grain spawn  can be
used.

Panaeolus  subbalteatus  is  considered  a  "weed  mushroom"  by  commercial  Agaricus  growers
and its presence suggests under-composting and/or excessive moisture. This species once had the
reputation,  albeit  undeserved,  of  being  poisonous—thus  the  synonym  Panaeolus  venenosus.

Growing Parameters for Various Mushroom Species/189

SPECIES:  Pleurotus  ostreatus  (Jacq.  ex  Fr.)  Kummcr

Figure 158  Fully mature Pleurotus ostreatus mushrooms fruiting on straw.

STRAINS: Strains  of Pleurotus  ostreatus  are  available from  commercial  and  private stocks.  The
American  Type  Culture  Collection,  which  sells  cultures  to  educational  organizations  and  research
facilities, has stock cultures of several wild and domesticated strains. Somycel's-3004 is the stan-
dard  strain  used  by  the  European  Pleurotus  industry  and  is  synonymous  with  ATCC's-38546.
COMMON NAME: The Oyster Mushroom.
LATIN  AND GREEK ROOTS:  Pleurotus comes from the greek "pleuro" which means formed
laterally or in  a sideways position,  referring to the  lateral  position  of the stem  relative to the cap. The
species  epithet  ostreatus  refers  to  its  oyster  shell-like  appearance  and  color.
GENERAL  DESCRIPTION:  Cap tongue shaped,  maturing  to a shell  shaped form,  50-1 50  mm.
in  diameter;  whitish  to  gray  to  blue  gray  overall.  (Color  is  a  light  determined  factor  in  this  species).
The flesh  is thin and white.  The margin  is even and occasionally wavy.  The gills are white, decurrent

190/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figures  159-162
wheat  straw.

Four day developmental  sequence of Pleurotus ostreatus fruiting on

and broadly spaced. The stem is attached in an off-centered fashion and is short at first and absent in
age.  Its  spores  are  whitish  to  lilac  gray  in  mass.
NATURAL  HABITAT:  A  wood  decomposing,  saprophytic  or  parasitic  fungus.  Pleurotus
ostreatus  grows abundantly on  standing and fallen  alder,  cottonwood  and  maple.  This species is es-
pecially  numerous  in  river  valleys  and  fruits  in  the  fall,  early  winter and  spring  across  much  of tem-
perate  North  America.

Growing  Parameters for Various Mushroom Species/191

GROWTH PARAMETERS

Mycelial  Types:  Fast  growing  rhizomorphic  to  linear  mycelia  noted.  Color  is  typically  whitish.
Spawn  Medium:  Rye  grain.  See  Chapters  III.
Fruiting  Substrate  and  Method  of  Preparation:  Cereal  straw  (normally  wheat)  balanced  to  a
75%  moisture  content.  The  straw,  chopped  or  whole,  is  pasteurized  by  submerging  in  a  160°F.
water bath for 30-45 minutes. An alternative method utilizes live steam pasteurization at 140°F. for
6 hours.  In Japan,  Pleurotus is grown on a mixture of hardwood sawdust and bran (4 parts to  1,
65%  moisture  and  a  pH  of  6.8-7.0).  This  mixture  is  sterilized  for  1-2  hours  at  15  psi.  Being  a
primary  decomposer,  Pleurotus  grows  on  a  wide  variety  of  cellulosic  wastes.
Spawn  Run:

Relative Humidity: 90-100%.
Substrate  Temperature:  Fastest growth  at 78-84 °F.  Thermal  death occurs if mycelium  is  held
above  104°F.  for  48  hours.
Duration:  10-14  days  for  complete  colonization.
C02:  20,000  ppm  or 20%  C02  by volume.  (Growth  is stimulated  up to 28,000  ppm}.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  0  per  hour.
Light:  Incubation  in  total  darkness.

Type of Casing:  None needed.
Pinhead  Initiation:

Relative  Humidity:  95%.
Air  Temperature:  55-60 °F.
Duration:  7-14  days.
C02'  less  than  600  ppm.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  4  per  hour.
Light:  Phototropic,  most  responsive  to  an  exposure  of  2,000  lux/hour for  12  hours/day.
Grow-lux  type  fluorescent  lighting  is  recommended.  Diffuse  natural  light  is  sufficient.
Watering:  Regular misting  once  to  twice daily  until  fruitbodies are  30-40%  of  harvest  size and
then  water  as  needed  to  prevent  caps  from  cracking.

Cropping:

Relative  Humidity:  85-92%.
Air  Temperature: 60-64 °F.
Duration:  5-7  weeks.
CO2:  less  than  600  ppm.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  4-6  per  hour  or  sufficient  to  meet  C02  and/or  cooling  reguirements.
Harvest Stage:  Directly  before  incurved  margin  elevates  to  plane.
Flushing  Interval:  10  days.
Light: Same  as  above.

192/The Mushroom Cultivator

Watering: Regular misting to prevent caps from cracking and to keep resting pinheads viable.
Yield  Potential:  Average  commercial  yields  are  1  kilogram  fresh  weight  of  mushrooms  per
kilogram  of  dry  weight  of  straw  substrate.
Moisture  Content  of  Mushrooms:  91 %  water;  9%  dry  matter.
Nutritional  Content:  Crude  protein  has  been  reported  at  30.4  %  of  dry  weight  and  109  milli-
grams  of  niacin  per  100  grams dry  weight.
Comments:  Biologically, Pleurotus ostreatus efficiently utilizes its substrate.  Its ability to fruit on a
single  component  substrate,  to  permeate  the  straw  rapidly  while  tolerating  high  carbon  dioxide
levels  and  to  produce  abundant  crops  within  a  short  time  period,  make  Pleurotus  ideal  for  home
cultivation.

Of concern to cultivators growing in enclosed rooms is the abundant spore load generated by

this species.  Pleurotus spores cause allergic reactions amongst some workers and mycophagists.
Sporeless strains are therefore desirable and are the object of current research.  Eger (1 974)  noted
the possibility that heavy spore concentrations from Pleurotus farms could infect surrounding wood-
lands.

Pleurotus ostreatus var.  Florida,  a warmth  loving  relative,  is also cultivated in  Europe (Hungary)

and  shares many of The  growth  properties of Pleurotus  ostreatus.
Genetic  Characteristics:  Basidia  tetrapolar,  producing  4  haploid  spores;  heterothallic.  Clamp
connections  present.  See  Chapter XV.
For  more  information  consult:

F.  Zadrazil,  1 974.  "The  Ecology and Industrial Production  of Pleurotus  ostreatus,  Pleurotus
Florida,  Pleurotus  cornucopiae,  and  Pleurotus  eiyngii"  in  Mushroom  Science  IX  (Part  I),  The
Mushroom  Research  Institute, Japan.

Growing Parameters for Various Mushroom Species/193

SPECIES:  Pleurotus ostreatus (Jacq.  ex  Fr.)  Kummer  (Florida

variety)
=  Pleurotus  ostreatus  var.  Honda  nom.  prov.  Eger
=  Pleurotus  floridanus  Singer

STRAINS:  Most  strains  of this  mushroom  originate from  wild specimens cultivated  in  1958  by
S.S.  Block of Gainesville,  Florida.  Eger compared the Florida strains with Pleurotus ostreatus from
Michigan  (supplied  by Alexander Smith) and found them to be identical  in form, taste,  color and
odor. Spore size and shape are also the same. Monokaryons arising from single spore germinations
are completely  cross fertile,  suggesting  that  these  two  mushrooms are  not  separate species,  but dif-
ferent strains within the same species.

The American Type Culture Collection, which sells cultures to educational organizations and
research facilities, lists this mushroom under Pleurotus ostreatus as number #38538. This strain is
Block's  original.  Eger  returned  to  Florida  with  San  Antonio  in  1977  and  recollected  four  more
strains of Pleurotus, three of which were deposited with ATCC. They are respectively: Fl  =  ATCC
#38539;  F2  =  #38540;  F4  =  #38541.

The  Florida Pleurotus is available as commercial  spawn from Somycel  as  #3025.  The Swiss

American  Spawn  Company  sells a  "low  spore  load"  strain  called  P-3.
COMMON  NAME:  Pleurotus  Florida.  The  Florida  Pleurotus.
LATIN AND GREEK ROOTS: Pleurotus comes from the Greek "pleuro" which means formed
laterally or in  a  sideways position,  referring to the  lateral  position  of the stem  relative to the cap.  The
epithet Florida obviously refers to the locality where this mushroom was first collected.
GENERAL DESCRIPTION: Cap tongue shaped, maturing to a shell shaped form, 50-100 mm.
in diameter; whitish to gray to pale yellow brown. (Color is a light and temperature determined fac-
tor in this species). The flesh is thin and white. The margin is even and occasionally wavy, The gills
are white, decurrent and broadly spaced. The stem is attached in an off-centered fashion and is short
at first and absent in  age.  Its spores are whitish to  lilac gray in  mass.
NATURAL  HABITAT:  A  wood  decomposing,  saprophytic  or  parasitic  fungus.  Pleurotus
ostreatus grows abundantly on standing and fallen alder, cottonwood and maple. This species is es-
pecially  numerous  in  river valleys  and  fruits  in  the  fall,  early  winter and  spring  in  subtropical  envi-
rons.

GROWTH  PARAMETERS

Mycelial Types:  Fast  growing  rhizomorphic to  linear  mycelia.  Its color  is typically  whitish.
Standard  Spawn  Medium:  Rye  grain.  See  Chapter  III.
Fruiting  Substrate  and  Method  of  Preparation:  Cereal  straw  (normally  wheat)  balanced  to  a
75%  moisture content. The straw,  chopped or whole,  is pasteurized by submerging  in a  1 60°F.

194/The Mushroom Cultivator

water bath for 20-30 minutes. An alternative method utilizes live steam pasteurization at 140 °F. for
6  hours.

In Japan,  Pleurotus is grown  on  a  mixture of hardwood sawdust and bran  (4 parts to  1,  65%
moisture and a  pH  of 6.8-7.0). This mixture is sterilized for  1  hour at  15  psi.  Being a primary de-
composer,  Pleurotus  grows  on  a wide  variety of wastes  high  in  cellulose.
Spawn  Run:

Relative  Humidify:  90-100%.
Substrate Temperature: Fastest growth at 82-86 °F. Thermal death occurs if mycelium is held
above  104°F.  for  72  hours.
Duration:  10-14  days  for complete  colonization.
CO2:  20,000  ppm  or 20%  C02  by volume.  (Growth  is  stimulated  up to 28,000  ppm).
Fresh  Air Exchanges:  0  per  hour.
Light: Incubation in total darkness.

Type of Casing:  None needed.
Pinhead  Initiation:

Relative  Humidify:  95%.
Air  Temperature:  72-77 °F.
Duration: 7-14  days.
C02:  less  than  600  ppm
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  4  per  hour.
Light: Positive phototropisrn  has been firmly established.  2,000 lux/hours for  12  hours/day is
most stimulatory.  Grow-lux type fluorescent  lighting  is recommended.  Diffuse  natural  light is
sufficient.
Watering:  Regular  misting  (once  to  twice  daily)  of  the  substrate  until  the  fruitbodies  are
30-40%  of  harvest size.

Cropping:

Relative  Humidify:  85-92%.
Air  Temperature: 72-77 °F.
Duration:  4-5  weeks.
CO2:  less  than  600  ppm.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  4-6  per  hour  or  sufficient  to  meet C02  and/or  cooling  requirements.
Harvest Stage:  Directly  before  incurved  margin  expands to  plane.
Flushing Intervals:  10  days.
Light:  Same  as  above.
Watering: Misting recommended to prevent cracking of caps and to prevent resting primordia
from drying.

Yield  Potential:  Average  commercial  yields  for  Pleurotus  ostreatus  var.  Florida  are  1  kilogram

Crowing Parameters for Various Mushroom Species/195

tresh  weight  of  mushrooms  per  kilogram  of  dry  weight  of  straw  substrate.  Pleurotus  ostreatus  var.
florida produces more mushrooms within a shorter period of time while attaining a similar total yield
per dry  pound  of substrate  than  does  Pleurotus  ostreatus.
Moisture  Content  of  Mushrooms:  91  %  water;  9%  dry  matter.
Nutritional  Content:  Crude  protein  has  been  reported  at  30.4%  of  dry  weight  and  109  milli-
grams  of  niacin  per  100  grams  dry  weight.
Comments: The  Floridan  Pleurotus ostreatus,  a warmth  loving variety,  is  popular with  growers in
Europe (Hungary, France and Germany) and shares many of the growth characteristics of Pleurotus
ostreatus.  Its preference for warmer climes recommends this species for cultivation during the late
spring through early fall whereas P.  ostreatus is ideal for winter cultivation.

This  mushroom,  like  its close cousin  P.  ostreatus,  is perfect for the  home  cultivator.  But,  the
Floridan Pleurotus ostreatus has a distinct advantage over P.  ostreatus in That a "cold shock"  is not
needed for pinhead formation and the period from  initiation to first flush is only  10 days compared
to 20 days for P.  ostreatus.  Its ability to fruit on a singular substrate, to permeate the straw rapidly
while tolerating  high C02  levels and to produce abundant crops within a short Time frame,  makes
Pleurotus an  excellent species for small  scale cultivation.

The  taxonomy  of  this  "species"  is  unsettled  and  contradictory.  Dr.  Rolf  Singer  places  P.
floridanus in the Section  Lentodiellum whose species are characterized  by deeply rooted  meTuloid
pleurocysfidia  (sterile  surface cells on  the gill  having  incrustations)  and  have  mycelia that do  not
sclerotize.  On the  other hand,  he assigns  Pleurotus ostreatus to the type section  Pleurotus which
lacks  metuloid  pleurocystidia  and  has  hyphae  that  undergoes  sclerotization.  Since  monokaryons
from  single spores are compatible between  these two mushrooms,  and because sporulating fruit-
bodies form as a  result of their mating,  it seems clear that these two  mushrooms are one species
sharing  a  common  genetic  heritage.

Of concern to cultivators is the abundant spore load produced by this mushroom, most notice-
able  within  an  enclosed  growing  environment.  Some  people  suffer  allergic  reactions  when  coming
into contact with Pleurotus spores. A small fraction of mycophagists are unable to eat P.  ostreatus
and allies without stomach upset. Hence, when eating these mushrooms for the first time, small por-
tions  are  recommended,
Genetic  Characteristics:  Basidia  tetrapolar,  producing  4  haploid  spores;  heterothallic.  Clamp
connections present.  See  Chapter XV.
For more information consult:

F.  Zadrazil,  1 974.  "The  Ecology and Industrial Production  of Pleurotus  ostreatus,  Pleurotus
florida,  Pleurotus  cornucopiae,  and  Pleurotus  eryngt'i"  in  Mushroom  Science  IX  (Part  I).  The
Mushroom  Research  Institute,  Japan.

F.  Zadrazil,  1978.  "Cultivation  of Pleurotus" in The  Biology and  Cultivation  of Edible  Mush-

rooms  ed.  by  S.T.  Chang  and  W.A.  Hayes,  Academic  Press,  New  York.

I.  Heltay,  1980.  "Pleurotus  florida  Production  in  Borota,  Hungary".  Mushroom  Journal,

London.

196/The Mushroom Cultivator

SPECIES:  Psilocybe  cubensis  (Earle)  Singer

=  Stropharia  cubensis  Earle.
=  Stropharia  cyanescens  Murr.
=  Stroparia caerulescens (Pat.) Sing.
=  Naematoloma  caerulescens  Pat.
=  Hypholoma  caerulescens  (Pat.)  Sacc.  &  Trott.

Figure  163  Psilocybe cubensis fruiting  on  cased  grain.

STRAINS:  Strains  of  Psilocybe  cubensis are  available  from  private  and  commercial  stocks.  The
American Type Culture Collection, which  sells cultures to educational  organizations and  research
facilities, has stock cultures of several wild strains. Note that the strains listed below are only some of
those  that  are  presently  circulating.  There  are  many  more.  Some  strains  may  originate  from  the
same  region  but  have  features  not  in  agreement with  those described  here.

Amazonian:  Medium  to  large  mushrooms  on  rye  grain;  thick  whitish  stems;  tenaciously  at-
tached  to  the  casing.

Growing  Parameters for Various Mushroom Species/197

Ecuadorian:  Medium  sized  mushrooms  on  rye  grain;  hemispheric  caps;  abundant  primordia
former;  high  yielding  on  compost;  thin  whitish  stems;  easily  picked.
Matias  Romero:  Medium  to  large  mushrooms  on  rye  grain;  early  fruiter;  thick  whitish  stems
and tenaciously attached.
Misantla: Medium sized mushrooms on rye grain; thin yellowish stems;  Tall standing and easi-
ly picked.
Palenque:  Large  mushrooms  on  rye  grain;  high  yielding;  and  easily  picked.

COMMON NAMES: San Isidro; Cubensis.
GREEK  ROOT:  Psilocybe comes from  the Greek  root "psilos"  meaning  bald  head  and  cubensis,
a  name  Earle  assigned  to  this  mushroom  because  it  was  first  recognized  as  a  new  species  from
specimens  collected  in  Cuba,
GENERAL  DESCRIPTION:  A  medium  to  large  size  mushroom  having  a  cap  that  becomes  con-
vex to  plane  in  age and  is  usually  pigrnented  chestnut  brown  to  deep  yellowish  or golden  brown.
The cap surface is finely fibrillose, sometimes covered with scattered, fugacious, cottony scales that
soon  disappear.  The  partial  veil  is  membranous,  well  developed  and  typically  leaving  a  persistent
annulus on the upper regions of the stem. The stem  is often  longitudinally striate,  powdered above
the  annulus  and  often  covered  with  dense  fibrils  below.  Flesh  bruising  bluish  or  bluish  green.  Its
spores  purplish  brown  in  mass.
NATURAL  HABITAT:  Naturally  found  in  horse  and  cow  pastures,  in  dung  or  in  soil  enriched with
manure.  Psilocybe  cubensis  is  a  widely  distributed  species  that  is  found  Throughout tropical  and
subtropical zones of the world and is common  in the pasturelands of the gulf coast of the southern
United States and eastern  Mexico.

GROWTH  PARAMETERS

Mycelial  Types:  Rhizomorphic to  linear; whitish  in  overall  color but often  bruising bluish  where  in-
jured.
Standard  Spawn  Medium:  Rye  grain.  See  Chapter  III.
Fruiting  Substrate:  Rye  grain;  wheat  straw; 
manure/straw  compost  balanced  to  a  71-74%  moisture  content.
Method  of Preparation: See Chapters III, V,  and VI.  Pasteurization  achieved through exposure to
live steam for 2  hours at  1 40°F.  throughout the substrate.  Straw or compost should  be filled to a
depth  of  6-12  inches.  Straw  should  be  spawned  at  a  rate  of  2  cups/sq.  ft.
Spawn  Run:

leached  horse  or  cow  manure;  and/or  horse

Relative  Humidify:  90%.
Substrate  Temperature:  84-86 °F.  Thermal  death  limits  have  been  established  at  106°F.
Duration:  10-14  days.
CO2: 5000-10,000 ppm.

198/The Mushroom Cultivator

Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  0  per  hour.

Type  of  Casing:  After  fully  run,  cover  with  the  standard  casing  whose  preparation  is  described  in
Chapter  VIII.  Layer  to  a  depth  of  1-2  inches.  The  casing  should  be  balanced  to  an  initial  pH  of
6.8-7.2,
Post  Casing/Prepinning:

Relative  Humidify:  90  +  %.
Substrate  Temperature:  84-86 °F.
Duration  of  Case  Run:  5-10  days.
CO2: 5000-10,000 ppm.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  0  per  hour.
Light:  Incubation  in  total  darkness.

Primordia  Formation:

Relative  Humidity:  95-100%.
Air Temperature: 74-78 °F.

Figure  164  Psilocybe cubensis fruiting  on  cased  straw.

Growing  Parameters for  Various  Mushroom  Species/199

Duration:  6-10  days.
CO2:  less than  5000  ppm.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  1-3  per  hour.
Light:  Diffuse  natural  or exposure  for  12-16  hours/day  of grow-lux  type  fluorescent  light  high
in  blue  spectra  at  the  480  nanometer  wavelength.  (See  Chapters  IV  and  IX).

Cropping:

Relative  Humidity:  85-92%.
Air  Temperature: 74-78°F.
CO2:  less  than  5000  ppm.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  1-3  per  hour.
Flushing  Pattern:  Every  5-8  days.
Harvest Stage:  When  the  cap  becomes  convex  and  soon  after  the  partial  veil  ruptures.
Light:  Indirect  natural  or  same  as  above.

Yield Potential: Average yields are 2-4 Ibs./sq.ft. over a 5 week cropping period.  Maximum yield
potential  has  not been  established.

Moisture  Content  of  Mushrooms:  92%  water;  8%  dry  matter.

Nutritional Content:  Not yet established.

Comments:  One  of  the  easiest  mushrooms  to  grow,  this  species  fruits  on  a  wide  variety  of  sub-
strates within broad environmental parameters. As a primary and secondary decomposer,  Psilocybe
cubensis  fruits  well  on  untreated  pasteurized  straw  and  on  horse  manure/straw  composts  trans-
formed  by  microbial  activity.  Sterilized  grain  typically  produces  smaller  mushrooms than  bulk  sub-
strates.  Given  the  numerous  substrates  that  support  fruitings,  Psilocybe  cubensis  is  well  suited  for
home  cultivation.

Psilocybe  cubensis  cultivation  was  unheard  of  twenty  years  ago.  Today,  this  species  ranks
amongst  one  of  the  most  commonly  cultivated  mushrooms  in  the  U.S.  and  soon  the  world.  This
sudden  escalation  in  interest  is  largely  due  to  the  publication  of several  popular  guides  illustrating
techniques  for  its  culture.

Psilocybe cubensis is a mushroom  with  psychoactive  properties,  containing  up to  1 %  psilocybin
and/or  psilocin  per dried  gram.  The  function  of these  serotonin-like  compounds  in  the  life  cycle of
the  mushroom  is not  known.
Genetic Characteristics:  Basidia tetrapolar (4-spored),  forming haploid spores (1N);  heterothallic.
The  mating  of  compatible  monokaryons  often  results  in  fruiting  strains.  Clamp  connections  are
present.  See  Chapter  XV.
For  further  information  consult:

Oss, O.T. and O.N.  Oeric,  1976.  "Psilocybin: Magic Mushroom Grower's Guide".  And/Or

Press, Berkeley.

200/The Mushroom  Cultivator

SPECIES:  Psilocybe  cyanescens  Wakefield

=  Geophila  cyanescens  (Maire)  Kuhn.  &  Romagn,
=  Psilocybe  mairei  Singer

Figure  165  Psilocybe  cyanescens  fruiting  indoors  in  a  tray  of  alder  chips.

STRAINS:  St.  Clair.

Many wild strains can be adapted to cultivation.

COMMON  NAMES:  Cyan;  Grandote.

GREEK  AND  LATIN  ROOTS:  Psilocybe  comes  from  the  Creek  "psilos"  or  bald  head.  The
species name cyanescens is from "cyaneus" or blue for the color reaction of the flesh upon bruis-
ing.
GENERAL  DESCRIPTION:  Cap  20-50  mm.  broad,  convex  to  broadly  convex  to  plane  in  age
with  an  elevated  and  undulating  margin  which  is,  in  turn,  translucent-striate.  The cap surface  is
smooth  and viscid when  moist from  a  separable gelatinous  pellicle  ("skin").  The color is caramel

Growing  Parameters  for  Various  Mushroom  Species/201

brown,  fading to yellow-brown to straw colored from the center.  The gills are attached in an adnare
to adnexed fashion,  dull  brown  with whitish  edges.  The stem  is 60-80  mm.  long  by 2-5 mm.  thick,
fibrous and enlarged towards the base. Its surface is smooth or powdered (pruinose). The stem color
is whitish,  silky and becomes blue where injured, with  rhizomorphs protruding about the stem  base.
The partial veil is cortinate (cobweb-like),  leaving little or no trace on the stem.  Its spore print is dark
purplish  brown.
NATURAL  HABITAT:  Clustered  in  woody habitats;  in  soils  high  in  the tissue  of deciduous trees;
or in tall  rank grass. This species grows throughout the Pacific Northwest in areas well mulched by
woody  debris  of  deciduous  and  coniferous  trees  (typically  not  associated  with  bark).  It  has  been
reported from  England and is thought to  be  broadly distributed throughout the  European  continent.

GROWTH PARAMETERS
Mycelial  Types:  Rhizomorphic  to  closely  linear;  whitish  in  color.
Spawn  Medium:  Sawdust/bran  or  rye  grain  spawn.
Fruiting  Substrate:  A  lignicolous  species  utilizing  a  number  of  wood  types,  most  notably  alder,
maple and fir.  It is able to grow on a wide variety of cellulosic wastes including newspaper and card-
board.
Method  of  Preparation:  Branches  and  other  small  diameter  wood  are  chipped  into  1-3  inch
pieces,  preferably  in  the  spring  when  the  sap  content  is  highest.  This  material  is  spawned  with
sawdust/bran  (4:1)  and  made  into  prepared  beds  outdoors  amongst  ornamental  shade  plants
(especially rhododendrons) or tall grass. Another method is to use sawdust/bran or rye grain spawn
to inoculate soaked corrugated cardboard.  When fully colonized, sheets of cardboard are laid at the
bottom of trays which are Then covered with a 2-4 inch layer of freshly cut alder chips. (Wood chips
are far superior to sawdust as a fruiting substrate).
Spawn  Run:

Substrate  Temperature:  65-75 °F.
Duration:  30-60  days.
Relative  Humidity:  90 + %
C02:  10,000  ppm  or  higher.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  0  per  hour.

Type  of  Casing:  None  required.
Primordia  Formation

Relative  Humidity:  95%.
Air Temperature:  50-60 °F.
COz'. 5000 ppm or below.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  2  per  hour.
Light  requirements:  Diffuse  natural  or  grow-lights.

202/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figure  166  Psilocybe cyanescens mycelium  growing on soaked corrugated cardboard
inoculated  with  grain  spawn.

Cropping:

Relative  Humidify:  85-9270.
Air  Temperature:  50-60 °F.
C02-  5000  ppm  or below.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  2  per  hour.
Harvest Stage:  When  the  caps  become  nearly  plane.
Light:  Diffuse  natural  or  grow-lights.

Yield  Potential:  In  natural  outdoor culture on  alder chips,  1  Ib. wet weight per square foot in one
growing season is easily obtained.
Moisture  Content:  90-927o  water;  8%  dry  matter  in  fruitbodies.
Comments:  Psilocybe cyanescens  in  a  primary decomposer,  readily digesting  newly cut alder and
other  deciduous  woods.  Considered  the  grandote  of  the  Pacific  Northwest,  this  species  is  both

Crowing Parameters for Various Mushroom Species/203

robust and potently psilocybian.  Much  sought after for its high  psilocybin and psilocin content,  it is a
favored  mushroom  by  those  seeking  entheogenic  experiences.

Psilocybe  cyanescens'  adaptability  to  natural  outdoor  culture  makes  this  species  attractive  to
beginning  and  connoisseur  cultivators  alike.  Virgin  spawn  can  be  collected  from  the  wild  and  im-
planted  in  prepared  beds  (see  Chapter  VI)  or  spawn  can  be  grown  out  on  bran/sawdust  or  grain
and inoculated directly onto unsterilized soaked corrugated cardboard. Grain spawn inoculated onto
untreated wood chips is associated with  a  higher contamination  rate than the same spawn  implanted
onto  soaked  cardboard,  owing  to  the  partial  selectivity  of  the  latter  material.

Although  fruitbodies  can  form  on  fresh  sawdust,  they  do  so  reluctantly and  belatedly.  The fact
that sawdust so  readily  loses  its  moisture  may explain,  in  part,  why  Psilocybe cyanescens  has diffi-
culty  fruiting  on  it.

Psilocybe  cyanescens  has  a  mycelium  that  is  typically whitish  and  strandy  (rhizomorphic).  Tis-
sue  and  spore cultures are  easy to obtain.  Outdoor colonies can  be  maintained for years with  mini-
mal  effort  and  produce  two  to  three  flushes  within  a  season.

See  Color Photos  17 &  18.

204/The Mushroom Cultivator

SPECIES:  Psilocybe  mexicana  Heim

Figure 167  Sclerotia of Psilocybe mexicana harvested from one cup of  rye grass seed
six  weeks  after  inoculation.

STRAINS:  Heim  Strain

Pollock  Strain

COMMON  NAMES:  Mushroom  of  the  Cods;  Teonanacatl  or  God's  Flesh; Nize  (Mazatec  Name);
and  Pajaritos  (Spanish  Name).
GREEK  ROOT:  Psilocybe  comes  from  the  Greek  "psilos"  or  bald  head.  The  species  name
mexicana  denotes  the  country  in  which  this  mushroom  grows.
GENERAL  DESCRIPTION:  Convex  To  subumbonate,  sometimes  with  a  small  umbo,  expanding
in age To plane or nearly so. The surface is smooth, translucent-striate Two Thirds To the disc. The cap
color is brownish to orangish grey to straw brown, more yellowish to the disc. The gills are adnately
attached,  grey  to  dark  purplish  brown.  The  stem  is equal,  smooth,  hollow,  pale straw to  brown  to
reddish yellow,  darkening when  injured but typically not bruising  bluish.  Its spores are dark violet
brown  in  mass.
NATURAL  HABITAT:  Solitary  to  numerous  in  grassy  areas,  horse  pastures  and  meadows  al-

Growing  Parameters  for  Various  Mushroom  Species/205

Figure  168  Two  quart jars  at  10  days and  30
days  after  inoculation  onto  rye  grass  seed.

though  not  occurring  on  dung.  Distributed  throughout  subtropical  regions  in  Mexico,  common  in
the  state  of  Oaxaca,  and  also  known  from  Guatemala.

GROWTH  PARAMETERS

Mycelial  Types:  Slightly  rhizomorphic  to  finely  linear;  off-white  to  tan  in  color,  sometimes  with
multicolored zones.
Spawn  Media:  Annual  rye  grass  seed  or  rye  grain.
Fruiting Substrates: Rye grass seed and to a lesser degree rye grain and pasteurized wheat straw.
Few  fruitbodies  form  on  enriched  malt  agar  media.
Method  of  Preparation:  Rye  grass  seed  combined  with  water  in  a  2:1  volumetric  proportion,
preferably soaked overnight and then sterilized for  1  hour at 15 psi. Wheat straw is pasteurized in a
hot water  bath  at  1 60-1 70 °F.  for  30  minutes.
Spawn  Run:

Relative  Humidity:  90 + %
Substrate  Temperature:  75-81  °F.
Duration:  10-14  days.
Relative  Humidity:  90 + %.
CO2:  10,000  ppm  or  higher.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  0  per  hour.

Type of Casing: Standard peat based casing whose preparation is described in Chapter VIII. Layer
to  a  depth  of  '/2-1  inch.

206/The Mushroom Cultivator

Post Casing/Pre-pinning:

Relative  Humidify:  90 + %.
Substrate  Temperature:  75-81  DF.
C02:  10,000 ppm or above.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  0  per  hour.
Light:  Incubation  in  darkness.

Primordia  Formation:

Relative  Humidity:  95 + %.
Air  Temperature:  71-74°F.
CO2:  5,000  ppm  or below.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  2  per  hour.
Light:  Diffuse  natural  or  fluorescent  grow-lights  for  12  hours  daily.

Cropping:

Relative  Humidity:  85-92%.
Air  Temperature:  71 -74 °F.
CO2-  5000  ppm  or below.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  2  per  hour.
Harvest Stage:  When  the  caps  become  nearly  plane.
Light:  Same  as  above.

Yield  Potential:  Not  yet  established,  A  petite  mushroom.  Psilocybe  mexicana  is  an  interesting
species  for the  connoisseur.  Because  of the  small  stature  of the fruitbody,  one  should  expect  low
yields  per square foot.  Sclerotia  formation  on  rye  grass seed  after two  months  is 50-70  grams  per
cup  of  seed.
Moisture  Content:  90-92%  water  and  8%  dry  matter  in  fruitbodies;  70%  water  and  30%  dry
matter  in  sclerotia.
Comments:  This  species  is  most  remarkable  for  its  early  formation  of sclerotia—only  three  weeks
after inoculation  onto rye grass seed.  Heim and Wasson  (1 958} considered sclerotia production  in
this species to be the most efficient method for the generation of biomass.  Optimum temperature for
sclerotia production was reported to be at 70-75 °F.  in darkness. Sclerotia on agar media peaked at
4.5%  malt  concentration.  Heim  and  Wasson  also  found  fruitbody  production  was  maximized  on
agar  media when  the  percentage  of  malt was  balanced  to  .45%.  Nevertheless,  sclerotia  form  best
on  rye grass seed incubated in total darkness.
For  further  information  consult:

"Les Champignons Hallucinogenes du Mexique" by R. Heim and R. G. Wasson, 1958. Edi-

tions  du  Museum  National  D'Histoire  Naturelle,  Paris.
See  Color  Photographs  2  and  13.

Growing Parameters for Various Mushroom Species/207

SPECIES:  Psilocybe  tampanensis  Guzman  and  Pollock

Figure  169  Sclerotia  of  Psilocybe  tampanensis  harvested  from
one cup  of  rye  grass seed  six months after  inoculation.

208/The Mushroom Cultivator

STRAINS:  Pollock  Strain.
COMMON  NAMES:  The  Tampa  Psilocybe;  Pollock's  Psilocybe.  Sclerotia  are  called  The  New
Age  Philosopher's  Stone  or  Cosmic  Comote.
GREEK  ROOT:  Psilocybe  comes  from  the  Greek  "psilos"  or  bald  head.  The  species  name
tampenensis  denotes  the  city  near which  this  mushroom  was first  collected.
GENERAL  DESCRIPTION:  Cap  convex  to  subumbonate,  soon  broadly  convex  to  plane.  The
surface is smooth and the color is ochraceous brown to straw brown to grey brown. The gills are ad-
nately  attached,  dark  violet  brown  with  whitish  edges.  The  stem  is  20-60  mm.  long  by  3-5  mm.
thick,  fibrous and enlarged towards the base.  The stem surface is smooth to powdered (pruinose)
and  its  color  is  yellowish  brown  to  reddish  brown  overall,  with  whitish  to  bluish  mycelium  at  or
around  the  base.  Its  spores  are  dark  purplish  brown  in  mass.
NATURAL  HABITAT: Solitary to scattered in  sandy soils and meadows in  Florida (near the city of
Tampa).  This species is known only from the type locality where one wild specimen was collected.

GROWTH  PARAMETERS

Mycelial Types:  Finely linear to cottony; tan to brownish in color, often  multicolored with brownish
hues.
Spawn  Media:  Annual  rye  grass  seed,  wheat  grass  seed  or  rye  grain.
Fruiting  Substrate:  Cased  rye  grass  seed  (and  possibly  rye  grain);  leached  cow  manure;  some
potting  soils;  and  enriched  malt agar  media.  This  species will  probably  fruit  on  cased  pasteurized
wheat straw.
Method  of  Preparation:  Rye  grass  seed  combined  with  water  in  a  2:1  volumetric  proportion,
preferably soaked overnight. Sterilize for 1  hour at 15 psi. Wheat straw is pasteurized in a hot water
bath  at  160-170°F.  for  20  minutes.
Spawn  Run:

Relative  Humidity:  90 + %.
Substrate  temperature:  75-81  °F.
Duration:  10-14  days.
CO2:  10,000  ppm  or higher.
Fresh  Air Exchanges:  0  per  hour.

Type of Casing: Standard peat based casing whose preparation is described in Chapter VIII. Layer
to a depth of  '/2  to  1  inch.
Post  Casing/Pre-pinning:

Substrate  temperature:  75-81  °F.
Relative  humidity:  90 + %.
CO2-  10,000 ppm or above.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  0  per  hour.

Growing  Parameters  for  Various  Mushroom  Species/209

Light:  Incubation  in  darkness.

Primordia  Formation:

Relative  Humidify:  85-92%.
Air Temperature: 71-74°F.
C02:  5000 ppm or below.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  2  per  hour.
Light requirements:  Diffuse  natural  or grow-lights for  12  hours/day.

Cropping:

Relative  humidity:  85-92%.
Air  Temperature:  71-74°F.
COz-  5000  ppm  or below.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  2  per  hour.
Harvest Stage:  When  the  caps  become  nearly  plane.
Light  requirements:  Diffuse  natural  or  grow-lights  for  12  hours/day.

Yield  Potential:  A  petite  species,  Psilocybe  tampanensis  is  noted  for  its  sclerotia  forming  ability,
approximately  10-30 grams (wet weight) per cup of rye grass seed over  12 weeks.  Because of the
small  stature  of  the  fruitbody,  one should  expect  low  yields  per square  foot  in  comparison  to  other
more  fleshy  species  of  Psilocybe.
Moisture Content: 90-92% water and 8-10% dry matter in fruitbodies; 70% water and 30% dry
matter  in  sclerotia.
Comments:  This  mushroom  would  not  be  known  but  for  a  single  specimen  collected  by  Steven
Pollock and Gary  Lincoff in  September of  1977.  Cultures Taken from  this wild specimen were mar-
keted  by  Hidden  Creek  Inc.  under the  name of the  "Cosmic Comote".

Sclerotia  do  not form  until  the fourth week  (typically six to eight weeks)  after inoculation  of rye
grass seed. To encourage sclerotia production only, incubate mycelia on rye grass seed at 75 °F.  in
complete darkness.
For  further  information  consult:

"Magic  Mushroom  Cultivation"  by  Steven  H.  Pollock,  1977.  Herbal  Medicine  Research

Foundation,  San  Antonio,  Texas  (out  of  print).
See  Color  Photographs  4,  14  and  15.

210/The Mushroom Cultivator

SPECIES:  Stropharia  rugoso-annulata  Farlow  apud  Murrill

=  Stropharia  fer'il  Bresadola
=  Naematoloma fern (Bres.) Singer

Figure  170  Young  fruitbodies  of Stropharia  rugoso-annulata  fruiting  on  pasteurized
straw cased with  peat.

STRAINS:  Gartenriese

Winnetou
Gelbschopf

The above listed strains are of European origin. Many strains of this species are available from
culture  banks,  including  those  maintained  by  the  American  Type  Culture  Collection  and
Pennsylvania State Buckhout Laboratory. Strains are easy to obtain from the spores and tissue of
wild specimens.
COMMON  NAMES:  The  Wine  Red  Stropharia;  The  Giant  Stropharia.
LATIN  ROOT:  Stropharia means  "sword  belt",  so  named for the belt-like ring  on  the stem. The
species epithet rugoso-annulata comes from the combination of two Latin words: "rugosus" mean-
ing  wrinkled  and  "annulus"  or  ring.

Growing Parameters for Various Mushroom Species/211

Figure  171  Buttons  of  Stropharia  rugoso-annulata
fruiting  outdoors  in  a  bed  of  wood  chips.

GENERAL  DESCRIPTION:  A  large,  thick  fleshed  mushroom  with  a  broadly convex  cap  measur-
ing  50-400  mm.  in  diameter,  darkly  pigrnented  yellowish  brown  with  distinct  reddish  tones.  The
partial veil is thick, membranous, leaving a persistent membranous ring on the stem on whose up-
persides are tiers of gills. The stem is whitish and has rhizomorphs attached to its base. Its spores are
dark  purplish  brown  in  mass.
NATURAL  HABITAT:  Occurring  in  gardens,  in  wood  chips,  on  decomposing  straw,  in  sawdust
enriched soils and commonly in  grounds where  potatoes have been  planted.

GROWTH  PARAMETERS
Mycelial  Types:  Rhizomorphic to closely linear;  whitish  in  color.
Standard  Spawn  Media:  Rye grain  or chopped wheat straw.
Fruiting  Substrates: Cased wheat straw, whole or chopped, and balanced to a 71 -74%  moisture
content. This species has been grown on a substrate of alder/maple chips mixed with mature horse
manure using natural culture techniques.

212/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

Method  of  Preparation:  Either chopped or whole straw  is adequate,  although  permeation  is more
rapid on the former.  (See Chapter VI on preparation of straw as a fruiting substrate).  Pasteurization
is  achieved  through  the  submersion  of  straw  into  a  hot water  bath  at  a  temperature  of  160°F.  for
20-30  minutes.  The  straw,  once  pasteurized  and  inoculated,  should  be  compacted  and  filled  to  a
depth  of 6-12  inches.  Gramss(1979)  noted  That wheat straw supplemented with  25%  Fagus saw-
dust enhanced yields.  Watling (1980)  reported, without elaboration, that fruitbodies form on a saw-
dust  based  medium.  This species also  fruits on  unpasteurized  straw  although  problems with  insect
pests  and  competitor  molds  are  more  pronounced.
Spawn  Run:

Relative  Humidity:  90  +  %>.
Substrate  Temperature:  76-82 °F.  Thermal  death  limits  have  been  reported  as  low  as 90 DF.
and -5°F.
Duration:  2-4  weeks.
CO2:  5000-10,000  ppm.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  0  per  hour.

Type  of Casing:  After fully  run,  cover with  peat/humus  (1:1}  casing.  Optimally,  the casing  should
have a  pH  of 5.7-6.0.  (Because calcium  based  buffers inhibit fruiting,  adjust the  casing's  pH  by  in-
creasing or decreasing amount of peat). Balance to a 70-75% moisture content. Layer to a depth of
1-2  inches.  Humus  should  be  pasteurized  to  kill  nematodes,  mites,  and  other  parasites.  Some
strains  form  fruitbodies  solely  on  a  peat  casing.  (Mushrooms  do  not  form,  however,  on  sterilized
casing.  Hence,  if the  casing  must  be  treated,  steam  pasteurization  is  recommended).
Post  Casing/Prepinning:

Relative  Humidify:  90 + %.
Bed Temperature: 76-82 °F.
Duration  of Case  Run:  10-12  days.
C02: 5000-10,000 ppm.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  0  per  hour.
Light:  Incubation  in  darkness.

Primordia  Formation:

Relative  Humidify:  95 + %.
Air  Temperature:  55-62 °F.
CO2:  less  than  1000  ppm.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  2-4  per  hour.
Watering:  Regular  misting  (once  to  twice  daily)  to  help  stimulate  primordia  formation.
Light:  Indirect  natural  or  exposure  to  grow-lux  type  fluorescent  for  12  hours/day.

Cropping:

Relative  Humidify:  85-92%.

Crowing  Parameters  for  Various  Mushroom  Species/213

Air  Temperature:  55-62 °F.
C02-  less  than  1000  pprn.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  2-4  per  hour.
Flushing  Interval:  Every  10-15  days.
Harvest Stage:  Directly  before  or as the  partial  veil  tears.  (Note that young  mushrooms  have a
much  better  flavor  than  mature  ones).
Light:  Indirect  natural  or  exposure  to  grow-lux  type  fluorescent  for  12  hours/day.

Yield  Potential:  Average  commercial  yields  are  2-3  Ibs./sq.ft.  over  a  8  week  cropping  period.
Maximum  yields  are  nearly  6  Ibs  per  square  foot.
Moisture  Content  of  Mushrooms:  92%  water;  8%  dry  matter.

Nutritional  Content:  22%  protein  (dry  weight);  34  milligrams  of  niacin  per  100  grams  dry
weight.
Comments:  A  mushroom  recently  cultivated  in  Europe  (Germany,  Czechoslovakia  and  Poland)
by  home  growers  in  outdoor  cold  frames,  The  status  of  knowledge  regarding  the  optimum  growing
parameters for this species remains in its infancy.  For instance, Szudyga (1978)  noted that fruitbod-
ies form just as well  at 50 °F.  and 68 °F.,  a  considerable  fruiting  range  for  any  species.

After the cropping period ends,  the spent straw is used as fodder for farm animals or is saved for
future  inoculations.  The  strain  is  kept  kept  alive  by  continous  transfer  onto fresh  substrates.  (See
Chapter VI  on  natural culture).  Propagating spawn  in this way,  however,  is less assured than sterile
methods.

Stanek  (1974)  reported  that the  introduction  of several  thermotolerant endospore-forming  bac-
teria of the genus Bacillus (B.  subtilus,  B.  meseatericus and B.  macerans) to the  casing  not only in-
hibited  attacks  by  competitors  but  also  stimulated  mycelial  growth  which  presumably  would  en-
hance yields.  Endospores of these bacteria survive pasteurization but not sterilization,  and are abun-
dant  in  soils.  This  discovery  may  explain  why  sterilized  casings  do  not  produce  fruitbodies,
Genetic  Characteristics:  Basidia  tetrapolar  (4-spored),  forming  haploid  spores;  heterothallic.
Clamp  connections  are  present.  See  Chapter  XV.
For  further  information  consult:

K.  Szudyga,  1978.  "Stropharia  rugoso-annulata"  in  The  Biology  and  Cultivation  of  Edible

Mushrooms  ed.  by  ST.  Chang  and  W.A.  Hayes.  Academic  Press,  New  York.

214/The Mushroom Cultivator

SPECIES:  Volvariella volvacea (Bull, ex Fr.) Sing.
STRAINS:  Many  strains  of  V.  volvacea  are  available  from  commercial  and  private  stocks.  The
American  Type  Culture  Collection,  which  sells cultures To  educational  organizations and  research
facilities, has stock cultures of several wild and domesticated strains. Several commercial companies
also  sell  strains  of this  species.
COMMON  NAMES:  The  Paddy  Straw  Mushroom;  The  Chinese  Mushroom.
LATIN  ROOT:  Volvariella  is  the  conjunction  of  two  words:  "volvatus"  which  means  having  a
volva  or  cup-like  sheath  and  the  suffix  "-cllus"  denoting  smallness  in  size.  The  species  name
volvacea shares  the  same  root as the  genus.
GENERAL  DESCRIPTION:  Mushrooms whitish  at first,  becoming  a  dark tan  as The veil tears and
eventually a pale tan with age.  Fruitbodies are relatively small when young, enveloped by a sheath-
like universal veil, soon  breaking as the fruitbodies mature and leaving an  irregular cup-like sack at
the base of the stem. The cap is egg shaped at first, soon hemispherical To convex and expanding To
plane  with  age.  Its  spores  are  pinkish  to  pinkish  brown  in  mass.
NATURAL  HABITAT:  Commonly  occurring  in  decomposing  straw  in  the  Orient  and  in  other
subtropical  regions  of  the  world.

GROWTH PARAMETERS

Mycelial  Types:  Fast  growing  rhizomorphic  to  slow  cottony  mycelia  noted.  The  color  is  typically
white  to  grayish  white.
Spawn  Medium:  Rice  straw  or  rye  grain.  See  Chapter  III.
Fruiting  Substrate  and  Method  of  Preparation:  Traditionally  grown  on  rice  straw that  has  been
composted for  1-2  days.  More recently Hu (1974) found that a mixture of cotton wastes supple-
mented  with  wheat  bran  and  calcium  carbonate  (5%  and  5-6%  by weight,  respectively)  and com-
posted for 3  days,  pasteurized for 2  hours at  140 °  F., conditioned for 8  hours at 125° F.  and then
gradually  lowered to 77 °F.  over a 8-12  hour period,  produced a  higher yielding substrate than  that
of  others  previously  used.  A  moisture  content  of 65-70%  is  recommended  for rice  straw and  70%
for  cotton  waste  mixtures.  Chang  (1978)  recommended  a  combination  of  the  two—with  the  rice
straw/cotton  waste  in  a  proportion  of  2:1  or  1:1  by  weight.
Spawn  Run:

Relative  Humidity:  90 + %.
Substrate  Temperature:  Fastest  growth  at  88-95 °F.
Duration:  4-6  days  for  thorough  colonization.
CO2: 5000-10.000 ppm.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  0  per  hour.
Light  Requirements:  Incubation  in  total  darkness.

Type  of Casing:  None needed.

Growing Parameters for Various Mushroom Species/215

Pinhead  Initiation:

Relative  Humidify:  95  + %.
Air  Temperature:  82-88  °F.
Duration:  4  days.
C02:  less  than  1000  ppm.
Fresh  Air  Exchanges:  2-4  per  hour.
Light:  Diffuse  natural  or  direct  grow-light  fluorescent  for  12-18  hours  per  day.
Watering:  Regular  misting  once  to twice  daiiy.

Cropping:

Relative  Humidify:  85-92%.
Air  Temperature:  82-88  °F.
Duration:  5-7  weeks.
C02:  less  than  600  ppm.
Fresh Air Exchanges: 2-4 per hour or sufficient to meet CO2  and/or cooling  requirements.
Harvest Stage:  Directly  before  rupturing  of  the  universal  veil.
Flushing Intervals: 5-10  days.
Light:  Same  as  above.
Watering: Regular misting to prevent caps from cracking and to keep resting pinheads viable.
Yield  Potential:  Average commercial  yields  on  rice  straw are  22-28  kilograms  of fresh  mush-
rooms  per  100  kilograms  of  dry  straw.  Optimum  yields  on  cotton  waste  compost  are  25-35
kilograms  per  100  kilograms  of  substrate.  Maximum  yields  are  nearly  45  kilograms  on  cotton
waste compost.
Moisture  Content  of  Mushrooms:  88-90%  water;  10-12%  dry  matter.
Nutritional Content: Crude protein  is reported at 21.2 %  of dry weight; 91  milligrams of niacin
per  1 00  grams  dry  weight.
Comments:  In  contrast to  other species  growing  on  straw,  this  mushroom  does  not  compare  fa-
vorably  in  terms  of yield.  The smaller crop figures are probably a  result of the  early  picking of the
mushroom  fruitbodies,  when  they  are  most  flavorful.

Several researchers have noted the difficulty of maintaining high yielding strains of this species
for any  length  of time.  Its  mycelium  seems to  have  a  limited  transfer  potential  and  should  be  stored
at moderate temperatures  (50  °F.).  Cultures are  frequently  renewed  through  multispore  germina-
tions.

Volvariella  volvacea  is  primarily  grown  in  the  Orient  and  is  a  warmth  loving  mushroom.

Genetic  Characteristics:  Basidia  tetrapolar,  producing  4  haploid  spores;  primary  homothallic.
Clamp  connections  are  present.  Chlamydospores  form.  See  Chapter  XV.
For more information  consult:

ST.  Chang,  1972.  "The  Chinese  Mushroom  (Volvariella  volvacea):  Morphology,  Cytology,

216/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

Genetics,  Nutrition  and  Cultivation"  The  Chinese  University  of  Hong  Kong,  Hong  Kong.

S.T.  Chang,  1 978.  'Volvariella  volvacea"  in  The  Biology and  Cultivation  of Edible  Mush-

rooms,  pp.  573-603.  Academic  Press.  New  York.

Cultivation  Problems and Their Solutions/217

CHAPTER XII

CULTIVATION PROBLEMS
AND THEIR SOLUTIONS:

A TROUBLE-SHOOTING GUIDE

Figure 172a,b,c,d. The results of bacterial contamination.

218/The Mushroom Cultivator

Many first-time cultivators fail to grow mushrooms for the simplest of reasons. Often times the

slightest error in technique sets into motion a series of events that drastically influence the out-
come  of the  crop.  Whenever  conducting  sterile  technique,  making  spawn,  preparing  compost or
cropping mushrooms, wise cultivators follow a routine that has proven successful in the past. Once
a  consistent  methodology  has been  established,  new variations are  introduced,  one at a time,  to
gauge their effect.

Problems intrinsic to mushroom  culture have been  encountered by most everyone attempting
to  grow  mushrooms.  The following trouble-shooting  guide  lists problems,  causes and  solutions ac-
cording  to  their  frequency  of  occurence  and  has  been  organized  into  five  categories:

1.  Sterile Technique:  media  (agar and  grain)  preparation,  spore  germination,  tissue  culture

and  spawn-making.

2.  Compost  Preparation:  raw  materials,  characteristics  of  composts  at  differents  stages,

Phase I  and Phase  II.

3.  Spawn  Running:  colonization  of  compost  and  bulk  substrates.
4.  Case  Running:  application,  colonization  by  mycelium,  pre-pinning  strategy.
5.  Mushroom  Formation  and  Development (Pinning to Cropping):  strategy for pinhead

formation,  maturation  and  harvesting.

Identify the problem, locate it on the list, read its possible causes, refer to the solutions availa-
ble, and if indicated, turn to the chapter noted in parentheses. Good luck, pay attention to detail and
may  your  problems  be  few.

Cultivation  Problems  and  Their  Solutions/219

STERILE  TECHNIQUE

PROBLEM 

CAUSE 

SOLUTION

Agar Culture
Media  fails to  solidify. 

Insufficient  quantity  of agar  or  Thoroughly  mix  media  before
distribution  thereof. 

pouring,

Media  boils  out  of  vessel  or 
flask  containing  it. 

Excessive  escape  of steam 
from  pressure  cooker. 

Do  not  vent  pressure  cooker

until  reaching  1  psi.
Crease  pressure  cooker seals
with  thin  film  of  petroleum  jel-
ly.
For  pressure  cookers  using  5.
10,  15  Ib  weights,  do  not
operate so  steam  escapes.

Contamination  occurs  in  petri 
dishes  after  pouring  media 
but  before  inoculation.

High  contaminant  spore  load 
in  lab. 

Clean,  paint  lab.  Install  lami-
nar  flow  hood,

Improper  media  preparation 
technique. 

Contaminated  pressure 
cooker  (bacteria). 

Allow  pressure  cooker  to  cool
in  sterile  setting  before  open-
ing.
Sterilize  pressure  cooker  for
24-48  hours  at  15  psi.

No  growth  from  spores  or  tis-  Wrong  type  of  media. 
sue  transferred. 

Wrong pH 

See  media  preparation.
See media  preparation

Old  or  dehydrated  spores. 

Scalpel  or loop too  hot. 

Sugar  in  media  caramelized. 

Soak  in  sterilized  water  for
12-24  hours.
Cool  tool  before  contacting
spores  or  tissue.
Lower  sterilization  pressure
and temp, to recommended
levels.

220/The Mushroom Cultivator

PROBLEM 

CAUSE 

SOLUTION

Contamination  occurs  around 
point  of transfer  onto  agar 
media. 

Inoculum  (spores  or  tissue) 
contaminated. 

Inoculation  tools  not  sterile. 

Rhizomophic  mycelia  be- 
comes  cottony,  slow  growing. 
Fruitings  diminish.  Strain  ap- 
pears to  be  degenerating.

Senescence,  strain  aging. 

Obtain  "cleaner"  spores  or
take  a  tissue  culture  from  a
fresher  specimen,  or  inoculate
as many  plates as  possible,
saving  only those  not becom-
ing  contaminated.
Autoclave  tools,  soak  in  alco-
hol,  flame  sterilize  before  us-
ing.

Retrieve  stock  cultures and  re-
activate  a  strain  of  known
vigor.

Alternate media so that gene
expression  is not selected by
a  limited  chemical  matrix.
Mutating.  Sugar  in  media  car-  Cook  agar  media  at  lower
amelized.  Media  containing 
mutagens. 
Insufficient jelling  agent  caus- 
ing  mycelium  to  grow  subsur-  mix  media  before  pouring
facely  and  appear  cottony. 

temp,  and  pressure,  between
12  and  15  psi.
Add  more  agar  or  thoroughly

petri  dishes.

Grain  Culture
Glass spawn jars  broken 
when  pressure  cooker  is 
opened. 

Pressure  cooker cooled  too 
rapidly.  Change  in  temp,  too 
abrupt.
Jars too tightly  packed. 

Jars  defective  or cracked. 

Wrong  type  of jars. 

Allow cooker to descend  to
room  temp,  gradually,

Allow space so jars  can  ex-
pand.
Check  for  cracks  or  defects.
Obtain  new jars.
Replace  with  canning  or  auto-
clavable type.

PROBLEM 

CAUSE 

SOLUTION

Cultivation  Problems and Their Solutions/221

Grain  jars  difficult  to  shake. 

Too  much  grain  in  container. 

Too  much  water  relative  to 
grain. 
Measuring  cups  not  accurate. 

Grain  "spontaneously"  con- 
taminates  before  inoculating 
or  opening  pressure  cooker. 

Introduction  of  alien  spores 
upon  cooling. 

Survival  of  bacterial  endo- 
spores  despite  autoclaving. 

Agar wedge  sticks to glass 
when  grain  jar  is  shaken. 

Agar media too  thin,  either 
from  evaporation  or  from 
shallow  pouring. 

Little  or  no  growth  after  my- 
celial  wedge  has  been  trans- 

Grain  too  hot  when  inocu- 
lated. 
Grain  too  dry. 

Mycelium  not  evenly  distrib- 
uted. 

Incubated  at  wrong  tempera- 
ture. 

pH  wrong. 

Wrong  spawn  medium. 

Reduce  grain  to  recom-
mended  levels.
Follow  recommended  for-
mulas.
Calibrate  measuring  cups  with
a  graduated  cylinder.

Cool-down  in  sterile  environ-
ment  or  in  front  of  laminar
flow  hood.

Replace  source  of  grain  or
presoak  grain  for  24  hours
before autoclaving.

Use  mycelium  covered  media

before  substantial  evaporation
occurs.  Pour  more  media  into
each  petri  dish  initially.

Allow  to  cool  to  room  tem-
perature  before  inoculating.
Balance  according  to  recom-
mended  recipes.
Vigorously  shake  spawn  jar
after  transfer  of  agar  wedge
and  again  3-5  days after inoc-
ulation.
See  recommended  spawn  in-
cubation  temperatures  in
Chap.  XI.
Buffer  with  calcium  carbonate
according To  species  being
cultured.
Use  media  recommended  for
that species.

222/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

PROBLEM 

CAUSE 

SOLUTION

Poor  strain. 

Contaminated  strain. 

No  growth  on  grain  after  in- 
oculated  with  liquid  cul- 
ture/stirrer  technique. 

Too  many  individual  hyphae 
(cells)  severed. 

Bacteria, 

Poor  strain. 

pH 

Water  too  hot. 

Contamination  after  transfer  of  High  contaminant  spore 
mycelium. 

count  in  laboratory. 

Tools  not  sterile. 

Mycelium  being  transferred 
has  high  resident  load  of  con- 
taminant  spores.

Mycelium  fails  to  grow  out 
through  entire  spawn  jar. 

Insufficient  shaking  of  grain 
after  inoculation. 

Discard  strain.  Obtain  purer
strain,  make  up  more  grain
media  and  clean  laboratory.

Stirred  for  too  long.  No  more
than  5  seconds  is  recom-
mend  for  high  speed  labora-
tory-type  blenders  to  produce
fragmented chains of hyphae.

Replace  mycelia  with  pure
strain,  free  of bacteria.  Be
sure tools and water are ster-
ile  before  inoculation.
Cottony  type  mycelia  is  slow
growing.  Replace with  rhizo-
morphic  or  faster  growing
strain.
Follow  recommended  recipes.
See  Chap.  II.
Allow to  cool  before  inoculat-
ing.

Clean  lab  before  inoculations,
Maintain  high  standards of
hygiene.
Autoclave  tools,  soak  in  alco-
hol,  flame sterilize before in-
oculation.
Obtain  cleaner  strain  or
spawn  of better  purity,

Thorough  shaking  after  dou-
ble-wedge  transfer,  combined
with re-shaking four days after
inoculation.

PROBLEM 

CAUSE 

SOLUTION

Cultivation  Problems  and  Their  Solutions/223

Mycelium  inhibited  by  con- 
tamination  (usually  bacteria). 
Externally or  internally  intro- 
duced. 

Inoculate  more  sterilized  grain
using a  pure  strain  and fol-
lowing  standard  practices for
doing  so.  See  Chap.  II.

Top  kernels  in  spawn jar  not 
colonized  by  mycelium. 

Top  kernels  dehydrated  from 
excessive  evaporation. 

Spawn jar discolored  with  yel-  Spawn  jar  incubated  for  an 
lowish  droplets  of fluid. 

overly  long  period  of  time,  at 
higher  than  optimum  temper- 
atures,  or  both,  causing  the 
exudation of metabolites
("sweat")  and  the  build-up  of
fluids  in  which  bacteria  thrive.

If  using  porous  filter  discs,
limit  evaporation.  Or  use  only
in  conjunction  with  narrow
mouthed  jars.

Incubate  at  temperature  and
for  period  of  time
recommended  for  species
being  cultivated,

COMPOST PREPARATION

Phase  1
Compost  does  not  heat  up, 
remains  under  140°F. 

Undersupplemented. 

Pile  too  open,  airy. 

Moisture  content  too  high  or 
low.
Insufficient  pile  mass. 

Compost  generates  no  am- 
rnonia. 

Undersupplemented. 

Check  compost  formula,
Check  Nitrogen  content  of
raw  materials.
Compress  pile  sides.  Protect
pile  from  strong  winds.
Balance  moisture  to  70%.

Increase total  raw  materials.

Check  compost  formula  cal-
culations.  Check  Nitrogen
content of raw  materials.

224/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

PROBLEM 

CAUSE 

SOLUTION

Compost  anaerobic. 

Compost  decomposing  un- 
evenly. 

Moisture  content  too  high. 
Straw  too  short;  pile  too 
dense, 

Pile  sitting  too  long  between 
turns.

Balance  moisture  to  70%.
Carefully  monitor  raw  materi-
als  and  adjust  pile  size  as  ma-
terials compact.
Turn  more  frequently,

Improper  turning  procedures.  Move  inside  of  pile  To  outside

Variable  starting  materials. 

Compost  greasy. 

Gypsum  quantity  too  low. 
Starting  materials too old. 

and  vice  versa.
Horse  manure  or  straw
should  all  be  in  the  same
state  of  decomposition  at  the
start  of  composting.

Add  more  gypsurn.
Use only fresh,  undecom-
posed starting  materials.

Compost  too  wet  or  too  dry 
at  filling. 

Incorrect  water  addition  or 
timing. 

Check  moisture  content  of
pile  before  each  Turn.

Straws  still  bright  and  shiny  at  Phase  1  too  short. 
filling.

Continue  composting,

Compost  short  and  black  at 
filling.

Phase II
Compost  will  not  heat  up. 

Phase  1  too  long. 

Shorten  Phase  1.

Supplementation  rates  too 
low, 
Compost  too  mature. 
Oversupply  of  fresh  air. 
Air  to  bed  ratio  too  great. 

Compost  too  wet. 

Check  compost formula  cal-
culations.
Shorten  Phase  1.
Reduce  fresh  air  supply.
Add  more  beds or trays and
fill  with  more  compost.
Compost  should  be  70%  at
filling.

PROBLEM 

CAUSE 

SOLUTION

Cultivation  Problems and Their Solutions/225

Compost temperature  erratic. 

Irregular fresh  air supply. 

Fresh  air supply  should  be
constant.  Make volume
changes  slowly  and  as  needed
to stablize temp.

Room  environment  not  moni-  Check  room  every  4-6  hours,
tored enough.

Compost temperature  un- 
even. 

Containers filled  unevenly. 

Uneven  supplement distribu- 
tion  in  Phase  1. 

Faulty air system  design. 

Fill  all  containers with  equal
amounts  of compost  and  to
the same depth.
Be  sure  supplements  are
evenly  mixed  and  are  not
concentrated  in  small  pockets.
Air system  should  insure  even
temp,  throughout  the  room.

Compost  temp,  too  high  after 
pasteurization. 

Inadequate  supply  of fresh  air. 

Increase  fresh  air.

Pasteurization  too  long. 

Pasteurize  for  2  hours  at
140°F.

Compost temp,  drops too  low  Prolonged  fresh  air supply. 
after  pasteurization. 

Pasteurize  at  a  lower  temp. 
for  more  time. 

Anticipate drop  in  compost
temp,  and  reduce  fresh  air
before  reaching  conditioning
temp.
Low  temperatures  preserve
more  microorganisms  that
prevent  temp,  from  falling
rapidly.

Prolonged  ammonification. 

Oversupplementation  with 
nitrogen.
Prolonged time at temp,  over  Keep  temp,  under  130° after
130°F. 

Reduce  nitrogen  supplements,

pasteurization.
Use  low temp,  ranges during
conditioning.

226/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

PROBLEM 

CAUSE 

SOLUTION

SPAWN  RUNNING

Spawn  grows slowly  or  not  at 
all. 

Inferior  spawn. 

Degenerative  or  inviable 
strain. 

Check  spawn  making  proce-

dures.  Review  strain  storage
methods.  Test  strain  purity  by
inoculating  agar plates.
Always  test  untried  strains  in
"miniculture"  trials  prior  to
inoculation  into bulk
substrates.  Switch  to  a  strain
of  known  viability.

Residual  ammonia  in  com- 
post. 

Improper  Phase  1  or  Phase  11. 
Substrate  moisture  content 
too  high. 

Fly or nematode  infestation. 

Mycelium  lacks  oxygen. 

Prolong  Phase  II  conditioning
until  litmus  paper  test  shows
no color change.
Review  composting  section.
Compost  should  be  64-66%
water;  straw  should  be
70-75% at spawning.
Check  pasteurization  time and
temperature.
Be  sure  the  container  has
provisions  for  air  exchange.

Improper  Phase  1  or  Phase  II.  Review  composting  section,

Check  contamination  section
for  identification  and  factors
predisposing to  mold  growth.

Prolong  Phase  II  conditioning
until  litmus  paper  test  shows
no  change.

Molds  present  during  spawn 
run. 

Inky  Caps  (Coprinus  sp.)  oc- 
cur  during  spawn  run. 

Residual  ammonia  in  com- 
post. 

Mites  or  nematodes  present. 

Insufficient  pasteurization. 
Compost  with  dense  overwet 
areas. 
Unclean  substrate  containers 
or spawning tools. 

Pasteurize  2  hrs.  at  140°  F.
Review  composting  and  filling
procedures.
Containers  and  tools  should
be  disinfected  before  use.

228/The Mushroom Cultivator

PROBLEM 

CAUSE 

SOLUTION

Mycelium  covers  the  casing 
but  forms  few  primordia. 

''Overlay"  caused  by  pro- 
longed  mycelial  growth  into 
the  casing  layer. 

Patch  the  casing.  Begin  initia-
tion  sequence  sooner.  If  deal-
ing  with  a  slow  pinning  strain
be careful that the evaporation
rate  off  the  casing  surface  is
not  excessive.

Mycelium  overlays  the  casing 
and then  "mats",  becoming 
flattened  and  impervious  to 
water.  No  primordia  form. 

Improper  watering  and/or  too 
low  humidity  in  the external 
environment.  Evaporation  rate  Reduce  evaporation  rate.  If
too  extreme. 

Scratch  and/or  re-case.  Main-
tain  95%  humidity at pinning,

watering,  mist  lightly  and
evenly.

Mycelium  runs  through  the 
casing  and  Then  disappears. 

Die  Back  Disease  (Virus). 

Dense  white  matted  zones 
form  on  casing. 

Stroma. 

Discard  and  begin  anew  with
a  virus-free  strain.  See  Chap.
XIII.
Select  strains  not  predisposed
to  stroma  formation  (those
without fluffy  sectors}.  Reduce
C02.

Contaminant  (Scopulariopsis).  pH  too  high.  Compost  im-

properly  prepared.  See  Chap-
ters  V,  XIII.

Cultivation  Problems  and  Their  Solutions/229

MUSHROOM  FORMATION  AND  DEVELOPMENT

CAUSE 

SOLUTION

PROBLEM 
Pinhead  Initiation
Mycelium  fails to  form  pri- 
rnorcfia. 

Monokaryotic  strain  with  low 
or  no  fruiting  ability. 

Humidity  too  low. 

CO2  too  high. 

Temperature  too  high. 

Insufficient  light. 

Start again  with  new tissue
isolate  or  isolate  from  multi-
spore  germination,
Keep  humidity  at  95%  during
pinning.
Reduce  C02  by  introducing
fresh  air.
Decrease  air  Temp,  to  the
fruiting range.
Illuminate  cropping  surface
for  12  hours/day.

Apply  casing  at  an  even
depth and patch areas where
mycelium  appears premature-
ly.
Incubate  culture  in  darkness
until  ready  to  pin.
Incubate  at  optimum  temp,
for  mycelial  growth  and  then
drop  temp,  for  pinning.
Maintain  airtight  room  and  re-
circulate  air  until  ready to  pin.

Patch  shallow areas  as  myce-
lium  appears  until  growth  is
even.
Water  casing  evenly and  care-
fully.
Keep casing  surface open  and
porous  through  proper  mist-
ing techniques.

Primordia  form  early. 

Uneven  casing  depth. 

Early  light  stimulation. 

Temperature  too  low. 

C02  levels  too  low. 

Primordia  formation  uneven. 

Uneven  casing  depth. 

Uneven  moisture  in  casing. 

Casing  surface  partially  dam- 
aged  from  heavy  watering. 

Uneven  environmental  condi-  Review air  system  design,
tions  within  the  growing
room.

230/The Mushroom Cultivator

PROBLEM 

CAUSE 

SOLUTION

Pinheads  fail  to  form  abun- 
dantly. 

Casing  layer  moisture  too  low  Adjust  moisture  level  in
or  too  high. 

casing  to  70-75%  for
pinhead  formation.

Casing  layer  pH  imbalanced. 

Magnesium  in  limestone  buf- 
fer too  high  (above  2%). 

C02  too  high. 

Insufficient light. 

Improper  pinhead  initiation 
strategy.
Defective  strain. 

Nematode  infestation. 

Pinheads form  but fail  to  ma- 
ture. 

Insufficient nutrient base. 

Excessive  C02  levels, 

Humidity  to  high. 
Insufficient fresh  air. 

Strain  idiosyncrasy. 

Adjust  pH  to  levels recom-
mended  in  Chap.  XI  for the
species being  cultivated.
Some  species are  inhibited  by
minerals  in  the  casing  layer,
especially the  magnesium  in
dolornitic  limestone.  Use  a
low  magnesium  lime,  less
than  2%.
Lower C02  to  recommended
levels.  (Some species fruit
poorly  in  high  C02  environ-
ments).
Photosensitive species require
several hours of light stimula-
tion  per  day  for  pinhead  for-
mation.
See  Chapter  IX.

Replace  with  strain  of  known
viability.
See  Chapter XIV.

Review substrate  materials
and  formulas.  Follow  those
that are recommended for the
species being cultivated.
Reduce C02  to  recom-
mended levels.
Reduce  humidity  to  85-92%.
Increase fresh  air  input  to  2-4
room  exchanges  per  hour.
Replace  with  a  strain  having
better  fruiting  calamities.

PROBLEM 

CAUSE 

SOLUTION

Cultivation  Problems  and  Their  Solutions/231

Fly,  nematode  or  other  con- 
taminant  inhibiting  develop- 
rnent. 

Excessive  loss  of  moisture 
from  casing. 

Review  contaminant  control
procedures.  Check  source
and  quality  of  casing  materi-
als.  Check  mixing  proce-
dures.
Maintain  sufficient moisture
(70-75%)  in  the  casing
through  daily  mistings  if re-
quired.

CROPPING

Low  yielding  first  flush. 

Poor  pin  set. 

Substrate  low  in  nutrients. 

Few  mushrooms  develop  ful- 
ly,  many  abort. 

Uneven  pinning. 

Lack  of  nutrients. 

Temperature  too  high. 

Parasitized  by  contaminant. 

Review  pinning  procedures
and  growing  parameters for
the species being  grown.
Review  substrate  materials
and formulas.
Remove  early  developing
pins.
Review  substrate  materials
and  formulas.
Maintain  air  temp,  within
cropping  range.
See  Chapters  X  and XIII.  Fol-
low procedures for encourag-
ing  cropping,  not  contamina-
tion.

Mushrooms  have  long  stems 
and  small  underdeveloped 
caps. 

Type 

CO2  too  high. 
Insufficient  lighting. 

Increase  fresh  air  input.
Evaluate  lighting  system  and

of 

light 

used.

232/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

PROBLEM 

CAUSE 

SOLUTION

Mushrooms develop  but ab- 
normally. 

Parasitized  by contaminant. 

Excessive  C02-  Improperly 
balanced  growing  environ- 
ment. 

Exposure  to  mutagenic  chern- 
icals  (insecticides,  detergents, 
chlorine, etc.)

Lack  of  adequate  light for 
fruitbody  development. 

Strain  idiosyncrasy. 

Eliminate stagnant air pockets
in  the  growing  environment.
See  Chap.  IV.
Lower C02  to  recommended
levels.  Maintain  air  circulation,
temp,  and  humidity  at  recom-
mended  levels.  See Chap.  X.
Limit  exposure  of  mushrooms
to  such  chemicals,

Increase  light  exposure  to  12
hours  per  day.  See  Chapters
IV  and  IX.
Switch  to  strain  of  known
fruiting ability.

The  Contaminants of  Mushroom  Culture/233

CHAPTER XIII

THE CONTAMINANTS OF

MUSHROOM  CULTURE

Figure  173  Sporulating structure of Aspergillus mold.

234/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

The contaminants are so named solely because they are undesired.  If one were trying to culture

Penicillium  and  spores  of  an  Agaricus  or  Psilocybe  settled  onto  the  agar  media  and  germi-
nated, the resulting mycelia would be the so-called "contaminant." The contaminants in mushroom
culture, however, are primarily molds, bacteria, viruses and insects. The pathway by which a disease
is introduced,  known as the vector of contamination,  can be used to trace the contaminant back to
its site  of origin  using simple deduction.  By observing  how a contaminant affects The mushroom
crop and  by  carefully  noting  the conditions in which  it flourishes,  a cultivator can soon  identify its
cause.

Earlier  in  the  book,  the five  most probable  vectors  of contamination  were  identified  as:
1.  The cultivator.
2.  the air.
3.  the substrate to be  inoculated.
4.  the mycelium  that was being transferred.
5.  the  inoculating  tools,  equipment,  containers,  facilities,  etc.

Different contaminants are associated with different stages of mushroom cultivation. Contami-
nants  in  agar culture  most often  come from  airborne spores.  Grain  cultures contaminate  from  air-
borne spores and from a source which many cultivators fail To idenTify: The grain used in spawn mak-
ing  which  is  laden  with  spores  of  imperfecl  fungi,  yeasts  and  bacteria.  (See  Ivanovich-Biserka,
1972).  In  compost  culture,  the  major  contributors  to  contamination  are  the  materials  used,  the
spawn,  the workers or The facilities.  This is not to say that contaminants can  not be introduced by
other means; these are the most probable sources of contamination given the cultivator has followed
generally  accepted  procedures  for  mushroom  culture.

Tracking  down  the  source  of contamination  is  not  difficult.  For  instance,  the  photographs be-
low show two media filled petri dishes contaminated with a Penicillium mold. Although the contam-
inant may be the same, the source of contamination is likely to be quite different. The plate in Fig.
174  has  a  mold  colony  growing  directly  beside  the  wedge  of  mycelium  that  was  transferred.  The
plate in  Fig.  1 75 shows contamination along the outer periphery.  Here is a clear example illustrat-
ing  how  contamination  spreads.

The  left plate became contaminated when  the  mycelium was transferred,  suggesting the mold
was associated with the previous culture.  The right petri dish contaminated from airborne spores
which  entered  as  the  culture  was  incubating,  judging  by  the  proximity of the  mold  colonies to the
outer  edge.  Air  movement  within  the  "sterile"  laboratory  most  likely  wafted  spores  towards  the
media plate and some penetrated the minute spaces between the lid and the base. Within the still air
environment of the petri  dish,  spores settled  nearest to their point of entry,  germinated and began
resporulating, soon to be visible as a green mold. One would, therefore, implement the measures of
control accordingly.

Often times the source of contamination is not obvious.  Beginners are at a particular disadvan-
tage because every contaminant they encounter is "new". With each crop, problems arise requiring
novel solutions. If a certain method of cultivation has been repeatedly successful in the past and sud-

The  Contaminants of  Mushroom  Culture/235

Figure  174  Penicillium  mold  near  to
transferred  wedge  of  mushroom  myceli-
urn.

Figure 175  Penicillium mold along outer
periphery  of  petri  dish.

denly  an  unfamiliar  contaminant  appears,  identifying  the  vector  can  be  much  more  difficult.  Only
when The cultivator can pinpoint the variables leading to the introduction of that contaminant can ap-
propriate counter-measures  be applied.  Frequently what seems to  be an  inconsequential  alteration
in  technique at  one  stage  leads to  a  radical  escalation  of the  contamination  rate  at  later  stages.

Since contamination  at any phase of cultivation  occurs for specific reasons,  the  contaminants
can  be the cultivator's most valuable guide for teaching one what NOT to do.  If the problem  causing
organism  is  identified  and  if  the  recommended  measures  of  control  are  carefully  followed,  a  con-
scientious cultivator will avoid those conditions predisposing to that one competitor and, incidental-
ly,  many others.  In effect, skill in mushroom culture is tantamount to skill in contamination control.
Molds and bacteria do not grow well in a climate specifically adjusted for mushrooms. Although
both  mushrooms and  contaminants  prefer humid conditions,  the  latter thrive in  prolonged  stagnant
air environments whereas  mushrooms do not.  The differences are frequently subtle—amounting  to
only a few percentage points in  relative  humidity and slight adjustments to the air intake dampers in
the growing room.

The  contaminants  can  be  divided  into  two  well  defined  groups.  Those  attacking  the  mush-
rooms  are  called  pathogens while Those  competing  for The  substraTe  are  labeled  indicators or
competitors.  (Mushroom  paThogens  are  either  molds,  bacferia,  viruses  or  pests;  indicators  are
always fungi of some sort).  In general,  mushroom  pathogens are not as numerous as the competitor
molds,  though  they  can  be  much  more  devastating.

Not all  molds and  bacteria  are  damaging  to  the  mushroom  crop.  To  the  contrary,  several  are
beneficial.  These  can  not  be  called  true  "contaminants"  since  cultivators  try  to  promote,  not hinder,

236/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

Figure  176  High magnification scanning electron micrograph  of Aspergillus spore be-
side  germinating  spore  of  Psilocybe  cubensis.

their growth. To the beginner,  however, they resemble real contaminants and therefore must be in-
cluded  in  this chapter.  Examples of yield  enhancing  organisms are  several  thermophilic fungi  and
bacteria,  including:

Humicola
Torula
Actinomyces
Streptomyces
Select  Pseudomonas  and  Bacillus  species

These  organisms  are  encouraged  during  the  preparation  of compost  or during  spawn  run  and  are
rarely  seen  in  agar  or  grain  culture.  Since  they  can  not  accurately  be  termed  contaminants,  the
aforementioned groups are  not in  the following  key though  they are fully discussed  in the ensuing
descriptions.

Fungi, bacteria and viruses can be roughly delimited according to their size. All but viruses can
be detected by the  home cultivator.  Viruses can  prevent fruiting, malform the mushroom fruitbody,
and expose the crop to further infestations from other pathogens. Since detecting viruses is beyond
the  means of home cultivators,  they  have also  been  excluded from  this  key.

The  Contaminants  of  Mushroom  Culture/237

RELATIVE SIZES  OF THE CONTAMINANT  GROUPS

Organism
Viruses

Size

(in  microns)
.01-.20

Bacteria

.40-5.0

Fungi

2.0-30.0

Method  of  Detection
X-ray detraction, transmission electron microscopy and ultracentrifuge.
Typically attached to other larger partices,  occurring within cells,  or
are  present  in  large  conglomerate  colonies.  Often  associated  with
bacteria.
Detected  by electron  microscopy,  light  microscopy and  ultracentri-
fuge.  Large colonies visible to  unaided eye.  Sometimes associated
with  mushroom  spores  or  mycelium.
Detected  by  light  microscopy.  Large  colonies  visible  to  unaided  eye.
Associated  with  a  larger spore  generating  structure,  often  chain-like  in
fnrm

Figure  177  Diagram  illustrating  comparative  sizes  of airborne  particulates.

238/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

What follows is a rudimentary key to the major contaminant groups encountered in mushroom
cultivation with the exception of insects and viruses which are discussed in later sections. Though
thousands of species of fungi  exist  in  nature,  only  a  small fraction  are  repeatedly seen  in  the course
of mushroom  culture.  Hence,  This  key  is  limited  to  that small  sphere  of microorganisms and  does
not propose To be an all encompassing guide to the molds. Nevertheless, this key should prove to
be a valuable resource for anyone interested  in  improving their cultivation  skills.  Some contami-
nants are keyed out more than once if occurring in various habitats, or if exhibiting significant color
changes. Since color has some emphasis in this key and that feature can be substrate specific, the
authors  presume  the agar  medium  employed  is  2%  malt  based,  the  spawn  carrier  is rye  grain  or
sawdust/bran,  and the fruiting  substrate  is one  outlined  in  this book.

Once led to a particular genus, refer to its description.  If in doubt, a quick look under a medium
power  (400  X)  microscope  should  readily  discern  one  contaminant  from  another.  If  the  contami-
nant can  be  identified  but  its  source  can  not,  turn  the  chapter  entitled  Cultivation  Problems  and
Their  Solutions.  One  or  more  of  the  common  names  have  been  listed  under  each  competitor.
Good luck, be meticulous in your observations and strictly adhere to the recommended measures of
control.

Contaminants encompassed  by this key:
A! tern aria
Aspergillus
Bacillus
Botrytis
Chaetomium
Chrysosporium

Cladosporium
Coprinus
Dactyl/urn
Epicoccum
Fusarium
Geotrichum

M on ilia
Mucor
Mycelia  Sterilia
Mycogone
Neurospora

Papulospora
Penicillium
Pseudomonas
Rhizopus
Scopulariopsis

Sepedonium
Trichoderma
Trichothecium
Verticillium
Yeasts

A  KEY  TO  THE  COMMON  CONTAMINANTS  IN  MUSHROOM  CULTURE

This key is easy to use.  Simply follow the key  lead  That best descibes the contaminant at hand.
When  the key terminates at a specific contaminant,  turn to the descriptions immediately following
this key and then refer to the photographs and any related genus mentioned. To confirm the identity
of any contaminant,  compare its sporulating structures with the accompanying microscopic illustra-
tions  and/or  micrographs.
1a  Contaminant  parasitizing  the  mushroom  fruitbody  (a  patho-

gen) 

1 b  Contaminant not parasitizing the mushroom fruitbody (an in-

dicator) 

2a  Contaminant causing  mushrooms to  become watery,  slimy,
or to have lesions from which a liquid oozes but not covered
with a powdery or downy mycelium 

2b  Contaminant  not  as  above  but  covering  mushrooms  with  a

fine powdery or mildew-like mycelium 

2

7

3

4

The  Contaminants  of  Mushroom  Culture/239

3a  Droplets forming across the cap and stem but lacking sunken
lesions.  Mushrooms  eventually  reduced  to  a  whitish  foam-
like mass 

3b  Cap not as above but first having brownish spots that enlarge,
deepen,  and  in  which  a  grayish  brown  slime  forms.  Mush-
rooms eventually disintegrate into a dark slimy, oozing mass

Causal  organism  not  known
" Weepers"

4a  Contaminant  eventually sporulating  as a  green  mold  on the
mushroom.  Usually  preceded  by an  outbreak of green  mold
on the casing layer 

4b  Not as above 

5a  Contaminant  appears  on  the  casing  soil  as  a  fast  running
grayish cobweb-like mycelium, enveloping mushrooms in its
path.  (Spores  usually  three  or  more  celled  and  20  x  5
microns in  size.  If two  celled,  not acorn-shaped) 

5b  Contaminant  attacking  the  mushroom  but  usually  not  ap-
pearing  on  the  casing  layer.  (Spores  single  celled  or  if  two
celled,  resembling  a  roughened acorn  and  measuring  much
less than above) 

6a  Contaminant turning  young  mushrooms  into a  rotting  amor-
phous ball-like  mass from which  an amber fluid oozes upon
cutting.  Stem  typically  not  splitting  or  peeling.  (Spores  one
and two celled, the latter being darkly pigrnented and acorn--
shaped) 

Pseudomonas  tolassii
Bacterial  Blotch
Bacterial  Pit

Trichoderma  viride
Trichoderma  kontngii
"Trichoderma  Blotch"
5

Dactlyium  dendroides
"Cobweb Mold"

6

Mycogone  pernciosa
"Wet  Bubble"

6b  Contaminant  afflicting  young  mushrooms  as  described
above but those parasitized not exuding amber fluid when cut
open.  Stem  in  more  mature  mushrooms  often  splitting  and
peeling, causing the mushrooms to tilt. (Spores one celled).  Verticiliurn  malthousei

7a  Contaminant  in  the  form  of  another  mushroom  whose  cap

deliquesces (melts) into a blackish liquid with age 

"Dry  Bubble"

Coprinus  spp.
"Inky  Cap"

240/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

7b  Contaminant not as above 

8a  Contaminant  becoming  pinkish  to  reddish  to  purplish  col-

ored in age 

8b  Contaminant not as above 

9a  Occurring on compost or the casing layer 
9b  Occurring on nutrient agar media and on grain 

8

9
14

10
11

10a  Mycelium fast growing, aerial, and never having a frosty tex-
ture.  Pinkish  with  spore  maturity.  (Spores  unicellular  with
nerve-like ridges longitudinally arranged and ellipsoid)  . . ..  Neurospora  sp.

"Pink  Mold"

10b  Mycelium  slow growing, appressed,  and developing a frosty
texture.  Often  becoming  cherry red.  (Spores cylindrical  and
lacking nerve-like ridges} 

Geotrichum  "Lipstick  Mold'

lla  Mycelial  network  of  contaminant  not  well  developed,  not

clearly visible to the unaided eye, often slime-like 

11 b  Mycelial  network of contaminant well  defined and easily dis-

cernible to the naked eye,  not slirne like 

12

13

1 2a  More frequently seen  in  agar culture.  (Spores produced  by

simple budding, ovoid, single celled) 

12b  More frequently seen in grain culture. (Spores produced on a

short conidiophore, sickle shaped, and multicelled) 

1 3a  Mycelium  fast  growing  and  aerial.  (Spores  with  nerve-like

ridges and ellipsoid) 

13b  Mycelium typically slow growing and appressed. (Spores two

celled, without ridges, and pear-shaped) 

The Yeasts
see  Cryptococcus

Fusarium
"Yellow  Rain  Mold"

Neurospora
"Pink Mold"

Trichothecium  sp.
"Pink  Mold"

14a  Contaminant slime-like in form 
14b  Contaminant mycelium-like or mold-like in form 

15
17

15a  Non-motile  (not  moving  spontaneously).  Spores  relatively

large,  4-20 microns in diameter.  Not affected by bacterial an-  The  Yeasts
tibiotics such as gentamycin sulfate 

(see  Cryptococcus  and
Rhodotorula  under  Torula)

The  Contaminants of  Mushroom  Culture/241

15b  Motile  (moving  spontaneously).  Spores  relatively  minute,
rarely  exceeding  2  microns  in  diameter.  Growth  prevented
by bacterial antibiotics such as gentamycin sulfate 

16

I6a  Cells  rod-like  in  shape.  Gram  positive  (retaining a violet dye

when fixed with crystal violet and an iodine solution) 

Bacillus
"Wet Spot"

I6b  Cells variable  in  shape.  Gram  negative  (not  retaining  a violet

dye when fixed with crystal violet and an iodine solution)  .  .  .  Pseudomonas

"Bacterial  Blotch"

17a  Contaminant mold greenish with  spore maturity 
17b  Contaminant mold blackish with spore maturity 
17c  Contaminant  mold  brownish with  spore  maturity 
17d  Contaminant  mold yellowish  with  spore maturity 
17e  Contaminant mold whitish with spore maturity 

18
20
24
25
28

18a  Forming small burrs and usually olive green in color.  (Spores
lemon  shaped,  enveloped  in  a  sac-like  structure  (a  perithe-
cium) 

18b  Not as above 

19a  Molds  typically  blue-green  in  color.  (Conidiophore  diverging
at apex into multiple chains of lightly pigrnented single celled
spores) 

19b  Molds  typically  true  green  to  yellow  green  in  color.  (Condio-
phore  swollen  at apex and bulb-like (capitate),  around which
multiple chains of  lightly  pigrnented  single celled spores ex-
tend) 

19c  Molds  forest  green  in  color.  (Conidiophore  easily  disassem-
bling  in  wet  mounts and  difficult to observe  under the  micro-
scope.  Spores single  celled,  lightly  pigrnented,  and encased
in a mucous-like substance) 

19d  Molds  blackish  green  in  color.  (Conidiophores  branching
into few forks  at whose  ends darkly  pigrnented  spores  form,
often two celled.)  . 

Chaetomium  olivaceum
"Olive Green  Mold"
19

Penicillium  spp.
"Blue Green  Mold"

Aspergillus  spp.
"Green  Mold"

Thchoderma  spp.
"Forest Green  Mold"

Cladosporium  spp.
"Blackish  Green  Mold"

242/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

20a  Mold  colony  appressed,  resembling  a  dark  Penicillium-\\ke

mold,  but not aerial 

20b  Mold colony aerial,  not Penicillium-like 

21
22

21 a  (Spores elongated and ornamented with ridges, generaly ex-

ceeding 20 microns in  length and 5 microns in diameter) 

.  .  Alternaria  spp.
"Black  Mold"

21 b  (Spores spherical, not ornamented with ridges, generally less

than 5 microns in diameter) 

Aspergillus  spp.
"Black  Mold"

22a  Most 

frequently  seen  on  compost.  Resembling  black
whiskers.  (Forming  a  conidiophore  that  diverges  into  multi-
ple  stalks  at  whose  ends  are  chains  of  darkly  pigrnented
spores) 

Doratomyces  stemonitis
"Black Whisker  Mold"

22b  Most frequently seen  in agar and grain  culture.  Resembling a
forest of dark  headed  pins.  (Forming  a  sporangiophore  con-
sisting  of  single  stalk  at  whose  end  a  ball-like  sporulating
structure is attached) 

23

23a  Conidiophore  appearing swelled at apex;  partially covered by

a sporulating membrane 

23b  Conidiophore  not swelled  as above;  apex  totally covered  by

sporulating  membrane 

24a  Mold  developing  small  bead-like  masses  of cells  (easily  visi-
ble  with  a  magnifying  lens).  Never  producing  cup-like  fruit-
bodies.  (Darkly pigrnented cells clustered on  a mycelial  mat;
spores lacking) 

Rhizopus
"Black  Bread  Mold"
"Black  Pin  Mold"

Mucor
"Black Pin  Mold"

Papulospora  byssina
"Brown  Plaster Mold"

24b  Mold  not  developing  the  ball-like  clusters  of  the  above.
Sometimes producing cup-like fruitbodies.  (Spores produced
in bunches in a grape-like fashion) 

Botrytis  "Brown  Mold"

The  Contaminants of  Mushroom  Culture/243

25a  Mold forming  a  corky  layer between  the casing  layer and the
compost,  and  mat-like.  (Spores  borne  on  short vase  shaped
pegs) 

Chrysosporium  luteum
"Yellow  Mar  Disease"
"Confetti"

25b  Mold  not  forming  a  corky  layer  and  appearing  mat-like.

(Spores not borne in The manner above) 

26

26a  Not  occurring  on  compost.  (Conidiophores  short,  arising
from  cushion  shaped  cells.  Spores,  if  reticulated,  appear  to
be  composed  of several  tightly  compacted  cells) 

Epicoccum
"Yellow  Mold"

26b  Frequently seen on compost but not exclusively so. (Conidio-

phores not as above.  Spores appearing  unicellular) 

27

27a  Spores  large,  exceeding  5  microns in  diameter,  and of two
types.  Some  spherical  and  spiny,  forming  singly at the  end of
individual hyphal  branches; others vase shaped arising singly
or  in  loose  clusters  from  an  indistinct,  hyphal-like  conidio-
phore) 

27b  Spores  small,  less  than  5  microns  in  diameter,  ovoid,  form-
ing on  chains arising from a head-like structure positioned at
the apex of a long stalk 

28a  Appearing  as  a  dense  plaster-like  or  stroma-like  mycelium.

(Condiophore  brush  shaped  (pencillate)) 

28b  Mycelium  not  plaster-like.  (Conidiophore  not  brush  shaped

(pencillate}) 

29a  Spores forming  from  hyphae  in  chains 

29b  Spores absent, not forming from hyphae 

Sepedonium
"Yellow  Mold"

Aspergillus  spp.
"Yellow Mold"

Scopulariopsis
"White  Plaster Mold"

29

Monilia
"White  Flour  Mold"
Mycelia  Sterilia
(see  also:  Mucor and
Sepedonium).

244/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

VIRUS

Common  Name:  Die-back  Disease;  La
France  Disease,  Mummy.
Habitat  and  Frequency  of  Occurence:
An  infrequent and  difficult to  detect disease.
Their habitats are other larger particles or or-
ganisms.
Medium  through  which  contamination
Is spread:  Primarily from  infected  mycelium
or  from  the  spores  of  diseased  mushrooms.
Dieleman-van  Zaayen  (1972)  found  that the
most common  way virus spreads is through
the  anastomosing  ("merging")  of  healthy
mycelia  with  infected  mycelia  that  was  left-
over  from  previous  crops.  Once  anasto-
mosed,  the virus particles spread throughout
the mycelial network of the new mycelium.
Measures  of  Control:  Thorough  disinfection  of  the  growing  room  between  crop  rotations  by
steam  heating for 12  hours at 158-160 ° F.; the installation of high efficiency spore filters to screen
particulates exiting the growing environment;  the disinfection of floors and hallways leading to and
from  the  growing  room  with  2%  chlorine  solution;  and  picking  diseased  mushrooms while the veil
is intact before spores have the opportunity to spred.  Isolation of infected crops from adjacent rooms
or those newly spawned helps retard the spread of this disease. Other measures of control include
the placement of disinfectant floor mats to prevent the tracking in of virus-carrying particles on work-
er's shoes and the  maintenance of strict hygienic  practices at all times,  particularly between  crops.
Macroscopic  Appearance:  On  nutrient  agar  media,  infected  mycelia  slows  or  nearly  abates  in
its  rate  of  growth  as  the  disease  progresses  throughout  the  mycelial  network.  When  running
through  the casing  layer,  large  zones one  to three  feet  in  diameter  remain  uncolonized.  In  some
cases  the  mycelia,  once  present,  disappears from  the  surface.  Fruitbodies  may  not form  at all,  or
when  they  do,  the  mushrooms  are  typically  deformed  (dwarfed  or  aborted),  often  with  watery  or
splitting  stems, and brown  rot.  The caps prematurely expand to plane.  Virus infected cultures can
exhibit any combination of the above described symptoms.
Microscopic  Characteristics:  Particles  typically  ovoid  to  polyhedral,  measuring  25  or  34  nano-
meters.  Elongated particles measure  19-50 nanometers. Virus particles dwell within hyphal cells or

The  Contaminants  of  Mushroom  Culture/245

on  the  surfaces  of spores.  They are  detectable  only through  transmission  electron  microscopy  or
ultracentrifuging.
History,  Use  and/or  Medical  Implications:  Responsible  for  many  plant,  animal  and  human  dis-
eases.  Typically viruses are associated with  larger carrier particles,  particularly bacteria.
Comments: Virus is most likely introduced during or directly after spawning.  Infected farms experi-
ence  losses up to 70%.  First reported from  Europe,  measures of control and prevention  have been
developed  and  successfully tested  by  the  Dutch.  Most  notably,  virus spreads by attaching  itself to
mushroom  spores which  then  become  airborne.  Virus also  spreads through  the  contact  of  healthy
mycelia with diseased mycelia. Afflicted mushrooms are soon exploited by a host of other parasites,
making a  late  and accurate diagnosis of this contaminant difficult.

Undoubtedly, virus is the cause of what many have noted as "strain degeneration". Heat treat-
ment  of infected  strains  grown  on  enriched  agar  media  at  95 °  F.  for three weeks  has  been  sug-
gested as one remedy for curing diseased mycelia. (See Candy and Hollings,  1962 and Rasmussen
et  al.,  1972).

Van Zaayen (1979) and others have noted that Agaricus bitorquis seems resistant to virus dis-
ease  even  when  inoculated  with  in  vitro  particles.  Another  species  of Agaricus,  called  Agaricus
arvensis,  exhibits similar virus resistant qualities.

Virus-like  particles have also been  found  in  Lentinus edodes by  Mori et alia  (1 979)  but do not
adversely affect fruitbody formation or development. These same researchers reported that this spe-
cies' viruses can  not be transmitted to other mushrooms or plants, a fact they attributed to the inter-
feron producing properties of the shiitake mushroom.  No work with infected strains of Psilocybe are
known.  Only  a  fraction  of  wild  mushrooms  harbor  virus-like  particles.

246/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figure  178  Drawing  of Actinomyces.

ACTINOMYCES

Class: Actinomyces
Order:  Actinomycetales
Family:  Actinomycetaceae
Common  Name:  Firefang.
Greek Root: From "actino" meaning rayed
or  star-like  and  "myces"  or fungus,  in  refer-
ence  to  its  characteristic  appearance  when
colonizing  straw  or  straw/manure  compost.
Habitat  &  Frequency  of  Occurrence:
Many  species  thermophilic;  thriving  in  the
115-135°F.  temperature  range  and  com-
monly  found 
in  decomposing  straw,  horse
and  cow  manures.  Actinomyces  are  impor-
tant  soil  constituents.  They  thrive  in  aerobic,
well prepared mushroom composts.
Medium  Through  Which  Contamina-
tion  Is  Spread:  Primarily  air;  secondarily the
straw  used  in  compost  preparation.

Measures  of  Control:  Generally  no  controls  are  necessary  during  compost  preparation.  However,
Actinomyces  can  cause  spontaneous  combustion  in  wet,  compacted  straw.  Covering  stored  baled
straw  from  excess  water  absorption  should  be  adequate  protection  from  Actinomyces  and  the  ther-
mogenic  reactions  they  cause.
Macroscopic  Appearance:  Grayish  To  whitish  speckled  colonies,  readily  apparent  on  dark  com-
posted straw.
Microscopic  Characteristics:  Composed  of  an  extensive, 
fine  hyphal  network  that  rarely
branches.  Rod-like  spores form when  the filaments break at the cell  wall junctions.  The filamentous
hyphae  and  spores are  minute,  measuring  only  1  micron  in  diameter.  Within  each  cell,  no well  de-
fined nucleus is discernible. Lacking differentiated spore-producing bodies, Actinomyces are Gram-
positive.
History,  Use,  and/or  Medical  Implications:  Few  species  pathogenic.  Amongst  agricultural
workers in the same position,  males are three times more susceptible to this bacterium than females
(see Cruickshank et a!.,  1973). Two notable species causing serious diseases (actinomycosis) of the
skin  and  oral  cavity  in  humans  are  Actinomyces  bovis  and  Actinomyces  israelii.  Generally,  these

The  Contaminants of  Mushroom  Culture/247

species  behave  as  secondary  infectious  organisms.  Penicillin  is  often  used  for  treatment.  Actino-
mycin,  a  potent  antibiotic  compound  interfering  with  RNA  synthesis,  is  derived  from  this  group  of
bacteria.

Although  the  likelihood  of  mushroom  growers  contracting  actinornycosis  is  remote,  workers
spawning  compost are exposed to  high  concentrations of Actinomyces spores and often  report  less
severe,  temporary  allergic  reactions.  Therefore,  the  use  of  a  filter  mask  when  spawning  large
volumes of compost  is advisable.
Comments:  The  Actinomyces  resemble  both  bacteria  and  fungi  and  have  alternately  been  called
one or the other.  Presently, the prevailing belief is that they are filamentous (Gram-positive) bacteria
because they are  prokaryotic  (lacking  a  defined  nucleus),  are  inhibited  by  bacterial  antibiotics and
not  affected  by  fungal  antibiotics;,  and  lack the  chitin-like  compounds  so  typical  of the true fungi.
The  hyphal  filaments  of Actinotnyces  are  one  fifth  to  one  tenth  as thick  as  those  of true  fungi.

Actinomyces  are  commonly  called  Firefang  for  their  ability  to  cause  spontaneous  combustion
is  prevented  by  proper  composting
of  decomposing  materials. 
practices.) Many of these bacteria/fungi are true thermophiles and can  live aerobically or anaerobic-
ally.  Actinomyces  is  the  major  microorganism  selected  to  colonize  the  compost  during  Phase  II.
When  the  finished  compost  is  spawned,  Actinomyces  are  consumed  by  the  mushroom  mycelia.
See  also  Streptomyces.  See  Color  Photo  VIII.

(Spontaneous  combustion 

248/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

BACILLUS

in 

reference  to 

Class:  Schizomycetes
Order:  Eubacteriales
Family:  Bacillaceae
Common Name: Wet Spot; Sour Rot.
Latin  Root:  From  "bacilliformis"  meaning
rod-like, 
its  characteristic
shape.
Habitat & Frequency of Occurrence: Liu-
ing within a broad range of habitats. Bacillus
grows  on  almost  anything  organic  that  is
moist and is surrounded by oxygen.  It is par-
ticularly  common  in  soils.
Medium  Through  Which  Contamina-
tion  Is  Spread:  Primarily  through  the  air;
secondarily through water,  grain, soils, com-
posts, insects, tools and workers.

Figure  179  Drawing  of  endospore  forming
Bacillus cells as they appear through a micro-
scope  and  without  special  stains.

Measures of Control: Air filtration through high efficiency Particulate air filters; thorough steriliza-
tion of grain;  and proper storage and  use of relatively "clean" grains. The addition of antibiotics to
agar media (gentamycin sulfate, penicillin, streptomycin, aureomycin, etc.) hinders or prevents the
growth of these contaminants.  Endospores are neutralized by exposure to moist heat, such as the
steam generated within a pressure cooker at temperatures of 250 °F. and 15 psi pressure for a full
hour.  Temperatures as low as 140°F.  kill the vegetative parent cells but not the endospores they
form.
Macroscopic  Appearance:  A  dull  gray  to  mucus-like  brownish  slime  characterized  by  a  strong
but foul odor variously described as smelling like rotting apples, dirty socks or burnt bacon. Bacillus
makes  uncolonized  grain  appear  excessively wet,  hence the  name  "Wet Spot".  Pallid to whitish
ridges along the margins of individual grain  kernels characterize this contaminant.
Microscopic Characteristics: Rod-like or cylindrical in shape, measuring 0.2-1.2 microns in di-
ameter and 1 -5 microns in length. When wet mounts are viewed through a microscope, Bacilli ex-
citedly wriggle back and forth. Species move by the vibrating action of flagella {"hairs") that outline
each cell. These flagella are difficult to observe microscopically without using specific staining tech-
niques, Bacilli are encapsulated by a thin but firm slime and conglomerations of cells give infected

The Contaminants of Mushroom  Culture/249

Figure 180  Bacillus, the Wet Spot bacter-
ium,  as  it appears on  grain.

Figure  181  Scanning  electron  micro-
graph of rod shaped bacteria on a spore of
Panaeolus acuminatus.

Figure  182  Scanning  electron  micro-
graph of rod shaped bacteria on mycelium
of Psilocybe cubensis.

250/The Mushroom Cultivator

grain  a  slimy  appearance.  Bacillus  primarily  reproduces  through  simple  cell  division.  In  times  of
adverse environmental conditions, especially heat, a single hardened spore forms within each par-
ent cell body. These endospores show an extraordinary resistance to heat, are low in water content
and  are  unaffected  by  drying.  Species  in  this  genus  are  Gram  positive.
History, Use, and/or Medical  Implications: The most notable species in the genus is Bacillus
anthracis.  the  cause  of  the  hideous  Anthrax  disease  that  killed  several  thousand  sheep  when  an
United  States Army experiment went awry in  Utah  during  the  1950s.  Home cultivators are,  how-
ever,  unlikely  to  be  exposed  to  this  species.  Most  endospore  forming  bacteria  are  not  virulent.
Bacillus subtilis, the bacterium spoiling grain spawn, is being developed To replace E.  coll as a re-
combinant-DNA  fermentor.  Clostridium  is  a  genus  similar  to  Bacillus  except  That  it  is  anaerobic.
That genus is reknowned for one toxic species  in  particular:  C.  botulinum,  the cause of botulism.
Comments:  A  pernicious and  tenacious competitor,  Bacillus  contamination  is the  most difficult to
control.  At room temperature, a single cell reproduces every 20 minutes and will  multiply into near-
ly a million daughter bacteria in only seven hours. In another seven hours each one of those million
bacteria  divide  into  a  million  more  cells.  Thus,  in  less  than  fourteen  hours,  one  trillion  bacteria
evolve  from  a  single  parent  cell!

The  phenomenonal  reproductive  capability  of Bacillus and  other  bacteria  poses a formidable
threat  to  the  spawn  maker.  Although  parent  cells  are  easily  destroyed,  their  endospores  are  not.
Under dry conditions, endospores form  in  increasing numbers as temperatures rise to  1 30 °  F.  In
boiling water (21 2 °  F.}, endospore  viabiliTy markedly decreases.  (Ninety percent of Bacillus spores
are killed in only one minute at 212°  F.). At the higher temperatures and pressures within an auto-
clave the survivability of Bacillus spores falls well below  1 %.  Nevertheless, this  1 % seriously ob-
structs  any  attempt  at  grain  culture  given  Bacillus' rapid  reproductive  capability.  This  problem  is
compounded  if the  bacteria  count  in  the  grain  is  initially  high.

In  one  study  (Shull  and  Ernst,  1962},  the  thermal  death  time  (TDT)  of  an  exposed  Bacillus
stearothermophilus population of 1,300,000 endospores was pinpointed at 250°F. for 13 min-
utes.  (In  a  pressure  cooker  at  sea  level,  250 °F.  corresponds  to  15  psi).  Food  researchers  con-
cerned with food-spoiling bacteria (particularly  Clostridium) have shown that endospore endurance
to heat is directly related To the amount of calcium in the host substrate.  Once formed, endospores
can  sit  dormant  for  extended  periods  of  time.  Even  endospores  removed  from  the  stomachs  of
mummies  have  proved  viable  after  hundreds  of  years.

Although an autoclave may read a certain Temperature, the grain within the spawn containers
may  be well  below that  reading.  To guarantee adequate steam  penetration,  the water in  pressure
cookers should be brought to a boil for 5 minutes before closing the vent valve.  Furthermore,  bacte-
ria within the spawn container are partially protected from the sterilizing influence of steam  by the
structural cavities of the grain medium. This delay in steam penetration time is especially character-
istic of large,  heavily packed autoclaves.

Despite the fact that autoclaving for one  hour at  15  psi  is sufficient to kill  most contaminants,

grain having initially high bacteria populations may reguire sterilization at higher temperatures and
for prolonged periods of time.  Autoclaving  quart jars for  1  hour at 270 °  F.  (which  is equivalent to

The  Contaminants  of  Mushroom  Culture/251

27  psi)  is sufficient to neutralize grain  heavily  infested with  endospore forming  bacteria.  If convert-
ing a standard home pressure cooker for This purpose, contact The manufacturer about stress limita-
tions  and  follow  all  safety  recommendafions.

If  "sterilized"  rye  grain  sponfaneously  contaminates  with  bacteria  before  inoculation  and  the
grain  is the cause,  it is best to replace the grain with a cleaner one than to undergo the expense and
Time of double sterilization.  Some spawn  laboratories  regularly precook their grain for approximate-
ly  2  hours  in  water  at  a  low  boil.  Excess  water  is  allowed  to  drain  from  the  grains which  are  then
placed  into the spawn  container and  sterilized  at  standard  time  and  pressure.

The  most  practical  method  for  eliminating  bacterial  endospores  involves  soaking  the  grain  at
room  temperature  24  hours  prior  to  sterilization.  Endospores,  if  viable,  will  germinate  within  that
time frame and then  be susceptible to standard sterilization  procedures. And,  new endospores won't
form  in  the  moist  environment  of  The  resting  jar  of  grain.

Bacillus  subtilis  var.  mucoides  is  the  common  bacterium  responsible  for  spoiling  spawn
media.  If allowed to  proliferate,  this contaminant wreaks  havoc  in  a spawn  laboratory,  necessitating
a complete shut-down  of operations.  Spores and  even  strains of mushroom  mycelium  can  become
hosts for Bacillus, carrying bacteria on their hyphae (see Figs.  181  & 182), and then contaminating
any  media  onto  which  the  mushroom  rnycelia  is  transferred.

Many  bacteria  are  rod-shaped  and  the term  bacillus  has  been  loosely  used  to  describe them.
The  genus  concept  of  Bacillus,  however,  has  been  narrowed  considerably  with  time;  Bacillus  is
now  defined  as  Gram  positive  rod-like,  aerobic  bacteria  that form  spores.

According  to  Park  and  Agnihotri  (1969),  Bacillus megaterium  stimulates  primordia  formation
in  certain  strains  of Agaricus  brunnescens  (bisporus).  (See  Appendix  II  for a  futher  discussion  on
the influence of bacteria on  fruiting). Another species,  Bacillus thermofibricolous,  if introduced at
spawning,  inhibits  the  growth  of competitor molds in  rice  bran/sawdust spawn  prepared for shiitake
cultivation  according  to  Steineck  (1973).

See Also Pseudomonas.

252/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

PSEUDOMONAS

Blotch;

Class:  Schizomycetes
Order:  Pseudomonadales
Family:  Pseudomonaceae
Common  Name:  Bacterial
Bacterial  Pit.
Greek  Root:  From  "pseudes"  meaning
spurious,  false  or  deceptive  and  "monas"
meaning one or a single unit, in reference to
the variable forms of this single celled bacteri-
um.
Habitat  &  Frequency  of  Occurrence:
Ubiquitous  in  all  soils  and  abounding  in
aqueous  habitats.  Pseudomonas 
tolaasii
commonly  parasitizes  mushrooms  that  re-
main  wet  over a  prolonged  period  of time.

Figure  183  Drawing  of  Pseudomonus,  a
genus  of  variably  shaped  bacteria  that  have
hair-like  flagella  at  their  ends.

Medium  Through  Which  Contamination  Is  Spread:  Primarily  water;  secondarily  through
grain, soils, composts, flies,  mites,  nematodes, tools and workers.
Measures of Control:  Use of mildly chlorinated water (150-250  ppm)  or water free of high  bac-
teria counts.  This contaminant can  easily be prevented  by:  isolating  and  properly disposing  of in-
fected fruitbodies; eliminating excessively high humidity levels during cropping (greater than 92%);
and preventing stagnant air pockets through a good air circulation system. Maintaining a sufficient
evaporation rate lessens the likelihood of these bacteria infecting the fruitbodies.
Macroscopic  Appearance:  Yellowish  spots  or  circular  or  irregular  lesions;  superficial;  rapidly
reproducing  on  wet  mushrooms;  and  becoming  chocolate  brown  and  slimy  with  age.  This
bacterium has a dull gray to mucus-like brownish slime.  It also has a mildly to strongly unpleasant
odor.
Microscopic  Characteristics:  Cylindrical  (bacilli)  and  spherical  (cocci)  forms  characterize  this
genus.  Cells are extremely variable in  shape,  measuring 0.4-0.5 x  1.0-1.7  microns.  Typically the
bacterial cell  has one or more flagella ("motile hairs") at one or both of its poles.  (Bacillus has fla-
gella along its entire outer periphery). Both organisms use these flagella for locomotion. Species in

The Contaminants of Mushroom Culture/253

Figure  184  Pseudomonas
putida, a beneficial bacterium stim-
ulatory  to  formation  of  fruitbodies
in some mushroom species, grow-
ing  on  malt agar.

Figure  185  Bacterial  pit  on
Psilocybe  cubensis 
f r om  a
Pseudomonas species.

254/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

this genus are generally Gram negative.
History,  Use  and/or  Medical  Implications:  Some  species  pathogenic  to  humans.  Of special
note is Pseudomonas aeruginosa (also known as Ps. pyocyanea), a species that causes blindness
and other diseases.  Pseudomonas putida is stimulatory to primordia formation in certain strains of
Agaricus brunnescens  (bisporus)  and  its  use  is  of  potential  commercial  value.
Comments: More than  140 species have been identified thus far; only a few have been identified
as affecting mushrooms.  Pseudomonas species are much more sensitive to heat sterilization than
the  endospore-forming  bacilli.  Pseudomonas  bacteria  proliferate  in  standing  water  or anywhere
there is moisture.

Pseudomonas tolaasii is the cause of bacterial blotch that can devastate crops of Agaricus and
Psilocybe.  One  biological  remedy  for  controlling  this  species  was  proposed  by  Nair  and  Fahy
(1972)  who  showed  that  introduction  of  Pseudomonas  fluorescens,  a  natural  antagonist  to
Pseudomonas tolaasii,  markedly decreased the occurrence of blotch while not hindering Agaricus
brunnescens  yields.  Others  believe  Pseudomonas  fluorescens  to  be  merely  a  variety  of
Pseudomonas  tolaasii,  and  hesitate to  recommend  it.

In a characteristic manner, Pseudomonas tolaasii causes sunken grayish brown lesions on the
mushroom cap in which a slimy fluid collects. Another Pseudomonas species, yet unidentified, has
been  implicated  in  the cause of a  more severe form  of blotch,  Bacterial  Pit.

Pseudomonas also contaminates agar and grain cultures, inhibiting mycelial growth. The use
of antibiotics (gentamycin sulfate) or micron filters prevents outbreaks of this contaminant. A few
species cause the mycelium to grow more rapidly and luxuriantly. Similarly, considerable attention
has centered on the beneficial role of Pseudomonas putida and allies in the casing layer. This sub-
ject  is  discussed  in  detail  in  Appendix  II.

See  also  Bacillus.

The  Contaminants  of  Mushroom  Culture/255

STREPTOMYCES

Class:  Actinomyces
Order:  Actinomycetales
Family:  Streptomycetaceae

Common  Name:  Firefang.
Greek  Root:  From 
"strepto"  meaning
twisted  and  "myces"  or fungus,  in  reference
to  the  twisting  and  branching  filaments  that
give  rise to spores.
Habitat & Frequency of Occurrence: Ubi-
quitous  on  straw,  manures  and  soil.  Strepto-
myces  is  a  predominant  microoganism  in  the
compost  pile,  thriving  between  115-135°F.
and preferring aerobic zones.
Medium Through Which Contamination
Is  Spread:  Primarily  air;  secondarily  from
materials  used  in  composting.  Streptomyces
are  naturally  present in  al!  soils.
Measures of Control: Generally no controls are necessary during compost preparation, nor desired.
General hygienic practices prevent this bacterium from becoming a problem contaminant in the labor-
atory.
Macroscopic  Appearance:  Grayish  to  whitish  specked  colonies,  readily  apparent  on  composted
straw.  On  grain,  Streptomyces  has  a  delicate  whitish  mycelium  and  is  powdery  in  form.
Microscopic Characteristics: Composed of an  extensive,  fine hyphal  network,  often  branching,
coiled and twisted. The  hyphae in Streptomyces do not fragment into spores as in Actinomyces but
form a chain-like structure of aerial hyphae called a sporophore from which cells evolve terminally.
The filamentous hyphae and spores measure only  1  micron in diameter. Within each cell,  no well de-
fined nucleus is discernible.  Streptomyces lack differentiated spore-producing bodies.  Its spores are
smooth  or  spiny.
History,  Use,  and/or  Medical  Implications:  Streptomyces  represents  80%  of  all  actinomycetes
which  inhabit mushroom  compost and is selected for its beneficial  properties during  Phase  II.  (See
Chapter  V).

Figure  186  Drawing  of  spore  producing
cells  of  Streptomyces.

Streptomyces griseus is the source of the antibiotic streptomycin, first discovered by Waksman in

256/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

1944. The autoclavable antibiotic gentamycin is derived from a genus closely allied to Streptomyces,
the genus Micromonospora.
Comments:  Streptomyces  resemble  both  bacteria  and  fungi  and  are  sometimes  referred  to  as the
"higher  bacteria."  Streptomyces  differ  from  Actinomyces  in  that  their  spores  are  produced  on  an
aerial chain-like structure and do not simply fragment from the hyphal network. Also, the filaments of
Streptomyces  frequently  branch  whereas  those  of  Actinomyces  do  not.  The  hyphal  filaments  of
Streptomyces are one fifth  to one tenth  as thick as that of true fungi.

Donoghue  (1962)  reported  that a  Streptomyces  contaminant  initiated  fruitbodies  in  spawn  of
Agaricus  bisporus,  a  species  that  does  not  normally  form  mushrooms  on  grain.  Furthermore,  he
observed that mycelia associated with Streptomyces grew faster and more luxuriantly than those not
infected with  it.  (For more information on the influence of bacteria on  mycelial  growth and fruiting,
turn  to  Appendix  II.)
See  also  Actinomyces.
For more information consult:  Kurylowicz, W. etal.,  1971  in "Atlas of Spores of Selected Genera and
Species  of Streptomycetaceae, " University  Park  Press,  Baltimore.

The  Contaminants  of  Mushroom  Culture/257

ALTERNARIA

Class:  Fungi  Impetiecti
Order:  Moniliales
Family:  Dematlaceae
Common  Name:  Black  Mold;  Gray  Black
Mold;  Black  Point.
Latin  Root:  From  "alternus"  which  means
alternating, in reference to the chains of alter-
nating  spores,  which  so  characterize  this
genus.
Habitat  &  Frequency  of  Occurrence:
Very  common  in  nature,  occasionally  to  fre-
quently  encountered  in  spawn  production,
and  present  in  large  numbers  in  household
dust.  Alternaria  is  infrequently  seen  on  rye
grain,  and  according  to  Bitner  (1972),  this
contaminant  is  more  prevalent  on  sorghum
than  on  other grains. Alternaria is one of the
major  fungal  saprophytes  on  grain,  seeds,
straw,  leaves,  rotting fruits and unsalted butter.  In Temperate climatic zones, it is more prevalent in
the  late  summer and fall  than  at any other time.
Medium Through Which Contamination  Is Spread: Air.
Measures  of  Control:  Good  hygienic  habits;  maintenance of a  low dust  level;  and  filtration  of air
through  micron  filters.
Macroscopic  Appearance:  A  rapidly  growing  rich  gray  black  to  blackish  mycelium.  Alternaria
first appears as scattered blackish spots in the spawn jars,  soon spreading and overwhelming The
mushroom  mycelium.  On  agar,  it  resembles  a  black  Penicillium-\\ke  mold.
Microscopic Characteristics: Vertically oriented lengths of cells (hyphae) emerging from a mat of
mycelium that segregates into conidia, and which originated through pores at the apices of vertically
oriented hyphae. Conidia (spores) are usually multicelled, sometimes Two celled and large, measur-
ing 20-100x 6-30 microns.
History,  Use and/or  Medical  Implications:  Species  in  This genus causing  allergies and  oTher
respiratory ailments in humans, particularly hay-fever. Because of their large size, Alternaria spores
soon  settle,  falling  at  a  rate  of  3  millimeters/second  in  still  air.

Figure  187  Drawing  of  conidia  typical  of
the  genus  Alternaria.

258/The Mushroom Cultivator

Comments: A black mold, occasional to common on enriched agar, easily separated from similar-
ly colored molds by its unique conidia (spores). It has been claimed that Alternaria more frequently
contaminates sorghum  than  rye although  the authors can  not corroborate this statement from  their
experiences.

See Aspergillus  and Cladosporium.

Figure  188  Scanning  electron  micrograph  of  Alternaria  conidia.

The  Contaminants of Mushroom  Culture/259

ASPERGILLUS

Class:  Fungi  Imperfect!
Order:  Moniliales
Family: Eurotiaceae
Common  Name:  Green  Mold;  Yellow
Mold;  Black  Mold
Latin  Root:  From  "aspergilliformis"  which
means  brush-shaped  in  reference  to  the
shape  of  the  conidiophore.
Habitat  &  Frequency  of  Occurrence:
Very  common  in  agar and  grain  culture,  and
in  compost  making.  Found  on  most  any
organic  substrate,  Aspergillus  prefers  a  near
neutral 
to  slightly  basic  pH.  Well  used
wooden  trays  and  shelves  for  holding  com-
post are frequent habitats for this contaminant
in  the  growing  house.
Medium  Through  Which  Contamina-
tion Is Spread: Air.
Measures  of  Control:  Good  hygienic  practices;  removing  supportive  substrates,  especially  food
residues  and  spent  compost;  and  filtration  of  air  through  micron  filters.
Macroscopic  Appearance:  Species  range  in  color  from  yellow  to  green  to  black.  Most  frequent-
ly,  Aspergillus  species  are  greenish  and  similar  to  Penidllium.  Aspergillus  niger,  as  its  name  im-
plies, 
is  black;  Aspergillus  flavus  is  yellow;  Aspergillus  davatus  is  blue-green;  Aspergillus
fumigatus  is  grayish  green;  and  Aspergillus  veriscolor  exhibits  a  variety  of  colors  (greenish  to
pinkish  to  yellowish).  These  molds,  like  many  others,  change  in  color and  appearance  according  to
the  medium  on  which  they  occur.  Several  species  are  thermophilic.
Microscopic  Characteristics:  Sporulating  structure  tall,  unbranched,  stalk-iike,  supporting  at  its
apex a spherical head to which linearly arranged chains of single celled spores (conidia), measuring
3-5  microns,  are  attached.
History,  Use and/or  Medical  Implications:  Some species toxic. Aspergillus flavus,  a yellow to
yellowish green species, produces the deadly aflatoxins. A.  flavus attacks cottonseed meals, peanuts
and other seeds  high  in  oil that have  been  stored  in  hot,  damp environments.  Of all the  biologically

Figure  189  Drawing  of  the  characteristic
sporulating  structure  of  Aspergillus.

260/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

Figure  190  Aspergillus  species  as  seen
through a light microscope.

Figure  191  Scanning  electron  micro-
graph  of  sporulating  Aspergillus.

produced toxins, the aflatoxins are the most potent hepatacarcinogens yet found. The toxicity of this
species was largely unknown until, in 1960, 100,000 turkeys mysteriously died from an outbreak
of this disease  in  Great Britain.

Since  A.  flavus  grows  on  practically  all  types  of grain,  this  species  is  of  serious  concern  to
mushroom  spawn  producers.  Careful  handling  of  any  molds,  particulary  those  of  the  genus
Aspergillus,  should be a primary responsibility of all  managers and workers in mushroom farms,
Aflatoxins are not,  however, taken up in the fruitbodies when contaminated spawn or cottonseed
meal is used to supplement a compost.

Aspergillus fumigatus and Aspergillus niger,  two thermotolerant mesophiles,  are also patho-
genic  to  humans  in  concentrated  quantities.  The  affliction  is  called  aspergilliosis  or  "Mushroom
Worker's  Lung  Disease".  Spent  compost  is  the  most  frequent  source  of Aspergillus  fumigatus.

Aspergillus  niger,  the  common  black  mold,  has  been  cultured  commercially  for  its  ability  to

The  Contaminants of Mushroom  Culture/261

synthesize  citric  acid  and  gluconic  acid  from  a  simple  sucrose  enriched  solution.  In  the  past,  citric
acid  was  extracted  from  lemon  juice;  now  it  is  made  more  profitably  from  this  fungus.
Comments: This  is  a  dangerous  genus.  Since  one can  encounters Aspergillus  flavus,  A.  niger,  A.
fumigatus  in  the  course  of  mushroom  culture,  precautionary  steps  should  be  undertaken  to  mini-
mize  exposure  to  these  toxic  contaminants.

Aspergillus candidus is a cream colored mold whose colonization of the grain  results in a sharp

escalation  of the  spawn  temperature.

See  also  Penicillium.  For  further  information  consult  "The  Genus Aspergillus" by  Raper  and
Fennel, a monograph  in which  132 species were recognized.  Presently,  more than 200 species are
known.

See  Color  Photograph  21.

262/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

BOTRYTIS

Class:  Fungi  Imperfecti
Order:  Moniliales
Family:  Moniliaceae
Common  Name:  Brown  Mold.
Latin  Root:  From  "botry"  meaning  bunch,
as in a bunch of grapes, which the clusters of
spores resemble.
Habitat  &  Frequency  of  Occurrence:
Common,  most frequently seen on the cas-
ing  soil  where  it  prefers  a  mixture  high  in
woody  tissue;  thriving  in  an  environment of
high  humidity  and  moderate  temperature.
Botrytis  often  occurs  on  woodwork  where
moisture has condensed.  It is less frequently
seen  on  compost.

Figure  192  Drawing  of  sporulating  struc-
ture  and  spores  (conidia)  characteristic  of
Botiytis.

Medium  Through  Which  Contamination  Is  Spread:  Air;  soil;  and  damp  wood.
Measures of Control: Use of clean casing soils; removal and isolation of contaminated trays which
are then thoroughly steam cleaned; positive pressurization of the growing room; and adherence to a
strict schedule of hygiene to prevent this mold from spreading.
Macroscopic Appearance: White at first, especially along the margins, soon gray, fast growing,
aerial, then dull golden brown to cinnamon brown as spores mature, spreading from casing soil to
woodwork and vice versa.  Spores become easily airborne  by the slightest drafts.  Outbreaks  last two
weeks at most, and sometimes develop into the sexual stage indicated by the formation of cup-like
fruitbodies.
Microscopic Characteristics: Conidiophores long, measuring  10-20 x 5-15 microns, simply but
irregularly  branched at the  apex but not enlarged,  and  not  Verticillium-\\ke.  Spores (conidia)  are one
celled,  oval  to  oblong,  clear to grayish,  some more  brightly colored.
History,  Use  and/or  Medical  Implications:  Apparently  inocuous;  no  toxic  species  known.
Botrytis  cinerea  is  a  species  highly  valued  for  its  timely  attack  on  ripening  grapes.  This  species

The  Contaminants of Mushroom  Culture/263

decreases  the  grapes'  acidity  while  increasing  their  sugar  content.  It  gives  the  grapes  a  most
desirable odor and flavor,  making infected crops ideal for sauterne table wines. Consequently, wine-
makers  have been  experimenting with  the deliberate inoculation  of their vineyards with  B.  cinerea
for more than a century.
Comments:  If the compost overheats during spawn  run or casing colonization,  Botrytis flourishes.
It is generally not considered to be a  "problem" contaminant but looked  upon as an  "indicator"
mold  by  mushroom  growers.  Botrytis  is  usually  overwhelmed  or  contained  by  the  mushroom
mycelium, although severe outbreaks,  if not checked in their growth, can  be detrimental to yields.
Botrytis  crystallina  or  Botiytis gemella are  probably The  species  most commonly encountered.

The taxonomy of the  Botrytis species seen  in  mushroom  culture  is  unresolved,  and therefore
placing these molds in the Botrytis complex avoids nomenclatural problems.  Botrytis has a perfect
stage  as  Peziza ostracoderma,  one of the common  cup  fungi.  Some  authors consider the  imperfect
form  to  more  properly  be  classified  in  the  genus  Chromelosporium  (belonging  to the  species  C.
fulva).  By  whatever  name,  this  frequently  encountered  brown  mold  is  not  regarded  as  a  virulent
competitor.

Papulospora byssina, the Brown Plaster Mold, is similar but can be distinguished from Botiytis
by the powdery granules evident using a hand lens, and by the shape of the conidiophore as viewed
through  a  microscope.

See  Color  Photograph  23.

264/The Mushroom Cultivator

CHAETOMIUM

Class:  Ascomycetes
Order:  Sphaeriales
Family:  Chaetomiaceae
Common  Name:  The  Olive  Green  Mold.
Greek  Root:  Having  the  same  root  as  the
suffix  "-chaeta"  which  means  long  hair.
Habitat  &  Frequency  of  Occurrence:
Common  on  fresh  manure;  especially  on
compost that has been anaerobically pasteur-
ized;  refuse  materials;  straw;  "leaf  mold";
soils;  plant  debris;  paper  products;  and  cloth
fabric.  Chaetomium  is a rare contaminant of
grain and is infrequently  seen  in agar culture.
A  white  species  occurs  on  the  casing  layer.

Figure  193  Drawing  of  Chaetomium
perithecium,  asci  and  spores.

Medium Through Which Contamination Is Spread: Air; soil; compost; and grain.
Measures of Control:  General  hygienic practices;  aerobic  pasteurization  and  Phase  II.  See Com-
ments.
Macroscopic  Appearance:  Mycelia  inconspicuous  at  first,  grayish  and  in  some  species  whitish,
cottony,  dense and aerial  (as  in  "White  Chaetomium").  Some forms  become  light brown,  yellowish
or  with  orangish  hues  when  well  developed.  At  maturity  these  molds  can  become  dark  green  to
olive  green  colored,  and  form  scattered  "burrs"  which  in  fact  are  perithecia  containing  spores.
Microscopic Characteristics:  Mycelium  forming  a  thin  walled  envelope  (a  perithecium)  from
which  unbranched  hairs  extend.  A  slit  in  the  perithecium  exposes  sacs  (asci)  containing  spores
which  are  then  liberated  into  the  air.  Spores  are  unicellular,  darkly  pigrnented  and  can  be  ovoid,
lemon-shaped  or  ellipsoid.
History,  Use  and/or  Medical  Implications:  Secreting  a  compound  called  "chaetomin"  that  is
toxic  to  Gram-positive  bacteria  and  to  mushrooms  and  other  fungi.
Comments:  Chaetomium  inhibits  mycelial  growth  through  the  toxins  it  produces  as  well  as  by

The Contaminants of Mushroom Culture/265

competing  with  the  mushroom  mycelium  for  base  nutrients.

Several  true  thermophiles  are  present  in  this  genus.  C  thermophile  and  its  many  varieties
thrive  in temperature zones from  82-136 °  F.  Its spores are especially  heat resistant.  Chaetomium
spores  are  killed  at  140°  F.  for  6-16  hours  or  at  130°  F.  for  24-48  hours,  Chaetomium
olivaceum infests compost that has been exposed to high temperature, anaerobic conditions during
Phase  II.  Compost  prepared  according  to  the  Phase  II  program  outlined  in  Chapter  V  practically
eliminates  the  manifestation  of  Chaetomium.  Chaetomium  globosum,  the  most  common  species
in this genus,  attacks straw,  compost and  paper products and forms small  burr-like colonies.  Spores
of  this  species  are  less  resilient  than  those  of  its  thermotolerant  allies.

C.  globosum  is an  occasional  contaminant of agar and grain  culture,  and  like  C.  olivaceum  it is
common on immature composts. White Chaetomium grows on the casing layer as a dense whitish
mold.  In  general,  Chaetomium  is  olive  green  while  Penicillium  and  Trichoderma  are  generally
blue  green  or  forest  green  in  color.

266/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

CHRYSOSPORIUM

"chryso-"  meaning

Class:  Fungi  Imperfect!
Order:  Moniliales
Family:  Aleuriosporae
Common  Names:  The  Yellow  Mat  Dis-
ease; Yellow Mold;  Confetti  Disease.
Latin  Root:  From 
golden  and  "sporium"  or  spore.
Habitat &  Frequency of Occurence: Sap-
rophytic,  a  common  mold  in  soils,  and  en-
demic  to  composts  prepared  in  direct  contact
with  the  ground.  Although  Chlysosporium
species  naturally  inhabit  the  dung  of  most
pastured animals and of chickens, today they
are  rarely  seen  in  finished  mushroom  com-
posts with the development of modern  com-
posting methods.
Medium  Through  Which  Contamina-
tion  Is  Spread:  Air;  soil;  and  dung.

Figure  194  Drawing  of  the  sporulating
structure  typical  of  Chlysosporium  luteum,
the  cause  of  Yellow  Mat  Disease.

Measures  of  Control:  Concrete  surface  used  for  composting;  isolation  of mushroom  compost
from areas where  untreated soils and raw dung are  being stored;  and filtration  of air during  Phase II.
If Chlysosporium occurs before or at the time of casing, salt or a similar alkaline buffer can be ap-
plied to  limit the  spread  of infection.
Macroscopic Appearance: Whitish at first, soon yellowish towards the center and maybe yellow-
ish overall in color, forming a "corky" layer of tissue between the infected compost and the casing
soil, and inhibiting fruitbody formation.
Microscopic Characteristics: Conidiophores poorly developed, relatively undifferentiated, irregu-
larly branched, vertically oriented, for the most part resembling and associated with the vegetative
mycelium. Clear,  unicellular and often ornamented spores (conidia) develop terminally, either in
short  chains or singularly,  and  measure  3-5  x  4-7  microns.
History,  Use and/or  Medical  Implications: The genus in  general does not host many patho-
genic species. One species of special concern is Chlysosporium dermatidis and allies, a mold caus-
ing a skin disease in humans.

The  Contaminants  of  Mushroom  Culture/267

Comments:  Chrysosporium  is an  indicator  mold whose  presence can  be traced to compost pre-
pared  on  soil.  Yellow  mat  disease  is  caused  by  Chrysosporium  luteum,  a  synonym  of
Myceliopthora lutea. Another species, Chrysosporium sulphureum, is known as Confetti, and is at
first  whitish,  then  yellowish  towards  the  center.  These  molds  were  fairly  common  in  Agaricus
culture previous to  1 940, when composts were prepared directly on soil. With the advent of con-
crete composting wharfs, they have all but disappeared. According to Atkins (1 974), this contami-
nant is more frequent in cave culture because of the use of ridge beds made directly on the floor of
the cave. Chrysosporium is usually not detected until the first break and retards subsequent flushes.
Moderate To severe outbreaks of either species can adversely affect yields.

Both  raw and  prepared  composts can  become  infected with this mold.  It  is thought that the
spores are introduced with the fresh air during the cool down period of the Phase II or from thermo-
tolerant spores from within the compost itself. Species in this genus can be found on media of poor
nutritional quality. They are generally not seen in spawn culture.

Chrysosporium can be grown for study on a hay infusion agar supplemented with sugar. Many

Chrysosporia have sexual forms in the Gymnoascaceae, an ascomycetous family.
For  futher  information  see:

Carmichael,  J.W.,  1962  "Chrysosporium  and  some  other  Aleuriosporic  Hyphomycetes.".
van  Oorshot,  CAN.,  1980  "A  Revision  of  Chrysosporium  and  Allied  Genera".  Studies  in

Mycology  No.  20.  CBS  Publication.  Baarn,  Nederland,

268/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

CLADOSPORIUM

is 

Figure  195  Drawing  of  Cladosporium.  Note
the two celled conidia.

Class:  Fungi  Imperfect!
Order:  Moniliales
Family:  Dematicaeae
Common  Name: The Dark Green Mold.
Greek  Root:  From  "klados"  which  means
branched  and  "sporium"  or  spore.  The
name is in reference to the two celled spores
produced on branches from the main body of
the conidiophore.
Habitat  &  Frequency  of  Occurrence:
Cladosporium 
the  most  predominant
genus  of  all  the  airborne  contaminants.  Its
species can be both saprophytic and parasitic.
At  least  three  species  infect  grain  spawn
although  they  are  not  as  common  as  the
Aspergilli  and  Penicillia.  Most  species  grow
poorly on  malt agar media,  Many decompose paper products (several of the black molds on old
books  are  Cladosporia),  plant  debris,  vegetables  and  other  higher  plants.
Medium Through Which  Contamination  Is Spread: Air.
Measures of Control: Good hygienic practices; removal of supportive substrates; and filtration of
air through  micron filters.
Macroscopic Appearance: Species of Cladosporium causing problems in spawn  production are
typically  dark  green  in  color,  often  becoming  blackish  with  age,  and  resemble  the  powdery
Penicillium  type  molds.
Microscopic Characteristics: Conidia (spores) and conidiophores distinctly septate; darkly pig-
rnented; conidiophores vertically oriented and variously diverging; tall; forked into several terminal
shoots at the apex from which the conidia arise in a chain-like fashion with the basal conidiurn being
the oldest and the apical one being the youngest. Conidia are one or two celled, developing from
the  swollen  ends of the  conidiophores,  and variously shaped  (measuring from  as small  as  3-6  x
2-3.5 microns to as large as  15-20 x 6-8 microns).  Some conidia are ovoid,  lemon shaped and

The  Contaminants of  Mushroom  Culture/269

cylindrical,  or  are  simply  irregular  in  form  and  have  peg-like  markings  ("scars")  where  adjacent
spores have been attached.
History,  Use  and/or  Medical 
Implications:  Some  species  toxic.  Cladosporium  carrionii
causes  a  severe  skin  infection  that  is  usually  associated  with  workers who  surfer  punctures from
thorns  or  splinters.
Comments:  In one study  (Kramer,  1959) where agar plates were exposed daily to the outside air
over  a  period  of  two  years,  Cladosporium  spores were  found  to  be  the  most  numerically  common
of all  airborne fungi,  representing  45%  of the  totals tallied.  Of these  species,  C  cladosporioides
was the  most frequently encountered.  In  contrast,  Penidllium  is the  most common  fungus  indoors,
undoubtedly  due  to  the  food  habits  of  humans.

The dark  conidiophore and the two  celled  conidia  (spores) are the  most distinguishing  features
of this genus. Over 160 species have been described. The perfect stage of a variety of C. herbarum
Link  ex  Fr.  is Mycosphaerella  tulasnei Janz.  C.  herbarum  has been  isolated from  timber,  logs and
wood  pulp.  Cladosporium  resinae  lives  on  creosote  and  other  petroleum  products,  including  the
petroleum  jelly  used  to  "grease"  the  seals  of  pressure  cookers.  C.  fulvum  Cke.  attacks  tomato
leaves,  appearing  as  brown  to  violet  colonies.  Other  molds  similar  in  appearance  are  Penidllium
and  Aspergi/lus.

For more  information  see  "Contribution  to  the  Knowledge  of the  Genus  Cladosporium  Link.

ex  Fr."  by  De  Fries,  1952.

See  Color  Photograph  20.

270/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

COPRINUS

Class:  Basidfomycetes
Order: Agaricales
Family:  Coprinaceae
Common  Name:  Inky Cap.
Habitat  and  Frequency  of  Occurrence:
Frequent  to  common  on  compost  and/or de-
composing  straw.
Medium Through Which Contamination
Is Spread:  Primarily air; secondarily through
materials  used  in  compost preparation.
Meaures  of  Control:  Proper  Phase  I  and
Phase  II  management,  especially  full  term
pasteurization;  reduction  of  ammonia  and
water in  finished compost;  and  homogenous
consistency of compost structure (avoidance
of densely compacted zones).

Figure  196  Coprinus,  the  Inky  Cap,  on
horse  manure.

Macroscopic Appearance: Appearing as a fast growing whitish  mycelium, typically fine and lack-
ing rhizomorphs, soon  knotting into small ovoid primordia that quickly enlarge into a whitish  mush-
room  with  a  long  fragile stem  and oblong  cap.  The cap soon  disintegrates into a  black inky  liquid
with  spore  maturity.
Microscopic  Characteristics:  Smooth,  elliptical  spores  produced  on  club-shaped  cells  called
basidia.  Hyphae  often  have  clamp  connections joining  adjacent  cells.
History,  Use  and/or  Medical  Implications:  Coprinus  species  are  noted  for  both  their  edibility
and toxicity.  Coprinus comatus,  the Shaggy  Mane,  is a  popular edible  and  choice  species that is
cultivated.  (See the growing  parameter outline for that species).  Coprinus atrementarius has been
reported  by Atkins (1973)  to  be a  competitor to  the  commercial  cultivation  of Agaricus,  occurring
in  under-composted straw/manure. This species also causes severe nausea and other unpleasant
symptoms  if alcohol  is  consumed within  twenty fours  of  ingestion.  Jonsson  et  al.  (1979)  reported
marked reduction  in sperm counts in  rats treated with coprine, the same compound responsible for
the  above  described  symptoms.
Comments:  Coprinus spores are  noted for their heat resistance and often survive the composting

The  Contaminants  of  Mushroom  Culture/271

Figure  197  Drawing  of  gill  cross  section  with  basidia  and  spores  of  Coprinus.

272/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

process. Although  not considered a dangerous competitor, species in this genus are common in the
piles  of  beginning  compost  makers.  If this species occurs  during  spawn  run  or at cropping,  it is an
indication of residual ammonia in the compost. Composts that have excessive ammonia concentra-
tions, composts that have been over-watered or those that are not homogenous in their structure en-
courage  Coprinus  infestation.

The  species  known 

to  contaminate  manure/straw  composts  are:  Coprinus 

fimetarius;
Coprinus  atrementarius',  and  Coprinus  niveus.  According 
(1978),  Coprinus
fimetarius  has  potential  value as a  commercially  cultivated  mushroom.  All the  above  mentioned
species are ones seen  in  poorly prepared composts.  Bitner (1972)  noted that Coprinus is a contam-
inant of grain  spawn,  although  rarely seen  and present in only one of every hundred or so  contami-
nated spawn jars.

to  Kurtzman 

The  Contaminants  of  Mushroom  Culture/273

CRYPTOCOCCUS

Class:  Fungi  Imperfect!
Order:  Cn/ptococcaies
Family:  Cryptococcaceae
Common  Names:  The  Yellowish  Brown
Yeast;  The  Carcinogenic  Yeast.
Greek Root: From "kryptos" meaning hid-
den and "kokkus" or berry, for the form of
the  conidia.
Habitat & Frequency of Occurence: Ubi-
quitous  and  common.  Cryptococcus  species
are  mostly  saprophytic  on  plant  debris,  in
soils,  cereal  grains  and  on  bird  (pigeon  or
chicken)  droppings.
Medium  Through  Which  Contamina-
tion  Is  Spread:  Air  and  pigeon  and/or
chicken wastes.
Measures  of  Control:  Good  hygienic  practices;  elimination  of  high  humidity  pockets;  removal  of
supportive substrates; and filtration of air through  micron filters.
Macroscopic Appearance:  A  spherical  yeast  not forming  a  pseudomycelium,  encapsulated  by a
cream  to  brown  colored  mucus.
Microscopic Characteristics:  Conidia  (spores)  vary  in  size,  4-20  microns  in  diameter;  ovoid;  re-
producing through simple budding;  not forming a true mycelium;  and lacking a specialized spore-
forming structure.  In some species there can be a simple ascus (a "sack"} enclosing a single spore.
Cryptococcus  species  are  Gram-positive.
History,  Use  and/or  Medical  Implications:  A  non-fermenting  yeast  with  alliances  to  the
Ascomycetes,  Cryptococcus  neoformans  (Sanf.)  Vuili.  causes  a  deadly  disease  in  animals  and
humans called cryptococcosis,  otherwise known  as "Torula  meningitis" or "yeast meningitis".  This
yeast attacks and reproduces in the central nervous system, particularly in the brain and spinal fluid.
Symptoms begin with a stiff neck and headache and end in total or partial blindness, paralysis, coma
and respiratory failure.  Less severe symptoms occur in other parts of the body, for which there is a

Figure 198  Drawing of spore formation typ-
ical  of  Cryptococcus  and  many  yeasts.

274/The Mushroom Cultivator

better chance of recovery.  It is believed that airborne spores are inhaled,  entering the body via the
lungs.  This yeast thrives in  droppings of pigeons and chickens.
Comments: Ctyptococcus is a non-fermenting yeast with alliances to some Ascomycetes:  Torula
(Black Yeast), Rhodotorula (Red Yeast) and Candida.

In 1 979 one of the containment buildings at the Tennessee Clinch River Breeder Reactor pro-

ject had to be quarantined because of a  massive outbreak of Ctyptococcus neoformans.

The  Contaminants  of  Mushroom  Culture/275

DACTYLIUM

Class:  Fungi  Imperfect!
Order:  Moniliales
Family:  Moniliaceae
Common  Name:  Cobweb  Mold;  Downy
Mildew;  Soft Mildew.
Greek  Root:  From  "daktylos"  meaning
finger, in reference to the forking of the con-
idiophore.
Habitat  &  Frequency  of  Occurrence:
Commonly seen on the casing soil or parasi-
tizing the mushroom  fruitbody.
Medium  Through  Which  Contamina-
tion  Is  Spread:  Air;  casing  soil;  water  and
insects.
Measures of Control:  Immediate  isolation  of parasitized  fruitbodies from  the  growing  environ-
ment; lowering of the relative humidity; and/or increasing air circulation. Carefully examine casing
soil components for hygienic quality. Pasteurization of casing soil generally prevents its occurrence.
Growth can be stopped by covering the cobweb mold with salt, baking soda or any highly alkaline
compound.
Macroscopic Appearance: Dacfylium dendroides Fr. is cobweb-like in appearance, first appear-
ing as small scattered patches rapidly running over the surface of the casing soil, then overwhelming
any and all mushrooms in its path. Afflicted mushrooms are covered with a fluffy down of delicate
mycelium.  This  mold  is  initially  grayish,  sometimes whitish  and  can  become  pinkish  tinged with
age.  When  cut open,  infected  mushrooms are composed of rotting flesh and young  buttons are
reduced  to  formless  masses  of  soft  tissue.
Microscopic Characteristics: Conidia multicelled,  usually composed of three or more connected
cells.  Conidia can  occur singly or clustered,  terminally positioned on the ends of branches which
often fork in a  Verfidllium-\\ke fashion and which originate from a major vertical shoot. Conidia are

Figure  199  Drawing  of  sporulating  struc-
ture  of  Dacfylium.  Note  multicelled  conida.

276/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

Figure  200  Photograph  of  Dactylium  running  through  casing
layer.

clear or  slightly yellowish  in  color  and  measure  20  x  5  microns.
History,  Use  and/or  Medical  Implications:  None  noted.
Comments: The Cobweb Mold is a fast growing, tenacious casing layer contaminant. Spores ger-
minate  upon  contact with  a  mushroom,  and  soon  envelope  it with  a  soft  mildewy  mycelium.

Spores  of  Dactylium  dendroides  are  killed  when  exposed  to  115-122°F.  for  only  1/2  hour.
(See Anderson,  1956).  The  genus  Dactlylaria  is synonomous with  Dactylium.  Several  species are
known  for  their  specialization  in  trapping  nematodes  by  arranging  their  hyphae  into  loose  coils.
When  one  enters  a  loop,  the  hypha  contract and  traps  the  nematode.

Dactylium  is the conidial  form  of Hypomyces,  some species of which  attack wild  mushrooms,
particularly Lactarius, Russula, Agaricus, Amanita and others. Dactlyium dendroides is the asexual
form  of  Hypomyces  rosellus.
For  more information consult:

Lentz,  P.L.  1966  "Dactylaria  in  Relation  to  the  Conservation  of Dactylium." Mycologia  58:

965-966.

The  Contaminants  of  Mushroom  Culture/277

DORATOMYCES

(STYSANUS)

Class:  Fungi  Imperfect!
Order:  Moniliales
Family:  Stilbellaceae
Common  Names:  The  Black  Whisker
Mold;  The  Smoky  Grey  Mold.
Habitat  and  Frequency  of  Occurrence:
A saprophyte, occasionally to frequently seen
on the straws of an  inadequately pasteurized
compost;  on  wooden  trays;  rarely  spreading
to  the  casing  soil;  sometimes  contaminating
grain  cultures;  and  seldom  seen  on  agar.  In
nature  Doratomyces is a  major constituent of
a  soil's  microflora.

Figure  201  Drawing  of  the  sporulating
structure  of  Doratomyces 
the
Black  Whisker  Mold.

(Stysanus), 

Medium Through Which Contamination Is Spread: Primarily an airborne contaminant; sec-
ondarily  transmitted  through  spent  compost  and  left  over  debris.
Methods of Control: Air filtration;  correct preparation  and  pasteurization  of compost;  and adher-
ence  to  a  strict  schedule  of  hygiene  in  the  laboratory  and  growing  room.  Whenever  a  room  be-
comes contaminated with this fungus, a thorough cleaning is in order, particularly any trays that har-
bored  this  rapidly  growing  contaminant.  The  most common  source  of this fungus  is  spent compost
or newly Turned soils.
Macroscopic  Appearance:  A  heavily  sporulating  grayish  to  blackish  mold,  permeating  through-
out the  compost  and  when  disrupted,  emitting  clouds  of  grayish  spores.  Contaminated  regions  of
compost  are  more  darkly  colored  and  seem  damper  than  uncontaminated  regions.  Its  common
name,  the Black Whisker Mold,  well describes the macroscopic appearance.
Microscopic  Characteristics:  Hyphae,  conidiophores  and  conidia  darkly  pigrnented.  Conidio-
phores  are  single  or  aligned  as  compacted  vertical  assemblages  of  hyphae  that  variously  diverge
near  the  apex  into  short  chains  of dry,  ovoid,  unicellular  spores  in  a  Penicillium-\\ke  fashion.

278/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

History,  Use  and/or  Medical  Implications:  Some  species  toxic.  Doratomyces  causes  an
asthma-like respiratory  response  (coughing,  soreness of throat,  nose  bleeds)  in those who are ex-
posed  to  concentrations of  its spores.  Workers  emptying  spent compost from  growing  houses are
the  most  likely To  be  inflicted with  this illness.
Comments:  Doratomyces  is  synonymous  with  Stysanus.  Doratomyces  microsporus  (=Stysanus
microsporus),  the  Smoky  Grey  Mold  and  Doratomyces  stemonitls  (=$tysanus  stemonitis),  the
Black  Whisker  Mold,  both  contaminate  the  compost  and  emit  huge  quantities  of  spores  when
disturbed. A moderately strong competitor of mushroom mycelium, this mold grows well in under-
composted,  poorly  pasteurized  and/or  wet  composts—composts  poorly  suited  for  good  mushroom
crops.  If the  compost  bed  heats  up  during  spawn  running  and  kills  the  grain  inoculum,  the  grain
kernels  are  soon  attacked  by  this  fungus  which  then  resporulates  and  infects  the  compost.
Doratomyces is an  indicator mold,  whose presence suggests poor composting,  pasteurization or
spawn  running  practices.

The  Contaminants  of  Mushroom  Culture/279

EPICOCCUM

Class:  Fungi  Imperfect!
Order:  Moniliales
Family:  Tubercularlaceae
Common  Name: Yellow Mold.
Habitat  and  Frequency  of  Occurrence:
An  occasional  contaminant of grain  culture.
Species  in  this  genus  are  decomposers  of
wood,  leaves and stems of plants, playing an
important  role  in  the  soil  community.
Medium Through Which Contamination
Is  Spread:  Air;  soil;  and  grain.
Methods  of  Control:  Isolation  of  contami-
nated cultures; careful screening of grain  us-
ed 
inoculum;  and  sufficient  steam
permeation  of  grain  during  sterilization.
Macroscopic  Appearance:  Species  in  this  genus  are  variously  pigrnented.  In  grain  culture,
Epicoccum is distinguished by its bright yellowish orange to pinkish orange color and is often asso-
ciated with a yellowish fluid which it apparently exudes. Its mycelium appears as dense zones within
which  blackish  spores are formed.  On  most agar media,  Epicoccum  is slow growing  and whitish.
Outside the laboratory, Epicoccum can be found on leaves and twigs, forming small black dot col-
onies.
Microscopic  Characteristics:  Conidiophores  compact,  short and  radiating  from  cushion  shaped
cells  called  "sporodochia"  and  from  which  dark,  one  celled,  round  spores  (conidia)  arise  or with
which they are associated. The conidia are typically reticulated or ornamented with small spine-like
projections,  measuring  (5)  1 5-25  (50)  microns.  These  reticulated conidia  appear to  be  composed
of several  tightly  interconnected  cells.
History,  Use and/or  Medical  Implications:  None noted.
Comments:  Not  strongly  inhibitory  to  mushroom  mycelium.  This  mold  can,  however,  spoil

Figure  202  Drawing  of  cushion  shaped
sporulating  structure  typical  of Epicoccum,  a
yellow  mold.

for 

280/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

spawn.  In  grain  culture,  fruitings still  develop  in  containers that are  partially contaminated with this
mold.

Epicoccum oiyzae attacks rice, causing lesions that are pinkish to reddish in coloration. Anoth-
er  Epicoccum  species  was  reported  by  Bitner  (1972)  To  be  the  most  common  mold  attacking
sorghum spawn, comprising nearly 30% of all contaminated cultures. On The other hand, it repre-
sented  only  5%  of  the  contaminants  on  rye.  The  frequency  with  which  this  contaminant  occurs
varies substantially.
For  more information:

M.B.  Schol-Schwartz  (1957),  "The  Genus  Epicoccum  (Link.)."

The Contaminants of Mushroom Culture/281

FUSARIUM

Class:  Fungi  Imperfect!
Order:  Moniliales
Family:  Tubericulariaceae
Common  Names:  The  Brightly  Colored
Contaminant;  Damping  Off  Disease;  or
Yellow  Rain  Mold.
Greek  Root:  Having  the  same  root  as  "fusi-
form",  meaning to  be swollen  in the center
and narrowing towards the ends, in reference
to  the  distinctive  shape  of  the  conidia.
Habitat  &  Frequency  of  Occurrence:
Commonly  encountered  in  spawn  produc-
tion  and  in  agar  culture.  A  natural  inhabitant
of  grains  (rye,  wheat,  barley,  rice),  Fusaria
also are found in soils, on  living and decaying
plants  and  on  decomposing 
textiles  and
paper.
Medium  Through  Which  Contamination  Is  Spread:  Air;  grain;  and casing soil.

Figure  203  Drawing  of  simple  sporulating
structure  typical  of the  genus  Fusarium.

Measures  of  Control:  Sufficient  sterilization  of  grain;  isolation  and  proper  disposal  of  contami-
nated cultures. General hygienic practices and air filtration prevent this contaminant. Increasing ven-
tilation  while  simultaneously  decreasing  humidity  hinders  the  proliferation  of  this  potentially
dangerous  contaminant.

Macroscopic  Appearance:  Appearing  as  an  extensive,  fast  growing,  and  whitish  cottony  myceli-
um which can  remain whitish  or,  as in  most cases,  becomes brightly pigrnented.  Fusarium species
most frequently  seen  on  grain  are  shades  of  pink,  purple  or  yellow.

Microscopic  Characteristics:  Conidia  generally  sickle  shaped;  multicelled;  septate  (segmented);
and developing from short,  simple and  irregularly branched conidiophores that arise from a cottony
mycelial  mat.  Conidia  are  canoe,  crescent or sickle shaped,  with  the  basal  end  notched  or  niched.
Some  pear  shaped,  single  celled  microconidia  are  also  produced.

History,  Use and/or  Medical  Implications: Some  Fusarium species highly toxic. Throughout

The  Contaminants  of  Mushroom  Culture/283

correlated  high  levels of Fusarium  to this phenomenon.  Even a  moderate  infestation  by this con-
taminant inhibits mushroom  growth.  Mushrooms afflicted with this disease remain small and often
have disproportionately small caps and stems whose interiors are brownish. Wolfe (1937) was able
to induce Damping Off Disease by first isolating Fusaria and then physically introducing it into The
casing layer of a healthy bed.

Although  not as commonly encountered as Penicillium or  Trichoderma,  Fusarium can wreak
havoc in a sterile lab if not soon contained. Grain  is the main source of Fusarium contamination in
mushroom culture. Twenty-eight Fusaria have been identified from cereal grains, five of which have
been isolated from contaminated mushroom spawn jars (see Pepper & Keisling,  1963). These are:

F.  lateritium,  a  pinkish  species.
F. avenaceum, a reddish species.
F.  culmorum, a vivid yellowish red species.
F. poae, a violet colored species.
F.  oxysporum, a red violet species.
F. sp., a fast growing whitish species.
Fusaria can cause severe mycosis and these molds must be treated with extreme caution. Grain

contaminated with  Fusarium  should  be sterilized  before  handling.

There are, undoubtedly, more toxic species than the literature presently indicates.
One of the first patents ever to be awarded to a living organism was given for F. gramineraum.

For  more  information  see:

Wood,  F.C.,  1  937  "Studies  of  Vamping  Off  of Cultivated Mushrooms  and Its  Association

with  Fusarium  Species."  Phytopath.  27:  85-94.

Toussoun,  T.A.  and  P.E.  Nelson,  1968  "A  Pictorial Guide to  the  Identification  of Fusarium

Species" Pennslyvania State University Press.

Seagrave,  S.,  1981  "Yellow Rain:  A  Test of  Terror" Seattle  Post Intelligencer,  September

27, B2.

284/The Mushroom Cultivator

GEOTRICHUM

Class:  Fungi  Imperfect!
Order:  Moniliales
Family:  Moniliaceae
Common  Name:  Lipstick  Mold.
Latin  Root:  From  "geo"  meaning  earth,
and "trichum" meaning hairy, in reference to
the character of the mycelial mat.
Habitat  &  Frequency  of  Occurrence:
Generally a saprophyte although some forms
act as parasites. Ceotrichum species are ex-
tremely  common  in  nature  but  infrequently
encountered in mushroom compost—unless
it  has  been  prepared  directly  on  soil.
Ceotrichum  dwells  in  soils,  cow  dung,  old
straw,  compost piles and rots some fruits and
vegetables.  In general, species of this genus
are mesophilic thermophiles  and  are there-
fore  sensitive  to  pasteurization  temperatures.
Medium  Through  Which  Contamination  Is  Spread:  Air;  soil;  and from  old straw  and  spent
composts.
Measures  of  Control:  Composting  on  a  concrete  surface;  thorough  pasteurization  of  compost
and  straw;  and  use  of clean  casing  materials.
Macroscopic Appearance: Mycelium whitish at first, often taking on a "frosty" appearance and
then forming whitish balls of mycelium. With age, the mycelium becomes pinkish and then reddish
due to the maturation  of spores.  Older colonies of this fungus fade to a  dull orange.
Microscopic  Characteristics:  Hyphae  septate,  in  the  form  of  extensive  but  random  chains  of
cells,  from  which  cylindrical  conidial  spores  segment,  measuring  5-10  x  3-6  microns.  Conidio-
phores are simple and often indistinguishable from the mycelial network.
History,  Use and/or  Medical  Implications:  Few species toxic.  Ceotrichum  candidum  causes
an oral, bronchial,  pulmonary and/or intestinal disease known as geotrichosis that infects humans
and other mammals.

Figure  205  Drawing  of  sporulating  struc-
ture of Ceotrichum, the Lipstick Mold, and its
characteristically shaped conidia.

The Contaminants of Mushroom Culture/285

Comments: Commonly encountered  in agar plates made from a soil  infusion;  otherwise  rarely en-
countered  in  sterile  culture.  An  occasional  contaminant  of  mushroom  beds  (compost),  Lipstick
Mold  inhibits  primordia  formation  and  development.  With  the  advent of concrete  composting  sur-
faces and peat based casings, this contaminant has been virtually eliminated from  modern mush-
room  farms.

This  fungus  is  closely  allied  to,  if  not synonymous  with  Sporendonema purpurescens.

For  more  information  see:

Sinden,  J.W.,  1971  "Ecological  Control of Pathogens  and  Weed Molds  in  Mushroom  Cul-

ture" &r\nua\  Review  of  Phytopathology  9.

Carmlchacl,  J.W.,  1957  "Ceotrichum  candidum" Mycologia  49.  pp.  820-830.

286/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

HUMICOLA

Class:  Fungi  Imperfect!
Order:  Moniliales
Series:  Aleuriosporae
Common  Name:  Gray  Mold.
Latin  Root:  From  "humus"  meaning  soil
and the suffix "cola" meaning dweller,  inhab-
itant.
Habitat  &  Frequency  of  Occurrence:  A
rare  contaminant  of  sterile  culture.  Thermo-
philic species are frequently seen  in the sec-
ond  phase  of  composting,  thriving  in  the
115-125  degree  F.  range.  Naturally  occur-
ring  on  grains,  straw,  wood,  sojjs  and  other
organic  matter  high  in  cellulose.
Medium  Through  Which  Contamina-
tion  Is  Spread:  Air;  soil;  and  grain.

Figure  206  Drawing  of  speculating  struc-
ture  and  spores  (conidia)  of  Humicola.

Measures  of  Control: Thorough  sterilization  of grain  and  incubation  of spawn  at  moderate  tem-
peratures. Humicola is a thermophile and thrives in elevated temperature zones. Since the presence
of Humicola is considered beneficial to compost,  no countermeasures are necessary if it occurs in
that substrate.
Macroscopic Appearance:  Mycelium  on  agar a fine to thick grayish  to colorless mat, varying  ac-
cording to the media employed. On grain its mycelium is typically thick, colorless at first, soon gray
and eventually dark gray with  spore production.  On compost,  Humicold is an aerial, fluffy,  whitish
mycelium that is soon grayish with spore maturity.  It is frequently seen at or near the surface where
temperatures are  115-125°F.
Microscopic  Characteristics:  Conidia  one  celled,  typically  globose,  brownish  colored  and  often
sculptured.  Conidiophores  are  also  darkly  pigrnented,  simple,  undeveloped  and  similar  to  the
mycelium  or at times having short lateral  branches at whose swollen  apices a  single conidium  is
borne.  Alternately, short chains of microconidia formed by flask shaped cells (phialides) can occur.
History,  Use  and/or  Medical  Implications:  Selected  for  use  in  compost  nutrient  conversion
during  Phase  II  of  composting.

The  Contaminants  of  Mushroom  Culture/287

Comments:  Humicola plays  an  important  role  in  the conversion  of the  nitrogen  in  ammonia  into
protein  rich compounds that the mushroom  mycelia can digest.  In this regard Humicola is an ally to
the  compost  preparation  process.  Compost  makers  have  long  believed  that Humicola  nigrescens
should  be  encouraged  to  grow  during  Phase  II  because  a  compost  colonized  with  it  resulted  in
higher yields. Humicola prospers in the 115-125 (130) °F. range. When the finished compost has
been  brought down to spawning  temperature,  these fungi are  rendered  inactive,  and are then con-
sumed  by the  mushroom  mycelium.

On  grain  Humicola  grisea  is  most  frequently  seen;  on  horse  manure/straw  composts
Humicola  nigrescens  is  most  commonly  encountered.  Humicola  that  occurs  during  cropping  does
not seem  to  pose  a  serious threat to the overall  crop.

Most species are mesophilic;  some are thermophilic; and all are saprophytic.  Humicola is not a

problem  contaminant.

See  Torula,  another  thermophilic  fungus  beneficial  to  composting.

For more information consult:

Bels-Koning,  H.C.,  Cerrits,  J.P.C.,  and  Vaandrager,  M.H.  1962.  "Some  Fungi  Appearing

Towards  the  End  of  Composting, "  Mushroom  Science  V.

288/The Mushroom Cultivator

MONIL1A

Figure  207  Drawing  of  chain-like  structure
by  which  Monilia  produces  conidia  (spores).

Class:  Fungi Imperfect!
Order:  Moniliales
Family:  Moniliaceae
Common Names: White Mold; White Flour
Mold;  or  Pink  Mold
Latin  Root: From "monile" or necklace for
the  chain-like  arrangement  of  the  mycelium
and  spore  producing  cells.
Habitat & Frequency of Occurence: Rel-
atively common on agar; grain; Compost and
casing  soil.
Medium  Through  Which  Contamina-
tion Is Spread: Primarily air; soil; and grain,
Measures  of  Control:  Air  filtration;  maintenance  of  good  hygiene  in  laboratory  and  growing
room, especially in the isolation and removal of contaminated cultures and debris from previous
croppings. Thorough sterilization of grain and pasteurization of casing reduces the possibility of
contamination arising from within. This contaminant is believed to be externally introduced through
airborne spores. High efficiency filters prevent Monilia spores from contaminating spawn and lessen
the risk of contamination in the growing room.
Macroscopic  Appearance:  Represented  by  two  mutable  forms:  the  imperfect form  Monilia  is
generally a fine powdery whitish mold; and the perfect form Neurospora is a rapid growing tena-
cious aerial mold that is pinkish with spore  maturity.  In  grain  both  the whitish and the pinkish
Neurospora are encountered. White Monilia has a remarkable resemblance to finely ground perlite
and can  easily  be mistaken for it.  On casing soil,  the pink form  is more common.  Both  are very
rapid  growing.
Microscopic  Characteristics:  Conidia  unicellular;  ova! to  lemon  shaped;  produced in  large quan-
tities on yeast-like chains with the terminal cells being the youngest and originating from a simple,
septate mycelial network. Less frequently, conidial spores are produced singly. Conidiophores are

The Contaminants of Mushroom Culture/289

extremely  simple  and  similar to  mycelium  or  absent  altogether.  Its  mycelium  is  hyaline,  white  or
gray  colored  while  the  conidia  are  tan,  gray  or  most  commonly  pink  in  color.
History,  Use  and/or  Medical  Implications:  Not  known  to  be  pathogenic.  A  disease  known  as
moniiiasis in medicine is actually caused by a related yeast-like fungus,  Candida,  and is more cor-
rectly termed candidiasis.  Candida has been incorrectly called Monilia in medical mycology texts.
Several  genera  share  the  same  overall  microscopic  features  and  can  be  easily  confused  with
Monilia.  Indeed,  Monilia is a pivotal genus amongst a constellation of genera.  For the purposes of
the  home  cultivator,  all  these  forms  might  be  more  usefully  called  a  "complex  of genera".
Comments:  Monilia's  perfect  form  is  represented  by  Neurospora  (see  that  genus)  and  either
phenotype is largely determined by nutritional factors, particularly pH. Monilia can vary substantially
in color on grain spawn: from a thick whitish mycelial mat to a powdery white, gray or pink colored
mycelium.  Perhaps the most devastating form  is the whitish one for its resemblence to mushroom
mycelium.  Also  seen  in  agar culture,  the  pink  form  is noted for its high  aerial  mycelium.  It climbs
the sides of petri dishes.  If not treated, this contaminant can be very difficult to eradicate. Complete
cleaning  of the  laboratory  is the only recourse.  After a  Monilia outbreak  careful  attention  must be
directed at reestablishing spawn  integrity.

Monilia and Neurospora attack the mushroom  beds and casing layers with rapid growing gray-
ish  mycelia  that soon  develop  pinkish  tones with  spore  maturity.  Contamination  by this fungus  is
usually traced Jo unclean casing or infected spawn.

Consult  the  genus  Neurospora.

Figure  208  Mon/7/a-like  mold  on  agar  media  with  mushroom
mycelium.

290/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

MUCOR

Figure  209  Drawing  of  sporulating  struc-
ture  (sporangiophore)  of  Mucor.

Class:  Zygomycetes
Order:  Mucorales
Family:  Mucoraceae
Common  Names: the  Black  Pin  Mold; the
Black Bread Mold
Habitat  &  Frequency  of  Occurrence:  A
common  saprophyte  of  stored  grains;  horse
dung; old straw;  mushroom composts;  peat;
soil; and plant debris. Mucor also rots textiles.
Medium  Through  Which  Contamina-
tion  Is  Spread:  Primarily  air;  secondarily
grain  and  contaminated  compost.
Measures  of  Control:  Air  filtration;  suffi-
cient  sterilization  of grain;  and  immediate  re-
moval and isolation of contaminated regions,
'spent' compost,  aged mushrooms or cropping debris.  Exercizing general  hygienic practices usual-
ly  prevents  this  contaminant  from  becoming  a  problem.
Macroscopic  Appearance:  A  fast  growing  fungus  forming  an  interwoven  dense  mycelial  mat,
whitish at first, producing a stalk-like sporangiophore which  is not swollen at the apex but is envel-
oped  by  spherical  spore  producing  body.  Soon  becoming  grayish  and  then  blackish  overall  with
spore production.  When Mucor sporulates,  it appears  like a  "forest of black  headed  pins".  On  malt
agar,  sporangiophores often  do  not form,  making  identification  difficult.
Microscopic Characteristics: Tall  sporangiophores arising  singly from  the mycelial  mat,  adorned
with a spherical  sporangium  composed of many spores.  Hyphae are non-septate (lacking distinct
cell walls).
History,  Use  and/or  Medical  Implications:  Some  species  toxic.  Mucor pusilius  and  other  mu-
curaceous fungi  are  the cause of a  rare  but deadly  disease  known  as  mucormycosis or  phycomy-
cosis. Although Mucor attacks open wounds, the outer ear and the lungs, it is not a primary parasite
but  one  that takes  advantage  of  poor  health  caused  from  other diseases.  This  disease  and  ones
related  to  it  are  more  prevalent  in  tropical  and  semitropical  zones than  in  temperate  regions.  For

The  Contaminants  of  Mushroom  Culture/291

Figure  210  Mucor,  the  Black  Pin  Mold,  on  malt agar.

more  information  on  the  pathogenic  aspects  of  fungi  in  This  group  refer  to  the  reference  below.
Comments: A vigorous contaminant and seen at various times in spawn production, inhibiting and
overwhelming  the  mushroom  mycelium.  On  malt agar  media  Mucor is a  fast growing,  non-sporu-
lating,  cottony  and  whitish  mycelial  network  competing  with  or  overwhelming  mushroom  myce-
lium. Mucor mycelium is non-rhizomorphic and lacks the clamp connections that is characteristic of
many  mushroom  mycelia.

If in doubt whether a whitish mycelium  Is Mucor or not, inoculate some bread with some myce-
lium covered kernels and incubate at a warm temperature. If the mold is Mucor,  it will sporulate in a
few days and be easy to identify.

The  most  frequently  seen  species  of this  genus  are  Mucor racemosus  and  Mucor plumbeus.
Mucor pusil/us,  a  true  thermophile,  thrives  in  the  68-131  °  F.  (20-55°  C.)  range and  is a  major
constituent in the microfiora of compost piles. Mucor infected spawn, when inadvertently inoculated
onto  the  mushroom  compost,  can  result  in  the  total  contamination  of the  bed  within  a  few  days.
Consult Sepedonium, a contaminant whose vegetative mycelia resembles the non-sporulating my-
celium  of Mucor.  See also Rhizopus,  a  genus that differs from  Mucor by its having  a  smaller spor-
angium  receding  from  the  "head"  of  the  sporangiophore.
For  more information  consult:

Emmans,  C.W.,  C.H.  Binford,  and  J.P.  Utz  1963,  "Medical Mycology"  Lea  and  Febiger,

Philadelphia.

292/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

MYCELIA  STERILIA

Figure  211  Drawing  of  mycelial  network 
showing  hyphae  with  clamp  connections  and 
sclerotia-hke  bodies  characteristic  of  species 
in  the  Order  Myce ha  Steriha. 

Class:  Fungi  Imperfect!
Order:  Mycelia  Sterilia
Common  Name:  White  Mold.
Habitat  and  Frequency  of  Occurrence:
Contaminants fitting into this order occasion-
ally encountered  in  sterile culture.
Medium Through Which Contamination
Is  Spread:  Hyphal  fragments  airborne.
Measures  of  Control:  General  hygienic
procedures, 
filtration  of  air
through high efficiency Particulate air (HEPA)
filters,  recommended.
T
Macroscopic  Appearance: 
lypically  ap-
. . ..  ,
peanng  as  a  fast  growing  whitish  mycelium,
fine  and  or  cottony  in  its  growth,  bpecies ot
Mycelia Sterilia closely resemble mushroom mycelium and may be mistaken for it. Sometimes they
form  whitish to  blackish  aggregates of hyphae that are sclerotia-like.
Microscopic  Characteristics:  Having  a  well  developed  hypha!  network,  with  or  without  clamp
connections.  Only  a  vegetative  mycelial  stage  is  known.  Since  sporulating  structures are  absent,
fungi  in  this  group  reproduce  through  random  fragmentation  of  hyphae.
History,  Use  and/or  Medical  Implications:  The  genus  Sclerotium  noted  for  two  species  that
parasitize a variety of green  plants.  Otherwise,  the  Order  is  unremarkable.
Comments:  Mycelia  Sterilia  is  often  called  a  "garbage  order"  for  non-sporulating  mycelium  of
molds that can not be otherwise identified.  Either a fungus has lost the ability to produce spores and
can  exist  only  in  a  vegetative  state,  or  it will  only  produce  spores  on  media  of  narrow  nutritional
specifications. In both cases, it is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to identify a fungus that has no
visible conidial  (sporulating)  stage.

including  the 

_ 

_ 

A 

,,  c«

There is a white mold that occasionally contaminates agar media and,  by default, qualifies for

The  Contaminants of  Mushroom  Culture/293

placement  into  the  Order  Mycelia  Sterilia.  Beginning  cultivators  have  been  known  to  propagate
these  sterile  fungi  in  large  quantities  thinking  them  to  be  mushroom  mycelia.  This  group  of  con-
taminants can  be  very  competitive  and  should  not  be  underestimated.

See  also Mucor,  a  mold  that  has  a  vigorously  growing  whitish  mycelium  on  agar  media  and

one  that  often  does  not  sporulate  until  it  is transferred  to  grain.

294/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

MYCOGONE

Class:  Fungi  Imperfecti
Order:  Moniliales
Family:  Hyphomyceteae
Common  Names:  Bubble;  Wet  Bubble;
White  Mushroom  Mold; and La  Mole.
Greek  Root:  From  "myco"  or  fungal  and
the  suffix  "gone"  meaning  reproductive
body. This mold is named in reference to this
mold's tendency to parasitize the mushroom
fruitbody.
Habitat  &  Frequency  of  Occurrence:
Very common,  infecting the mushroom itself
and  causing  significant  losses  to  crops.
Mycogone  naturally  occurs  in  loils  from
which this aggressive contaminant attacks the
mushroom fruitbody,  It does not grow well at
temperatures lower than 60 °F.

Figure  212  Drawing  of  sporulating  struc-
ture characteristic of Mycogone.

Medium  Through  Which  Contamination  Is  Spread:  Mostly  through  soils;  debris  (stem  butts,
etc.); and spent compost. Workers, especially harvesters, are one of the primary vehicles for spore
dispersal. Watering infected areas further spreads this contaminant.
Measures of Control: Use of clean casing materials; moderation of temperature and adhering to a
strict regimen of hygiene, especially between cropping cycles. Without touching the casing, infected
mushrooms should be removed from the bed. The localized area is then sprinkled with salt, baking
soda or a similar alkalinic substance.  Do not water until the infected area is treated.
Macroscopic  Appearance:  Appearing  as  a  whitish  mold  attacking  primordia  and  turning  them
into  a  soft whitish  ball  of mycelia.  From  the  brown  and  rotting  interior of these  "bubbles",  amber
fluid containing  spores and  bacteria  ooze.  More  mature  mushrooms  that are  afflicted with this  dis-
ease have a felt-like covering of mycelium and a disproportionately small cap relative to The size of
the  stem.
Microscopic Characteristics: Conidiophores short; generally hyaline; relatively undeveloped; lat-
eral;  and  altogether similar to the mycelia. Two types of conidia,  terminally  produced,  can  occur.
The first and most distinctive type of chlamydospore is dark, round and two celled with one being

The  Contaminants  of  Mushroom  Culture/295

Figure 213  Mycogone,  Wet Bubble,  on cased rye grain spawn.

large and rough walled, often adorned with short spine-like projections, and which  is attached to a
smaller cup shaped smooth  cell.  The second conidial type  is smaller,  ellipsoid,  unicellular and de-
velops  apically  from  the  ends  of  Verticillium-\\\<.e  conidiophores.
History,  Use and/or  Medical  Implications:  Not known  to  be pathogenic to man or animals.
Comments:  Mycogone perniciosa  Magnus  is  the  species  in  the  genus  responsible  for  attacking
the  mushroom  crop.  Its mycelia  intergrows with  mushroom  mycelia,  according  Kneebone  (1 961).
This is a vigorous and resilient contaminant. Its spores are killed at 120 ° F. when exposed to moist
heat  (pasteurization)  for  24  hours.  Isolation  of  contaminated  mushrooms,  increasing  ventilation,
lowering  temperature  and  proper  bed  cleaning  techniques  all  limit  the  spread  of  Mycogone.
Kneebone recommends the use of chlorinated water (150  ppm) during  normal crop watering to im-
pede  the  germination  of  its  spores.

Harvey et  al.  1982,  noted that if Mycogone appears during the first flush, then  its spores were
probably introduced via the casing—either at the time of its application or during spawn run through
it, a period of about two weeks. Later infestations are more probably spread by flies, workers, air cur-
rents  or  other  means.

Mycogone  is  believed  by  some  mycologists  to  be  an  imperfect  form  of  Hypomyces,  an

ascomycetous fungus that parasitizes wild mushrooms,  especially Russula and  Lactarius.

See  also  Verticillium  and  Dactyl/urn.

296/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

NEUROSPORA

Class:  Ascomycetes
Order:  Xylariales
Family:  Sordariaceae
Common  Names:  Pink  Mold;  Red  Bread
Mold
Latin  Root:  From  "neuro"  meaning  nerve
and "spora" or spore, in reference to The lon-
gitudinal  nerve-like  ridges  running  along  the
axis of the  spore.
Habitat  &  Frequency  of  Occurrence:
Commonly to occasionally seen  on  agar and
grain.  Neurospora  is  fast  growing,  some-
times taking  only  24 four  hours to tqjally col-
onize a media filled petri dish.  It is ubiquitous
in  nature, occurring on dung, in soils and on
decaying  plant matter.

Figure  214  Drawing  of  speculating  struc-
ture  and  distinctive  spores  of  Neurospora,  a
pink  mold.

Medium  Through  Which  Contamination  Is  Spread:  Primarily  air;  secondarily  soils;  dung  and
grains.
Measures of Control: Air filtration; incubation of cultures in a sterile environment; thorough sterili-
zation  of grain;  isolation  and  destruction  of contaminated  cultures;  and otherwise  maintaining the
standard  regimen  of  hygiene.
Macroscopic Appearance: A fast growing, creeping aerial  mycelia that becomes bright pinkish  in
color  with  spore  maturity.
Microscopic  Characteristics:  Spores  distinctively  longitudinally  ribbed  with  nerve-like  ridges,
produced eight at a time (rarely four) in a sac-like organ called an ascus which is in turn enclosed
within a ball-like perithecium  that can be dark brown to black to pink in color.  Its mycelium is usual-
ly pigrnented, a feature influenced by the type of habitat.  Its imperfect form, Monilia, consists of a
simple  mycelia  network which  branches.  Monilia segments at the tips from which  ellipsoid, oval or
globose  spores are  formed  in  short  chains from  the terminal  ends.  Monilia  spores  are  frequently
pinkish.
History,  Use and/or Medical Implications: Not known to be pathogenic to man or animals.

The  Contaminants  of  Mushroom  Culture/297

Neurospora crassa has become a standard species for studying fungal  genetics in  culture.
Comments:  Neurospora  has  an  imperfect  form  represented  by  the  genus  Moni/ia  which  forms
spores  not  in  a  sac-like  envelope  but  in  simple  chains  at  the  end  of  hyphae.  (See  that  genus).
Neurospora and/or Monilia are  some  of the fastest growing  contaminants on  grain  and agar.  The
color of this contaminant,  in  either form,  varies substantially. The ability of this organism  to mutate
into both  an  asexually  reproducing fungus (Monilia) and  a  sexual  one  (Neurospora) is a  factor  large-
ly determined by nutrition and pH—low pH levels encourage the expression of Monilia while higher
pH  media  favor  Neurospora.

The characteristic pinkish tone and unique spore structure make Neurospora an easy contami-
nant to identify.  Since this fungus grows through cotton stoppers or filter discs, a single contami-
nated jar, though sealed, can spread spores to adjacent spawn jars within the laboratory. This condi-
tion is more likely if the filter discs or cotton plugs are the least bit damp; or if The external humidity is
high.  Furthermore,  Neurospora  spores  germinate  more  readily at elevated  temperatures.

The red  bread mold belongs to the Neurospora crassa complex.  The pink  mold seen  in  mush-
room  culture  is  most frequently  Neurospora  sitophila,  a  pernicious contaminant that  is difficult to
eliminate.

All infected cultures should be removed as soon as possible from the laboratory and destroyed.
A thorough cleaning of the laboratory is absolutely necessary. If contamination persists, remove ail
spawn and start anew. Since Neurospora spores are spread via the air, high efficiency Particulate air
(HEPA) filters readily eliminate this contaminant.

Refer  to  the  genus  Monilia,  an  imperfect  form  of  Neurospora.

Figure  215  Neurospora  contaminating  PDA  media.  Note creeping  aerial  mycelium.

298/The Mushroom  Cultivator

PAPULOSPORA

Class:  Fungi  Imperfect!
Order:  Mycelia  Sterilia
Common  Name:  Brown  Plaster  Mold.
Latin  Root:  From  "papulosus"  meaning
pimple-like  and  "spora"  or spore.  Named  in
reference to the  rounded groups of cells  that
resemble  sclerotia  and  are  characteristic  of
this genus.
Habitat  &  Frequency  of  Occurrence:  A
saprophyte,  common  on  overly  mature  com-
posts or on compost with excessive moisture.
Some  species  grow  directly  on  the  wood
used in the construction of the trays and then
spread  to  the  beds.
Medium  Through  Which  Contamina-
tion 
Is  Spread:  Primarily  air;  from  spent
compost;  or  from  untreated  trays  that  once
harbored  this  contaminant.

Figure  216  Drawing  of  non-sporulating
sclerotia-like  mycelial  mass  that  is  typical  of
the  Brown  Plaster  Mold,  Papulospora
byssina.

Measures  of  Control:  Avoidance  of  over-composting;  proper  balancing  of  moisture  in  the  com-
post; expeditious removal of old or contaminated compost; steam cleaning of trays; and maintaining
good  hygiene  between  crops.
Macroscopic  Appearance:  Dense  whitish  mycelium,  resembling  Scopulariopsis  fimicola  (the
White  Plaster  Mold)  in  the  early  stages,  soon  becoming  cinnamon  brown  from  small  bead-like  or
"powdery"  sclerotia-like  balls  of cells.  The  balls of cells  are  easily seen  with  a  hand  lens  and  are
darkly pigrnented.  Often there is a whitish rim of new growth along the outer periphery of the myce-
lium.
Microscopic  Characteristics:  True  conidia  absent,  propagating  through  simple  fragmentation  of
mycelia  or through  dense  spherical  sclerotia-like  masses  of dark  cells.
History,  Use and/or  Medical  Implications:  None  known.
Comments:  Papulospora  is  competitive  to  mushroom  mycelium  and  can  therefore  postpone  or
inhibit  fruiting.  Papulospora  byss'ma  Hotson  is  the  brown  plaster  mold  commonly  encountered  in
mushroom cultivation.  Colonies of this contaminant can grow up to several feet in diameter if cor-

The Contaminants of Mushroom  Culture/299

rective countermeasures are not taken. It frequently grows on wooden trays or shelves. The Brown
Plaster Mold is detrimental to mushroom crops only in the sense that Papulospora usurps valuable
nutrients  that  would  otherwise  be  available  to  the  mushroom  mycelium.  According  to  Atkins
(1974), wet, compact and overly mature compost is likely to favor these contaminants.

Because no conidial (spore producing) phase is known,  it has been placed in the "garbage"

order of little understood fungi,  the  Mycelia Sterilia.

See  also  Bottytis and Scopulariopsis.

300/The Mushroom Cultivator

PENICILLIUM

Class:  Fungi  Imperfect!
Order:  Moniliales
Family:  Eurotiaceae
Common  Name: The  Bluish  Green  Mold.
Latin  Root:  From  "penicillum"  meaning  a
brush-like tuft of hairs, so named in reference
to  the  shape  of the  sporulating  body.
Habitat &  Frequency  of Occurrence: An
extremely  common  contaminant.  Although
not as  prevalent  in  nature  as  Cladosporium,
Penidlliutn  is  the  most  prevalent  of  indoor
contaminants,  a  fact  that  is  undoubtedly  re-
lated  to  human  eating  habits.  Penidllium
species  abound  on  foodstuffs  such  as  fruits,
cheeses and stored grains. Many species pre-
fer habitats with an acid pH. Penicillia are oc-
casional  to  frequent  on  under-developed
mushroom  compost,  casing  soil  and  on  dis-
carded  mushroom  debris.

Figure  217  Drawing  of  sporulating  struc-
ture  characteristic  of  Penidllium  molds.

Medium  Through  Which  Contamination  Is  Spread:  Primarily  through  the  air,  although  stored
grain and other foodstuffs,  as well as humans are the most frequent carriers of this mold.
Measures of Control: Air filtration;  removal of waste products;  isolation of contaminated cultures;
and  maintenance  of a  high  level  of  hygiene.
Macroscopic Appearance: Appearing as a granular or powdery  bluish  green  mold,  often with a
broad whitish  rim  of new growth.  Some species,  less frequently encountered,  are whitish,  yellowish
or even  reddish  in color.  Many species exude droplets of fluid from their surfaces having antibiotic
properties.
Microscopic  Characteristics:  Conidiophores  arising  singly,  long,  and  branching  near  the  apex
into  short  chains  of  globose,  green,  dry  conidia.  Compared  to  mushroom  spores,  the  conidia  of
Penicillia  are  minute,  measuring  only  2-4  microns  in  diameter.
History,  Use and/or Medical Implications: In  1928-1929 while Dr. Alexander Fleming was
studying  Staphylococcus  aureus,  he  noticed  that a  green  mold  contaminant  inhibited  his cultured

The  Contaminants  of  Mushroom  Culture/301

Figure  218  Scanning  electron
micrograph of Penicillium.

bacteria  when  the  two  grew  in  close  proximity.  A  fluid  that  was  being  exuded  from  the  fungus
caught his curiosity.  Upon  reporting  his finding,  collegues later found the fluid contained a powerful
new antibiotic which  was named penicillin.  He had,  in fact,  cultured  Penicillium  notatum West!.
Currently  penicillin  is  commercially  produced  by  high  yielding  strains  of Penicillium  chrysogenum
Thorn. Through  its use,  millions of people have been cured of illnesses that were previously untreat-
able.  From the widespread use and abuse of this drug, however, new, more virulent andj?enicillin
resistant strains of bacteria have evolved.

From  the  production  of steroids to the  making  of roquefort cheese  (by Penicillium  roquefortii),

this genus is resplendent with  species of proven value to man.  Few,  if any,  are pathogenic.
Comments:  Since  the  high  count  of  Penicillium  spores  indoors  is  directly  traceable  to  decompos-
ing foodstuffs, one can  reduce the prevalence of this contaminant by simply following good hygien-
ic practices. Penicillium, a prolific spore producer, is an ubiquitous fungus. It is probably the most
common  contaminant seen  in  the laboratory.  Although  Penicillium can attack compost,  casing soil
and mushroom  debris,  it is not as prevalent as  Trichoderma in  these  habitats.  Other green  molds,
similar in  appearance,  are  Cladosporium and Aspergillus.

Penicillium  sometimes  contaminates  poorly  prepared  compost  or  spawned  compost  that  has
undergone  secondary  heating.  Here,  grain  kernels formerly colonized  by  mushroom  mycelium  be-
come susceptible to weed molds such as Penicillium and Doratomyces and then spread onto the
compost  and/or  casing  soil.

Differing  from  Aspergillus  and  Trichoderma  in  the  shape  of  the  conidiophore.

For further information:

"The Penicillia" by Raper and Thorn (1949) who recognized  138 species at the time of pub-

lication.

See  Color Photograph  20.

302/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

RHIZOPUS

Class:  Zygomycetes
Order:  Mucorales
Family:  Mucoraceae
Common  Names:  Bread  Mold;  The  Pin
Mold,
Latin  Root:  From  the  prefix  "rhizo",  per-
taining to  roots,  and the suffix "pus"  or foot,
in reference to the rhizoids at the base of the
sporangiophore that is characteristic of some
species  in  this  genus.
Habitat  &  Frequency  of  Occurrence:  A
saprophyte, commonly seen in both agar and
grain  culture.  Rhizopus  naturally  inhabits
dung and soils and is a decomposer of dead
plant  and  animal  matter.  Within  the  home,
this  contaminant  is  most  often  seen  on  old
bread  or  on  poorly  stored  grain  and  fruits.

Figure  219  Drawing  of  asexual  sporangio-
phore  and  sexual  zygosporium  of  Rhizopus.

Medium  Through  Which  Contamination  Is  Spread:  Primarily  air.
Measures  of  Control:  Air  filtration;  strict  adherence  to  general  hygienic  practices;  and  steam  steri-
lization  of grain and agar media.
Macroscopic Appearance: Similar to Mucor. When sporulating, Rhizopus appears as a a dense
mat of tall, aerial, vertically oriented hyphae upon which sit dark grey to grey black heads. It resem-
bles a forest of pins.
Microscopic Characteristics: A creeping  hyphal  network that gives rise to individual,  vertically
oriented stalks that are  unbranched and at whose  base distinct rhizoids can  be attached.  The apex is
swelled into a vesicle upon which a dark spherical body (sporangium) rests. This sporangium does
not fully  envelope the  sporangiophore.  Hence,  the sporangiophore  swells  before  contacting the
sporangium. The sporangium is a mass of spores within a thin envelope of tissue that soon disinte-
grates and frees the asexual spores. Joining these individual sporangiophores are long interconnect-
ing  mycelial  veins  called  stolons.  Mating  can  also  occur  betwen  two  sexually  complementary
hyphae and results in the formation of a globose reproductive body, a zygosporium. (See Fig. 219).
Its mycelia lacks distinct cell walls.

The Contaminants of Mushroom  Culture/303

History,  Use and/or  Medical  Implications:  In  itself,  not a  pathogen  to  man.  Reports  in  The
medical  literature  have  in  the  past  blamed  Rhizopus  for  zygomycosis  when  in  fact  other  related
genera—Absidia  and  Mucor—were  responsible.

Rhizopus stolonifer,  the  black  bread  moid,  is  also  utilized  in  the  commerical  production  of fu-
maric acid  and cortisone.  Other species  in  the  genus secrete assorted alcohols and acids as  meta-
bolic waste products.
Comments: Along with Aspergillus and  Penicillium,  species of this genus are the primary con-
taminants of grain  spawn.  Rhizopus  is very  rapid growing,  and  is called  the  Pin  Mold for the shape
of  the  spore  producing  body.  Rhizopus  stolonifer (= Rhizopus  nigracans)  is  called  the  Black  Pin
Mold and can elevate the substrate temperature from room temperature to the 95-104° F. range.
At  this  level,  the  populations  of the  true  thermophiles  increase  dramatically,  further  heating  up  the
host  substrate  to  temperatures  lethal  to  the  mushroom  mycelium.

See also Mucor,  a  mold that is cioseiy related to Rhizopus,  but whose sporangium  completely

covers  the  apex  of  the  sporagiophore.

Figure  220  Rhizopus,  the  Black  Pin  Mold,  on  malt agar.

304/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

SCOPULARIOPSIS

Mold;

Class:  Fungi  Imperfect!
Order:  Moniliales
Series: Annelosporae
Common  Names:  White  Plaster
Flour  Mold.
Latin  Root:  From  "scopulatus"  meaning
broom-like  or  brush  shaped,  in  reference  to
the  structure  of the  sporulating  reproductive
body.
Habitat  &  Frequency  of  Occurrence:  A
saprophyte,  occasionally  seen  in  composts
that have been  over-watered  or are too  high
in  nitrogen.  Scopulariopsis also forms on the
casing  during  the  fruiting  cycle.  It  naturally
grows  in  soils,  on  hay,  on  rotting4eaves and
on  other  decaying  plant  material  including
grain.  This  group  of  molds  generally  prefer
an  alkaline  pH.

Figure  221  Drawing  of  sporulating  struc
ture  typical  of  Scopulariopsis.

Medium  Through  Which  Contamination  Is  Spread:  Primarily  airborne  spores,  spent  compost
and insects;  and from  materials previously in contact with this contaminant that were not thoroughly
cleaned before use.
Measures of Control:  Proper preparation  and  sufficient air during  Phase II  composting discour-
ages  this  fungus.  Atkins  (1974)  reported  that  excessive  moisture  and  subsequent  anaerobic
pasteurization were the Kvo main factors contributing to the spread of the White Plaster Mold.  Be-
fore  filling,  the  addition  of  gypsum  to  an  overly  wet  compost  will  bind  loose  water,  a  condition
favorable  to  this  mold.
Macroscopic Appearance:  Circular colonies of densely  matted,  whitish  mycelia;  with  age devel-
oping slight pinkish tones. This mold often appears as "splotches",  mostly on the compost bed and
to a  lesser degree on the casing soil.
Microscopic  Characteristics:  Conidiophores  short,  soon  branching,  delineating  into  several
elongated cells which then  give rise to short chains of globose,  hyaline,  finely warted,  dry conidia
that measure 5-8  x 5-7  microns. Annular zonations are present at the junction  of the sporogenous
cells and the first spore in the conidial chain. Terminal cells in the chain are the oldest and typically

The Contaminants of Mushroom Culture/305

the  largest.  The  conidiophores  generally  resemble  that  of Penicillium  and  thus  are  described  as
pencillate,  or  brush  shaped.
History,  Use  and/or  Medical  Implications:  One  species  toxic  to  humans:  Scopulariopsis
brevicaulis (Saccardo) Brainer.  This species  usually attacks tissue already diseased by other micro-
organisms.  It  is an  improbable threat to the  health  of mushroom  cultivators.
Comments: Scopu/ariopsis fimicola is the White Plaster Mold seen on compost beds. It is very de-
trimental  to the  growth  of  mushroom  mycelia.  Its  presence  is  usually  an  indication  of a  short,  wet
and over-mature compost. This condition predisposes the compost to a difficult Phase II with dense
anaerobic areas, ammonia-lock and consequently high pH levels. All these factors contribute to the
growth and spread of Scopulariopsis fimicola,  the species of White Plaster Mold most frequently
seen  in  mushroom  culture.

Contamination  can also arise from  within  the  mushroom  house if there has been  a prior history
of problems with  this contaminant and  if strict contamination control  procedures  have not been  in-
stigated.  Not  surprisingly,  one  often  finds  Scopulariopsis  with  the  Inky  Cap  (a  Copr'mus  species)
which  is also associated with  residual  ammonia  in  composts.

See also  Papulospora  (P.  byssina  Hots.},  a genus  containing the Brown  Plaster Mold whose

early stages  of growth  resemble  the  White  Plaster  Mold.

306/The Mushroom Cultivator

SEPEDONIUM

White

Figure  222  Drawing  of  sporulating  struc-
ture  and  flask  shaped  conidia.

Class:  Fungi  Imperfect!
Order:  Moniliales
Series:  Aleurisporae
Common  Names:  Yellow  Mold;
Mold.
Habitat  and  Frequency  of  Occurrence:
Occasionally  to  frequently  encountered  on
agar;  more  common  on  compost;  and  para-
sitic  on  wild  mushrooms  (both  Basidiomy-
cetes and Ascomycetes),
Medium  Through  Which  Contamina-
tion  Is  Spread:  Primarily  through  the  air,
but  also  from  spent  compost.
Methods  of  Control:  Air  filtration;  strict
maintenance of hygiene in the laboratory and
growing  room;  the  expeditious  removal of spent compost;  and the thorough  disinfection  of wooden
compost containers.
Macroscopic Appearance:  On  malt agar and  on  rye grain  appearing  as a fast growing whitish
mold,  very similar to cottony mushroom  mycelia and frequently mistaken for it.  On compost it is a
fine white mold which with age becomes yellowish to golden yellow from spore production.  It is not
as prolific a spore producer as the powdery  Trichoderma.  If spores are not produced at all,  the my-
celia remains whitish. This mold attacks composts that otherwise have been properly prepared for
mushroom  growing.
Microscopic Characteristics: Two types of spores formed. The more obvious are large,  globose
chlamydospores  ornamented  with  short  spines  and  similar to  those  of  Mycogone;  except  in  this
genus  a  hemispheric foot cell,  shaped  like  a teacup is absent.  Conidiophores are  simple,  relatively
undeveloped, resembling mushroom mycelium and not easily distinguished from it except that they
lack clamps. Globose to vase shaped conidia develop terminally at the end of these branches, either
singly  or  in  loose  clusters.

The  Contaminants  of  Mushroom  Culture/307

History, Use and/or Medical Implications: Some species possibly toxic. It has been suggested
That this mold secretes a  sweet odor nauseous to some mushroom workers and possibly the cause
of a  little  understood  respiratory  illness.  Not  much  is  known.
Comments: Sepedonium spores are  noted for their heat resistance.  It is a whitish  mold  until the
yellow conidia are produced.  On malt agar media, Sepedonium is fast running, and out-grows most
mushroom  mycelia.  When  the two fungi  grow within  close proximity to one another,  a  line  of inhibi-
tion  usually develops between  the two.  If conidiospores or chiamydospores are  not produced,  this
mold  is difficult to identify.  The conidiophores are indistinct,  very much  resembling its own  myceli-
um.  From the authors' experience this contaminant is a vigorous competitor on agar media.  Its ap-
pearance necessitates a thorough cleaning of the laboratory and spawn incubation environment.  If
this mold contaminates grain spawn  and goes undetected,  use of this spawn  in subequent inocula-
tions would  be  disastrous.

The second site of contamination is horse manure/straw compost where it most frequently ap-
pears during spawn  run. Only detrimental when  large outbreaks occur, Sepedonium's presence on
compost  can  be  traced  to  insufficient  pasteurization  or  spent  compost  residues  in  the  trays  or
shelves. Although not regarded as a serious competitor on mushroom compost, Sepedonium is an-
other fungus  believed  to  be  a  food  source for  mites  (Kneebone,  1961).

Sepedonium,  like  Mycogone,  is  an  imperfect  state  of  Hypomyces,  a  common  parasite  on
mushrooms.  In  the  wild,  Sepedonium  chrysosperma  parasitizes  Boletus  species  (particularly  B.
chrysenteron) and causes them To abort. The chiamydospores of Sepedonium are generally similar
to  Mycogone.
See  also  Mucor and Mycelia  Sterilia,  two  fast  running  whitish  molds  on  agar  media.  *

«—^^^^nvBw^^^^^w^BUBB^^^vg^^^M^^BH^B^H

Figure  223  Sepedonium  mold  compet-
ing  with  Psilocybe  cubensis  mycelia  on
malt  agar  media
malt  anar  m*>rli;i

308/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

TORULA

(Torula

Class:  Fungi  Imperfect!
Order:  Moniliales
Family:  Dematiaceae
Common  Name:  Black  Yeast 
nigra).
Latin root: From the same root as the adjec-
tival "torulosus",  meaning cylindrical shaped
with  bulges and constrictions at regular inter-
vals, chain-like.
Habitat  and  Frequency  of  Occurrence:
Saprophytic,  common.  Many  thermophilic
species  participate  in  the  decomposition  of
straw  and  manure  in  the  making  oi  mush-
room  composts.  Although  Torula  is  rarely
seen  in agar culture,  its cousin Rhodotorula,
a red yeast, is frequently seen.

Figure  224  Drawing  of  the  sporulating
structure  of  Torula,  the  Black  Yeast.

Medium Through Which Contamination Is Spread: Primarily an airborne contaminant; sec-
ondarily  transmitted  through  compost.
Methods  of  Control:  None  generally  needed  or  desired.  Torula  is  a  beneficial,  thermophilic
microorganism  thriving  in  the  115-125°  F.  range.
Macroscopic Appearance:  Whitish  at first,  then  grayish,  soon  dark  brown  or jet black with  spore
production. As  Torula matures, the mycelium  becomes covered with a mass of spores that give it a
soot-like  appearance.  On  compost,  this  fungus  appears  similar  to  Humicola.
Microscopic  Characteristics:  Mycelium  colorless  or  slightly  pigrnented.  True  conidiophores  are
lacking.  Hyphae abruptly terminate  into conidia which  are ovoid,  translucent,  dark brown,  smooth
and produced in branched or unbranched chains by either of two methods. In one form, the more
mature spores of a conidia!  chain develop apically, with the younger spores arising from the spore
closest to the hyphal branch.  (This is called basipetal development).  In a second form, conidia can
develop by simple budding from the tips of a hypha, in a yeast-like fashion. The budding hypha nar-
rows towards the apex into immature spores and finally terminates with an attenuating tail. Freed are
conidia found singly or attached several  at a time.

The  Contaminants of Mushroom  Culture/309

History,  Use  and/or  Medical  Implications:  Not  thought  to  be  pathogenic.  Confusion  with
Cryptococcus has in the past given  Torula an  undeserved  pathogenic reputation.  Cryptococcosis in
the medical  literature  is often Though  incorrectly termed Torulosis.
Comments:  Torula,  like  Humicola,  is  an  ally  to  the  mushroom  compost  maker,  converting  am-
monic nitrogen into protein  usable To the mushroom.  Torula fhermophila Cooney & Emerson is
the species most frequently seen  in composting straw and manure.  Originally isolated from  chicken
droppings, this species is a true thermophile with a temperature range from 73-136° F., and an op-
timum of 104° F. The Torula genus is known for a number of thermophilic species thaf survive the
pasteurization  process and  flourish  at standard  Phase  II  conditioning  temperatures (118-125°  F).
When  pasteurized  compost  is  cooled  down  to  room  temperature,  this  fungus  is  rendered  inactive
and in turn becomes a food source for the mushroom mycelium.

Rhodoforula reproduces very similarly to  Torula.  It is  known  as the  Red Yeast,  commonly con-
taminating  agar  cultures.  Rhodoforula glutinis,  a  common  soil  inhabitant,  may  play  an  important
role  in  the  reproductive  cycle  of the  common  Chantarelle  mushroom,  Cantharellus  cibarius.  Pure
cultures  of Chantarelles  have  been  difficult to obtain  from wild specimens.  And,  Chantarelle spores
do  not  germinate  using  standard  laboratory  techniques.  In  1979,  a  Sweedish  mycologist  named
Nils  Fries  discovered  that,  in  the  presence  of  Rhodotorula  glutinis  and  activated  charcoal,  C.
cibarius  spores  readily  germinate.  Pure  cultures  of  Chantarelles,  once  nearly  impossible  to  obtain,
are  now feasible.  Other related  yeasts  may have  a  similar stimulatory effect on  various mushrooms
species  currently  not  prone  to  cultivation.

Torula  species,  as  with  most  yeasts,  are  separated  from  one  another  largely  by  chemical

means.

310/The Mushroom Cultivator

TRICHODERMA

Class:  Fungi  Imperfect!
Order:  Moniliales
Family:  Moniliaceae
Common  Names:  Forest  Green  Mold;
Green  Mold;  and  Trichoderma  Blotch.
Greek  Root:  From  "trichos"  meaning  hairy
and  "derma"  or skin.
Habitat  &  Frequency  of  Occurrence:
Very  common  on  compost,  casing  soil  and
to  a 
lesser  degree  on  grain  and  agar.
Trichoderma  often  parasitizes  mushrooms
under  cultivation  and  can  inhibit  or^educe
fruitings.  Many  species  grow  on  wood  or
woody  Tissue  and  are  abundant  in  peat.
Trichoderma  frequently  grows  on  the  wood-
en trays holding  compost.

Figure  225  Drawing  of  conidia  and  sporu-
lating  structure  typical  of  Trichoderma.

Medium  Through  Which  Contamination  Is  Spread:  Primarily  an  airborne  contaminant  when
contaminating  agar or grain  cultures.  On  casing  soils,  it is introduced through the  peat or  humus.
Trichoderma  is  often  spread  during  harvesting,  bed  cleaning  or watering.  Species  in  this  genus
generally  prefer an  acid  pH  in  the  4-5.5  (6)  range.
Measures of Control: Careful picking; disposal of dead and diseased mushrooms; lowering of hu-
midity levels; lowering carbon dioxide and increasing air circulation to eliminate dead air pockets.
Use of clean casing materials lacking undecomposed woody tissue lessen the chance of Trichoder-
ma contamination.  Isolated  outbreaks of  Trichoderma can  easily  be  contained  by  one  of several
methods. Since Trichoderma thrives in acid habitats, raising the pH of the surrounding soil inhibits
further growth.  Perhaps the simplest way to raise pH is to cover the infecting colony with salt, sodi-
um  hypochlorite  or  sodium  bicarbonate  (baking  soda)  or  a  solution  thereof.  Recognizing  and
treating this fungus in its earliest stages, before many spores are produced, greatly reduces the risk
of satellite colonies spreading throughout the growing room.  Mushrooms afflicted with  Trichoderma
should  be  carefully  isolated.  All  items  coming  in  contact  with  it  (tools,  workers,  etc.)  should  be
resanitized. Steam pasteurization at 1 60 °F. for one hour effectively kills the spores of this fungus.

The  Contaminants  of  Mushroom  Culture/311

Macroscopic  Appearance:  A  cottony  mold,  growing  in  circular  colonies  on  the  casing  soil  or  on
compost; grayish and diffuse at first;  rapidly growing; and soon forest green from spore production.
On  malt agar colonies of  Trichoderma have an  aerial,  cottony and  brilliant forest green  mycelium
whereas Penicillium  has an  appressed,  granular and blue green  mycelium. Some infrequently en-
countered species are whitish or yellowish,  but the majority of those seen in mushroom culture are
greenish shaded.

Parasitized  mushrooms  have  dry  brownish  blotches  or  sunken  lesions  on  the  cap  or  stern.
They are often  enveloped  by a fine downy mildew that may eventually  become greenish from  spore
production,  and  are  grossly  misproportioned.
Microscopic  Characteristics:  Conidiophores  clear,  profusely  branched  upon  whose  ends  small
bunches of ovoid greenish  pigrnented,  smooth spores are borne.  In  many species uniquely shaped
sporogenous  cells  are  present  roughly  resembling  bowling  pins  and  arranged  as  triads.  After
squashing  a  sample for viewing  under the microscope,  the  conidiophores readily disassemble and
are difficult to recognize. The freed conidia, however, are not arranged in linear chains as common-
ly  seen  in  Aspergillus and  Penicillium,  but  are  in  loose  clusters  or  are  scattered  as  individuals.  A

Figure  226  Trichoderma-\ike  mold  parasitizing  Psilocybe
cubensis.

312/The  Mushroom  Cultivator

most distinctive feature is that the conidia are encased in a mucus-like substance, making the spores
sticky.  Spores  measure  3-5  x  3-4  microns.
History,  Use and/or Medical  Implications:  Not  known  to be pathogenic.  One  industrial  ap-
plication utilizes Trichoderma, Pendllium and Cladosporium to precipitate precious metals such as
gold  and  platinum  from  solutions.  The process  is  being  patented.
Comments: In cased grain culture,  Trichoderma is the most frequently encountered contaminant
on the casing layer and usually originates there. Upon casing, spores harbored in the peat infect ex-
posed  grain  kernels  and  sporulate.  The  contaminaled  kernels  become  a  platform  for further con-
tamination. The mold then spreads through the casing layer until it breaks through to the surface of
the  casing  layer.  Also,  Trichoderma  is  prone  to  casings  with  undecomposed  woody  tissue  and
those incorporating potting soils.  Trichoderma is also caused by excessively wet casings applied to
sterile grain spawn.

Trichoderma is an ubiquitous fungus that is encouraged by improperly adjusted environmental
parameters.  Conditions of excessively high and prolonged  humidity in combination with stagnant
air and high carbon dioxide levels tip the ecological balance of the casing soil's micro-ecology in fa-
vor  of  this  contaminant.  Once  Trichoderma  populations  bloom,  this  mold  quickly  infects  newly
formed  primordia  and  developing  fruitbodies which  become  deformed.  This  pathogen  also  grows
on  discarded mushroom  debris, particularly stem  butts.

Afflicted mushrooms have brownish specks or lesions on the stem, especially near The base or
apex. A fuzzy mycelium similar to  Verficillium may be present on the cap. These lesions are dry,
whereas the blotches caused by bacteria tend to be moist. The growth of the fruitbody is abruptly ar-
rested by this mold.  Under extreme conditions this mold sporulates directly on the mushroom, be-
coming  green  in  color.  Adjacent mushrooms,  newly formed  pinheads and subsequent crops need
not be affected if air circulation is increased to proper levels and if humidity is decreased to within
tolerable limits (3-5 exchanges of air per hour while maintaing 85-92%  humidity).  Trichoderma is
alleged to  secrete toxins that  inhibit  mushroom  primordia formation  and  growth.

Another problem with  Trichoderma is that its spores are utilized by red pigmy mites as food.

Trichoderma spores are  sticky and  attach  to anything  coming  in  contact with  them,  in  this way,
mites  further  aid  the  spread  of  Trichoderma  contamination.  And,  soon  after  an  outbreak  of
Trichoderma,  it  is  not  unusual  to  see  a  population  explosion  of  mites.

Most notable are  Trichoderma viride (a synonym  of  Trichoderma lignorum),  an early appear-
ing  mold  with  roughened  spores  and  Trichoderma  koningii,  a  smooth  spored  mold  seen  later  in
the  cropping  cycle.  Both  are  mushroom  pathogens.
See  Verticillium,  a  mold  with  similar  symptoms  when  attacking  fruitbodies.
See  Color  Photograph  22.

The Contaminants of Mushroom  Culture/313

TRICHOTHECIUM

Class:  Fungi  Imperfect!
Order:  Moniliales
Family:  Moniliaceae
Common  Name:  Pink  Mold.
Greek Root: From "trichos" meaning hairy
and  "theke"  meaning  sac  or  capsule.
Habitat  and  Frequency  of  Occurrence:
For  the  most  part,  a  saprophyte,  rarely  en-
countered in spawn  making even though  it is
one  of  the  many  microflora  associated  with
grain.  Trichofhecium  is  an  occasional  con-
taminant  in  agar  culture  and  in  poorly  pre-
pared  or  immature  composts.
Medium  Through  Which  Contamina-
tion  Is  Spread:  Primarily an  airborne con-
taminant.
Measures  of  Control:  Air  filtration  and  maintenance  of  good  hygiene  in  the  laboratory.
Macroscopic Appearance: Mycelium initially whitish; soon pinkish with spore production; and
typically  slow  growing  on  malt  agars.  Trichothecium  is  a  powdery  Penicillium  type  mold.
Microscopic Characteristics:  Conidia  measuring  12-18  x 4-10  microns;  colorless to  brightly
colored; two celled; pear shaped, ellipsoid or ovoid;  borne in clusters with the basal cell being small-
er than  the terminal  one;  and  positioned  at the  apex of tall,  thin,  unbranched.  but septate  conidio-
phores.  Spore bunches are attached to one another either in a chain-like fashion or in  loose groups
but  not  lineally.
History,  Use and/or Medical Implications: One mold notable.  Trichothecium roseum  Link ex
Fr.  secretes an  antibiotic  (trichothecin)  that is toxic to bacteria,  fungi  and  animals.
Comments:  More frequently seen in the course of agar culture than  on  grain,  this contaminant can
become  a formidable  problem  if not detected early,  and  if  large spore  populations are  permitted to
develop within the laboratory.

Figure  227  Drawing  of  conidia  and  sporu-
lating  structure  of  Trichothecium.

Also  occurring  on  compost  and  occasionally  on  the  casing  soil,  particularly  where  nitrogen

314/The Mushroom Cultivator

enriched compounds have not been converted into protein usable To the mushroom mycelium. By
itself it is not strongly inhibitory to mushroom mycelium, but thrives in habitats generally unsuited
for good mushroom growth. Adhering to good compost practices and following standard hygienic
procedures  prevents  This  fungus  from  occurring.
See also Fusarium,  a genus containing several pinkish  colored contaminants and Geotrichum,  a
genus  known  for  The  Red  Lipstick  molds.

The  Contaminants of  Mushroom  Culture/315

VERTICILLIUM

the 

Class:  Fungi  imperfect!
Order:  Moniliales
Family:  Moniliaceae
Common  Names:  Dry  Bubble;  Brown
Spot;  and Verticillium Disease.
Latin  Root:  From  "verticillus"  meaning
whorled  or  having  branches  on  the  same
plane, in reference to the shape of the conid-
iophore.
Habitat  &  Frequency  of  Occurrence:  A
common  parasite  of 
fruitbody.
Verticillium 
is  promoted  during  cropping
under conditions of excessive humidity com-
bined  with 
inadequate  air  circulation.
Verticillium  grows  within  a  broad
temperature range although warmer Temper-
atures  (62 °F.  and  above)  are  preferred.
Singer  (1961)  reported  an  optimum  of 72 °F.  Verticillium  abounds  in  soils  and  is  introduced  into
the  growing  environment  via  the  materials  composing  the  casing.
Medium  Through  Which  Contamination  Is  Spread:  Primarily  transmitted  from  one  infected
region to another by mushroom harvesters, flies and insects. Watering infected mushrooms further
spreads  Verticillium  spores.
Measures of Control:  General  hygiene  maintenance;  proper picking  and cleaning  practices;  re-
moval or isolation of infected cultures; increasing air circulation; lowering of humidity; and elimina-
tion of flies and mites. If Verticillium is evident before a crop is harvested, carefully pick the infected
mushrooms,  seal them  in  a  plastic bag and leave the growing  room with  minimal  contact with  unaf-
fected  areas.  Vertici/lium  spores  are  highly  viscous  and  are  best  transmitted  by  motile  hosts,
especially rnites and other insects. Never water an infected bed until The diseased mushrooms have
been  removed and the infected zones have been  salted with alkaline buffer (baking soda, sodium
hypochlorite).
Macroscopic Appearance: Slightly infected  mushrooms characterized  by brown colored spots or

Figure  228  Conidia  and  sporulating  struc-
ture  of  VerficiHium.

316/The Mushroom Cultivator

streaks on the  basal  or upper regions of the stem  and on  the caps of developing  primordia.  These
spots become grayish colored from spore production. Afflicted mushrooms often bend towards the
side that is infected.  If the mushrooms do develop at all, they are typically tilted to one side or the
other.  Verticillium  attacks  developing  fruitbodies—the  more  severely  infected  are  grossly  mal-
formed,  especially  young  primordia  which  are  turned  into  sclerotia-like  balls of amorphous whitish
mycelia.  More  mature  but diseased  mushrooms  have  a  deformed  pileus,  sometimes with  a  "hair
lip",  and frequently with  a  downy grayish  mycelium  over the cap. The stem can  be covered with  a
downy mycelium and often vertically splits,  roughly resembling a peeled banana. The cap becomes
disproportionately small relative to the fatter Than normal stem. The overall texture of the mushroom
is dry  and  leathery.

When  this mold attacks  Psilocybe  cubensis,  there  are  several  additional  characters worthy of
note.  Parasitized P.  cubensis caps frequently become plane at an early stage. The stem becomes
swollen and hollow, narrowing radically towards the apex. Only in an extremely humid environment
does  a  downy  mildew  develop  over  the  cap  and  stem  surface.  The  "Verticillium  spots"  so  com-
monly reported by growers o&Agaticus,  a white mushroom, are more accurately called "Verticillium
streaks"  on  P.  cubensis,  a  mushroom  with  a  brownish  cap  and  a whitish  stem.

Figure  229 

Verticillium  attacking  Psilocybe  cubensis.

The  Contaminants  of  Mushroom  Culture/317

Microscopic  Characteristics:  Conidia  hyaline;  unicellular;  ovoid  to  ellipsoid;  minute,  measuring
1 -3 x  1-2 microns; borne singly or in small groups at the tips of narrow branches that whorl from a
central trunk at regular intervals.  Conidiophores are slender and relatively tall.
History,  Use and/or Medical Implications: Apparently  inocuous,  no pathogenic species are
known.
Comments:  Verticillium  is  the  most  common  fungal  disease  parasitizing  the  mushroom  crop  and
the  bane  of  both  small  and  large  scale  growers.  One  misfortune  of  losing  an  early  flush  to
Verticillium disease is the increased probability of other diseases appearing. Split stems open the
mushroom up to attack by numerous insects and other pathogens. Not surprisingly, the sciarid fly is
a  vector  for  the  spread  of  Verticillium  spores  from  parasitized  mushrooms  to  healthy  ones.  It  be-
comes clear that if conditions are right for  Verticillium, the conditions are right for other molds. The
cultivator  may  soon  have  to  deal  with  not one  contaminant,  but  many.

Verticillium  malthousei  Ware  is  synonomous  with  Verticillium  fungicola.  Both  are  "brown
spot" fungi that envelope the mushroom with a fine grayish mycelium and cause brownish lesions
on their surfaces.  Verticillium albo-atrum is another species in mushroom culture, although  not as
frequently seen.

Verticillium  is  specifically  a  casing  related  contaminant  that  parasitizes  the  mushroom  fruit-
body.  Other  molds  that  parasitize  the  mushroom  are  Dacfylium  and  Trichoderma.  They  can  be
separated microscopically. Dacfylium spores are two celled and quite large (20 microns long) while
'those of  Trichoderma and  Verticillium are single celled and much  smaller ( 4 x5  microns and 2-3
microns, respectively).

An  easy  method for the  home  cultivator to distinguish  Verticillium  infection from  Trichod/rma
is to plate out the suspect mold on  malt agar media.  If the mold is  Trichoderma,  forest green  colo-
nies of mycelium will form.  Other than  green  colonies of mycelium  suggests the contaminant be
Dacfylium  or  Verticillium,

Usually  one  sees  Trichoderma  blotch  simultaneous  to  or after  the  occurrence  of green  mold
colonies on the casing layer. If there is no evidence of green mold on the casing layer and the mush-
rooms  display  these  symptoms,  then  the  mold  is  probably  Verticillium  or  Dacfylium.  Dacfylium
can  be  distinguished  from  Verticillium  by  its  locus and  manner of infection.  Dactlyium  is a  grey,
aerial  mold,  fast  growing  and  obvious  on  the  casing.  Verticillium  is  primarily  evident  on  the fruit-
body and  scarcely seen  on  the casing.

Steane (1979) reported that Agaricus bitorqut's seemed especially resistant to  Verticillium dis-
ease whereas Agaricus brunnescens was more susceptible to it. Furthermore, he noted that farms
regularly  suffering  from  this  disease  could  greatly  reduce  the  level  of  infection  by  intermittently
growing  A.  bitorquis  between  A.  brunnescens  crops.

A  saprophyte  and  parasite  causing  "wilt  disease"  of many  plants,  particulary  garden  vegeta-
bles,  Verticillium  is abundant  in  most soils.  Some  Verticillium  species are  endoparasitic to  nema-
todes—their spores  germinate in the  mouth tubes of the  nematode with the  resulting  mycelia  quick-
ly digesting the organism from within.  Other pathogens that have similar symptoms to one or more
of the  various  stages  of  Verticillium  are:  Dacfylium;  Trichoderma;  Mycogone;  and  Virus.

Pests of  Mushroom  Culture/319

CHAPTER  XIV
THE PESTS OF

MUSHROOM  CULTURE

Figure 230  Red  Pepper Mites swarming on Agaricus brunnescens.

320/Pests of Mushroom Culture

MUSHROOM  FLIES

Mushroom  flies  and  midges  are  present  in  nature  wherever  fungi  are  found.  Attracted  by  the

odor  of  decomposing  manure  and  vegetable  matter,  as  well  as  the  smell  of  growing

mycelium,  these  insect pests zero  in  and  lay their  eggs on  or  near the  mycelium  and  fruitbodies.
Under  proper conditions these  eggs  hatch.  But  it  is the  larvae that  do the extensive  damage to the
mushroom  plant,  either  by  directly  feeding  on  the  mycelial  cells  or  tunneling  through  the  mush-
room  fruitbody.  Because  of the concentration  of attractive  odors,  a  commercial  mushroom  farm  is
always under siege by these pests. To insure insect free crops, certain measures are necessary.  Un-
fortunately the  bulk of these  control  measures involve  insecticides,  an  approach  not  recommended
by the  authors.  The  use of insecticides  is not only  costly  and  hazardous to  human  health,  but also
represents  a  short  term  solution  of  a  symptom  rather  than  the  solution  of the  problem  itself.  The
answer to disease and  pest control  in  mushroom  growing  is strict hygiene for which there can  be no
substitute.

Fly  Control  Measures

1.  Pasteurization  periods  and  temperatures  must  be  sufficient  to  kill  all  stages  of  insect

growth—140°F.  for 2 hours in composts or other bulk substrates.

2.  All  Phase  II, spawning,  spawn  running and cropping  rooms  must be airtight.  Physically ex-
cluding  insects  from  these  areas  is  the  most  positive  control  one  can  exercize.  Even  the
smallest  crack  can  serve  as  an  entrance  to  the  growing  room.  The  spawn  running  rooms
should  be  the  most  secure  with  access  to  these  areas  restricted.  All  doors  should  be
weather-stripped  and  tight  fitting.  Positive  pressure  and  air  locks  also  help.

3.  All  tools  and  implements  should  be  cleaned  and  disinfected  before  use  on  a  new  crop.  A

commonly  used  disinfectant  is  a  2%  chlorine  solution.

4.  Breeding  areas must  be  prevented  by  removing from  the  premises all  excess or spent sub-

strates,  used  grains,  mushroom  trimmings  and  other  related  by-products.

5.  The  growing  room  and  all  containers  should  be  washed  and  disinfected  between  crops.
Wood  in  particular  harbors  contaminants,  including  virus  infected  mushroom  mycelium.
Treatment  of  wood  with  cuprinol  or  copper  sulfate  is  common.  Petroleum  based  products
should  be  avoided.

6.  Fresh  air  intakes  and  exhaust  vents  must  be  screened  with  fine  mosquito  netting.  Be  sure

there  are  no  cracks  around  the filters  and  fan  housing.

7.  The  room  should  be equipped  with  an  insect monitor.  The  use of a  monitor alerts the grow-
er  to  fly  emergence  from  within  the  growing  room  or  to  fly  entry  from  the  outside.  The
monitor can  be as simple as a  12"  x 12"  plywood  board to which  a small  black  light (long
wave  UV)  is  centrally  mounted.  On  either  side  of the  light  sticky  paper  is  attached.  There
are also small  pest  lights commercially available.  (See  Resource section  in  the Appendix).

Pests  of  Mushroom  Culture/321

Figure  231  Sciarid  adult  and  its  larva.  (Adapted  from  P.R.  VanderMeer;  Penn.  St.
Univ.  Coop.  Ext.  Ser.) 

f

Order:  Diptera
Family:  Lycoriidae  (Fungus  Gnats)
Genus/Species:  Lycoriella  solani,  Lycoriella  mali,  Lycoriella  auripila
Common  Names:  Sciarid  Fly,  Big  Fly
Natural  Habitat:  Predominantly  saprophytes,  living  on  wild  mushrooms,  rotting  wood,  leaf mold
and  manure  piles.  Maturing  mushrooms  are  frequently  infested  with  sciarid  larvae,  the  so-called
"worms"  that  commonly  ruin  choice  wild  edibles.
PHYSICAL  CHARACTERISTICS
Mature  Stage:  Sciarids  are  small  gnat-like  flies characterized  by two  long segmented  antennae,
large compound  eyes,  a  black  head  and thorax and a yellow segmented abdomen.  Females are
about 3  mm.  long and can  be distinquished by the swollen  abdomen  which ends in  an  ovipositor.
Males  are  about  2  mm.  long  and  have  a  narrow  abdomen  ending  in  a  distinct clasper.
Larval Stage:  Larvae measure 6-12  mm.  long with twelve abdominal sections and a distinct black
shiny head. The long creamy white body has a semi-transparent cuticle with a visibly darkened ali-
mentary  canal.  Larvae  go  through  four  development stages,  or  instars,  before  pupating.
Pupal  Stage:  Fully mature  larvae spend two to three days spinning a cocoon  of fine silky threads
and compost fragments. These threads are sometimes detected as slime trails left behind in the sub-

strate as the wandering larvae pupate.  Once the cocoon  is finished, the larva contracts into a pupal
stage,  thus  begining  the  transition  to  the  adult  stage.  Pupae  are  2-4  mm.  long  and  change  from
white to  almost  black.
Life  Cycle:  Developmental  period  in  days
Temperature 
At 75°  F. 
At 61  °  F. 

Adull
5-7
(no  data)

Egg 
2 
7 

Larva 
16 
23 

Pupa 
3 
8 

Sciarids thrive  in  the  summer  and  fall  with  populations  building  to  a  peak  in  September  and

October.  Sciarids  then  die  with  the  onset  of  cold  outside  temperatures.
Comments:  The  sciarid  fly  is  responsible for  considerable  damage  to  commercial Agaricus  crops.
Attracted  by the smell  of newly pasteurized compost,  sciarids  home  in  from  miles  away.  A female
can  lay  between  150-170  eggs at a time.  Eggs  laid in  the compost just after  Phase  II  composting
hatch  quickly  into  larvae  during  the  spawn  running  period.  These  larvae  then  feed  on  the  running
mycelium as well as compost, which is broken down into a foul smelling, spggy mass, Totally unsuit-
able  for spawn  growth.  Massive  infestations  can  cause  total  crop  failure.

At lower infestation levels, larvae migrate into The casing layer and then emerge just as the first
mushroom pins appear or as late as the first flush. These adults lay more eggs in the casing, and the
newly  hatched  larvae  attack  both  mycelia  and  mushrooms.  Symptoms  of this  attack  include:

1.  Dead  pinheads.
2.  Pins or  mushrooms  that  are  loosely connected  to the  casing  due  to  severed  mycelial  con-

nections.

3.  Brown  or  black  spots  on  pinheads  or  on  the  stems  of  mushrooms.
4.  "Salt  shaker  pins"  perforated  by  larval  tunnels.
5.  Browning  of the  stem  where  cut.
Secondary  damage  to  mushroom  crops  by  sciarid  flies  comes  from  their  role  as  carriers  of
mites and diseases,  including the pathogens  Veiiicillium and  Thchoderma.  A single sciarid fly can
carry  up  to  20  mites!

Figure 232  Phorid  fly and  its  larva.  (Adapted  from  P.R.  VanderMeer;  Penn.  St.  Univ.
Coop. Ext. Ser.)

Order:  Diptera
Family:  Phoridae
Genus/Species:  Megaselia  nigra,  Megaselia  halterata
Common  Names:  Phorid  Fly,  Dung  Fly
Natural  Habitat:  Commonly inhabiting manure piles and rank,  decaying vegetation; feeding on
wild fungi and their myceiia.  Phorid larvae are frequently seen tunneling through wild mushrooms.
PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS:
Mature Stage:  Distinguishing features are a  humped  back,  a rapid jerky run,  a  rounded third an-
tennal segment and a yellowish to reddish brown back. Adults measure 2-5 mm. long. Females live
16  days and  males  live  10 days.
Larval Stage: Larvae are 6-10 mm. long, white and semi-transparent. The head is characterized
by a pair of "mouth hooks" with seven teeth. The segmented body tapers from the head to the pos-
terior end.  Larvae  pass  through  three  instars.
Pupal  Stage:  Pupae  are  white  at  first then  becoming  pale  yellow  to  brown.  They can  be  distin-
guished by a pair of curved black  respiratory  horns.
Life  Cycle:  Developmental  period  in  days

Temperature 

75°F. 
61  °F. 

Eggs 
2
4 

Larvae 
58
14 

Pupa

28

Comments:  Phorids can do extensive damage to the mushroom crop and are considered the prin-

324/Pests of Mushroom  Culture

cipal  mushroom  pest  in  western  Lurope.  Mated  female  phorids are  drawn  by the  odor of mushroom
mycelium.  This  attraction  increases  during  the  spawn  running  period  and  peaks  at full  colonization.
Each  female  can  lay  up  to  50  eggs which  are  placed  in  close  proximity  to  the  mycelium.  In  mature
mushroom  crops,  females  lay  eggs  on  the  gills,  in  the  casing,  and  adjacent  to  young  pinheads.
Once  hatched,  the  larvae  feed  on  the  mycelium,  then  tunnel  into  the  mushrooms  through  the  base
of  the  stem.  Arising  from  these  tunnels  are  secondary  bacterial  infections  causing  further  damage
and  brownish  discolorations.

The fact that females will  not lay eggs in  total darkness gives the grower an effective method for

preventing  Phorid  infestation  during  spawn  running.

Pests  of Mushroom  Culture/325

Figure  233  Cecid  fly  and  its  mother  larva.  (Adapted  from  P.R.  VanderMeer;  Penn.  St.
Univ. Coop. Ext. Ser.)

Order:  Diptera
Family:  Cecldomyfidae
Genus/Species:  Heteropeza  pigmaea,  Mycophila  speyeri.
Common  Names:  Cecids,  Gall  Midges
Natural Habitat: Commonly inhabiting decaying wood, rotting vegetation and manure piles or
wherever fungal mycelium occurs.
PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS:
Mature Stage: Adult cecids measure less than  1  mm. long making them almost invisible to the
naked eye. H. pigmaea are orange with a long segmented abdomen and segmented antennae.
Wing  venation  or structure  is  noticably  absent  except close to the thorax.
Larval Stage:  Newly born  larvae are  1  mm.  long and 2-3  mm. when  mature.  H. pigmaea are
white  to  cream;  M.  speyeri  are  bright  orange.  Larval  movement  is  facilitated  by  free  water,
whereas in dry conditions this movement is by flexion, jumping as far as 2 cm. Larvae are photo-
kinetic (moving to light) and can reproduce through paedogenesis, a process whereby mother lar-
vae  give  birth  to  daughter  larvae.  Under optima!  conditions  mother  larvae  can  produce  14-20
daughter larvae in  six days. Thus, in a short period of time a population explosion can  occur.
Pupal Stage: H. pygmaea larvae molt to a rigid "hemi-pupa" within which  new daughter  larva
evolve. Conditions favorable to larval growth lead to a "resting mother larvae" stage which can

326/Pests  of  Mushroom  Culture

remain alive up to 1 8 months. M. speyeri has neither of these particular attributes although it also
performs paedogenesis.  Larvae of both species can change to "imago"  larvae, form only one in-
star, then molt to free pupae,  emerging as adults five days later.
Life  Cycle:  Developmental  Period  in  Days

Egg 
2 

Mother Larva 

5-6 

Daughter Larva

(2) 

5-6

Comments:  Cecid  larvae  pierce  or  tear  growing  hyphae,  sucking  out  the  contents.  The  main
loss suffered  by  commercial  growers  is contamination  of the  mushrooms by larvae.  H. pygmaea
can also carry a bacterium which produces longitudinal brown stripes on the stem. In the infected
mushrooms,  tiny  biack  droplets  of  fluid  form  on  the  gills,  which  then  become  spotted  or  turn
black.

Pests  of  Mushroom  Culture/327

Figure  234  Wing  venation  of  mushroom  flies:  clockwise  from  top  right,  Leptocera,
Sciarid,  Cecid  and  Phorid.

Order:  Diptera
Family:  Sphaeroceridae  (Borboridae)
Genus/Species:  Leptocera  heteroneura
Natural  Habitat:  Associated  with  manure,  compost  piles  and  decaying  organic  matter.
PHYSICAL  CHARACTERISTICS:
Mature  Stage:  Leptocera  has  large  red  compound  eyes  and  with  a  yellow  and  black  striped  ab-
domen.  Leptocera  flies  are  very  similar  to  phorid  flies  but  are  smaller  and  have  a  distinctive  wing
venation.  They  somewhat  resemble  the  common  fruit  fly.
Larval  Stage:  Larvae  have  a  blunt  posterior  end  tapering  to  a  slender  head  which  is  equipped
with  mouth  hooks.  Leptocera  larvae  are  very  similar  to  house  fly  maggots  in  appearance.
Pupal  Stage:  Pupae  are  golden  brown  and  barrel  shaped.
Life Cycle:  Developmental  Period  in Days

Egg
3

Larva
14-28

Pupa
10-14

Comments: The Leptocera fly acts as a vector for disease organisms and is frequently associated
with  bacterial  infections.  It  is  a  known  carrier  of  mites.

328/Pests of Mushroom Culture

MUSHROOM  MITES

Mites are very small  spider-like insects that live and breed  in decomposing  vegetable matter,
feeding  on  molds  present  therein.  Optimum  breeding  environments  are  moist  and  warm,  giving
rise to a  rapid succession  of generations and exponential  growth.  Under adverse conditions cer-
tain  mites have the ability to change into an  intermediate stage called a "hypopus". The hypopae
have flattened bodies, short stubby legs and a sucker plate with which they attach to moving ob-
jects. These attributes facilitate dispersal. An  excellent survival  mechanism,  it is the hypopae that
are  commonly  carried  by  flies.  A  typical  life  cycle  for  mites  in  days  is:

Temperature

75°F.
60°F.

Eggs
6
11

Larvae
2
8

Protonymph

Tritonymph

2
6

3
11

Total
13
36

Mites are  known to eat mushrooms and their mycelia. Additionally they devalue the crop and
crawl  onto  pickers,  causing  temporary  discomfort.  Their  presence  is an  indication  of unsatisfac-
tory  substrate  preparation  and  insufficient  pasteurization  Times and/or  temperatures.

Figure  235 

Straw  mites.

Pests  of  Mushroom  Culture/329

Order:  Arcana
Family:  Tyrogelyphidae
Genus/Species:  Tyrophagus  putrescentiae,  Caloglyphus  mycophagus
Common  Names:  Straw  or  Hay  Mites
Discussion:  Straw  mites  have  soft translucent  pinkish  or yellowish  bodies  punctuated  by  long
flexible hairs. One female is capable of producing 500 eggs in a lifetime.  Commonly found in hay
or  straw  piles,  these  saprophytic  mites  are  endemic  to  foul  compost.  They  feed  on  molds  and
bacterial  contaminants of the  mushroom  crop and  also  eat mycelium  and  mushrooms,  making
small  irregular pits in  the stem and cap.  These pits can  later become infected  by  bacteria.

Order:  Arcana
Family:  Eupodidae
Genus/Species:  Linopodes  antennaepes
Common  Name:  Long  Legged  Mushroom  Mite.
Discussion: This mite is easily recognized by its long front legs which are twice the length of the
light, yellowish brown body.  It is not believed to be directly injurious to the mushroom crop and in
fact  is a  predator on  other mite species.

Order:  Arcana
Family:  Tarsonemidae
Genus/Species:  Tarsonemus  myceliophagus
Common  Name: The  Mushroom  Loving  Mite.
Discussion:  Tarsonemus  mites are  very  small,  180-190  microns  long,  with  pale  brown,  shin-
ing, oval bodies. They occasionally swarm in masses on mushroom caps but otherwise are rarely
seen except by microscopic examination. Females produce an average of 22 eggs in a lifetime of
2-8 weeks. These mites cause a bright reddish-brown discoloration at the base of the mushroom
stem and may cut the stem's mycelial connections. Known to survive normal compost pasteuriza-
tion temperatures,  they can  carry a virus disease to Agaricus brunnescens.

Order:  Arcana
Family:  Pyemotidae
Genus/Species:  Pygmephorus  sp.
Common  Names:  Red Pepper Mites;  Pygmy Mites.
Discussion:  Pepper  mites are  small  (250  microns  long)  with  yellowish  brown,  wedge-shaped
bodies, crossed by a central whitish band. Red pepper mites are often seen as a swarming jostling
mass, on mushroom caps or the surface of the casing. These mites ace commonly associated with
Penicillium  and  Trichoderma  molds,  upon  which  they  feed.

330/Pests of  Mushroom  Culture

Figure  236  Light  micrograph  of  Red
Pepper Mite. Note that darkened shapes
by front leg are Panaeolus subbalteatus
spores.  See also  Figure 230.

Figure 237  Nematode testing apparat-
us.  Sample  is  wrapped  in  gauze  and
submerged in a water filled funnel. After
twenty-four  hours,  a  small  amount  of
water is drawn off and examined with a
magnifying  lens  or  dissecting  scope.

Pests  of  Mushroom  Culture/331

NEMATODES

Nematodes  or  eelworms  are  microscopic  roundworms  which  live  in  soil,  decomposing
organic matter, fresh or salt water, or on living host plants, fungi, insects and animals. Nematodes
can  survive  up  to  six  weeks  without  food  and  are  unaffected  by  freezing.  With  eight  billion
nematodes  in  each  acre  of  soil,  they  are  one  of the  most  numerous  creatures  on  earth.

Water is essential for locomotion and breeding.  Swimming in an eel-like fashion and because
of their minute size,  nematodes can live in the thinnest films of water. With sufficient water, nema-
todes  rise to the  surface of their environment.  In  moist casing,  large  numbers  of nematodes are
visible  as  a  shimmering  veneer  on  the  casing  surface.  This  behavior  is  called  "winking"  and  is
caused by the nematodes standing on their tails and waving their bodies in the air.  Considered to
be an  adaptation  for dispersal,  the winking  nematode adheres  by means of a sticky outer skin  to
whatever  they  come  in  contact  with,  be  it a  fly,  mite,  human  hand  or  clothing.  This  same  outer
skin  protects  the  nematode  from  adverse  conditions.

If dried slowly,  nematodes can  change to a "cryptobiotic" or "cyst"  state, thereby preserved
for years  until  reactivated  by water.  In  this cyst state,  nematodes are also able to  persist  in  high
temperatures that would  otherwise  be  lethal.

Parthenogenesis, the ability for females to breed asexually without males, is common among
nematodes  and  leads to  very  rapid  population  expansion.  By this  means,  a  single  nematode  can
breed  millions  of descendants within  a  few weeks.  Nematodes  can  also  reproduce  sexually,  but
not  as  rapidly.

Nematodes  present  in  mushroom  culture  can  be  classed  into  two  basic types  according  t<f

their  feeding  habits:  saprophagous  and  mycophagous.

Saprophagous Nematotodes
Genus/Species:  Rhabditus  spp.

Saprophagous eelworrns are characterized by a tube-like mouth through which they suck nu-
trient  particles  suspended  in  water.  These  nutrients  are  comprised  of  organic  matter  and  its
accompanying microorganisms, particularly bacteria.  Because bacteria occur in  large numbers in
both  mushroom  compost  and  casing soil,  these  materials  provide excellent  breeding  grounds for
saprophagous eelworms.

In bulk substrates such as compost or plain straw,  nematodes can be found in great numbers.
The  high  temperatures of  Phase  I  conditioning  would  normally  destroy them  if it were  not for the
fact they  migrate  to  the  cooler outer shell  of the  compost  pile.  Phase  II  can  eliminate  nematodes
but only  if the  entire  compost  is subjected  to  pasteurization  temperatures.  In  a  properly  prepared
and thoroughly pasteurized substrate,  the mushroom  mycelium consumes all free water and then
feeds  on  the  bacterial  population.  This  creates  a  "bacteriostatic environment",  which  effectively
limits  nematode  growth  capabilties.  In  an  uneven  substrate  with  overly  wet  and  dry  areas,
however,  the  nematode's  ability  to  breed  increases.  Wet  areas  are  particularly  suitable  for

332/Pests of  Mushroom  Culture

Figure  238  Mycophagous  eelworm  (top)  and  Saprophagous  eelu/orm.  Note  stylet  in
mouth tube of former.

eelworms  to  breed  and  feed.  And,  as  their  population  increases,  the  build-up  of  waste  material
from  metabolic  excretions  soon  fouls  the  substrate,  rendering  it  unsuitable  for  mycelial  growth.
These  excretions  result  in  similar  damage  to  infested  casing  soils.

Although  saprophagous  eelworms  are  not  primary  pathogens,  their  presence  indicates  im-
proper  hygiene  or  imbalanced  growing  conditions.  For  this  reason,  control  measures  focu£  on
prevention rather than treatment.  In fact, there are no practical means to treat infested areas that
would  not likewise  harm the mushroom  mycelium.

Mycophagous  Nematodes
Genus/Species:  Difylenchus  myceliophagus;  Aphelenchiodes  composticola

Mycophagous  eelworms  feed  directly  on  mushrooms.  They  are  characterized  by  a  mouth
stylet or needle with which  these eelworms puncture hyphae,  inject digestive juices and then suck
out the cellular contents.  The damaged cell,  drained of its cytoplasm,  soon  dies.  Feeding continu-
ally  and  moving  from  cell  to  cell,  mycophagous  eelworms  can  soon  destroy  whole  mycelial  net-
works. In infected substrates, the fine mycelial growth disappears, leaving only the coarse strands
which  give  the  appearance  of  stringy  growth.  Eventually  the  substrate  becomes  soggy  and  foul
smelling,  a condition further promoted  by the build-up of anaerobic  bacteria.  Often  the nematode
trapping  fungi,  Arthmbotrys  spp.  develop  in  association  with  them.  It  is  visible  as  a  fine  grayish
mold-like growth. Although the presence of this mold is a useful indicator of nematode infestation,  it
is  not a  true  control  for  these  organisms.

Mycophages  differ from  saprophages  in  their slower non-parthogenetic  reproduction  and their
lack  of  the  "winking"  behavior  mentioned  earlier.  Both  Mycophagus  species  can  reproduce
30-100  fold  in  about  two  weeks  at  70-75°F.

Mushroom  Genetics/333

CHAPTER XV

MUSHROOM GENETICS

Figure 239  Gill face of Psilocybe cyanescens populated with fertile spore-bearing
basidia and sterile cells called pleurocystidia.

334/Mushroom  Genetics

INTRODUCTION

This  chapter discusses what genes are and  what they do.  It addresses the  relationship  between  an

individual's set of genes and the characteristics of that individual.  The implications of genetics
for the grower or breeder of mushroom  strains are examined and an  improved,  easy technique for
generating  cultures from  spore  prints will  be  presented.
What  Are  Genes?

Genes  contain  specific  sequences  of  nucleotides,  the  nitrogen-based  building  blocks  of  the
DNA  molecule.  These  sequences  specify  the  order  of  nucleotides  in  messenger  RNA  molecules,
which  in turn  determine the sequence of the amino acids in a protein  chain.  For the purposes of this
discussion, genes may be regarded as indivisible units, although in fact, they can on rare occasions
be split or altered. A mutation is the permanent alteration of a gene caused by some outside force
(chemicals,  radiation,  mistakes by the DNA copying mechanism of the cell, etc.).  In discussions of
genetics, a gene is often referred to as a genetic locus, emphasizing the fact that genes are regions
of a DNA molecule. Within a population of a species, there are many differing copies of each gene.
Each copy is referred To as an  allele of that gene.

What  Do  Genes  Do?

Genes are the blueprints of life. They specify The structure of RNA and protein molecules; these
molecules create all the other compounds and structures which  make up a living organism. An indi-
vidual organism is an emergent property of its genes in that not only is it the result of gene products,
but also the interactions of gene products. The expression and interaction of genes, that is the char-
acteristics of an individual, are known collectively as the phenotype of that individual, whereas the
sets  of  genes  which  produce  the  phenotype  is  known  as  the  genotype.

The  Advantage  of  Multiple  Copies  of  Genes

Many genes are present in the genotype in several copies, and these copies are often different
from one another. This is because the protein specified by any one gene copy has unique physical
and chemical properties of its own.  It functions most efficiently at a certain temperature, pH and salt
concentration.  If an  important protein is represented in several different gene versions, a broad band
rather  than  a  narrow  range  of  temperatures  and  chemical  conditions  will  be  optimal.

Chromosomes

Chromosomes are collections of genes.  They are  long  DNA molecules,  each  of which  contain
several thousand genes.  For this discussion, The genes are best visualized as beads on a string, so
that the string can be cut at any point between the beads, and can be rejoined at the place of The cut
or to any cut "string portion" or the chromosome.

Chromosomes are  very  small.  With  special  stains  and  high  powered  microscopes,  the  larger
ones can be seen. Unfortunately, the chromosomes of fungi are extremely small, and the number of
chromosomes, something characteristic of each species, has never been determined for most fungi.

Mushroom  Genetics/335

There is a complete set of chromosomes in every cell of every organism. This means that every
time a cell divides, a complete copy must be made of every chromosome, and hence of every gene
in  the  organism's  genome.  The cellular copying  process  is very  nearly perfect,  with  errors  being
made at about the rate of one per million genes. That is , to find a random mutation of a particular
gene, you would have to look at a million cells.  Factors which produce mutations will, of course, in-
crease this rate. These copy errors are the source of background mutations, which are always ap-
pearing  in  every  organism.

Mitosis

Mitosis  is  the  normal  process  of  chromosome  duplication  which  takes  place  every  Time  that  a
cell  divides.  In  it,  all  the  chromosomes are  duplicated,  and  in  the early stages of the process,  the
copies stick together. All  of the duplicated chromosomes line  up  in  the  middle of the cell,  and one
of the two copies of each is pulled to either end of the cell, resulting in two complete sets of chromo-
somes.

Meiosis

Meiosis is the unique series of events which takes place when a cell is involved in sexual repro-
duction.  In  meiosis, the chromosomes are copied just as in  mitosis, but the genes are shuffled in a
process  called  recombination.  Sexually reproducing  organisms  have  two  sets  of chromosomes,
one from each parent. In meiosis, these two sets line up side by side, and reciprocal exchanges of
sections of chromosomes take place. That is, a section of The maternal copy of a chromosome is
transferred to The paternal copy, and a section of the paternal copy is simultaneous y transferred to
the  maternal  one.  This  happens  to  all  of the  chromosomes,  usually  once  per  chromosome,  but
sometimes  more  than  once.

After these reciprocal exchanges take place, Two successive cell divisions occur, resulting in
four cells, each with ONE copy of each chromosome.  None of these cells are identical to any of the
others. They each have unique sets of genes. These cells are known as gametes, and are basidio-
spores in a mushroom, ascospores in a cup fungus or a yeast and sperm or egg cells in an animal.
It  is this  act  of  recombination  of  genes  within  the  genome  and  the  combination  of  genomes
from two parents which is the genius of sexual reproduction. By this mechanism, variety is constant-
ly introduced into the population of a species. A bacterium, which can reproduce very rapidly by mi-
tosis,  can  generate  vast  numbers of  bacteria  in  a  very  short  time,  but all of the offspring are iden-
tical.  The importance of this difference cannot be overstated.  If conditions fall below optimal or into
the lethal range for the parent bacterium, all of the progeny soon die or are equally affected (unless,
of course, there has been  a favorable random  mutation).  Chance favorable mutations are, in fact,
the  major means  of evolution  available to  bacteria.

Sexual reproduction, on the other hand, constantly spins off variation. Some of the progeny are
substandard and do not survive, or do poorly, most are average and some are clearly superior, flour-
ishing and leaving behind a greater number of offspring than the other groups.  In this way, the pop-
ulation  is  enriched  in  gene  combinations which  are  better adapted  to  the  environment.

336/Mushroom  Genetics

REPRODUCTIVE STRATEGIES

The two aforementioned modes of reproduction  lead to three primary reproductive strategies.
These are the primary use of asexual reproduction, the primary use of sexual reproduction and the
sequential or seasonal use of both  methods of reproduction.

1.  Asexual (rnitotic) reproduction allows an organism to produce large numbers of offspring in
a very short period of time. This makes possible the rapid exploitation of any ecological niche which
becomes available. This strategy is used by bacteria, yeasts, many molds (Fungi Imperfecti) and a
surprising  number  of  plants.

2.  Sexual  reproduction  is not as rapid,  since meiosis,  gamete production  and fusion and zy-
gote growth are relatively slow processes. The progeny, however, have built-in variation and are ca-
pable of exploiting a wider assortment of niches than the parents. This strategy is used by larger or-
ganisms which tend to live for a longer time than those which are primarily asexual.  Examples of or-
ganisms using this strategy are polypores, most plants and all large animals.

3.  Combining sexual and asexual reproductions in different portions of the life cycle results in
a highly effective strategy. This method is utilized by most lower plants and most fungi. In this strate-
gy, when a suitable niche is found, asexual reproduction allows it to be rapidly filled and exploited.
When that niche has been populated and nutrients become scarce, sexual reproduction is triggered.
As well as releasing a number of varied progeny to the environment, sexually produced spores are
usually  more  resistant  to  the  harsh  environmental  conditions  than  mitotically  produced  spores.
Often they are specifically adapted to lasting through winter or through a period of dryness, condi-
tions  not  conducive  to  the  growth  of  fungi.

Asexual  Reproduction  in  the  Fungi

Asexual reproduction in the fungi takes many forms, including buds, conidia, sporangiospores

and fragmentation  products.

Yeasts reproduce by budding, which is the constant growth of new cells from the surface of a

mother  cell.  The  new  cells  literally  "blow  out"  of  the  mother  cell  wall  like  a  balloon.

Conidia are  mitotic spores which  are continuously produced within  or upon  special structures
called  conidiogenous  cells.  Examples  of  conidial  fungi  are  represented  by  Penicillium  and
Aspergillus molds,  the fungi which  attack spoiled foodstuffs,  the downy and  powdery mildew which
attack  garden  plants,  and  the  hundreds  of  genera  which  are  involved  in  the  breaddown  and  re-
cycling  of debris  and  litter  in  nature.

Sporangiospores  (spores  formed  in  batches  within  saclike  structures  called  sporangia)  are
found in the water molds and the Zygomycetes. Rhizopus, which is often seen on breads and straw-
berries,  reproduces in  this  manner.

A common mode of asexual reproduction  is for portions of vegetative mycelium to thicken and
form  heavy walls  and septae.  These  reinforced  hyphal  fragments then  break  apart and  are  distri-
buted by natural processes. These vegetative propagules are called by many names, including ar-

Mushroom  Genetics/337

throspores, chlamydospores, gemmae and others.

Sexual  Reproduction  in  Mushrooms

While mushrooms reproduce sexually, they have no sexes. All that the term sexual reproduc-
tion means is that two sets of genetic information are carried, and that the genes in those sets are
shuffled  randomly  before one  set is provided to  each  gamete.  Two  gametes must come together
and fuse to form  the next fertile generation.

In  animals and  plants,  the  notion  of sexes  is realistic,  because  there  are two  kinds of gametes,

an egg and a sperm.  In mushrooms, all the gametes are physically identical; they are the basidio-
spores.  Because of meiosis,  however, there are genetic differences between them.

One of the genetic characters sorted out during meiosis is the mating type. The mating type is
a character which prevents a spore or monokaryotic hypha carrying a  particular allele from fusing
sexually with any spore or hypha carrying the same allele, no matter how different the genomes are
at all other loci. It takes the presence of different alleles at the mating type locus for sexual reproduc-
tion to occur.  In any one species, there may be any number of alleles within the population.  In gen-
eral,  any one of them  is compatible with  all of the others,  the only prohibition  being  against fusion
with the identical mating type.

If a species of mushroom  has only one locus controlling  mating  type,  with  varying  numbers of
alleles for that locus, that species has what is known as an unifactorial, heterothallic mating sys-
tem.  In such a system, the only physiological requirement for mating to take place is that two differ-
ing alleles of the mating type locus be present. Since two alleles must be present in a sexually ma-
ture  mushroom,  and each  spore only gets one,  any randon  spore is compatible with  half of its sib-
lings. Since there are a large number of alleles for the mating type locus in the population at iarge,
any random spore has a higher probability of being compatible with a spore of another strain. Thus
this system  increases the percentage of outcrossing  by members of the species  using  it.

The majority of mushrooms, however, are heterothallic and bifactorial, a system known as
tetrapolar. In this system, there are Two separate and distinct mating type loci, each of which must
have differing alleles present to form a dikaryotic colony. This system produces four distinct types of
spores on each basidium, and any random spore from a single strain is fertile with only one fourth of
its siblings. This is a strong form of incest taboo, and makes it four times as likely that any naturally
formed dikaryon will be from  non-related spores.  Unfortunately, the two types of spores which are
not totally identical or non-identical can form dikaryotic colonies which  look like fertile ones. These
products  of  illegitimate  matings,  though,  are  incapable  of  making  fruitbodies  or  basidiospores.

There are strains and species in  which  the  mating type system  has broken  down,  These are

known as homothallic fungi, and they are fully capable of mating with themselves. In fact, a single
spore of a homothallic fungus is usually capable of making a ferile dikaryotic colony. A fair number
of spores,  however,  due to the effects of recombination, will  be incapable of forming fertile colonies
unless they  mate with  another strain.  This  is a  system  often  found  in  fungi  which  live  in  marginal
habitats;  usually there  is a  time  lag  before  a  monokaryotic  colony dikaryotics  itself.

338/Mushroom Genetics

There  are  two  types  of  homothallisrn  in  mushrooms:  primary  and  secondary.  Primary
homothallism  is  the  case  described  above,  where  the  majority  of  spores,  while  initially  forming
monokaryotic colonies,  will  eventually become dikaryotic and  fruit normally.  Secondary  homothal-
lism is the case where each spore receives one nucleus of each mating type, generating a dikaryotic
colony  from  the  moment of spore  germination. Agaricus  brunnescens  is the  best  known  example
of this type of fungus,  while another commonly  cultivated  mushroom,  Volvariella  volvacea,  has a
primary  homothallic  mating  system.

IMPLICATIONS  FOR CULTURE WORK

The single most important implication of the genetics that has been described thus far is the oc-
currence of illegitimate matings.  In a tetrapolar fungus,  only one fourth  of the spores from  any one
mushroom are fully compatible with  any random  spore from  That same strain. This mechanism  ex-
ists to encourage outcrossing. When a cultivator is trying to produce a strain from a spore print, es-
tablishing a fruiting strain can be frustrating. This is because monkaryotic hyphae with common A
factors  or  with  common  B  factors  can  fuse  and  form  dikaryons,  and  these  dikaryons  can  even
make convincing  looking  clamp  connections.  (See  Figs.  10  and  182).  These  colonies,  however,
are  incapable  of fruiting.  It  becomes  obvious  at this  point  that  two  thirds  of the  random  dikaryons
formed will be of the illegitimate type. This implies that a large number of dikaryotic cultures must
be  isolated and tested for fruiting  ability. Another,  but less precise way around This problem  is to
inoculate with a large number of spores and take a tissue culture of The firsT mushroom that appears
in the culture. This procedure is the one usually listed in books on mushroom cultivation because it
is simple,  but the strains produced in this manner still  must be tested thoroughly.

The  phenomenon  of sectoring  is the  production  of wedge shaped areas of differing  physical
or growth  characteristics  by  a  colony of mycelium.  There are two types of sectoring,  one found in
young  cultures,  and  one  in  old  ones.

In young multispore cultures, several different strains are all growing together at the same time.
Some are the products of legitimate matings, some of illegitimate ones. These strains all have differ-
ing characteristics. Some of these strains grow faster than others, some are rhizomorphic and some
are fluffy in  appearance,  Some fruit well,  some poorly.  Some produce clumps of many tiny mush-
rooms,  some produce a few large ones.  They each  have a  unique set of preferred culture condi-
tions.

Fortunately, the different strains formed from multispore germinations Tend to sort Themselves
out. As the colony grows, strains segregate into sectors of different appearances and growth rates.
The repeated separation and propagation of individual sectors, until a colony is obtained which no
longer produces new ones is one way of isolating a pure strain. Several strains may be isolated from
The same original petri  plate in  This way.

As pure cultures grow old and become senescent, they produce ever greater quantities of sec-
tors due to the accumulation of random mutations.  Repeated subculturing of the culture gives accu-
mulated mutations a chance to express themselves. A strain which has reached this condition is no
longer  pure,  and  should  not  be  used  for cultivation.

Mushroom Genetics/339

Culture  Trials

When a number of strains have been generated from a sporeprint, they are different because of
recombination  in the basidium.  Some of the strains MAY be identical to the parent strain,  but that
must  demonstrated  by  some  testing  procedure.  As  in  any  screening  operation,  the  more  strains
used, the better the chance of a good result. In fact, professional mushroom breeders often do trials
with thousands of strains at a time. This kind of work, however, takes large and expensive facilities,
and is unnecessary if the purpose is simply to find a strain which fruits well under a certain set of
conditions. A strain which fruits well in test batches under uniform conditions has a high likelihood
of doing well in larges batches when The same conditions of temperature, humidity and aeration are
maintained. How many strains need to be tested? If the mushroom being worked with is tetrapolar,
only one third of the dikaryotic colonies picked out will be capable of fruiting at all. In order to make
trials of ten fruiting strains,  begin with at least thirty dikaryotic strains.

Many mushrooms,  especially the wood-rotters, fruit on  enriched agar media in  a  petri  plate if
given proper temperatures and some light. If the mushroom being tested is one of These, the selec-
tion of fruiting strains is simple. A mushroom requiring a special substrate or additive to fruit should
be provided with the smallest amount allowable. For example, Agaricus brunnescens can be fruited
on  50  grams of sterilized  grain  in  a  pint jar,  if it  is  cased  with  soil  containing  certain  bacteria.  The

Figure 240  Two  spored  basidium  of a  Copelandian  Panaeolus.

340/Mushroom Genetics

smallest  possible  amount  of  substrate  allows  the  rapid  determination  of fruiting  strains.

Once ten to fifteen fruiting strains are  in  hand, they should be tested  in a small scale version of
the ultimate culture method.  This step allows the strain  best adapted to culture conditions to be se-
lected.  All strains should be tested at  least in  duplicates; five replicates per strain  are  preferable.

If the  ultimate cultivation  method  involves  beds of compost,  the tests can  be made with  small
boxes filled with compost,  but the boxes should be filled to the same depth as the beds will be in the
full scale project.  If the fungus is fruited in jars (ex. Flammulina velutipes), a few jars can be inocu-
lated with each strain.  Good  records must be kept for comparing the fruiting potential of each strain.
In  small  scale trials such  as these,  often several strains  look good.  In this case, the only way to
find the best one is to make full scale trials, with one third or one fourth of the jars or beds inoculated
with  each  of the strains being tested.  Once again,  good record  keeping  practices should soon show
the  differences  between  the  most  and  least  productive  strains.

If the mushroom  under consideration for cultivation takes a  long time to establish  its fruiting
cycle (ex. Lentinus edodes), it is best to simply purchase a culture from a spawn  lab or to take tissue
cultures  from  commercially  grown  mushrooms.

Spore  Dilution  Technique

A simple technique can  be  used to physically separate spores so that individual dikaryotic  (or
even  monokaryotic) cultures can  be isolated in  one step.  The necessary equipment includes a bac-
terial  (small)  inoculating  loop,  several screw-cap vials of 20-30 ml,  capacity,  a flame and several
sterile  pipettes  or  small  syringes.

To  utilize this  method,  first fill  each  of the vials with  9  ml.  of distilled water,  place the  caps on
loosely and sterilize them.  After they have cooled,  the caps should be firmly screwed down.  The in-
oculation loop is then flamed, cooled and gently rubbed on the spore print, being careful not to get
a  large  mass of spores.  The  loop  is  dipped  and  twirled  in  one  of the  vials,  which  is then  recapped
and  shaken  vigorously.  One  milliliter  of  the  fluid  is  then  transferred  to  another  vial,  which  is  re-
capped and shaken, generating a dilute spore suspension. This suspension may be further diluted in
the same manner. In this way, the cultivator has generated three suspensions of spores, one of high
spore density, one 1 /1 Oth as concentrated and one with 1 /100th or 1 % of the original concentra-
tion.  Now spread  1/1 Oth  of a  mililiter of each  suspension  on  a  separate  media filled  petri  plate  (or
better yet,  use several plates for each dilution). The original strength suspension  in all likelihood will
produce a dense lawn of cultures, which will be difficult to separate. This is the same condition as is
produced with  normal  spore  spreading  methods.  The  less dense suspensions,  however,  should  pro-
duce  many fewer colonies,  usually  in  the  range of 20-50  per plate for the  1:10  dilution  and  2-5  per
plate  for  the  1:100  dilution.

Look carefully at the plates having only a few colonies. The slower growing monokaryons can
be  discerned from  the faster  growing  dikaryons.  Pick  about  25  of the  dikaryons to  test  for fruiting
ability  and  reaction  to  culture  conditions.

If desired,  the  monokaryotic  cultures  can  be  picked  out for a  breeding  program.  This is espe-

daily valuable if there are spores from several strains available. When spores are simply spread onto
a  plate,  they adhere to one another,  so attempts to simply streak spores of two strains on a plate usu-
ally  do  not  yield  hybrids.

Mushroom Genetics/341

(The  authors  gratefully  acknowledge  Michael  McCaw  for  the  contribution  of  this  chapter  on
genetics).

Plate  1  Psilocybe cubensis  mycelium. 

Plate  2  Psilocybe mexicana  mycelium.

Plate  3  Lepista  nuda  mycelium.

Plate  4  Psilocybe  tampensis  mycelium.

Plate  5  Compost  raw  materials  during  Plate 6  Compost raw materials at ricking,
pre-composting.

Plate 7  Compost raw materials at filling. Plate  8  Compost  ready  for  spawning.

Note  whitish  colonies  of  Actinomycetes.

Plate  16  Psilocybe  cyanescens  mycelium  running  through  moist  alder  sawdust.

Plate  17  Psilocybe  cyanescens  fruiting  on  alder  chips.

Plate  18  Psilocybe cubensis fruiting  on  cased,  pasteurized  wheat  straw.

Plate  19  Panaeolus cyanescens fruiting  on  cased  wheat  straw.

Plate  20  Penicillium,  the  Blue  Green
Mold  and  Cladosporium,  the  Dark  Green
Mold,  growing  on  malt agar  media.

Plate  21  Aspergillus,  the  Green  Mold,
growing on  malt agar media.

Plate 22  Trichoderma,  the  Forest Green  Plate  23  Botrytis,  the  Brown  Mold,  con-
Mold,  contaminating the casing  layer. 

taminating  the casing  layer.

GLOSSARY

Glossary/389

a

(of the  gills)  Attached  to  the  stem

(of the  gills)  Bluntly  attached  to  the

acute  Pointed,  sharp.
adnate 
stem.
adnexed 
in  an  ascending  manner
agar  A  product  derived  from  seaweed  and
valued  for  its  gelatinizing  properties.  Com-
monly  used  to  solidify  media  in  any  type  of
sterile tissue culture.
Agaricales  The  order  of  mushrooms  which
includes all  mushrooms with  true  gills.
amyloid  The  characteristic  bluish  reaction
the flesh or the spores of a mushroom exhibits
in  Melzer's  iodine.
anastomosis 
(pi.  anastomoses)  The
crosswise  fusion  of  hyphal  systems  to  form  a
network  of  mycelia.
angstrom  10~'° microns, 1  ten thousandth
of a  micron.
annular  Resembling  an  annulus,  appearing
as a  ring-like zone.
annulus  The  tissue  remnants  of  the  partial
veil  adhering to the stem and forming a mem-
branous  collar or  ring.
apex  The  top  or  highest  point.
apiculus  a  term  (misused)  for  the  hilar  ap-
pendix,  the  nipple-like  projection  by  which  a
spore is attached to the srrerigmata ("arms") of
the  basidium.
appendiculate  Hanging  with  fragments  of
tissue.
appressed  Flattened.

Ascomycetes  Fungi  that produce spores in
an  ascus.
ascus  A sac-like organ in which eight spores
develop  and  is  characteristic  of  the  perfect
stage  of ascomycetous fungi.
autoclave  A  steam  pressurized vessel  used
to  sterilize  media.

b
bacillus  (pi.  bacilli)  A  general  term  for any
rod-shaped bacteria forming spores in free ox-
ygen  environments.  (The  genus  Bacillus  is
more  narrowly  defined).
bacterium 
(pi.  bacteria)  The  simplest
group of non-chlorophyll  plant-like organisms.
Basidiomycetes  All 
fungi  which  bear
spores externally upon a club-like cell  known
as a  basidium.
basidium,  basidia  A  unique  fertile  cell,
club-like in form,  in which  meiosis occurs and
by which  sexual  spores are  produced.
basidiocarp  The  fruiting  body  of fungi  that
reproduce  through  basidia.
binucleate  Having  two  nuclei  in  one  cell.
border  break  The  early  occurence  of
mushrooms along the edge of a substrate con-
tainer.

c

campanulate  Bell  shaped.
carpophore  The 
fungi.

fruiting  body  of  higher

390/Glossary

the

to  a 

carpophoroid  Analagous 
fruitbody,
although usually a poorly differentiated mass of
tissue,  not  well  developed  ("aborted")  and
sterile.
cartilaginous  Brittle,  not  pliant.
casing  A  layer  of  water  retentive  materials
applied  to  a  substrate  to  encourage  and  en-
hance  fruitbody  production.
caulocystidia  Sterile  cells  covering 
mushroom  stem.
cellular  Composed  of  globose  to  rounded
cells, not thread-like.
cespitose  Crowing  clustered,  appearing  to
arise from a single base.
cheilocystidia  Sterile  cells  on  the  mush-
room  gill  edge,  sometimes  called  marginal
cystidia.
chlamydospores  A thick walled spore,  typ-
ically of a  secondary type,  that arises directly
from the mycelium and having the full comple-
ment  of  chromosomes 
for  producing  off-
spring.  Chlamydospores  are  typically  ovoid
and  heat  resistant.

type  of  cystidia 

chrysocystidia  A 
is
highly  refractive  in  once  dried  tissue  revived
with  a  potassium  hydroxide  (KOH)  solution
and  appearing  as  a  yellowish  brown  amor-
phous mass within the cell.

that 

conditioning  The 
final  conversion  of
mushroom  compost  by  selected  microbial
groups.
conic  Shaped  like  a  cone.
conidia  A  uninucleate  exteriorly  borne  cell
formed  by  constriction  of the  conidiophore.
conidiophore  A  specialized  stalk  arising
from  mycelium  upon which  conidia are borne.
conidium  (pi.  conidia)  An  asexual  spore
formed by the constriction of hyphae to chains
of  cells.
context  The  flesh  of a  mushroom.
convex  Regularly  rounded.
Coprinaceae  A  family  of  mushrooms  con-
taining  the  genera  Coprinus,  Panaeolus  and
Psathyrella.
coprophilous  Growing  on  dung.
cortinate  A  type  of  veil  consisting  of  fine
cobweb-like threads of tissue, extending from
the  mushroom  cap  margin  to  the  stem.
cropping  The  time  of  mushroom  forma-
tion,  development and harvesting.
cuticle  The  surface of cells on  the cap that
can undergo varying degrees of differentiation.
cystidia  Microscopic  sterile  cells  adorning
the  mushroom  fruitbody.

clamp  connection  An  elbow-like  protuber-
ance  which  arches  over  the  walls  separating
cells  in  mated  (dikaryotic)  mycelia  of  some
mushroom  species.

compost  A  biological  matrix  of  microorga-
nisms combined with  straw,  manure and other
organic  substances  and  designed  for  mush-
room  fruitbody  production.

concolorous  Having  the  same  color.

d

decurrent  The  attachment  of the  gill  plates
to the  stem  of  mushrooms where the  gills are
markedly  downcurved,  partially  extending
down  the stem.
decurved  Curving  in  a  downwards fashion.
deciduous  Describing  trees that seasonally
shed their leaves.

deliquescing  The  process  of  autodigestion
by which the gills and cap of a mushroom melt
into  a 
liquid.  Most  typical  of  The  genus
Coprinus.
dikaryophase  The phase in which there are
two individual  nuclei  in each cell of the mush-
room  plant.
dikaryotic  The  state  of  cells 
dikaryophase.
diploid  A  genetic  condition  where  each  cell
has  a  full  set  of  chromosomes  necessary  for
sexual  reporduction  (2N).
disc  The  central  portion  of  the  mushroom
cap.

the

in 

c

eccentric  Off-centered.
ellipsoid  Shaped  like  an  oblong  circle.
endospores  Spores  formed  internally.
entheogenic  A term  to  describe substances
that  induce  god  inspiring  feelings  or  expe-
riences.
equal  Evenly  proportioned.
eroded 
Irregularly  broken.
evanescent  Fragile  and  soon  disappearing.

f

fibrillose  Having  fibrils.
fibrils  Fine delicate 'hairs'  found on the sur-
face  of the  cap  or  stem.
fibrous  Composed of tough,  stringy tissue.
filamentous  Composed  of  hyphae  or
thread-like cells.

Glossary/391

flexuose,  flexuous  Bent  alternately  in  op-
posite  directions.
floccose  Wooly  tufts  or  cottony  vei!  rem-
nants,  typically  adorning  the  cap  or  stem  of
some mushroom  species.
flush  The collective formation  and  develop-
ment of mushrooms within a short time period,
often  occurring  in  a  rhythmic  manner.
fructification  The  act  of  fruitbody  forma-
tion.
fruitbody  What 
the
mushroom.  The  sexual  reproductive  body  of
the  mushroom  plant.
fugacious 
stroyed.
fusoid  Rounded and tapering from the cen-
ter.

Impermanent,  easily  torn  or  de-

is  commonly  called 

g

gelatinous  Having  the  consistency  of jelly.
genotype  The  genetic  heritage  or  constitu-
tion  of  an  organism.  The  genotype  produces
the  phenotype,
geotropism  Growing oriented towards or in
response to gravity.
glabrescent  Becoming  smooth.
glabrous  Smooth,  bald.
glutinous  Having  a  highly  viscous  gelati-
nous layer,  an  extreme condition  of viscidity.
Gram  (Gram's  Stain)  A  method  for  sepa-
rating  bacteria  whereby  bacteria  are  stained
first  with  crystal  violet  (a  red  dye)  and  then
washed with an  iodine solution.  Gram  positive
bacteria (Bacillus) retain the dye. Gram  nega-
tive  bacteria 
(Pseudomonas  and  some
Bacillus)  lose the dye.

392/Glossary

gregarious  Crowing  numerously  in  small
groups but not in clusters.

h

habitat  The  substrate  in  which  mushrooms
grow.
heliotropic  Growing  or turning  towards  the
sun.
heteromorphic  Composed  of different  eel!
types,  usually  describing  the  type  of  mush-
room  gill  edge.
heterothallic  Having  two  or  more  morpho-
logically similar pairs of strains within The same
species.  The combination of compatible spore
types  is  essential  for  producing  fertile  off-
spring. Typically a spore on a four spored ba-
sidium is compatible with only one of its coun-
terparts.
hilar  appendix  The  stub-like  protrusion  on
the  spore  that  connects  the  spore-producing
cell  (ex.  the  basidium)  to  it.
hilum A marking on the spore where it was at-
tached to a spore-producing cell.
homomorphic  Composed  of  similar  cell
types.
homothallic  Having one strain type that is,
by  nature,  dikaryotic  and  self-fertile;  often  aris-
ing from  two  spored  basidia.
humicolous  Crowing  in  humus,  soil.
hygrophanous  Markedly  fading  in  color
upon drying, used to describe the condition of
the  mushroom  cap.
hymenium  The 
bearing cells on the gill.
hypha,  hyphae 
mycelium.

fertile  spore-

layer  of 

Individual 

cells  of

hyphal  aggregate  A  concentration  of
mycelium;  a  "knot"  in  the  mycelial  network
which often  differentiates into a primordium.
hyphosphere  The  region  immediately  on
and surrounding  hyphae.

indicator  mold  A  mold,  usually  non-
destructive, whose occurrence indicates an im-
properly balanced condition in the substrate or
environment.

instar  An  insect  in  any  of  its  stages  of  post
embryonic  growth.

k

karyogamy  The  fusion  of two  sexually  op-
posite nuclei within a single cell.
KOH  Potassium  Hydroxide,  an  agent com-
monly used to revive dried mushroom material
for  microscopic  study  at  a  concentration  of
2%%.

I

E

in  wood  or  on 

lamellae  Mushroom  gills.
lignicolous  Growing 
substratum composed of woody tissue.
lignin  The  organic  substance  which,  witr
cellulose,  forms  the  basis  of  most  woody  tis
sue.
linear  Considerably  longer  than  wide,  witr
edges  parallel.
lubricous  Smooth

lumen  The  amount  of the  flow  of  light emit-
ted  from  a  single  international  foot  candle.
lux  The  amount  of  illumination  received  by
a surface one meter from  1  foot candle, equal
to  1  lumen/square  meter.

m

macroscopic  Visible  to  the  unaided  eye,
matting  A  condition  of  a  mycelium  casing-
run  that  has  become appressed from  overwa-
tering.  Similar  to  overlay  except  that  matting
infers the  mycelium  has formed a dense, dead
layer of cells on the casing's surface.
meiosis  The  process  of  reduction  division
by  which  a  single  cell  with  a  diploid  nucleus
subdivides  into  four  cells  with  one  haploid
nucleus apiece.
membranous  Being  sheath-like  in  form.
mesophile  An  organism  thriving  in  moder-
ate temperature zones, usually 40-90 °F.
metuloid  Used to describe a  sterile cell en-
crusted with a crystalline (calcitized) substance.
micron  One  millionth  of  a  meter,  10~6
meters,  one thousandth  of a  millimeter.
microscopic  Visible only with  the  aid  of a
microscope.
mitosis  The  non-sexual  process  of  nuclear
division in a cell by which the chromosomes of
one nucleus are replicated and divided equally
into  two  daughter  nuclei.
monkaryon,  monocaryon  (adj.  monokar-
yotic,  monocan/otic)  The  haploid  state  of
the  mushroom  mycelium,  typically  containing
a  single nucleus.
mottled  Spotted,  as  in  the  uneven  ripening
of spores on the gill surfaces that so character-
izes species in the genus Panaeolus.

Glossary/393

(pi.  micella)  A  network  of

mushroom  A  fleshy  fungus  that  erects  a
body of tissue in which sexual spores are pro-
duced  and from  which  they  are  distributed.
mycelium 
hyphae.
mycology  The study of fungi.
mycophagist  A  person  or  animal  that  eats
fungi.
mycophile  a  person  who  likes  mushrooms.
mycophobe  a  person  who  fears  mush-
rooms.
mycorrhizal  A  peculiar  type  of  symbiotic
relationship a  mushroom  mycelium forms with
the roots of a seed plant,  typically trees.

n

nanometer  10"  meters,  one  thousandth  of
a  micron.
natural  culture  The  in  vitro  cultivation  of
mushrooms  by  transplanting  living  mycelium,
usually from a natural habitat.
nomenclature  Any system  of classification.
nucleate  Having  nuclei
nucleotide  One  of  the  four  nitrogenous
bases in  DNA; often called the building blocks
of  the  DNA  molecule.
nucleus, nuclei  A concentrated mass of dif-
ferentiated protoplasm in cells containing chro-
mosomes  and  playing  an  integral  role  in  the
reproduction and continuation of genetic mate-
rial.

o

obtuse  Bluntly  shaped.

394/Glossary

ochraceous  Light  orangish  brown  to  pale
yellowish  brown.
oidia  Conidia  (spores)  borne  in  chains.
olivaceous  Olive  gray-brown.
overlay  A condition of the casing where my-
celium  been  allowed to completely  cover the
surface.  Overlay is caused by prolonged vege-
tative  growth  temperatures,  high  C02  levels
and  excessive  humidity.  Overlay,  if  overwa-
tered,  becomes  matted.
ovoid  Oval  shaped.

P

pallid  Pale  in  color.
parasite  An  organism  living  on  another  liv-
ing species and deriving its sustenance to the
detriment  of  the  host.
partial  veil  The  inner  veil  of tissue  extend-
ing from the cap margin to the stem and at first
covering  the  gills  of  mushrooms.
pasteurization  A  process  by  which  bulk
materials are partially sterilized through contact
with  live  steam,  hot  water  or  dry  heat  at tem-
peratures of between  140-160°F.
pellicle  A  skin-like  covering  on  the  cap,
sometimes gelatinous and separable.
pencillate  Resembling  a  broom  or  brush;
Penicillium-\\ke.
perithecium  A  flask  shaped  or  pear  shaped
saclike fruitbody of some Ascomycetes that en-
closes  asci.
persistent  Not  disappearing  with  age.
Phase  I  The  steps  taken  in  the  outdoor
preparation,  assemblage  and  conversion  of
raw  materials  into  a  nutritious  medium  for
mushroom  growth.

Phase  II  The  pasteurization  and final  condi-
tioning  of  a  mushroom  compost.
phenotype  The observable  physical charac-
teristics resulting from  interaction  between the
host  environment  and  the  genotype.
photosensitive  Sensitive  to  light.
phototropic  Growing  towards  light.
pileus  The mushroom cap.
pith  The  central  cottony  "stuffing"  in  the
stems  of  some  mushrooms.

pleurocystidia  Sterile  cells  on  The  surface
of  mushroom  gills.  Sometimes  called  facial
cystidia.

pliant  Flexible.

pore  A  circular  depression  at  the  end  of
spores  in  many  species.

primary mycelium  The haploid and uninu-
cleate mycelium originating from the germina-
tion  of a  spore which  is otherwise  not capable
of  producing  a  sporulating  organ.

primordium  (pi.  primordia)  The  first  rec-
ognizable  but  undifferentiated  mass of hyphae
that develops into a mushroom fruitbody.  Syn-
onymous  with  "pinhead".

pruinose  Having  a  powdery  appearance.

pseudorhiza  A  long  root-like  extension  of
the  stem.

pseudosclerotium 
(pi.  pseudosderotia)
A  conglomerated  mass  of  mycelial  tissue  re-
sembling  a  sclerotium  but which  can  not  pro-
duce a fruitbody or new mycelial  growth.
psilocybian  Having  psilocybin  and/or  psi-
locin.  (Not necessarily belonging to the genus
Psilocybe).
psilocyboid  Resembling  a  Psilocybe mush-
room.

r

radicate  Tapering  downwards.  Having  a
long  root like extension  of the stem.
reticulate  Marked  by  lines  or  ridges.
rhizomorphs  Cord-like  or  strand-like
hyphae.

s

SACing  Nutrient  supplementation  of  bulk
substrates at the  time  of casing.
saprophyte  A  plant  (fungus)  That  lives  on
dead  organic  matter.
saltation  The  mutation  developing  from  an
isolate  of  mycelium  having  a  known  pure
genotype.
scanning  electron  microscope  An  elec-
tronic microscope which  scans an  object  in  a
vacuum  with a  beam of electrons resulting  in
an  image of high  resolution  and magnification
that  is  then  displayed  on  a  television-type  mon-
itor.
sclerotium 
(pi.  sclerotia)  A  hardened
mass  of  mycelium,  usually  darkly  pigrnented,
that  is  the  resting  (vegetative)  phase  in  some
fleshy  and  non-fleshy  fungi,  and  from  which
fruitbodies or viable  mycelium  can  arise.
scratching  Ruffling  of the substrate  or cas-
ing surface in  order to maintain an open,  por-
ous  condition  conducive  to  primordia  forma-
tion.
seceding  Describing  the  condition  where
the gills have separated in their attachment to
the mushroom stem  and  have torn free,  usual-
ly  leaving  longitudinal  ridges  at  the  stem's
apex.

Glossary/395

sector  A geometric growth  of diverging  my-
celium  (most  visible  on  media  filled  petri
dishes), the appearance of which contrasts with
that  of  neighboring  mycelia,  usually indicative
of  genetic  mutation.
secondary  mycelium  A  dikaryotic  and  bi-
nucleate  mycelium  characterized  by  clamp
connections,  crossing 
(anastomosis),  and
which  is assimilative, not generative, in func-
tion.
senescent  Having  grown  old.
septate  Having  walls  dividing  cells.
sinuate  Describing  the  attachment  of  the
mushroom  gill  to  the  stem  at  the  junction  of
which  the gill appears  notched.
somatic  Being  in  the  assimilative  phase  of
mycelial  growth.
sordid  Dirty  looking.
spawn  The  aggregation  of  mycelium  on  a
carrier material which is usually used to inocu-
late prepared substrates.
spores  The reproductive cells or "seeds" of
fungi, bacteria, and plants.

sporocarps  Any 
spores.

fruitbody 

that  produces

sterigmata (pi.  sterigmatae)  Elongated ap-
pendages or "arms"  extending  from  the apex
of the  basidiurn  and  upon  which  spores form.

stipe  The stem  or stalk  of a  fungus.

strain  A race of individuals within a species
sharing  a common  genetic  heritage but differ-
ing  in  some  observable  features  of  no  taxo-
nomic  significance.

stroma  A  dense,  cushion-like  aggregation
of  mycelium  forming  on  the  surface  of  com-
posts  or  casings  and  indicative  of  somatic
(vegetative), not generative growth.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

FOREWORD by Dr. Andrew Weil 
PREFACE 
I.  INTRODUCTION TO MUSHROOM CULTURE 

An Overview of Techniques for Mushroom  Cultivation 
Mushrooms and Mushroom  Culture 
The Mushroom Life Cycle 

II.  STERILE TECHNIQUE AND AGAR CULTURE 

Design and Construction of a Sterile Laboratory 
Preparation of Agar Media 
Starting A Culture from Spores 

Taking a Spore Print 
Techniques for Spore Germination 
Characteristics of the Mushroom Mycelium 
Ramifications of Multispore Culture 

Sectoring: Strain Selection and Development 
Stock Cultures: Methods For Preserving Mushroom Strains 

III.  GRAIN CULTURE 

The Development of Grain Spawn 
Preparation of Grain Spawn 

Spawn  Formulas 
Inoculation of Sterilized Grain from Agar Media 
Inoculation of Sterilized Grain from Grain Masters 

Alternative Spawn Media 
Liquid Inoculation Techniques 
Incubation of Spawn 

IV.  THE MUSHROOM GROWING ROOM 

Structure and Growing Systems 

Structure 
Shelves 
Trays 

Environmental Control Systems 

Fresh Air 
Fans 
Air Ducting 
Filters 
Exhaust Vents 
Heating 

VII

xi
xii
1
3
4
6
15
16
19
23
23
24
25
25
31
37
41
42
45
46
48
49
54
55
57
61
62
63
64
65
66
66
68
70
70
72
73

Vlll

Cooling 
Humidification 
Thermostats and Humidistats 
Lighting 
Environmental  Monitoring  Equipment 

V.  COMPOST PREPARATION 

Phase I Composting 

Basic Raw Materials 
Supplements 
Formulas 
Ammonia 
Carbon:Nitrogen  Ratio 
WaterAir 
Pre-Wetting 
Building  the  Pile 
Turning 
Temperature 
Long  Composting 
Short Composting 

Synthetic Compost Procedure 

Composting Tools 
Characteristics of the Compost at Filling 
Supplementation at Filling 

Phase II Composting 

Basic Air Requirements 
Phase II Room Design 
Filling  Procedures 
Depth  of Fill 
Phase  II  Procedures: Trays or Shelves 
Phase II in Bulk 
Bulk  Room  Design  Features 
Bulk Room Filling Procedures 
Bulk Room Phase II Program 
Testing for Ammonia 
Aspect of the Finished Compost 

Alternative Composts and Composting Procedures 

Sugar Cane Bagasse Compost 
The Five Day Express Composting Method 

VI.  NON-COMPOSTED SUBSTRATES 

Natural Culture 
Wood Based Substrates . 

73
74
74
74
76
77
78
78
79
81
82
83
83
84
85
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
95
96
97
98
98
99
100
101
102
104
104
104
105
106
106
106
109
1 10
114

Straw 

VII.  SPAWNING AND SPAWN  RUNNING IN  BULK SUBSTRATES 

Moisture Content 
Substrate Temperature 
Dry Weight of Substrate 
Duration  of Spawn  Run 
Spawning  Methods 
Environmental  Conditions 
Super Spawning 
Supplementation  at Spawning 
Supplementation  at Casing 

VIII.  THE CASING LAYER 

Function 
Properties 
Materials 
Formulas and  Preparation 
Application 
Casing Colonization 
Casing  Moisture and  Mycelial Appearance 

IX.  STRATEGIES FOR MUSHROOM FORMATION {PINHEAD INITIATION) 

Basic Pinning Strategy 
Primordia  Formation  Procedures 
The Relationship Between  Primordia  Formation and Yield 
The Influence  of Light on  Pinhead  Initiation 

X.  ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS: SUSTAINING THE MUSHROOM CROP 

Temperature 
Flushing  Pattern 
Air  Movement 
Watering 
Harvesting 
Preserving Mushrooms 

XI.  GROWING PARAMETERS FOR VARIOUS MUSHROOM SPECIES 

Agahcusbitorquis 
Agaricus brunnescens 
Coprinus comatus 
Flammulina velutipes 
Lentinus edodes 
Lepista nuda 
Panaeolus cyanescens 
Panaeolussubbalteatus  . 

117
1 21
122
122
122
124
1 24
125
126
126
126

127
128
129
130
1 32
133
1 35
1 37

139
140
141
146
147

149
150
1 50
1 52
154
155
1 56

159
161
1 64
168
172
176
180
183
186

Pleurotus ostrealus (Type Variety) 
Pleurolus ostreatus (Florida Variety) 
Psilocybe cubensis 
Psilocybe cyanescens 
Psilocybe mexicana 
Psilocybe tampanensis 
Stropharia  rugoso-annulata 
Volvariella volvacea 

XII.  CULTIVATION  PROBLEMS  AND THEIR  SOLUTIONS:

A TROUBLE SHOOTING GUIDE 
Sterile Technique 
Agar Culture 
Grain  Culture 

Compost Preparation 

Phase I 
Phase II 

Spawn  Running 
Case Running 
Mushroom  Formation and  Development 

Pinhead  Initiation 
Cropping 

XIII.  THE CONTAMINANTS OF MUSHROOM  CULTURE:

IDENTIFICATION AND CONTROL 

A  Key to the  Common  Contaminants of  Mushroom  Culture 
Virus (Die-Back  Disease) 
Actinomyces (Firefang) 
Bacillus (Wet Spot) 
Pseudomonas (Bacterial  Blotch &  Pit) 
Streptomyces  (Firefang) 
Alternaria (Black Mold) 
Aspergillus (Green Mold) 
Botrytis (Brown  Mold) 
Chaetomium  (Olive Green  Mold) 
Chrysosporium (Yellow Mold) 
Cladosporium  (Dark Green  Mold) 
Coprinus (Inky Cap) 
Cryptococcus (Cream Colored Yeast) 
Dactylium  (Cobweb Mold) 
Doratormyces (Black Whisker Mold) 
Epicoccum  (Yellow  Mold) 

. 

189
193
196
200
204
207
210
214

217
219
219
220
223
223
224
226
227
229
229
231

233
238
244
246
248
252
255
257
259
262
264
266
268
270
273
275
277
279

Fusarium  (Pink Mold) 
Geotrichum  (Lipstick  Mold) 
Humicola  (Gray  Mold) 
Moniiia (White Flour Mold) 
Mucor (Black Pin Mold) 
Mycelia Sterilia (White Mold) 
Mycogone (Wet Bubble) 
INeurospora (Pink Mold 
Papulospora (Brown  Plaster Mold) 
Penicillium  (Bluish Green  Mold) 
Rhizopus (Black Pin Mold) 
Scopulariopsis (White Plaster Mold) 
Sepedonium (White or Yellow Mold) 
Torula (Black Yeast) 
Trichoderma (Forest Green Mold) 
Trichothecium (Pink Moid) 
Verticillium  (Dry Bubble) 

XIV.  THE PESTS OF MUSHROOM CULTURE 

Mushroom  Flies 

Fly  Control  Measures 
Sciarid Fly 
Phorid Fly 
Cecid  Fly 

Mites 
INematodes (Eelworrns) 

XV.  MUSHROOM GENETICS 

Reproductive  Strategies 
Implications for Culture Work 

APPENDICES 

I.  Medicinal Properties of Mushrooms 
II.  Laminar Flow Systems 
III.  The Effect of Bacteria and Other Microorganisms  on  Fruiting 
IV.  The Use of Mushroom  Extracts to Induce Fruiting 
V.  Data Collection and Environmental  Monitoring Records 
VI.  Analyses of Basic Materials Used in Substrate  Preparation 
VII.  Resources For Mushroom Growing  Equipment and Supplies 
VIII.  English to Metric Conversion Tables 

GLOSSARY 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

281
284
286
288
290
292
294
296
298
300
302
304
306
308
310
313
315

319
320
320
321
323
325
328
331

333
336
338

343
345
347
253
357
359
369
384
386

389

397

INDEX 
PHOTOGRAPHY AND ILLUSTRATION CREDITS 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS. 

409
414
415

FOREWORD

XIII

Ever  since  French  growers  pioneered  The  cultivation  of the  common  Agaricus  more  than  two

hundred years ago, mushroom cultivation  in the Western world has been a mysterious art.  Pro-
fessional cultivators, fearful of competition, have guarded their techniques as trade secrets, sharing
them  only with  closest associates,  never with  amateurs.  The  difficulty  of domesticating  mushrooms
adds to the mystery:  they are just harder to grow than flowering plants.  Some species refuse to grow
at all under artificial conditions; many more refuse to fruit; and even the familiar Agaricus of super-
markets demands a  level of care and attention to detail much  beyond the scope of ordinary garden-
ing  and  agriculture.

In the past ten years, interest in mushrooms has literally mushroomed in America.  For the first
time in  history the  English-speaking world  is flooded with  good field guides to the  higher fungi,  and
significant  numbers  of  people  are  learning  To  collect  and  eat  choice  wild  species.  In  the  United
States and  Canada  mushroom  conferences  and  forays  attract  more  and  more  participants.  Culti-
vated  forms  of  species  other  than  the  common  Agaricus  have  begun  to  appear  in  specialty  shops
and  even  supermarkets.

The  reasons for this dramatic change  in  a  traditionally  mycophobic  part of the world  may  never
be  known.  I  have been  fascinated with  mushrooms as symbols of the unconscious mind and think
their growing  populariTy here  is a  hopeful sign  of progress  in  The  revolufion  of consciousness that
began  in  the  1 960s.  A  more  specific  reason  may  be  the  rediscovery  of  psychedelic  mushrooms—
the  Psilocybes  and  their allies—which  have  thoroughly  invaded American  society  in  recent  years.
The possibility of collecting wild psychoactive mushrooms in  many parts of North America  has
motivated thousands of people to buy field guides and attend mushroom conferences. The possibil-
ity  of growing  Psilocybe  cubensis  at  home,  one  of the  easier species  to  cultivate,  has  made  many
people  eager  to  learn  the  art  of  mushroom  production.  As  they  pursue  their  hobby,  fans  of
Psilocybes  often  find  their  interest  in  mushrooms  broadening  to  include  other  genera  that  boast
nonpsychoactive  but  delicious  edible  species.  Other  mycophiles.  uninterested  in  altered  states  of
consciousness,  have  grown  so fond  of some  edible  species as to want  better access to  them  than
foraying  in the wild provides. The result has been a demand from a variety of amateurs for the trade
secrets of professional cultivators.

The  book  you  are  about  to  read  is  a  milestone  in  the  new  awareness  of  mushrooms.  THE
MUSHROOM  CULTIVATOR  by  Paul  Stamets  and  Jeff  Chilton  is  easily  the  best source  of  informa-
tion  on  growing  mushrooms at home.  Both authors are experts on  the higher fungi,  on  their techni-
cal  aspects  as  well  as  the  practical  methods  of  working  with  the  most  interesting  species.  Paul
Stamets is a recognized authority on the Psilocybes and their relatives; Jeff Chilton has been a pro-
fessional  consultant  to  large-scale,  commercial  producers  of  the  common  Agaricus  and  the  once-
exotic  shiitake  of Japan  and  China.  Together  they  have  organized  a  number of successful  mush-
room  conferences  in  the  Pacific  Northwest  and  have  championed  the  cause  of  growing  at  home.

XIV

Unlike experts of the past (and some of the  present),  they are willing and ready to share their know-
ledge  and  practical  information  with  ail  lovers  of mushrooms,  whether they are amateurs or profes-
sionals,  devotees  of  Psilocybe  or  of  Pleurotus.

THE  MUSHROOM  CULTVATOR  is  indeed  "A  Practical  Guide  to  Growing  Mushrooms  at
Home,"  as its subtitle  indicates.  It covers every aspect of the subject in a readable style and in  suffi-
cient  detail  to  enable  both  rank  amateurs  and  serious  mycoiogists  to  succeed  at  growing  the  mush-
rooms they  like.  By  including  a wealth  of excellent  illustrations,  information  on  obtaining equipment
and  supplies,  and  step-by-step  directions  for  every  procedure,  from  starting  spore  cultures  to  har-
vesting  fruiting  bodies  to  dealing  with  contaminants  and  pests,  the  authors  demystify  the  art  of
mushroom  cultivation  and  put  mastery  of  it within  everyone's reach.  It is a  pleasure to introduce this
fine  book.  If you  have  been  searching  for  information  on  this  topic,  you  will  find  it  to  be  all  that you
have  been  looking  for  and  more.

Andrew  Weil,  M.D.,  F.LS.

PREFACE

The  use  of  mushrooms  as  food  crosses  all  cultural  boundaries.  Highly  prized  by  the

Greeks,  mushroom  consumption  in  European  nations  has  deep  traditional  roots.  The
Agari,  a  pre-Scythian  people from  Samartia  (now  Poland  and the western  Soviet Union),  held
mushrooms  in  high  esteem  and  used  them  medicinally.  The  early  Greeks  held  a  similar
fascination for fungi and apparently worked them  into their religious rituals,  even to the extent
that to discuss the use of these sacraments violated strong taboos.  For thousands of years, the
Chinese and Japanese  have  prized  a  variety  of mushroom  species for their beneficial  proper-
ties.  In  the  New  World,  the  Aztec  and  Mazatec  Indians  of  Mexico  used  mushrooms for  both
their healing and divining properties. Clearly,  mushrooms have played a significant role in  the
course  of  human  cultures  worldwide.

Although  the  Japanese  have  cultivated  the  Shiitake  mushroom  for two thousand  years,
the  earliest  record  of  European  mushroom  cultivation  was  in  the  17th  century  when  an
agronomist  to  Louis  XIV,  Olivier  de  Serres,  retrieved  wi!d  specimens  and  implanted  mush-
room  mycelium  in  prepared substrates.  In  those times mushroom  growing was a small scale
outdoor activity practiced  by the rural populace.  Materials in which  mushrooms grew naturally
were collected and concentrated into prepared beds. These beds were cropped and then  used
to start new beds. As demand increased and new methods improved yields,  mushroom grow-
ing  developed  into a  large scale  commercial  business complete with  computer controlled  in-
door  environments  and  scientifically  formulated  substrates.  Spawn  with  which  to  plant
prepared  beds,  initially gathered  in  nature,  became standardized  as sterile culture techniques
were  perfected.

It  is  now  known  that  many  of the  mushrooms  presently  under  cultivation  rank  above  all
vegetable and legumes (except soybeans) in protein content, and have significant levels of B
and  C  vitamins  and  are  low  in  fat.  Research  has  shown  that  certain  cultivated  mushrooms
reduce serum cholesterol,  inhibit tumors, stimulate interferon production and possess antiviral
properties.  It is no surprise, therefore, that as food plants were developed into cultivars,  mush-
rooms  were  among  those  selected.

Discovering the  methods most successful for mushroom  cultivation  has been a  long and
arduous  task,  evolving  from  the  experience  of  lifetimes  of  research.  As  mushroom  growing
expanded from  the  realm  of  home  cultivators  to  that of a  multimillion  dollar  industry,  it is  not
surprising  that  growers  became  more  secretive  about  their  methods.  For  prospective  home
cultivators,  finding  appropriate  information  has become  increasingly difficult.  As a  result,  the
number of small  growers  decreased  and  home  cultivation  became  a  rare  enterprise.

The  Mushroom  Cultivator  is written  expressly for the  home  cultivator and  is without bias
against any group of interested  growers.  For the first time,  information  previously  unavailable
to the general public is presented in a clear and easy to understand fashion. The book reflects
not only the work of the authors but also the cumulative knowledge gained through countless

XVI

trials by  mushrooms growers and researchers.  It is the sincere  hope of the authors that this
work  will  re-open  the  door  to  the  fascinating  world  of  mushroom  culture.  The  Mushroom
Cultivator is dedicated to this goal as we pursue the Art and Science of mushroom cultivation.

Appendix  I:  Medicinal  Properties/345

APPENDIX I

THE MEDICINAL PROPERTIES

OF MUSHROOMS

Ivl ushrooms have long been  esteemed for their medicinal properties, especially by Far Eastern
' 
'cultures,  while  western  cultures  have  largely  been  oblivious  to  the  beneficial  properties  of
mushrooms.  For centuries, the Japanese  have  hailed the shiitake  mushroom  (Lentinus edodes) as
an elixir of life, a cure-all, revitalizing both body and soul, a cure for cancer,  impotency, senility and
a  host of other ailments.  Mazatec shamans of southern  Mexico have used  Psilocybe mushrooms in
their  divination  and  healing  ceremonies,  extolling  them  for  their  life-giving  properties  and  calling
them  "Mushrooms of Superior Reason" for the  heightened  mental state they induce.  Even the very
term  "agaric,"  still  used  to  describe  all  mushrooms  with  gills,  comes  from  the  name  of  a  pre-
Scythian  people,  the Agari,  who were skilled  in  the  use  of medicinal  plants,  of which  mushrooms
were  one.

Not until the  late  1 920's,  when  Dr.  Alexander  Fleming  published a  note  in  a  microbiological
journal, did fungi draw the scrutiny of scientists looking for new sources of antibiotics.  He observed,
quite  by  accident,  the  deterrent  effect  a  Penicillium  mold  had  on  a  bacterial  contaminant  (a
Staphylococcus  species}.  Years  later,  fellower  researchers  pursued  his  suggestion  that  antibiotics
were being  produced  by this mold,  which shortly  led to the discovery of penicillin.  Forthwith,  molds
of all  types were  examined  by W.H.  Wilkins  (and others)  from  1945  to  1954 who systematically
tested  one  hundred  species  at  a  time  for  antibiotic  effects  against  bacteria  and  bacteria-carrying
viruses.  Eventually, Wilkins turned his attention To the fleshy fungi and interest within the scientific
community  grew.

Claims of healing properties in mushrooms have been  primarily promoted,  until recently,  by
the commercial  mushroom  industry and others with  vested  interests.  It appears,  however,  much  of
the  medicinal  claims  attributed to  mushrooms are  not  myth,  but founded  in  some truth.  Within  the
last ten years,  numerous studies demonstrating the anti-cancer and interferon stimulating properties
of  Lentinus  edodes  have  been  published.  Individuals  can  significantly  reduce  serum  chloresterol
levels by eating these mushrooms for as short a period as a week (Suzuki and Ohshima,  1 974).  In
another  study  (Hamuro  et  al.,  1974),  the  antitumor  influence  of  hot  water  extracts  of  Lentinus
edodes was demonstrated  in  mice  implanted with  sarcoma-180  and  other  cancers,  resulting  in  a
80%  remission from treatment lasting only ten  days,  and  a  1007o  prevention  of growth  if the  mice
were  injected  prior  to  implantation.  The  causal  compound  is  appropriately  named  lentinan,  a  anti-
tumor  polysaccharide.  Extracts  from  shiitake  spores  and  the  isolation  of  "mushroom  RNA"  from
them  have  proved  effective  against  influenza  (Suzuki  et  al.,  1974).  Similar  antitumor,  immuno-
potentiator and  interferon  stimulating  polysaccharides have  been found  in Boletus edulis,  Calvatia
gigantea,  Coriolus  veriscolor,  Flammulina  velutipes,  Canoderma  applanatum,  Canoderma

346/Appendix  I:  Medicinal  Properties

lucidum  (the  classic  "Reishi  Mushroom"),  Phelinus  linteus,  Armillaria  ponderosa  (Tricholoma
matsutake)  and  Pholiota  nameko.  (See  Yamamura  and  Cochran,  1974).

In  the  treatment  of  other  diseases,  Cochran  and  Lucas  (1959)  reported  Panaeolus  sub-
balteatus,  a  mushroom  producing  psilocybin  and  psilocin,  provided  significant  protection  from
polio virus  in  mice  as did  several  other edible  and  inedible  mushroom  species.  Psilocybian  mush-
rooms  might be  of further usefulness in  improving  eye  sight,  hearing,  circulation  and in activating
the  self-healing  processes within  the  human  body.

With  the  current  emphasis on  prevention  and  natural  cures for  human  diseases,  mushrooms
are  proving to  be a  convenient,  inexpensive and  an  effective  method of sustaining  health.  Health
conscious individuals beginning a daily regimen of eating shiitake, for instance,  have been shown to
be less suceptible to virus-induced diseases than those abstaining. Until these studies progress and
are  tested  more  extensively on  human  populations,  hopes should  not  be  unduly  raised for mush-
rooms  might  be  of further  usefulness  in  improving  eye  sight,  hearing,  circulation  and  in  activating
the  self-healing  processes  within  the  human  body.

Appendix  II:  Laminar  Flow  Systems/347

APPENDIX II

LAMINAR  FLOW SYSTEMS

Suspended in  the air is an  invisible cloud of contaminants. These airborne spores are the primary

source  of contamination  during  agar and  grain  culture,  and  they  are the  major force  defeating
beginning  cultivators.  To  control  contamination,  the  cultivator  must start with  a  sterile  laboratory.
Without  pure  culture  spawn,  the  prospect  for  a  good  crop  is  slight,  no  matter  how  refined  one's
other techniques.

Creating an absolutely sterile environment, free of all airborne particulates, is extremely difficult,
if not  impossible.  "Nearly  sterile"  environments  are  more  easily  constructed  and  are  quite  suitable
for  the  purposes  of the  mushroom  cultivator.

Chemical  cleaners like  detergents and  disinfectants have traditionally  been  used for this pur-
pose.  Unfortunately,  the frequent  use of these cleaners to  maintain  hygiene  in  the  laboratory pose
some  risk to the  handler.  Ultraviolet  lights are  likewise  dangerous and  are difficult to  position  in  a
room  so that no  shadows are cast.  By far the least harmful  and  most effective method  is the  use of
high efficiency filters that screen out airborne particulates when air is pushed through them. These
filters  are the  basis of laminar flow  systems.  An  understanding  of the  composition  of unfiltered  air
helps put into perspective the problem for which  laminar flow systems are designed.  The air,  the fil-
ter,  the  fan  and  the  laminar  flow system  will  be  discussed  in  that order.

The  Air

Air  is composed  of many suspended and falling  particles.  A sample of air holds soot or smoke,
silica, clay, decayed animal and vegetable matter, and many, many spores. Some are only a fraction
of a  micron  in  diameter while  other are  hundreds of times  larger.  These  particles continously rain
down  on  the  earth's surface.  In  light  impact zones  isolated  from  industrial  centers,  twenty  tons per
square mile per month fall from the sky (ASHRAE,  1 978).  Industrial areas have a fall-out that is ten
times greater.  So-called "clean country air1'  contains,  on the average,  one million  particles (greater
than  .3 microns) per cubic foot. But in a room where a cigarette is being smoked,  more than one
hundred  million  particles  are  suspended  in  the  same  air  space.  A  sterile  laboratory,  on  the  other
hand,  has  less  than  one  hundred  particles  per  cubic  foot  of  air!

Most of the spores contaminating  mushroom  cultures are between  .5 and 20  microns  in  diam-
eter.  Generally,  particles  greater than  10  microns fall  out of the air  because  of their weight.  The
smallest  particles  in  this  group  are  the  airborne  spore-forming  bacteria  which  originate  from  soils.
The  smallest endospore  forming  bacteria  are  around  .4  microns in  diameter.  Viruses which  meas-
ure even smaller,  sometimes a mere .05 of a micron  in size,  are  usually attached to larger particles
such as fungal spores. This broad assortment of airborne debris poses the greatest danger to mush-
room  culture.

Figure  239  A  standard  design  of  a  laminar  flow  cabinet  for  tissue  culturists.

The  Filter

Two  types  of  high  efficiency  filters  are  available  today.  One  is  an  electrostatic  filter  which  will
screen  out  spores  down  to  5  microns or  less.  These  filters  operate  on  a  charged  particle  principle
where,  by  a  variety of means,  airborne  particles are  passed through  an  ionizing  field  and then  be-
tween  two  oppositely  charged  electrical  plates.  Charged  particles  are  drawn  to  the  grounded  plate
by the force of the electric field.  Because an  agglomeration  of particles is  likely to blow off the retain-
ing plate. They are often coated with a special oil. The advantages of electrostatic filters are that they
have  little  resistance  (a  low  pressure  drop)  and  that they  are  reusable.  But they  have  several  disad-
vantages.  One  disadvantage  is  that they  do  not  screen  out  the  particles  of  1  micron  or  less with  a
99 + %  efficiency  in  high  velocity  airstreams.  Hence,  as  air  velocity  increases,  their  efficiency  de-
creases. Many electrostatic filters have, as a result, a sliding scale of efficiencies based on air speed.
Another  problem  associated  with  electrostatic  filters  is  that  particles  not  caught  in  the  filter  are  still
partially  charged  and  stick to the  walls of a room,  discoloring them.  Also,  toxic ozone may be gener-
ated  by the  constant  arcing  in  the electrostatic field.

The  basic element  in  an  air filter is the  media,  particularly  the dry  extended  surface  kind that is

Appendix  II:  Laminar  Flow  Systems/349

Figure  240  A  commercially  available  laminar  flow
hood.

rated  to  .3  or  .1  microns.  Extended  surface filters  are  commonly  known  as  HEPA  (High  Efficiency
Particulate  Air)  filters.  First  used  commercially  in  1961,  these  filters  are  honeycombed  with  fine
sheets  of  microporous  material  that  can  screen  out  particulates  down  to  less  than  one  third  of  a
micron  size with  a  rated  99.99%  efficiency.  All  spores of plants,  fungi  and  most bacteria are thereby
trapped  within  the  folds  of  the  filter.

The  collection  media  in  this  type  of filter can  be  composed  of various  materials  including  hair,
spun  glass,  wool,  paper and asbestos.  (In the past,  asbestos has been  used in  the  manufacturing of
all types of filters. Since asbestos is cancer causing, be sure to specify a non-asbestos fiber). The ex-
Tended surface media filter consists of folds of material woven back and forth. Corrogated aluminum
or paper separators are  inserted perpendicularly to the filter face and separate the folds to help direct
airflow  in  an  even,  parallel  fashion.

The airstream  hits the filter material  at a  perpendicular angle and  is forced  to  pass through  the
many  weaves of  the  filter  before  exiting.  From  the  force  of  impact,  inertia  and  the  size  of the  media
web,  particles are trapped within the filter.  The result is that a very high  efficiency is achieved,  partic-
ularly  with  small  diameter  particles.

Extended surface filters have much  higher resistance than electrostatic filters but they have a far

350/Appendix  II:  Laminar  Flow  Systems

greater capacity for  holding dust.  As the filter traps dust,  it increases in  weight and airflow declines.
Generally  a  HEPA  filter  is  not  reused  but  discarded  when,  as  a  rule  of  thumb,  the  resistance  or
"pressure drop"  doubles.  Extended surface filters are  used in  hospital surgery rooms as well  as cul-
ture  laboratories  and  nuclear  facilities.  Since  its  efficiency  is  somewhat  dependent  on  the  impact
velocity of the  particle striking the  media web,  an  appropriate fan  must be  matched with  this type of
filter.

The  Fan

When  constructing  a  laminar flow  hood,  the filter size must be precisely fitted with  a  high  pres-
sure  fan.  All  fans  are  rated  by the  manufacturer according  to  the  volume of air  (CFM  or cubic feet
per  minute)  they  can  push  past  materials  of  specified  resistance.  The  type  of  high  pressure  fans
needed  in  a  laminar  flow  hood  are  usually  of  the  squirrel  cage  type  ("furnace  blowers").

In turn, the  resistance of all  micron  filters are measured  in  inches of static  pressure at a certain
air speed.  A standard  resistance for a  micron  filter of this type  is .75-1.00  inches of static  pressure.
Because  extended  surface  filters  have  a  high  initial  resistance,  the  housing  must  tightly  hold  the
HEPA  filter  so  that  impure  air  is  not  sucked  into  the  exiting  airstream.

To  calculate  the  correct  fan/filter  combination,  take  the  net  CFM  of the  fan  at  the  filter's  rated
level  of resistance and divide that number  by the  square footage  of the filter face.  Ideally,  that  num-
ber will  be  100  feet  per minute,  the  optimum  range for air velocity  in  laminar flow  systems.  An  ex-
ample  will  more  clearly  illustrate  this  basic  principle.

IF a micron  filter measures 2 feet long by 2  feet high  by 6  inches deep and  has a static pressure
rating  of  1.0  inches  of  resistance,  the  fan  required  would  have  to  be  capable  of  pushing  400  CFM
at  1  inch  of static  pressure.

IF  X  =  the  desired  net  CFM  of  a  fan  at  1"  S.P.  and
Y  =  4 square  feet  (the  square  footage  of the  filter face)
THEN  X  =  100  feet  per  minute  x  Y
X  =  100  feet  per  minute  x  4  square  feet
X  =  400  cubic  feet  per  minute
This means that a fan  capable of pushing  400  cubic feet per minute at  1  inch  of static pressure
is  needed to  yield  the  optimum  air velocity  of  100 feet  per  minute.  (Note  that  different filters  have
different static pressure ratings and suggested CFM's). In selecting a fan, it is best to choose one that
can  deliver more than a  100 feet per minute air velocity.  Install a solid state speed control to regu-
late the  fan  as  needed.

As the filters become laden with particulates, the resistance increases and the airflow declines. If
the  airflow  falls  below  20%  of  the  suggested  optimum,  the  99.99%  efficiency  rating  can  not  be
guaranteed.  Filters  of  the  size  in  the  example  above  can  hold  four  or  more  pounds  of  dust  and
spores  before  needing  replacement!  With  a  few  hours of use every week  (the time  most  home culti-
vators  spend  conducting  sterile  transfers),  the  micron  filter  should  last  many  years,  depending  of
course,  on  the  ambient  spore  load  in  the  laboratory.

Appendix  II:  Laminar  Flow  Systems/351

The  life  of a  HEPA filter can  be extended  with the  placement  of  prefilters to  screen  out coarse
particulates.  Prefilters can be made of fiberglass media, the type commonly used for furnace filters,
or they can be composed of a thin open-celled foam. Prefilters of the latter type increase resistance
significantly whereas furnace type filters increase resistance only slightly. In this regard, furnace fil-
ters are well suited because they are cheap (less than five dollars}, readily available, and come in nu-
merous sizes.

Laminar  Flow  Designs

There are several types of laminar flow systems, each designed for specific applications. The

airflow in a biological safety cabinet, built for use with pathogenic organisms, is such that the worker
is  not  endangered  if spores from  a  virulent organism  became airborne.  The air is drawn  from  the
work area into the  hood and then  up through  micron filters and exited to the outside.  Laminar flow
hoods  for work with  radioactive and toxic  materials are similarly designed.  Because of their  intri-

Figure 241  Sterile room with ceiling composed of micron filters.

352/Appendix  II:  Laminar  Flow  Systems

cacy,  they are considerably  more expensive than  the  kind  needed for mushroom  and plant culture.
Laminar flow systems for tissue culturists operate on a reverse principle of the one designed for
use with toxic substances. Air is forced through a micron filter to the work area,  creating a positive
pressure  sterile  wind  in  which  to  conduct  mycelial  transfers.  These  types of  hoods  are  perfect for
pouring  media,  maintaining  pure  rnycelia and  inoculating spawn containers.  Since they  greatly  re-
duce the waste caused by contamination, their cost is soon offset by the savings realized. A laminar
flow  hood  is a  low  maintenance,  affordable  and  appropriate  technology for the  serious  home  culti-
vator.

An alternative to building a laminar flow hood is the construction of a laminar flow wall or ceil-

ing. A laminar flow ceiling is preferable because The draft is directed downwards to the floor where it
exists Through evenly placed pressure activated dampers. When a wall or ceiling is composed of mi-
cron filters, the air is usually drawn from the outside where the prefilters can be changed wiThouT en-
tering  the  sterile  laboratory.  Any  contaminant spores tracked  in  on  the  shoes of workers are  kept
close to the floor and is immediately swept away by the flow of sterile air.  The atmosphere in a this
type  of  sterile  room  is  fully  exchanged  10-20  times  per  hour.

Foremost, tissue culturists are interested in preventing contamination from occurring,  not from
spreading.  They are concerned with  creating  sterile  media and  maintaining the purity of cultures.  A
laminar  flow  hood  is  of  little  value  in  helping  a  cultivator  isolate  a  colony  of  mushroom  mycelium
away  from,  for  instance,  a  green  mold  on  a  petri  dish.  The  turbulence  generated  from  the  hood
would free thousands of spores, some of which would adhere to the surface of the sterile media, ger-
minate and produce more spores.  In these cases, a laminar flow hood is best used as an air cleaner
prior to isolating a culture away from a contaminant. Several minutes after it has been turned off and
the air currents have settled,  transfers can  be made away from  neighboring contaminants with  little
danger  of airborne  spores.

Although  sterile  work  can  be  conducted  without  a  laminar  flow  system,  they  have  become  a
standard piece of equipment in professional spawn  laboratories and increasingly in the sterile rooms
of  many  home  cultivators.

Appendix III:  Effects of Bacteria on Fruiting/353

APPENDIX  III

THE EFFECT OF BACTERIA

AND OTHER MICROORGANISMS

ON FRUITING

A lthough  mushrooms  have  been  cultivated  for  more  than  two  hundred  years,  little  is  known

about the biological processes of fruiting.  For mushroom pinheads to form suddenly and then
to enlarge into towering mushrooms within only a few days represents a many hundred-fold multi-
plication  in  biomass.  This ability to  generate tissue  so  rapidly has few  parallels  in  nature and  has
been the subject of numerous scientific papers.

Mushrooms are in constant competition with organisms sharing the same habitat. Dung inhabit-
ing  mushrooms  in  particular  (like  Psilocybe cubensis and Agaricus  brunnescens)  live  in  an  envi-
ronment  that teems with  other  microorganisms feeding  on  organic  wastes and  dead  cell  matter.
Dung is by nature a temporary substrate, decomposing completely in only a few weeks. Within this
short period of time there is a succession of dominant microorganisms, most notably fungi and bac-
teria.  For a new mushroom colony to grow,  its spores must fall, germinate,  mate, form a substantial

Figure  242  Psilocybe  cyanescens  mycelium  contaminated  with
bacteria.

354/Appendix  111:  Effects  of  Bacteria  on  Fruiting

mycelial network and then produce a specialized fruitbody. This series of events is made less likely
by  poor weather  conditions and/or competing  microorganisms. The  brevity of the generative  phase
in  the  mushroom  life  cycle  suggests  a  highly  advanced  metabolic  system,  one  that  has  evolved
despite  its fiercely  competitive  environment.

The  fact  that Agaricus  brunnescens  fails  to fruit  on  sterilized  substrates  has  been  well  docu-
mented.  It  has  been  shown  that  if  the  casing  layer  is  sterilized  and  applied  to  grain  or compost,
mushrooms do not form.  On  the other hand,  if the casing  layer is only pasteurized or left untreated,
fruiting is unhindered. Obviously something in the peat based casing is essential to the fructification
process.

Past investigations have shown  the significance of bacteria  in  mushroom  growth.  It should not
be  surprising  then  to  learn  that  some  of these  microorganisms are  not  harmful  To  the  mushroom
plant,  but  beneficial.  Under  conditions  of  high  humidity,  CO2  and  acetone,  bacterial  populations
spiral.  In  a way  not presently understood,  some of these bacteria act as a trigger to fruiting.  The
prevalence  of bacteria on  hyphae  may explain why  most dung dwelling  mushrooms can  be fruited
with comparative ease on basic enriched agar media while wood and soil inhabitors can not. The as-
sociation of these two organisms, a fungus and a bacterium, reflects a tacit agreement for mutual co-
existence,  one  perhaps  negotiated  by  evolutionary  necessity.

In  1 956 Dr. Takashi Urayama first noted the stimulative influence of bacteria on the fruiting of
Psilocybe  coprophila.  (Actually  he  misidentified  the  mushroom  species  as  P.  panaeoliformis).  In
that paper and ones soon thereafter (Urayama 1960,  1961  and  1967), he reported the isolation of
a  bacterium  he  thought  responsible for fruiting  in  not only  Psilocybe  "panaeoliformis" but also  in
Agaricus  brunnescens.  He  named  that  bacterium  Bacillus  psilocybe  nom.  prov.  Apparently  un-
aware of Urayama's work, a German  rnycologist named Eger similarly isolated a bacterium stimula-
tive  to  pinhead  formation.  She  first  published  her  notes  in  1959.  For  years  this  bacterium  was
known  as  "Eger's  Bacterium"  until  Hayes  (1969) 
in  question  as
Pseudomonas putida.  This  identification  set  in  motion  other  research  projects whose conclusions
revealed a  subtle  but dynamic  interplay  between  microflora  in  the casing  layer and the mushroom
mycelium.

identified  the  organism 

Mushroom mycelium releases several metabolites as it grows through a substrate, most impor-
tantly  C02.  Other  compounds  identified  by  researchers  as  metabolic  waste  products  include ace-
tone, ethanol and ethylene. Upon casing, the release of volatile metabolites from the spawned com-
post or grain is drastically inhibited. The casing layer interferes with the free diffusion of acetone, and
hence its concentrations in  the casing  biosphere  increase.  Since Pseudomonas putida grows on
media whose sole carbon source is acetone or ethanol (2.5%), cultivators can adopt measures that
will  enhance the  levels of these  Pseudomonas propagating  compounds  in  the  casing  layer.  Eger
first suggested a  practical  application  for commercial  cultivators:

"In  order  to  prove  our  hypothesis,  freshly  prepared,  moist casing  casing  soil  of a  commercial
mushroom  plant should  be  incubated with  acetone for several  days apart from  mushroom  cultures.
If acetone has a stimulative effect on the microflora that induces fructification, soil treated with ace-
tone  should  allow  earlier  pinhead  formation  than  control  samples."  (Eger,  1972,  pp.  723.)

Two years later Hayes and Nair (1974} noted that more bacteria flourish in wet casings placed

Appendix  III:  Effects  of  Bacteria  on  Fruiting/355

on compost than in wet casing alone.  Peak activity occurred ten days after application. Dry casings,
as one  would  expect,  had  significantly fewer  bacteria.  Continuing with  this work,  Hayes and  Nair
showed  that the  addition  of 5%  spawned compost  into the casing  layer resulted  in  the  largest in-
crease  in  P.  putida  populations,  the  most pinheads and the  greatest overall  yields.

Stanek  (1974),  a  Czech  mycologist,  studied  the  bacteria  associated  directly with  mushroom
mycelium,  in  the zone he called the  "hyphosphere".  These hyphosphere bacteria differed from
other bacteria in that they were predominantly Gram-negative (as is Pseudomonas putida} and they
utilized nitrogenous compounds secreted by the mycelium.  Both the growth of mycelia and bacteria
were stimulated by extracts of one another, suggesting a mutually enhancing relationship much like
the  one  between  nitrogen  fixing  bacteria  and  the  roots  of  many  plants.  Stanek  further  determined
that mycelium  infected with  bacteria grew more quickly through compost and would,  therefore,  give
mushroom  mycelium  a  decided  advantage  over  other  competing  microorganisms.  From  this
author's  experience  (Stamets')  in  the  course  of  studying  the  hyphosphere  of  several  Psilocybe
species,  bacteria  are  not  uncommon  and  may  play  a  similarly  beneficial  role.

Not all  strains of Pseudomonas putida cause  pinheads to form  in Agaricus brunnescens,  nor
do all  strains of mushrooms respond similarly to the  presence of selected bacteria.  The two proven
stimulative  strains,  ATCC  #12633  and  #17419,  are  deposited with  the American  Type  Culture
Collection.  Some strains of Pseudomonas putida have no effect whatsoever,  while others are most
stimulative  if The  bacterial  colonies  are  grown  on  a  2.5%  acetone  based  liquid  media  (see  Eger,
1972).  After  incubating  for  10  days  at  25°C.  in  30-40  ml.  of  nutrient  broth,  a  density  of
1,000,000 to 2,000,000 cells/milliliter is achieved. Ten milliliters of this concentrated solution is
recommended  for  each  square  meter  of  casing  surface.  (For  ease  of application,  one  milliliter  of
concentrate  can  be  diluted  in  100  milliliters  of sterilized  water}.

Eger,  Hayes  and  Nair  have  demonstrated  the  stimulative  effect of  Pseudomonas putida.  But
why  Pseudomonas putida  stimulates  primordia  formation  is a  question  yet  unanswered.  Some  be-
lieve its effect is indirect,  removing  chelating  compounds that inhibit mushroom  initiation.  Others
(Fritsche,  1 981;  Visscher,  1981)  suspect its influence is more direct and biologically oriented.

Pseudomonas putida  is  not  the  only  microorganism  implicated  in  the  phenomenon  of fruiting.
Park and Agnihorti (1 969) published a short note where they compared bacteria introduced to soils
that  had  been  autoclaved,  gamma  sterilized  and  untreated.  Three  other  bacteria  (Bacillus
megatehum, Arthrobacter terregens and Rhizobium meliloti) stimulated abundant fruitbody forma-
tion and development on sterilized soils. (Interestingly, these same nitrogen fixing bacteria are pres-
ently  being  marketed  to  farmers for  increasing  crop  production).  In  yet  another  study,  Curto  and
Favelli (1972) examined a gamut of microorganisms (bacteria, yeasts and microaigae) and their ef-
fect  on  potentiating  yields.  Again,  Bacillus  megaterium  significantly  increased  mushroom  forma-
tion.  Even  more  remarkably  Scenedesmus  quadricauda  (a  common  pond  dwelling  blue-green
alga)  enhanced  production  by nearly  60%  over and above the control.  This alga  seemed to  have a
particularly  influencial  effect on  the  number of primordia  generated on  the first flush.  Although  as
exciting as these findings  may at first  appear,  it  must  be  noted that other researchers have  not yet
confirmed the findings of Curto and  Favelli.  For reasons not presently understood,  activated char-

356/Appendix  IN:  Effects  of  Bacteria  on  Fruiting

coal  mimics the  primordia  stimulating  properties  of Pseudomonas putida and  other  beneficial  mi-
croorganisms.  (See  Chapter  VIII).  Its  addition  to  unsterilized  casings  seems  wholly  unnecessary
considering  The  ease  with  which  Agaricus  brunnescens  and  Psilocybe  cubensis  form  pinheads.
But, in sterilized casings or in casings applied to difficult to fruit species, the use of activated charcoal
and  select  bacteria  gives  the  cultivator  another  means  to  promote  fructification.  Although  many
studies have been published, work with fruiting potentiators is still in  its in infancy. Specific mush-
room  strains must be carefully matched with  specific strains of potentiators.  And the potentiators
themselves, while of value at fruiting, can be formidable competitors to sterile culture in the labora-
tory.  Nevertheless,  utilizing these benevolent microorganisms holds great promise for the future of
mushroom culture.

NOTE:  Bacteria,  if  cultured,  must  be  kept  separate  from  the  mushroom  culture  laboratory.

Pseudomonas  and  Bacillus  grow  well  on  standard  2%  malt  agar  media.

Appendix  IV:  Extracts to  Induce  Prirnordia  Formation 7357

APPENDIX IV

THE USE OF MUSHROOM

EXTRACTS TO INDUCE
PRIMORDIA FORMATION

The search  for the  biochemical  means  by which  mushrooms fruit has been  ongoing  for years.

Several researchers have demonstrated the influence of hormones in regulating mushroom for-
mation  and development.  From this work,  it is clear that no one mechanism,  but many,  cause the
phenomenon  of  fruiting.

Urayama  (1972)  found  that  live  extracts  from  young  buttons  of Agaricus  brunnescens  and
from  other species would  induce pinhead  initiation  in  a  Marasmius species that otherwise failed to
fruit on  a  specified  agar medium.  He  determined that this  particular Marasmius failed  to form  fruit-
bodies  on  agar  media  that  had  a  carbon:nitrogen  ratio  of  1:10  with  sucrose  levels  maintained  at
1 %. Given the inability of pinheads to form  at this Sucrose/Peptone  ratio,  he could  introduce stan-
dardized  cell  free  extracts of other mushroom  species to  gauge their effects.  Species from  which
crude  extracts  were  taken  were:  Agaricus  brunnescens,  Lentinus  edodes,  Flammulina  velutipes
and  Pleurotus ostreatus.  The extracts were  performed  by washing  200  grams of homogenized  live
mushroom tissue (primordia less than  1  cm. tall) with four successive baths of 80%  methanol. The
residue was discarded each time and the mefhanol solution allowed to evaporate,  under a slight vac-
uum,  until a dried filtrate remained. One gram of this crude extract was then immersed into  1 0 rnilli-
liters of water and applied in  '/10th  milliliter increments to each culture tube,  except for the controls.
The  results of Urayama's work  showed  that each  of the four fractionations  induced  primordia
formation provided aqueous methanol (8070) and only young mushrooms were used.  Extracts from
older fruitbodies,  especially that of Agaricus brunnescens and Lentinus edodes,  had no effect what-
soever.  Urayama tried other solvents to isolate the  mysterious "fruiting  hormone"  and discovered
that it was soluble in water and  not soluble in absolute methano!, chloroform or petroleum  benzine.
He  worked  on  his  "Substance  X",  as  he  liked  to  call  it,  for  many  years  until  his  death  in  1980.

Shiio  et alia  (1974)  realized  that young  mushroom  buttons contained  high  concentrations of
the  fruiting  hormones  and  applied  this  knowledge  to  The  commercial  cultivation  of  Flammulina
velutipes.  Pieces  of Flammulina  velutipes  primordia were  immersed  into sterile water and  sprayed
over sawdust/bran  beds.  Not only were yields substantially  increased  by this crude  procedure,  but
initiation  occurred  much  earlier,  and the overall  fruiting  cycle was narrowed considerably.  Clearly
these  mycologists were  on  the  road  to discovering  an  important  link  in  the  biochemistry of fruiting.
Around  the  same  time  as  the work  of Shiio et alia,  two  other Japanese  mycologists  published
related studies (Uno &  Ishikawa,  1971,  1 973) whereby pinheads of Coprinus formed if a  "cell free
extract"  from  young  mushrooms  was  added  to  the  culture.  They  and  others  isolated  the  causal

358/Appendix  IV:  Extracts  to  Induce  Primordia  Formation

compounds—cyclic  adenosine  monophosphate  (c  AMP)  and  related  enzymes.  They  further  found
that light stimulated the  production  of c AMP  in the mycelium of phototropic mushroom  species.
Conversely,  the  absence  of  light  in  phototropic  mushroom  species  resulted  in  no  production  of  c
AMP.

Wood  (1 979)  tried to substantiate the findings of Uno and  Ishikawa with Agaricus brunnescens
and  failed.  He  could  not  induce  primordia  to  form  using  c  AMP.  However,  this  fact  does  not  bear
any  significance  on  the  importance  of  cyclic  adenosine  monophosphate  in  phototropic  species
since  A.  brunnescens  is  a  mushroom  needing  no  light  whatsoever  for  primordia  formation  and  de-
velopment.

The question  of how  mushrooms fruit is  not simple;  nor will  there be one answer explaining the
mechanisms in all species. What is apparent at this early stage of research is that photosensitive and
non-photosensitive species have developed different means for mushroom  development. The  infor-
mation  most  useful  for  home  and  commercial  cultivators  will  come  in  the  areas  of  yield  enhance-
ment and  the  growing  of exotic  mushrooms on  readily available,  cheap  materials.  By  good fortune,
this  is  one  area  of  research  that  is  not  beyond  the  means  of  the  innovative  home  cultivator.

384/Appendix  VII:  Resources  for  Mushroom  Growers

APPENDIX  VII

RESOURCES FOR

MUSHROOM GROWERS

Suppliers  of  Cultures  of  Edible
Mushrooms
American  Type  Culture  Collection
12301  Parklawn  Drive
Rockville,  Maryland  20852
Pennsylvania  State  University
2111  Buckhout Laboratory
University  Park,  Maryland  16802

Commercial  Spawn  Makers
Rainforest Mushroom Spawn
International Division
PO  Box  1793
Gibsons.  B.C.
Canada  VON  WO
Spawn  of  these  species  available:  Pleurotus
ostreatus;  Pleurotus  sajor-caju:  Pleurotus
comucopiae;  Pleurotus  eryngii;  Lentinus
edodes:  and  Stropharia  rugoso-annulata.

General  Supplies  &  Equipment
Fungi Perfect!
PO Box 7634
Olympia, Wa. 98507
Phone:360426-9292
Fax:360-426-9377
Home Page: www.fungi.com
Products  include:  micron  filters:  laminar  flow
hoods: sterile and room supplies: pressure
cookers; steam boilers: cultures; sterile and
growing  room  instruments;  pure  cultures
and  spawn.  Write  for  free  brochure  or  in-
clude  $4.50 
illustrated
catalogue. International orders welcomed.

for  our 

fully 

Appendix  VII:  Resources  for  Mushroom  Growers/385

Organizations
North  American  Mycological  Association

(NAMA)

4245 Redinger Rd.
Portsmouth,  Oh.  45662
The  Mycological  Society of America  (MSA)
c/o  Dr.  Harry  Thiers
Department  of  Biology
San Francisco State University
1600  Holloway Ave.
San Francisco, Ca. 94132
MycoMedia
PO Box 2222
Olympia, Wa. 98507
(Sponsors yearly forays and educational

conferences.)

Puget  Sound  Mycological  Society
2161  E.  Hamlin
Seattle,  Wa.  98112

Publications
The  Mushroom  Journal  (monthly)
The  Mushroom  Growers  Association  (MGA)
Agriculture House
Knightsbridge
London,  SW1X  7NJ
(Available in  large  university libraries.)
The Mushroom News (monthly)
American  Mushroom  Institute  (AMI)
Box  373
Kennett Square,  Pa.  1 9348
(Available in large university libraries.)
Mushroom  Growing  Bulletins
Dr.  Paul  Wuest
Department  of  Botany
Pennsylvania State University
University  Park,  Pa.  16802
Mycologia
The  New  York  Botanical  Garden
Bronx,  New York  10458
Mushroom  Newsletter 

the  Tropics

for 

(quarterly)

The  International  Mushroom  Society  for  the

Tropics

c/o  Department  of  Biology
The  Chinese  University  of  Hong  Kong
Shatin,  N.T.  Hong  Kong

386/Appendix  VIII:  Metric  Conversion  Tables

APPENDIX VIII

METRIC CONVERSION TABLES

Cropping  Yield 

Substrate  Depths

Ibs./sq.  ft. 

1.0 
1.4 
2.0 
2.2 
2.6 
3.0 
3.5 
4.0 
4.5 
5.0 
5.5 
6.0 
6.5 

kg./sq.  m. 

4.9 
6.8 
9.8 
10,8 
12.7 
14.7 
17.7 
19.6 
22.0 
24.4 
27.0 
29.0 
31.4

inches 

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 

centimeters

2.54
5.08
7.62
10.16
12.70
15.24
17.78
20.32
22.86
25.40
27.94
30.48

Inch  =  2.54  centimeters 
Foot  =  0.3048  meters 
Yard  =  0.9144  meters 

Sq. in.  =  6.4516 sq. cm. 
Sq. ft.  = 0.0929 sq. m. 
Sq. yd. = 0.8361 sq. m. 

Length

Centimeter  =  0.3937  inches
Meter  =  3.2808  feet
Meter  =  1.0936  yards

Area

Sq.  cm.  =  0.1550 sq.  in.
Sq.  m.  =  10.7639  sq.  ft.
Sq.  m.  =  1.1960  sq.  yd.

Volume

Cu. in. = 16.3872 cu. cm. 
Cu. ft. = 0.0283 cu. m. 
Cu. yd. = 0.7646 cu. m. 

Cu. cm. = 0.0610 cu. in.
Cu. m. = 35.3145 cu. ft.
Cu. m. = 1.3079 cu. yd.

Appendix  VIII:  Metric  Conversion  Tables/387

Capacity

Cu.  in.  =  0.0164 liters 
Cu.  ft.  =  28.3162 liters 
Cup  =  0.2366  liters 
Quart  =  0.9463  liters 
Gallon  =  3.7853  liters 
A  liter  of distilled  water weighs  1000  grams or  1  kilogram.

Liter  =  61,0250  cu.  in.
Liter  =  0.0353  cu.  ft.
Liter  =  0,2642  gal.
Liter  =  1.0567  qt.
Liter  =  1000  ml.

Grain  =  0.0648  grams 
Ounce  =  28.3495  grams 
Pound  =  454  grams 
Pound  -  0.4536  kilograms 
Ton = 907.1848 kilograms

Gram  =  15.4324  grains
Gram  =  0.0353  ounces
Kilogram  =  2.2046  pounds
Metric  Ton  =  2,204  pounds

Weight

Pressure

1  kg. per sq. cm.  =  14.223 Ib. per sq. in.
1  Ib. per sq. in.  =  .0703 kg. per sq. cm.
1  kg. per sq. m.  =  .2048 Ib. per sq. ft.
1  atmosphere  =  1.0332  kg.  per sq.  cm.  -  4.696  Ib.  per sq.  in.  =  1.0133  bars

Temperature

Fahrenheit  to  Centigrade
5/9 (°F - 32) =°C
Centigrade  to  Fahrenheit
9/5 (°Q  +  32  =°F.

C 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
35 
40 
50 
55 
60 
65 
70 
75 
80 

F
32
41
50
59
68
77
95
104
122
131
140
149
158
167
176

396/Glossary

Strophariaceae  The  family  of  dark  brown
spored  mushrooms  containing  the  genera
Melanotus,  Naematoloma,  Pholiota,
Psilocybe  and  Stropharia.
stropharioid  Resembling  a  species  of
Stropharia,  i.e.  having  a  membranous  ring  on
the  stem,  a  convex  cap,  and  purplish  brown
spores.
substrate  Straw,  sawdust,  compost,  soil,  or
any  fibrous  material  on  which  mushrooms
grow.

t
terrestrial  Growing  on  the  ground.
tertiary  mycelium  Mycelium  arising  from
secondary  mycelium  that  is  involved  in  mush-
room  fruitbody  formation.
tetrapolar  Having  or  located  at  four  poles,
as with the four spored basidia in most mush-
rooms.
thermogenesis  The process of heat gener-
ation  by microorganisms.
thermophile  An  organism 
75-140°F.  temperature  zone.
trama  The  fleshy  part  of  the  cap  beTween
the cap cuticle and The fertile spore bearing lay-
ers  of  the  mushroom  gill.
translucent  Transmitting 
semitransparent.

light  diffusely,

thriving 

in

u

umbilicate  Depressed  in  the  center  region
of the  mushroom  cap.

umbo  A  knob-like  protrusion  on  the  top
center  of the  mushroom  cap.
umbonate  Having an umbo.
uncinate  A  type  of  gill  attachment.
undulating  Wavy.
universal veil  An outer layer of tissue envel-
oping the cap and stem  of some mushrooms,
best  seen  in  The  youngest  stages  of  fruitbody
development.

v

variety  A  sub-species  epithet  used  to  de-
scribe a consistently appearing variation of a
particular mushroom  species.
vector  The  pathway  by  which  a  disease  is
spread; the "vehicle" for distributing a patho-
gen.
veil  A  tissue  covering  mushrooms  as  they
develop.
vesicle  A  small  bulb-like  swelling  (some-
limes bladder-like).
viscid  Slimy  or  slippery  when  moist,  sticky
to The touch when partially dry. A characteristic
of the  mushroom  cap or stem.

zonate  Having  a  band-like  region  darker in
color or different in form than the surrounding
tissue.

