On Human Nature
Biology, Psychology, Ethics,
Politics, and Religion

Edited by

Michel Tibayrenc
Institut de Recherche pour le De´veloppement,
Montpellier, France
Francisco J. Ayala
Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology,
Ayala School of Biological Sciences,
University of California, Irvine, CA, United States

AMSTERDAM l BOSTON l HEIDELBERG l LONDON l NEW YORK l OXFORD l PARIS

SAN DIEGO l SAN FRANCISCO l SINGAPORE l SYDNEY l TOKYO

Academic Press is an imprint of Elsevier

Academic Press is an imprint of Elsevier
125 London Wall, London EC2Y 5AS, United Kingdom
525 B Street, Suite 1800, San Diego, CA 92101-4495, United States
50 Hampshire Street, 5th Floor, Cambridge, MA 02139, United States
The Boulevard, Langford Lane, Kidlington, Oxford OX5 1GB, United Kingdom

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including
photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.
Details on how to seek permission, further information about the Publisher’s permissions policies and our arrangements with
organizations such as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our website:
www.elsevier.com/permissions.

This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the Publisher (other than as may be
noted herein).

Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this ﬁeld are constantly changing. As new research and experience broaden our understanding,
changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical treatment may become necessary.

Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluating and using any information,
methods, compounds, or experiments described herein. In using such information or methods they should be mindful of their
own safety and the safety of others, including parties for whom they have a professional responsibility.

To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors, assume any liability for any injury
and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of
any methods, products, instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress

British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library

ISBN: 978-0-12-420190-3

For information on all Academic Press publications
visit our website at https://www.elsevier.com/

Publisher: Sara Tenney
Acquisition Editor: Kristi Gomez
Editorial Project Manager: Pat Gonzalez
Production Project Manager: Laura Jackson
Designer: Maria Inês Cruz

Typeset by TNQ Books and Journals

List of Contributors

J. Alcock Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, United

States

K. Aoki Meiji University, Tokyo, Japan
G. Arunkumar SASTRA University, Thanjavur, India
S.N. Austad University of Alabama at Birmingham,

B. Dubreuil Québec (Québec), Canada
M.W. Feldman Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United

States

C.E. Finch University of Southern California, Los

Angeles, CA, United States

Birmingham, AL, United States

M.V. Flinn University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, United

F.J. Ayala University of California, Irvine, CA, United

States

States

M. Fumagalli University College London, London, United

D.H. Bailey University of California, Irvine, CA, United

Kingdom

States

P. Gagneux University of California at San Diego, La

F. Balloux University College London, London, United

Jolla, CA, United States

Kingdom

O. Bar-Yosef Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, United

States

H.C. Barrett UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States
W.M. Baum University of New Hampshire, Durham, NH,
United States; University of California, Davis, CA,
United States

A. Bilbao Leis University of Heidelberg, Mannheim,

Germany

T. Borchert University of Vermont, Burlington, VT,

United States

E. Boyle George Washington University, Washington, DC,

United States

L.G. Cabral University of California, Irvine, CA, United

States

A.L. Canﬁeld University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United

States

C.J. Cela-Conde University of the Balearic Islands, Palma

de Mallorca, Spain

B.G. Cervantes University of California,

Irvine, CA,

United States

T.W. Deacon University of California, Berkeley, CA,

United States

J. DeGregori University of Colorado School of Medicine,

Aurora, CO, United States

S. Gaudieri University of Western Australia, Nedlands,
WA, Australia; Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN,
United States; Murdoch University, Murdoch, WA,
Australia

L.F. Greer University of California, Irvine, CA, United

States

S. Hameroff The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ,

United States

M. Henneberg The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA,

Australia

A.K. Hill University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United

States

M. John Murdoch University, Murdoch, WA, Australia
A. Kingstone University of British Columbia, Vancouver,

BC, Canada

M. Kronfeldner Central European University, Budapest,

Hungary

K.E.W. Laidlaw University

of British Columbia,

Vancouver, BC, Canada

D. Lordkipanidze Georgian National Museum, Tbilisi,

Georgia

S. Mallal Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN, United States; Murdoch University,
Murdoch, Western Australia

R. McDermott Brown University, Providence, RI, United

States

xvii

xviii

List of Contributors

K. McKenzie University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada; Center for Addiction and Mental Health,
Toronto, ON, Canada; CEO Wellesley Institute,
Toronto, ON, Canada

K.R. Monroe University of California, Irvine, CA, United

States

J. Murphy Ulster University, Derry, Northern Ireland
E. Nasiopoulos University of British Columbia, Vancouver,

BC, Canada

A.I. Rozhok University of Colorado School of Medicine,

Aurora, CO, United States

F. Rühli Institute of Evolutionary Medicine, University of

Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland

M. Ruse Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL, United

States

G.A. Rutledge University of California, Irvine, CA, United

States

M. Stoneking Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary

B. Oakley Oakland University, Rochester, MI, United

Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany

States

T. Peters GTU/CTNS, Berkeley, CA, United States
R.M. Pitchappan Chettinad Academy of Research &

Education, Chennai, India

T.M. Preuss Emory University, Atlanta, GA, United States
D.A. Puts The Pennsylvania State University, University

Park, PA, United States

M. Reimers Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI,

United States

E.F. Risko University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
A. Roland National Psychological Association for

Psychoanalysis, New York, NY, United States

M.R. Rose University of California, Irvine, CA, United

States

J. Roughgarden The Hawai’i Institute of Marine Biology,
Kane’ohe, HI, United States; Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, United States

A.R. Templeton Washington University, St. Louis, MO,

United States; University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel

M. Tibayrenc Maladies

et Vecteurs
Ecologie, Génétique, Evolution et Contrôle, MIVEGEC
(IRD 224-CNRS 5290-UM1-UM2),
IRD Center,
Montpellier, Cedex 5, France

Infectieuses

A. Varki University of California at San Diego, La Jolla,

CA, United States

G.M. Verschuuren Genesis P.C., LLC, Atkinson, NH,

United States

J.Y. Wakano Meiji University, Tokyo, Japan
B. Wood George Washington University, Washington,

DC, United States

F. Zampieri University of Padua, Padua, Italy

Editors’ Biographies

Michel Tibayrenc, MD, PhD, has worked on the evolution
of infectious diseases for more than 35 years. He is a
director of research emeritus at
the French Institut de
Recherche pour le Développement (IRD), the founder and
editor-in-chief of Infection, Genetics and Evolution (Elsev-
ier), with a 2014 impact factor of 3.015, and the founder and
principal organizer of the international congresses MEEGID
(molecular epidemiology and evolutionary genetics of
infectious diseases). He is the author of more than 200
international papers. He has worked for one year in Algeria
(as a general practitioner), one year in French Guiana,
seven years in Bolivia, ﬁve years in the United States, and
three years in Thailand. He has been the head of the unit of
research “genetics and evolution of infectious diseases” at
the IRD research center in Montpellier, France, for 20 years.
With his collaborator Jenny Telleria, he is the founder and
scientiﬁc adviser of the Bolivian Society of Human Genetics
(2012). He has won the prize of the Belgian Society of
tropical medicine (1985), the medal of the Instituto Oswaldo
Cruz, Rio de Janeiro (2000), for his work on Chagas
disease, and he is a fellow of the American Association for
the Advancement of Science (1993).

Francisco J. Ayala is University Professor and Donald
Bren Professor of Biological Sciences and Professor of
Philosophy at the University of California, Irvine. On June
12, 2002, President George W. Bush awarded him the 2001
National Medal of Science at the White House. On May 5,
2010, he received the 2010 Templeton Prize for exceptional
contribution to afﬁrming life’s spiritual dimension from
HRH Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, at a private cere-
mony in Buckingham Palace, London.

Born in Madrid, Spain, he has lived in the United States
since 1961, and became a US citizen in 1971. He has
published more than 1100 articles and is the author or
editor of 50 books,
including Essential Readings in
Evolutionary Biology (2014), The Big Questions: Evolution
(2012), Am I a Monkey? (2010), Human Evolution (2007),
and Darwin’s Gift to Science and Religion (2007).

He is a member of the U.S. National Academy of
Sciences, the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and
the
the American Philosophical Society, a Fellow of
Linnean Society of London, Foreign Member of
the

xix

xx Editors’ Biographies

Russian Academy of Sciences,
the Royal Academy of
Sciences of Spain, the Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei
(Italy),
the Mexican Academy of Sciences, and other
international academies.

Ayala has received the Gold Honorary Gregor Mendel
Medal from the Czech Academy of Sciences, the Gold
Medal of
the

the Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei,

Gold Medal of the Stazione Zoologica of Naples,
the
President’s Award of the American Institute of Biological
the Scientiﬁc Freedom and Responsibility
Sciences,
Award from the AAAS,
the Medal of the College of
France, and numerous other recognitions and awards. He
has also received honorary degrees from 24 universities in
10 countries.

Foreword

Science has evolved through the centuries by the entan-
glement of two very different modes of creative inquiry.
The ﬁrst mode is the straightforward discovery of new
phenomena, typically made more likely by technological
advance. For example, researchers are now able to deter-
mine the age of most fossil and archaeological remains by
the amount of radioactive decay measured within them.
They can track local brain activity with functional magnetic
resonance imaging. By shifting to frequencies higher than
visible light on the electromagnetic spectrum, they are able
to ﬁnd and study microorganisms too small to be seen with
conventional
light microscopy. And by discovering
“missing link” species by whatever means, the researchers
can draw more accurate, and often surprising, evolutionary
family trees.

The second mode of inquiry is the synthesis of new and
old information across disciplines. Soon after the structure
of DNA was adduced, its base-pair code was broken, then
linked to the already well-established principles of partic-
ulate heredity. There ensued a linkage to the mother lode of
established biochemistry and cell architecture. A major
consequence was the inauguration of molecular biology,
whose achievements sufﬁce to designate the second half of
the 20th century as the golden age of modern biology.

As the veils of mystery in biology have been removed
one by one, the cause-and-effect explanations have drawn
closer together. Hybrid disciplines became the rule in
biology, yielding, for example, behavioral ecology, physi-
ological ecology, biochemical physics, developmental
biology, economic botany, neurobiology, population ge-
netics, sociobiology, and a thicket of others, each attended
by its own journals and well-trained experts.

At ﬁrst thought this proliferation of specialties may
seem a symptom of the splintering of biological knowl-
edge. But the opposite is true. The hybrid disciplines are
better recognized as silos that researchers have built to
master detailed information and thereby to promote original
discoveries. When biology is viewed as a whole,
the
principles,
the fundamentals, and even the styles of
expression are seen as actually convergent. The overall
network of biological knowledge it expresses is tightening.

One result is the production of ever farther-reaching syn-
theses such as the one presented in this book, which dares
to take biology deeper into the humanities, and the hu-
manities deeper into biology.

The contribution of the present work, On Human Na-
ture: Biology, Psychology, Ethics, Politics, and Religion, is
potentially profound. It is encyclopedic in coverage, written
by leaders in a large part of human biology rarely covered
within a single volume. Its aim, according to the editors, is
to evaluate “the present state of knowledge on human di-
versity and its adaptive signiﬁcance through a broad se-
lection of
the
is
crossroads between biology and the human sciences.

representative chapters.” Its center

On Human Nature uses detailed information to disclose
how and when humanity originated, what we are today, and
why we behave the way we do in an increasingly fragile
world of our own making. The content is fearless, tracking
change not just through the dawn of history in Neolithic
times, but much deeper into Paleolithic times, when our
physiological and emotional responses were programmed
by genetic evolution.

From the same perspective it is entirely appropriate for
some of the authors in the symposium, as elsewhere among
many scholars, to carry biological reasoning into subjects
traditionally reserved for the humanities. It has become
increasingly evidentdalthough far
from conclusively
provendthat the biological sciences are not separated from
humanistic explanations of aesthetics and moral reasoning,
at least not by the divide of seismic proportions formerly
accepted. Like other traits of physiology and behavior, they
are guided by emotional responses programmed from the
start by genetic evolution. “Human nature” is a concept
appropriately applied to characterize traits of this bedrock
origin. Biological research is the truest way to track its
inﬂuence, or lack of inﬂuence, during the evolutionary
transition from instinct to culture.

Edward O. Wilson
Museum of Comparative Zoology,
Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA, United States

xxi

Preface

The late Nobel Prize winner Jacques Monod used to say
that the ultimate goal of science was to elucidate Human
Nature. Monod, a molecular biologist, had written the
famous book Chance and Necessity, which expressed a
striking neodarwinian, reductionist, and atheist view of the
living world. The properties of the genetic code, recently
discovered at that time (the book was published in 1970)
appeared to Monod as evidence that absolute chance was at
the root of evolution. It was not a hypothesis: it was a
certainty. For the author, blind natural selection (“Neces-
sity”) was able to fully explain teleonomy (the obvious
purposefulness of living organisms’ features).

We now know much more genetics and biology than
Monod did. However, to the eyes of many, genetics and
evolutionary studies are far from being able to provide a
comprehensive and sophisticated view of human nature.
These studies only bring some important parts of the puz-
zle, while many questions remain unanswered. This is also
the thinking of the two editors and initiators of this book.
This is why, when designing the project, we decided to
cover as broad a range as possible of all ﬁelds of knowledge
that would enlighten human nature. Controversies are
neither avoided nor hidden. However, subjects that, in the
view of the editorsdrightly or wrongly asserting their
decisionddo not meet the requirements of methodological
rigor (such as creationism and intelligent design) were not
included in the project. Otherwise, the book presents a fair
balance between social, medical, and biological sciences.
Authors were asked to make their chapters accessible to a
broad range of readers, including students, teachers, and the
educated public. However, all chapters are quite up to date
and include all recent advances in their ﬁeld, which should
make them highly relevant to specialists as well.

The book comprises three parts, intended to be com-
plementary to each other and purposely featuring some
overlap and redundancy:

Part I: Biological Basis of Human Diversity
Part II: Psychology, Behavior and Society
Part III: Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

The editors decided that each author would deliver her/
his chapter independently from other authors. Authors were
aware about the whole design and content of the book, and
of the identity of other authors. However, they did not read
the other chapters of the book. Authors were only given a
few basic indications about
the concept of the book.
Chapters were reviewed by the editors only, who interfered
as little as possible with the ﬁnal outcome. The goal of this
way of processing was to get the personal vision of each
author about her/his own ﬁeld. The whole design and set of
chapters has been extensively discussed between the two
editors, as well as the selection of authors. The topics were
selected before identifying authors. Once a topic was
agreed on between the two editors,
top authors were
selected either from personal contacts or through relevant
databases. The selection of topics is a reﬂection of how the
editors conceive what should not be a full synthesis about
human nature but rather a diversiﬁed sample of how human
intelligence approaches various facets of human nature.
Selection of topics and authors certainly is not beyond
criticism. Moreover, the two editors are both Westerners
and trained in the tradition of modern biology. A book on
human nature designed by Thai Buddhist monks or
Amazonian forest native shamans would certainly have
been quite differentdand fascinating. Cultural and pro-
fessional biases as well as ethnocentrism are sins shared by
everyone on Earth. Nevertheless, the design of the book
should be considered to be free of any deliberate bias or
thematic imperialism.

Michel Tibayrenc
Francisco J. Ayala

xxiii

Chapter 1

The Advent of Biological Evolution and
Humankind: Chance or Necessity?

C.J. Cela-Conde1 and F.J. Ayala2
1University of the Balearic Islands, Palma de Mallorca, Spain; 2University of California, Irvine, CA, United States

CHANCE AND NECESSITY

Chance and Necessity is the title of a book written by
Jacques Monod which explains how DNA is expressed in
the enzymes and proteins determining the organism’s
phenotype. Monod holds that “[t]he initial elementary
events which open the way to evolution in the intensely
conservative systems called living beings are microscopic,
fortuitous, and totally unrelated to whatever may be their
effects upon teleonomic functioning” (Monod, 1970, 1971,
p. 114). More than four decades later, we keep in mind the
same view: evolution starts fortuitously, and unrelated to
effects or events. These microscopic events mean “nov-
elties” that, as Monod said, “in the shape of an alteration of
the protein structure, will be tested before all else for its
compatibility with the whole of the system already bound
by the innumerable controls commanding the execution of
the organism’s projective purpose” (Monod, 1971, p. 115).
The word “purpose” obviously is polysemic, meaning
desires, ends, goals, determinations, resoluteness, and de-
signs, but also meaning practical results. The teleonomic
functioning that is affected by the initial, fortuitous events
could be explained in any of these several levels of “pur-
pose.” Environment also counts: “Let us say that the ‘initial
conditions’ of selection encountered by a new mutation
simultaneously and inseparably include both the environ-
ment surrounding it and the total structures and perfor-
mances of
the teleonomic apparatus belonging to it.”
(Monod, 1971, p. 121). In the end, “It is obvious that the
part played by teleonomic performances in the orientation of
selection becomes greater and greater, the higher the level
of organization and hence autonomy (Monod’s emphasis)
of the organism with respect to its environmentdto the
point where teleonomic performance may indeed be

considered decisive in the higher organisms, whose survival
and reproduction depend above all upon their behavior.”
(Monod, 1971, p. 121).

The necessity expressed by the organism’s purposes
may seem to lead us to a Lamarckian-like scheme. How-
ever, “teleonomy” and “purpose” are related, in Monod’s
analysis of the whole process of evolution, to the results of
every organism’s ﬁght for survival and reproduction. A true
Lamarckian scheme should relate the teleonomic purpose to
the reproduction,
the organism’s
achievements in its ﬁght for survival. Is this the case?

transmission of

ie,

Monod’s work is an example of an anti-Lamarckian
interpretation of the links existing between proteins and
nucleic acids. With his own words “there is no possible
(Monod’s emphasis) mechanism whereby the structure and
performance of a protein could be modiﬁed, and these
modiﬁcations transmitted even partially to posterity, except
an alteration of the instructions represented by a segment of
DNA sequence” (Monod, 1971, p. 107e108).

However,

the lack of a mechanism for transmitting
protein modiﬁcations to the DNA does not preclude the
existence of other kind of heredity linked not to the genetic
material but to its development. This is the case of epige-
netic processes.

EPIGENETIC PROCESSES

as

the

take

epigenetics

We will
“DNA sequence-
independent changes in chromosomal function that yield
a stable and heritable phenotype” (Rissman and Adli,
2014). The phenotype may refer to the whole organism, or
to only particular cells or tissues. Three conditions must be
fulﬁlled for an epigenetic process, currently called trans-
generational epigenetic inheritance (TEI): (1) changes in

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00001-6
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3

4 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

chromosomal function expressed in a different phenotype
(different from parents’ phenotype); (2) independent from
DNA sequences (neither coded in the genome, nor linked to
parents’ germ cells alterationsdsee Choi and Mango,
2014); (3) which is heritable in a stable way (persisting for
at least three generations). As Choi and Mango say, “Both
invertebrates and vertebrates exhibit such inheritance, and a
range of environmental factors can act as a trigger.” The
challenge is to ascertain “what molecular mechanisms ac-
count
inheritance of TEI phenotypes” (Choi and
Mango, 2014).

for

Mechanisms leading to TEI have been related to (see

Rissman and Adli, 2014):

l DNA methylation (a biochemical process in which
methyl chemical groups are covalently attached to cyto-
sine residues by DNA methyltransferase enzymes);

l histone modiﬁcations (posttranslational modiﬁcations in
histone proteins, mainly studied in organisms, such as
Caenorhabditis elegans, lacking DNA methylation);

l ncRNAs (noncoding RNA that alters chromatin struc-

ture and DNA accessibility).

The need for these mechanisms seems clear. Though all
cells share a common nuclear genome, the necessity for
genetic expression, from DNA to proteins, varies in the
different tissues. Thus, a great part of the genome must be
silenced, not leading to codify any protein or enzyme. This
silencing strategy is reached during the ontogenetic devel-
opment, ie, by means of epigenetic episodes. Several fac-
tors, including environmental conditions and parental care,
seem to affect epigenetics. If the alterations provoked are
inherited, we are facing a TEI phenotype.

Chance has a great role in the phylogenetic appearance
of any new organism. As we know, paleontology is a his-
torical science:
it does not consist of predictive laws.
Rather, it describes the evolutionary changes that occurred
in evolution. These changes include processes such as
mutation, genetic recombination ensuing from sexual
reproduction, and epigenetic events prompted by particular
environmental circumstances. What about necessity? It is
imposed by the environmental circumstances associated
with each evolutionary episode. Every population of or-
ganisms must
its
ecosystem or it will lose its biological ﬁtness.

remain adapted to the demands of

Epigenetic processes become a kind of intermediate
expanse between absolute chancedthe fortuitous modiﬁ-
cation of DNAdand required necessitydthe suitability of
new proteins to adapt to environment. Epigenetics have
been used sometimes as an argument against
the neo-
Darwinist approach to evolution. The fact that noncoding
changes could be inherited has been claimed as something
like a Lamarckian approach. However, no mysterious
process that might be achieved by an organism’s alleged
“will” exists. DNA silencing obviously depends on genetic

information appearing by means of well-known molecular
mechanisms. All TEI phenotypes are the result of genetic,
inheritable material that, under externaldenvironmental, at
least relative to the cell or tissuedpressures, becomes
modiﬁed. TEI phenotypes are inherited because parents
transmit not only DNA to the progeny but also because the
mother contributes with a whole set of cellular organs, as
well as several kinds of ncRNA, included in the ovule.

This chapter will engage these two components, hazard
and necessity, of human evolution, exploring how they
participate and become integrated in the human phylogeny.

WHAT IS A HOMININ?

We humans form an evolutionary lineage among those
belonging to the order Primata. According to the traditional
classiﬁcation, the order Primata includes three suborders
(Anthropoidea, Tarsioidea, and Prosimii). The suborder
Anthropoidea includes two infraorders, Catarrhini (African,
European, and Asian monkeys) and Platyrrhini (American
monkeys), which diverged after continental drift separated
South America from Africa. Catarrhini are divided into two
superfamilies: Cercopithecoidea (Old World monkeys) and
Hominoidea (apes and humans; hominoids in popular
terms; see Table 1.1).

In the 1960s, with analyses of proteins in the blood
serum of hominoids, Morris Goodman, a molecular
geneticist at Wayne State University in Detroit, determined
that humans, chimpanzees, and gorillas are closer to each
other than any of them is to orangutans (Goodman, 1962,
1963; Goodman et al., 1960). According to Goodman’s
results the evolution of hominoids proceeded very differ-
ently from what Simpson’s taxonomy implied. The lineage
leading to orangutans was the ﬁrst to split, then the lineage
of gorillas split from the others, and, ﬁnally, the chimpan-
zees and human lineages diverged from each other.
Consequently, using the language of cladistics, lineages of
humans and chimpanzees are “sister groups.” They come
from a common ancestor and thus share remarkable simi-
larities. Regarding the age of the split of these sister groups,
Vince Sarich and Alan Wilson (1967a,b) argued that the
rate of genetic change in chimpanzees and humans was fast,
the divergence of the evolutionary
and estimated that
branches of the last
two hominoid lineages took place
4e5 Ma (mega-annum, million years) ago.

Here we will adopt a taxonomic classiﬁcation which
respects the increasing molecular evidence. We will largely
follow Bernard Wood and Brian Richmond (2000;
Table 1.1). The family Hominidae embraces the set of great
apes and humans. Orangutans constitute the subfamily
Ponginae and gorillas the subfamily Gorillinae, while
chimpanzees and humans form the subfamily Homininae.
Within the latter, chimpanzees belong to the tribe Panini
and humans to the tribe Hominini. The human lineage has

Mankind’s Origin: Chance or Necessity? Chapter | 1 5

TABLE 1.1 The Suprageneric Taxonomy of Great Apes and Humans

Family

Subfamily

Tribe

Hominidae

Ponginae

Pongini

Gorillinae

Gorillini

Homininae

Panini

Subtribe

Pongina

Gorillina

Panina

Hominini
(hominins)

Ardipithecina (ardipiths)
Australopithecina (australopiths)
Paranthropitecina (robusts australopiths)
Hominina (hominans or, for short,
homo)

Current Species

Orangutans

Gorillas

Common chimpanzees;
bonobos

Humans

In brackets, popular names.
Adapted from Wood, B., Richmond, B.G., 2000. Human evolution: taxonomy and paleobiology. Journal of Anatomy 196, 19e60, adding the subtribes
Ardipithecina and Paranthropitecina.

(informal

the category of tribe: Hominini (informal name, “homi-
nins”). Two subtribes are included in it. One is Austral-
opithecina
“australopiths”), which
encompasses four genera: Orrorin, Ardipithecus, Austral-
opithecus, Paranthropus. The other subtribe is Hominina
(informal name, “hominina”, or just “homo”), with one
single genus, Homo.

name

Our interest is focused on the tribe Hominini, which
deﬁnes current humans and some of our extinct ancestors as
a distinct group; it does not include our closest living rel-
atives. The question of whether hominin and African ape
clades constitute tribes, as we support, or families, sub-
families, or even genera,
to the present
discussion. It does not alter the basic question regarding the
relative distribution of lineages.

is irrelevant

The term “hominin” is extensively used in the scientiﬁc
literature to identify members of the human lineage, ie,
direct and collateral ancestors that are not also ancestors of
other living hominoids, though it has not yet been widely
adopted in popular writings.

HUMAN SIMILARITIES AND
DIFFERENCES

Apart from taxonomy, what a hominin is can be inferred
from genetic and phenotypic comparison between humans
and modern chimpanzees. DNA hybridization studies
(Sibley and Ahlquist, 1984) have shown that chimpanzees
and humans share close to 98% or 99% of their genomic
DNA. The direct sequencing of the human chromosome
21(Hattori et al., 2000) and its orthologue 22 in chimpan-
zees (Watanabe et al., 2004) allowed the detailed compar-
ison of their genomes, conﬁrming their genetic proximity.
Excluding deletions and insertions, the differences between
the two species amounted to only 1.44% of the nucleotides.
It became obvious that
the genomes of humans and

chimpanzees are extremely similar in their DNA sequence.
How similar has become recently known with the publi-
cation of the draft genome sequence of the chimpanzee and
its preliminary comparison to the human genome.

The Human Genome Project of the United States was
initiated in 1989 and funded through two agencies, the
National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the Department of
Energy (DOE) with eventual participation of scientists
outside the United States. A draft of the genome sequence
was completed ahead of schedule in 2001 (International
Human Genome Sequencing Consortium, 2001). In 2003
the Human Genome Project was ﬁnished, but the analysis
the DNA sequences chromosome by chromosome
of
continued over
these
detailed analyses were published on June 1, 2006, by the
Nature Publishing Group, in a special supplement entitled
Nature Collections: Human Genome.

the following years. Results of

The draft DNA sequence of the chimpanzee genome
was published on September 1, 2005, by the Chimpanzee
Sequencing and Analysis Consortium (2005) embedded
within a series of articles and commentaries called The
Chimpanzee Genome. The last paper in the collection
presents
fossil chimpanzee ever discovered
(McBrearty and Jablonski, 2005).

the ﬁrst

In the genome regions shared by humans and chim-
panzees, the two species are 99% identical. These differ-
ences may seem very small or quite large, depending on
how one chooses to look at them: 1% of the total appears to
be very little, but it amounts to a difference of 30 million
DNA nucleotides out of the 3 billion in each genome.
Twenty-nine percent of the enzymes and other proteins
encoded by the genes are identical in both species. Out of
the one hundred to several hundred amino acids that make
up each protein, the 71% of nonidentical proteins differ
between humans and chimpanzees by only two amino
acids, on average. If one takes into account DNA stretches

6 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

found in one species but not the other, the two genomes are
about 96% identical, rather than nearly 99% identical as in
the case of DNA sequences shared by both species. That is,
a large amount of genetic material, about 3% or some
90 million DNA nucleotides, have been inserted or deleted
since humans and chimps initiated their separate evolu-
tionary ways, about 6e8 Ma ago. Most of this DNA does
not contain genes coding for proteins, although it may
include tool-kit genes and switch genes that impact devel-
opmental processes, as the rest of the noncoding DNA
surely does.

Comparison of the two genomes provides insights into
the rate of evolution of particular genes in the two species.
One signiﬁcant ﬁnding is that genes active in the brain have
changed more in the human lineage than in the chimp
lineage (Khaitovich et al., 2005). Also signiﬁcant is that the
fastest evolving human genes are those coding for “tran-
scription factors.” These are “switch” proteins, which
control the expression of other genes, that is, they deter-
mine when other genes are turned on and off. On the whole,
585 genes have been identiﬁed as evolving faster
in
including genes involved in
humans than in chimps,
resistance to malaria and tuberculosis.
(It might be
mentioned that malaria is a severe disease for humans but
not for chimps.) There are several regions of the human
genome that contain beneﬁcial genes that have rapidly
evolved within the past 250,000 years. One region contains
the FOXP2 gene, involved in the evolution of speech.

Other regions that show a higher rate of evolution in
humans than in chimpanzees and other animals include 49
segments, dubbed human accelerated regions (HARs). The
greatest observed difference occurs in HAR1F, an RNA
gene that “is expressed speciﬁcally in Cajal-Retzius neu-
rons in the developing human neocortex from 7 to 19
gestational weeks, a crucial period for cortical neuron
speciﬁcation and migration” (Pollard et al., 2006; see also
Smith, 2006).

All this knowledge (and much more of the same kind
that will be forthcoming) is of great interest, but what we so
far know advances but very little our understanding of what
genetic changes make us distinctively human. Extended
comparisons of the human and chimpanzee genomes and
experimental exploration of the functions associated with
signiﬁcant genes will surely advance further our under-
standing, over the next decade or two, of what it is that
makes us humans, what it is that differentiates Homo sa-
piens from our closest living species, chimpanzees and
bonobos, and will provide some light on how and when
these differences may have come about during hominid
evolution.

The comparative studies also lead to an initially sur-
prising conclusion: although genome differences are very
tiny, differences between the resulting proteins are not.

Most of the proteins coded by chromosomes 21/22 are
different in humans and chimpanzees. The estimate calcu-
lated by Galina Glazko et al. (2005) places the difference
close to 80%, which naturally leads to the differences be-
tween the phenotypes of Homo and Pan.

How can this fact be interpreted in evolutionary terms?
As Maryellen Ruvolo (2004) said in this regard, when
genomes of more distant species such as humans and mice
are compared, the basic premise is “if it’s conserved, it
must be functionally important.” By contrast, for closely
related species, such as humans and chimpanzees, the basic
premise is “if it’s different,
in
explaining species differences.” Let us proceed, then, with
an attempt to understand the reasons for the differences in
this case.

it might be important

The discrepancy between small molecular distance and
large protein distance is explained by gene expression, by
the way in which information contained in the genome
leads to a protein. It is clear that genome expression is not
equivalent in chimpanzees and humans. But the genome
itself also contains some notable differences that are not
expressed in genetic distance when compared sequence by
sequence. The human genome is comparatively larger than
that of chimpanzees and other primates like lemurs because
of a greater number of insertions. To give an example, the
human Alu gene has experienced twice the number of in-
sertions as its corresponding gene in chimpanzees during
the separate evolution of both lineages (Hedges et al.,
2004). Chromosomes of each lineage have also suffered
rearrangements, which have been related with encoding
different proteins (Navarro and Barton, 2003), although a
later, larger study denied that relationship (Vallender and
Lahn, 2004). In any case, the basic issue in evolutionary
terms is, as mentioned, to identify which expression regions
of genes carry functional differencesdthat
is, what
particular differences are involved in producing a human or
chimpanzee, starting from a fairly similar DNA.

identifying genetic differences that

Much of the difference between the two sibling groups,
from locomotion to the way they communicate, is func-
tional; ultimately, to some extent dependent on those pro-
tein functions to which Ruvolo (2004)
referred when
talking about the evolutionary signiﬁcance of disparities
obtained, either by molecular transformations, positive se-
lection of protein changes, or differential gene expression.
But
translate into
functional differences in either lineage is, for the moment,
beyond our capacity. The available panorama is very poor;
for instance, only one gene related to language production,
FOXP2, is known, and its peculiarities appear to be the
result of a mutation that occurred after the human lineage
separated from the chimpanzee (Enard et al., 2002).
However, FOXP2 is related to motor control disorders that
hinder language, not to the act of speaking (Cela-Conde

et al., 2008). Perhaps the strongest evidence for a genetic,
anatomical, and functional correlate would be the mutations
suffered in the Myosin gene of Homo (Stedman et al.,
2004), which would have allowed the development of large
crania in our genus. The possible role of this gene has also
been discussed (Perry et al., 2005).

THE DISTINCTIVE FEATURES OF
HUMANS

Technically, “apomorphy” is a distinctive feature of a
lineage that is not found in the sibling group, and forms,
therefore, a distinguishing characteristic.

Sean Carroll (2003), in his study of the genetic basis of
the physical and behavioral traits that distinguish humans
from other primates, gave a list of distinctive human
apomorphies:

l Body shape and thorax
l Cranial features (brain case and face)
l Brain size
l Brain morphology
l Limb length
l Long ontogeny and lifespan
l Small canine teeth
l Skull balanced upright on vertebral column
l Reduced hair cover
l Elongated thumb and shortened ﬁngers
l Dimensions of the pelvis
l Presence of a chin
l S-shaped spine
l Language
l Advanced tool making.

Some of the apomorphies listed by Carroll are func-
tional, like language. Others that are anatomical are not
shown in fossils, like hair or the brain’s topology. How-
ever, body shape, brain size, relative length of limbs, and
vertically placed cranium above the vertebral column are
morphological traits that clearly set us apart from any ape.
Moreover, many distinctive human traits have appeared
recently; if we look back in time they disappear from our
lineage. Ten thousand years ago neither writing nor agri-
culture existed. Fifty thousand years ago there were no
people in America. These are negligible time intervals
relative to the several million years that have passed by
since the divergence of the evolutionary branches leading
to the African great apes and humans.

Thus, current human features are generally not very
helpful to reach conclusions about our initial apomorphies.
What we are looking for are derived ancient traits that can
be considered synapomorphic, shared by every hominin
that ever existed. These would deﬁne the earliest member
of our lineage as adaptively distinct. Leaving aside the

Mankind’s Origin: Chance or Necessity? Chapter | 1 7

necessarily dark period surrounding the exact moment
when the lineages split, are there any such traits? Can we
ﬁnd a trait that will allow us to determine whether a given
fossil specimen is a hominin?

It is generally accepted nowadays that bipedalism is a
hominin synapomorphydan apomorphy shared by all the
members of the lineage. Thus, being a primate bipedal
equals being a hominin. Any specimen close to the diver-
gence between the chimpanzee and human lineages is
attributed to the latter if it is bipedal. Most of the modiﬁ-
cations to the trunk, limbs, hip, and the insertion of the
vertebral column in the skull are related to bipedalism,
which distinguishes our species from the apes. Since
bipedal specimen with ages around 6e7 Ma have been
found in Chad (Brunet et al., 2002), Kenya (Senut et al.,
2001), and Ethiopia (White et al., 2009), we may take the
Late Miocene as the epoch in which the split between
chimpanzees and humans took place.

CHANCE AND NECESSITY IN HUMAN
EVOLUTION

Let us summarize what we have presented, thus far. The
hominin lineage appeared about 7 million years ago in the
tropical forests of the Rift depression, associated with an
essential apomorphy: bipedal
locomotion that separated
humans from chimpanzees. In time, the human lineage
diversiﬁed and dispersed, colonizing the whole planet.

The different clades of the human lineage gradually
developed adaptive specializations. One of its branches, the
genus Homo, managed to live until the present. Coming
back to the title of this chapter, would this journey express
just hazardous episodes that modulated the evolutionary
development of the human lineage? Or was the acquisition
of our current traitsdbe they bipedalism or the kind of
apomorphies typical of Homo, including language, morals,
technologydsomehow
aesthetics,
necessary?

sophisticated

and

is ﬁxed. Evolution involves, ﬁrst,

According to the roles that we have given to chance and
necessity, following the argument of Monod, one quickly
concludes that both components are involved when any
trait
the need for
(random) changes to appear in the genetic material, which
often affect epigenetic events whose relationship with the
environment is very close. In that way, the imposed ne-
cessity to adapt to any ecosystem becomes the other side of
the coin in a complex process. The issue is to determine to
what extent genetic and environmental components inﬂu-
ence the appearance of a particular trait.

Can we indicate with which genetic changes bipedalism
is related, and what adaptive advantages it provides in the
ecosystem of the ﬁrst hominids? The ﬁrst question has
necessarily a negative answer at this time. The genetic

8 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

components of Miocene hominids are completely un-
known. The alternative chance/necessity could be trans-
ferred, however, to the ﬁeld of adaptation. If it is possible to
identify clear adaptive advantages in bipedalism, then the
component of necessity gains relevance. If we ﬁnd it
difﬁcult, or even impossible, to associate bipedalism to
adaptive advantages,
the component of chance gains
weight.

Darwin envisioned the following chain of events
regarding human evolution: descent from the trees, biped-
alism, brain size increase, language, and appearance of
culture (with all
its components, both intellectual and
technological). Some of these elements can be traced in the
fossil record, but not others. Phenomena such as the
development of moral sense, which Darwin believed was
extremely important, are not associated with fossil remains.
Language does not fossilize either. But the cranium and
bones of the hip and lower limbs leave fossil trails that can
provide ﬁrm evidence regarding whether it was our bipedal
posture or our large brain that developed ﬁrst.

During the early 20th century there were defenders of
two opposite hypotheses. Arthur Keith was one of the
most notorious advocates for bipedalism as the initial trait,
while Grafton Elliot Smith argued that a large encephali-
zation appeared ﬁrst. The swords were drawn when the
Piltdown fossil specimen appeared on the scene. The
specimen had a large cranium, the size of the cranium of a
modern human, combined with a very primitive mandible,
resembling that of an orangutan or gorilla. The different
fragments that formed the specimen were found in 1912
by Charles Dawson, an amateur archaeologist in the En-
glish town of Piltdown. The story of its discovery and the
controversy it sparked has been told many times. The
article that The London Illustrated News devoted to the
ﬁnding in September 1913 renders a very good picture of
the challenges posed by the specimen’s interpretation
(Pycraft, 1913).

The Piltdown fossil exhibited some unconvincing traits,
such as the awkward connection between the cranium and
mandibledraising the suspicion that
they belonged to
different specimens. Many paleontologists were indeed
suspicious. Its discoverers did not allow its examination,
alluding to the fragility of the original fossil. It was
necessary to use copies made with a mold. The suspicions
turned out to be well founded. In 1953 (thanks to Joseph
Weiner, Kenneth Oakley, and Wilfred Le Gros Clark) it
was conﬁrmed that
the Piltdown fossil was a fraud.
Someone had ﬁled an orangutan’s mandible and canines to
reduce them and ﬁt them, quite sloppily, to a human cra-
nium. The main suspect of the fraud is Martin Hinton,
curator of the Natural History Museum, London. Hinton
was the owner of a trunk found in the museum’s attic in
1996, with bones manipulated in a similar way to those
constituting the Piltdown specimen (Gee, 1996).

Before the Piltdown deception, there already was evi-
dence contrary to the early evolution of a large brain. Re-
mains of fossil beings that were very similar to us were
known since the beginning of the 19th century, before the
controversy between evolutionists and antievolutionists
reached the virulence sparked by Darwin’s work. The
discovery of a very famous specimen in 1856, the Neander
valley cranium (Germany), which would christen the Ne-
andertals, occurred several years before the publication of
Darwin’s Origin of Species. But the ﬁrst “modern” dis-
coveries, that is to say, interpreted in terms of evolutionary
ideas, were made after 1887, subsequent to the arrival of
the Dutch physician Eugène Dubois in Indonesia. As a
hobby, Dubois searched for fossils that could prove Darwin
was right. At the Javanese site of Trinil, Dubois discovered
in 1891 remains that completely transcended the realm of
scientists and became universally known. The specimen
includes a primitive and small cranium (with a capacity
of about 850 cc) found beside a femur that was very similar
to that of modern humans. The name given to the
taxon, Pithecanthropus erectus, means upright ape-man,
conveying the idea that it was an intermediate being be-
tween humans and apes (pithecus for ape, and anthropus
for human); and that it had a posture distinctively upright
(erectus) (Dubois, 1894). Eugène Dubois gave to the fossil
a very different signiﬁcance from the one we give it today
(Dubois, 1894). For Dubois, Pithecanthropus was a
gigantic genus of the gibbon’s type, although superior
because of their large brains and ability to assume an erect
posture (Dubois, 1935). The fact
that Lydekker had
discovered Paleopithecus
the
gibbon, in Siwaliks (Pakistan) in 1879, must have inﬂu-
enced this diagnosis.

sivalensis, ancestor of

Subsequent discoveries have required revising Dubois’
interpretations. The Trinil fossil is not an “intermediate”
form between humans and apes, but a fairly advanced
hominin. The upright posture was not a new apomorphy;
rather it was already present in its ancestors. But Dubois’
phylogenetic interpretation was correct: the ancestors of
current humans had ﬁxed a bipedalism similar to our own
before the brain reached its current size.

CAN ADAPTIVE ADVANTAGES OF
BIPEDALISM BE IDENTIFIED?

Most of the modiﬁcations to the trunk, limbs, hip, and the
insertion of the vertebral column in the skull are related to
bipedalism, which distinguishes our species from the apes.
Bipedalism can be detected in the fossil record by
means of several anatomic evidences, as well as some
footprints exceptionally conserved. However, its adaptive
advantages are far from being clear. Charles Darwin sug-
gested a hypothesis that related bipedalism, free hands, and
tool use to the extent that their combination would amount

to a single complex phenomenon with morphological and
functional aspects (Darwin, 1871). But, as Tobias (1965)
noted, bipedalism is not a requisite for making or using
tools. Chimpanzees use instruments quite ably, and they do
so sitting up. The essential element in the relation between
posture and the use of cultural elements is upright posture,
not bipedalism. But there is more. Bipedalism appeared in
human evolution long before culture.

Different hypotheses concerning the adaptive advan-
tages of bipedalism in precultural conditions, without
reference to tool use, have been proposed (see Tuttle et al.,
1990). We have retained the original names used by Tuttle
et al. (1990), referred to concepts expressed in a pretty
casual tone. But that does not mean they should not be
taken seriously. For instance, studies on the mechanics of
locomotion have shown the beneﬁts of the bipedal solution
in terms of energetic economy (Kimura et al., 1979;
Reynolds, 1985).

As Tuttle et al. (1990) noted, it is possible that several
factors provided adaptive advantages and that some, or
many, of them combined to achieve the result of bipedal
behavior. There are two separate issues underlying the
search for hypotheses to explain the adaptive advantage of
bipedalism. The ﬁrst
issue concerns the circumstances
behind the appearance of the ﬁrst bipedal behaviors in a
tropical forest environment. The second issue concerns the
beneﬁts of bipedalism as an adaptation to the savanna.
These two questions must not be confounded: bipedal
behavior existed long before savannas were extensive in the
Rift Valley. The two questions are often confounded by
seeking a “general explanation of bipedalism.” The hy-
potheses summarized in Tuttle et al. (1990) classiﬁcation
refer to the adaptive advantages of bipedalism in the
savanna, not on the forest ﬂoor. Thus, they are inadequate
to explain the reason for an upright locomotion, unless this
evolution is considered to have taken place only during the
last 2.5 Ma.

Yves Coppens suggested the progressive reduction of
the tropical forest
thickness as a possible explanation
for the gradual evolution of bipedalism. If the distance
among the trees gradually increased, it would become
necessary to travel longer distances on the ground to go
from one to another. At
the same time it would be
imperative to retain the locomotor means for climbing.
Distinct functional responses appeared in the different
lineages leading to current primates: knuckle-walking
bipedalism in the ancestors of gorillas and chimpanzees
and an incipient bipedalism in the ﬁrst hominins
(Coppens, 1983b, 1991; Senut, 1991).

The gradual substitution of forests for open savanna
spaces would be an increasing selective pressure toward
more complete bipedalism, functionally speaking. The
ﬁnal result of this process was two evolutionary lineages
of bipedal primates based on different adaptive strategies,

Mankind’s Origin: Chance or Necessity? Chapter | 1 9

close to 3.5 Ma. One million years later this divergence
would increase with the decrease in temperatures and the
appearance of extremely robust australopiths and the
genus Homo.

The explanation given by Coppens and Senut has a
considerable advantage: simplicity. Brigitte Senut noted
that the locomotor hypothesis of the origin of bipedalism
has been among the least favored. This hypothesis suggests
that hominins had become bipedal for reasons strictly
associated with locomotion itself (Senut, 1991), that is to
say, the need for traveling on the ground of open forests.
Senut explored eight hypothetical ways in which biped-
alism could have originated from the locomotion of other
primates, but ended up developing with greater detail the
explanation favored by Coppens (1983a,b).

Senut (1991) has argued that the comparative exami-
nation of fossil specimens and current great apes does not
lead to deﬁnitive conclusions. The combination of traits
observed in fossil hominin species suggests that their lo-
comotor habit would be very different from the very
specialized locomotion of current great apes. If so, the only
clues regarding the evolution of bipedalism are provided by
fossil hip and limb postcranial remains of Miocene and
early Pliocene members of our tribe, australopiths. The
answers concerning the evolution of bipedalism depend on
the analysis of these morphological
traits in early and
current specimens of our lineage. If they are similar but not
identical, what do the differences mean phylogenetically?

“PARTIAL” VERSUS “COMPLETE”
BIPEDALISM

Hominin bipedalism is thought
to have developed in
several stages from the incipient bipedalism of early aus-
tralopiths to the complete bipedalism of the specimen found
in Java by Dubois, Homo erectus. But this is not the only
possible interpretation. There are authors who reject the
idea that there were different stages in the evolution of
bipedalism along the hominin lineage. For instance, the
comparative examination of the tibia of australopith spec-
imens from Olduvai (Tanzania), Koobi Fora (Kenya), and
Hadar (Ethiopia) leddas we pointed out earlierdOwen
Lovejoy, renowned specialist in hominin locomotor pat-
terns, to the conclusion that the bipedal locomotion of early
hominins was as developed as our own (Lovejoy, 1975;
Latimer et al., 1987). The study of australopith specimens
from South Africa also indicated, according to Lovejoy
(1975), that there is no morphological reason to consider
that their locomotion was “intermediate” between that of
African apes and modern humans. The morphology of the
pelvis of those early hominins is very similar to that of
living current humans, according to this author. Their
illium is equivalent to that of human beings (this, by the
way, had already been noted since the discovery of the ﬁrst

10 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

exemplarsdDart, 1949dand generally admitted since
then). The differences observed in their ischium probably
have no functional consequences. And the pubis, in any
case, has little bearing on the question of locomotion.

The idea that

the very wide pelvis of australopiths
would have been favorable for bipedal locomotion has been
rejected, however, by Christine Berge (1991) after the ex-
amination of
the AL 288-1 specimen from Hadar
(Ethiopia). At the level of the iliac crests and the pelvic
cavity, the pelvis of AL 288-1 is much wider than that of
modern humans. In Berge’s biomechanical reconstruction,
the long neck of the femur, acting as a lever arm, does not
constitute an advantage, as Lovejoy surmised; rather, it
introduces balancing problems. The vertical of the center of
gravity would fall, in the case of Australopithecus afar-
ensis, far from the knee articulation when leaning on one
foot while traveling, leading to a greater instability of the
lower limb (Berge, 1991). As a consequence, the kind of
bipedal locomotion exhibited by A. afarensis would have
required a higher degree of hip rotation to place the leaning
knee within the body’s vertical axis. In her morphometric
study of the mobility of the hip of A. afarensis, and in order
to obviate the difference in height between Lucy and cur-
rent humans, Berge carried out the comparison with the
pelvis of a pigmy woman 137 cm tall.

Regarding the possible reconstruction of the insertion of
the gluteus in the hip of AL 288-1, Berge (1991) pointed
out a noteworthy circumstance. Not much is known about
that
insertion, but the two possible alternatives are the
“human” way, with the gluteus maximus inserted in the
illium, and the “ape” way, in which the muscle would be
inserted for the most part in the ischium. When Berge
reconstructed the internal rotation movements of the thigh,
she argued that the hip’s morphology, together with the
“human” reconstruction of the gluteus maximus insertion,
would not allow AL 288-1 to perform the necessary
movements for bipedalism. These could only be performed
with an “ape” insertion of the gluteus. This point is espe-
cially important, given that the role of the gluteus maximus
in the evolution of bipedalism had been considered in a
different way by Sherwood Washburn (1967), who
believed that the transition from quadrupedalism to biped-
alism began precisely with “human” changes to the gluteus,
and John Napier (1967), who believed that this change did
not take place until later stages in the evolution of biped-
alism and carried out functions related only with balance
while running or going up slopes, but not walking. Berge’s
(1991) study supported Napier’s point of view and
concluded that the hip of AL 288-1 suggests that its loco-
motion included partially arboreal behavior.

Latimer et al. (1987) and Latimer (1991) have put for-
ward an argument against the notion of australopith “par-
tial” bipedalism, which, by the way, can be applied to any
evolutionary process. They argue that the earliest hominins

were bipedal, although they preserved some climbing traits.
This claim is based on the fact that, within a Darwinian
scenario,
is not
signiﬁcant.

the persistence of primitive

traits

In Latimer’s (1991) opinion, the functional value of
primitive and derived traits is not the same. No arboreal
primitive traits are retained by late Pliocene African great
apes (Latimer and Lovejoy, 1989). This means, according to
Latimer, that if australopiths are considered arboreal, they
should be so based on certain derived traits that reveal the
speciﬁc way in which they had adapted to their particular
arboreal life. But all australopith-derived traits are related to
bipedalism, not arboreality. Therefore, Latimer
(1991)
concluded that there can be no talk of “intermediate de-
grees” of bipedalism. Locomotion is determined by the new
derived bipedal
traits, while the presence of primitive
characters must be understood as atavisms. Latimer (1991)
believed this is supported by the morphology of the lower
limbs, very evolved toward bipedalism, while primitive
traits present in the upper limbs have little evolutionary
signiﬁcance.

THE TWO ADAPTIVE ADVANTAGES OF
BIPEDALISM

Rejecting Lovejoy’s notion of an advantage of australopith
bipedalism has often led to the opposite conclusion. The
bipedalism of early hominins is considered to be partial,
something like a stage prior to development of complete
bipedalismdwhich is believed to begin with H. erectus,
such as the Trinil specimen. A partial bipedalismdlike that
described by Tuttle and Basmajian (1974)dis well
adjusted to the morphology of australopith hands and feet
and would be an adequate way to respond to the environ-
mental demands of a tropical forest in which a considerable
amount of traveling, but not alldand not even most of
itdwas done on the ground. But, is such locomotion a ﬁrst
step toward complete bipedalism?

Randall Susman and Jack Stern (1991) argue that the
evolution of bipedalism was gradual and venture how it
occurred differently in the gracile and robust australopith
species. The earliest exemplars of our genus, Homo
habilis, exhibit bipedal features in their feet (OH 8 from
Olduvai, Tanzania), but their ﬁngers (OH 7, OH 62) are
functionally apt for climbing. However, Fred Spoor et al.
(1994) have suggested a new way of studying the evo-
lution of bipedalism: examination of
the vestibular
apparatus, the inner structure of the ear that is part of the
system that controls movement. Using high resolution
computerized tomography techniques,
authors
analyzed the morphology of the bones of the semicircular
canals of the ear in 31 current primate species, including
our own and several higher apes, as well as different fossil
specimens. Spoor et al. concluded that H. erectus was the

these

ﬁrst species to exhibit an undoubtable modern human
morphology. The dimensions of
the australopith and
paranthropine semicircular canal are similar to those of
current higher apes. According to Spoor et al. (1994)
H. erectus would necessarily be completely bipedal,
while Australopithecus africanus had locomotor habits
including optional bipedalism and arboreal climbing.
Among australopiths, bipedalism would be a matter of
posture and would not allow them to perform more
complex movements, such as running or jumping.

The studies by Susman and Stern (1991), and Spoor
et al. (1994), suggest that posture and balance differ be-
tween australopiths and the genus Homo. Patricia Kramer
and Gerald Eck’s (2000) study of the energetic balance of
bipedalism puts the ﬁnger on the central question in the
evolution of hominin locomotion. Can the same criterion
be applied to calibrate the efﬁciency of different forms of
hominin locomotion? From the point of view of our
current
the way in which australopiths
walked can seem inefﬁcient. But the energetic balance of
early bipedalism should be seen as an optimization to a
different ecological niche. Thus,
there would be two
different adaptive strategies related with our lineage’s
bipedalism:

locomotion,

l “slow” bipedalism, characteristic of australopiths, with
an excellent energetic balance in foraging tasks at low
velocity, but inefﬁcient for running at higher speeds;

l “fast” bipedalism, apt for running, with high energetic
efﬁciency when great distances have to be traveled.
This is the characteristic locomotion of H. erectus and
later Homo taxa.

Accepting that

the bipedalism of australopiths was
different from that of modern humans does not imply that it
was an incipient stage in human locomotion. This is theo-
retically robust, because intermediate stages do not make
much evolutionary sense. Each taxon has evolved its own
distinctive adaptations, which are, in this sense, ﬁnal, rather
than intermediate. A given species does not evolve a partial
organ as an intermediate step toward later complete ver-
sions of it.

Within such a scheme, “slow” australopith bipedalism is
not a transitory stage toward more developed locomotion
processes. Morphological and functional indications sug-
gest their locomotion was apt for individuals that lived in
tropical forests and traveled short distances in their foraging
activities. Sarmiento (1998) and Sarmiento and Marcus
(2000) have proposed that Hadar australopiths would adopt
quadrupedalism when they needed to move fast or travel
long distances.

The importance of fast bipedalism in the evolution of
the genus Homo has been brought
in Dennis
Bramble and Daniel Lieberman’s (2004) study of the role
of running. It is evident that current humans are not among

to light

Mankind’s Origin: Chance or Necessity? Chapter | 1 11

the fastest animals in the savanna, nor were our hominin
ancestors. However, running is related not only to speed
itself. After comparing the metabolic costs of running and
walking, Bramble and Lieberman (2004) conclude that
several anatomical traits of the genus Homodincluding
narrow pelvis, long legs, short neck of the femur, and big
toedimproved the energetic balance of fast bipedalism,
running, because of enhanced features of fast marching:
balance, thermoregulation, shock absorption, stress reduc-
tion, stabilization of the head and trunk, energy storage, and
so on. The most important characteristic of running would
be related with energy balance factors and not pure speed.
This kind of locomotion would have been efﬁcient for
hunting and scavenging in open savannas when long dis-
tances had to be covered.

THE ORIGIN OF MODERN HUMANS

As we have seen, the study of fossil records, including
using sophisticated models to evaluate the effectiveness of
bipedalism, does not clarify the balance of chance and
necessity in human evolution. Until a more complete pic-
ture is available of the evolution of genetic components
along the phylogeny of our lineage, we must content our-
selves with necessarily incomplete functional explanations
of human distinctive traits and their adaptive scope. A
direct comparison with our closest living siblings is the
only resource that gives us ﬁrm evidence regarding func-
tional explanations.

At

the level of molecular expression it

is already
possible to identify some differences in the expressions of
tissues. Logically, the picture is partial, because tissues are
usually the result of the expression of different genes.
Even so, differential gene expression patterns have been
identiﬁed in the brains of humans and chimpanzees
(Marqués-Bonet et al., 2004) and to a greater degree in
their livers (Hsieh et al., 2003).

Paradoxically, the comparison of the members of our
species with our closest relatives, gorillas and chimpanzees,
produces, as we have seen, contradictory results: both are
very similar to or very different from humans, depending
on the chosen trait. Humans and chimpanzees are 99%
identical in the overlapping genome regions, and 29% of
the enzymes and other proteins encoded by the genes are
identical in both species. The nonidentical proteins differ
between humans and chimps by only two amino acids, on
the average. Concluding that minor protein differences and
1% DNA sequence difference imply a virtual biological
identity between chimpanzees and humans would, how-
ever,
ignore the immense importance of development
processes.

Epigenetic processes can modify the genetic back-
ground allowing to express, or not,
the way in which
environmental challenges are solved to allow any organism

12 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

to each adaptive ﬁtness. How these epigenetic processes
might have evolved into the human lineage is something
very difﬁcult to explain. However, the recovery of the
ancient DNA of species of the human lineage closely
related with the moment of appearance of modern humans,
has opened a promising ﬁeld of study.

for example,

Usually included in modern H. sapiens are modern
humans and their ancestors that are not ancestors of Homo
neanderthalensis as well. To be able to identify whether
any other fossil specimen belongs in our species, we need
to deﬁne the apomorphies of H. sapiens. It seems easy to
identify the traits characteristic of modern humans, because
we have an immense number of exemplars. But
their
abundance entails enormous intraspeciﬁc variation, which
to establish quantitative measure-
handicaps any effort
ments. Consider,
the paradox faced by
Stringer et al. (1984) seeking to specify the cranial mea-
surements of H. sapiens. If bounds are used that would
distinguish modern humans and their direct ancestors from
other
those bounds would exclude many living
humans from the taxon. The issue is not, of course, how to
know who is human and who is not. Fortunately the
ethnocentrism of past generations that classiﬁed the “infe-
rior races” as arboreal primates has long ago disappeared.
The issue, however,
is how to identify the taxon of
“modern humans” so that we can decide whether particular
fossils belong or not within the taxon, when this is not
readily obvious.

taxa,

In order to identify valid human apomorphies, we need
to compare the traits of modern humans with those of our
sister taxon, H. neanderthalensisdassuming, of course,
that
this taxon is a different species. William Howells
(1973, 1989) made that comparison with respect to cranial
measurements. More generally, Wood and Richmond
(2000) have listed the apomorphies of H. sapiens. These
apomorphies, as noted by Wood and Richmond, seem to ﬁt
best modern humans from hot, arid climates. This is hardly
surprising since modern humans evolved in tropical Africa
and their earlier expansion was through tropical or sub-
tropical lands.

Molecular genetics has become, over the last few de-
cades, a powerful method for investigating evolutionary
questions. With respect to the origin of modern humans, it
makes it possible to investigate three important issues: (1)
time of origin: when did modern humans evolve? (2) place
of origin: where did modern humans evolve? and (3)
demography: how large was the original population of
modern humans? Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
in-
vestigations placed the origin of modern humans in Africa,
the time of origin between 150,000 and 200,000 years ago,
and a mean population size that ranges between 10,000 and
more than 50,000 individuals throughout the Pleistocene
(see Cela-Conde and Ayala, 2007, Chapter 9).

TABLE 1.2 Nucleotide Substitutions and Deletions in
the Comparison of Neandertal and Modern Human
Genome With the Genome of the Chimpanzee
(Green et al., 2010)

Substitutions

Deletions

Modern human genome

10,535,445

Neandertal genome

3,202,190

Percentage

30%

479,863

69,029

14%

The development of techniques to recover ancient DNA
has allowed us to obtain not only mitochondrial genetic
material but also nuclear. The high resolution polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) technique permitted the recovery
from Neandertal specimen Vi-80 of Vindija (Croatia), a
total of 254,953 sequences of nuclear DNA of around
1 million bp (0.03 of the total) (Green et al., 2006). This
was the ﬁrst important step in obtaining the Neandertal
genome.

The complete recovery of the Neandertal genome was
achieved by using PCR techniques on three Neandertal
bone fragmentsdall of
them femalesdfrom Vindija
(Green et al., 2010). The comparison of the Neandertal
genome with those from modern humans and chimpanzees
has allowed inferring the number of nucleotide sub-
stitutions and deletions which occurred with respect to the
chimpanzee genome shown in Table 1.2.

The great majority of substitutions and deletions found
in the Neandertal genome (87.9% and 87.3%, respectively)
occurred before its separation from the modern human
lineage. Features derived in modern humans and primitive
in Neandertals could be encoded by only 78 nucleotides
whose substitution would have affected the structure of the
protein, which, according to Green et al. (2010), indicates
few changes at the level of amino acids during the several
100,000s of years that the two lineages, Neandertals and
modern humans, have been separated. In order to under-
stand the process of the hominin lineage evolution in its last
segment,
single nucleotide poly-
morphisms (SNP)dpolymorphisms in which the alleles
differ in one or a few nucleotidesdis the most relevant
analysis.

the comparison of

Neandertals exhibit a similar range of SNP variation as
modern humans in many regions of the genome; thus, both
lineages share the same allele currently present in modern
humans. However, in order to detect positive selection in
modern humans, Green et al. (2010) focused on those SNPs
that appeared as derived in our species, while Neandertals
retained the plesiomorphy (shared with the chimpanzee
genome)die, changes in the SNPs of the human lineage

Mankind’s Origin: Chance or Necessity? Chapter | 1 13

TABLE 1.3 Genes Belonging to Regions With Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms Indicating a Likely Positive
Selection in Modern Humans, With Defective Alleles Associated With Cognitive Disorders (Green et al., 2010)

Chromosome

7

21

10

6

7

Region
6,8662946e69,274,862
3,7580123e37,789,088
8,3336607e83,714,543
4,5440283e45,705,503

1,21763417e122,282,663

Genes
AUTS2

DYRK1A

NRG3

RUNX2

CADPS2

Associated Disorder

Autism

Down syndrome

Schizophrenia

Cleidocranial dysostosis

Autism

that emerged after
its separation from the Neandertal
lineagedby a process, therefore, of positive selection for
the modern human lineage.

Green et al. (2010) identiﬁed a total of 212 regions
which have likely experienced positive selection in
H. sapiens. As there is a direct relationship between the
strength of positive selection and the length of the affected
sequence, the authors focused on 20 larger regions with
positive selection SNPs, to identify the genes encoded by
these nucleotide sequences. Five of the regions contained
no protein-coding genes; the remaining 15 regions con-
tained between 1 and 12 genes. The widest region, with an
area of 336,000 bp, has very few derived SNPs in the
Neandertal genome; this region is located on chromosome
2 and contains the THADA gene. Some alterations of this
gene cause type II diabetes; Green et al. (2010) hypothe-
sized a possible role of THADA in early modern humans
which would affect energy metabolism regulation.

Table 1.3 shows different genes associated with con-
ditions affecting cognitive capacity that belong to one of
the 20 regions most
likely to have undergone positive
selection.

Obviously, positive selection is meaningless if it leads
to select defective genes. The situation, however, is that in
order to accommodate the need to direct medical research
toward correlates between diseases and genes, the ﬁrst gene
function to be identiﬁed is altered. So far, functions per-
formed by the genes of Table 20.4 in their nondefective
version are unknown. However, it must be remembered
that the Tim Crow evolutionary model on the origin of
schizophrenia contemplates this disorder as a collateral and
undesired outcome of gene positive selection, that, in their
nondefective version, are related to language (see Crow,
1997, 2003, for example).

To verify the scope of Crow’s hypothesis is beyond our
current capabilities. It is unknown to what extent these
genes are expressed in brain tissue, or even what meaning
they might have with respect to cognitive functions. To
pose the question whether the appearance of such human

is

advantages

cognitive functions could be a random issue or due to
adaptive
speculative. However, using
Illumina techniques to sequence ancient genomes has
permitted the recovery of Neandertal nuclear DNA with an
unexpected level of precision (Prufer et al., 2014). The
starting material was a toe proximal phalanx of about
50,000 years age, found in Denisova Cave, Altai Moun-
tains (Siberia, Russia) (Mednikova, 2011). Another very
accurate retrieval of nuclear DNA, this time from a hand
phalanx of an age of 48,000/30,000 years, found in Deni-
sova Cave and attributed to an unknown group of archaic
humans who have been called “Denisovans” (Meyer et al.,
2012), provides us with genetic material of high quality
from up to three species of humans from the late Paleo-
lithic, enabling the comparison of some epigenetic pro-
cesses in modern humans, Neandertals, and Denisovans.

As we have seen, one of the main epigenetic mecha-
nisms of genetic alteration is DNA methylation, which
consists in most cases in a change on the nucleobase
cytosine preceding a guanine in the base sequence of the
DNA chain (what is known as CpG dinucleotide). This
change converts cytosine into thymine. The amount of
CpGeTpG substitutions allows an estimate of the degree of
methylation of a particular ancient genome (Gokhman
et al., 2014).

differentially methylated

David Gokhman et al. (2014) have reconstructed com-
plete methylation maps of recovered Denisova DNA by
comparing it with the current human genome. The authors
identiﬁed w2000
regions
(DMRs), with substantial differences in the gene cluster
HOXD due to methylation. This cluster is related to pro-
cesses that lead to the development of the limbs. Gokhman
et al. (2014) detected hypermethylation in the HOXD9
promoter and in the HOXD10 gene body of both, Nean-
dertals and Denisovans. In turn, these regions are hypo-
methylated in all 37 bone samples of modern humans.

With regard to modern humans, the biggest difference
in DMRs with respect to archaic humansdDenisovans and
Neandertalsdaffects nervous, immune, cardiovascular, and

14 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

skeletal systems (Gokhman et al., 2014; supplementary
materials). Moreover, Gokhman et al. (2014) indicated that
“DMR-containing genes in present-day humans are almost
twice as likely to be disease-related. More than a third of
the disease-linked genes (30/81) are involved in neurolog-
ical and psychiatric disorders.” Once again, we are
reminded of Crow’s hypothesis,
to which we referred
earlier, relating the evolution of some speciﬁcally human
cognitive capacities to their collateral consequences of
having certain mental disorders.

At the current level of knowledge it is impossible to go
beyond speculative explanations about the type of evolu-
tion, random or adaptive, which led to human cognitive
differences. However, the DMRs identiﬁed by Gokhman
et al. (2014) highlight the important role of epigenetics in
ﬁxing current human characteristics. The most important
conclusion to be drawn is that the evolutionary models we
use to explain the emergence of hominins and our own
species may be too simple to portray the actual phyloge-
netic processes that occurred.

REFERENCES

Berge, C., 1991. Quelle est la signiﬁcation fonctionelle du pelvis très large
de Australopithecus afarensis (AL 288-1)? In: Coppens, Y., Senut, B.
(Eds.), Origine(s) de la Bipédie Chez les Hominidés. Centre National
de la Rechérche Scientiﬁque, Paris, pp. 113e120.

Bramble, D.M., Lieberman, D.E., 2004. Endurance running and the

evolution of Homo. Nature 432 (7015), 345e352.

Crow, T.J., 1997. Is schizophrenia the price that Homo sapiens pays for

language? Schizophrenia Research 28, 127e141.

Crow, T.J., 2003. Genes for schizophrenia. The Lancet 361, 1829e1830.
Dart, R., 1949. Innominate fragments of Australopithecus prometeus.

American Journal of Physical Anthropology 7, 301e334.

Darwin, C., 1871. The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex.

John Murray, London.

Dubois, E., 1894. Pithecanthropus erectus: Eine Menschanähnliche

Übergangsform aus Java. Landsdruckerei, Batavia.

Dubois, E., 1935. On the gibbon-like appearance of Pithecanthropus

erectus. In: Royal Acad., Proc, Amsterdam, p. 38.

Enard, W., Przeworski, M., Fisher, S.E., et al., 2002. Molecular evolution
of FOXP2, a gene involved in speech and language. Nature 418,
869e872.

Gee, H., 1996. Box of bones ‘clinches’ identity of Piltdown paleontology

hoaxer. Nature 381, 261e262.

Glazko, G., Veeramachaneni, G.G., Nei, M., et al., 2005. Eighty percent of
proteins are different between humans and chimpanzees. Gene 346,
215e219.

Gokhman, D., Lavi, E., Prüfer, K., et al., 2014. Reconstructing the DNA
methylation maps of the Neandertal and the Denisovan. Science 344
(6183), 523e527.

Goodman, M., Poulik, E., Poulik, M.D., 1960. Variations in the serum
speciﬁties of higher primates detected by two-dimensional starch-gel
electrophoresis. Nature 188, 78e79.

Goodman, M., 1962. Evolution of the immunologic species speciﬁcity of

human serum proteins. Human Biology 34, 104e150.

Goodman, M., 1963. Man’s place in the phylogeny of the primates as
reﬂected in serum proteins. In: Washburn, S.L. (Ed.), Classiﬁcation
and Human Evolution. Aldine, Chicago, pp. 204e234.

Green, R.E., Krause, J., Ptak, S.E., et al., 2006. Analysis of one million

Brunet, M., Guy, F., Pilbeam, D., et al., 2002. A new hominid from the

base pairs of Neanderthal DNA. Nature 444 (7117), 330e336.

Upper Miocene of Chad, Central Africa. Nature 418, 145e151.

Green, R.E., Krause, J., Briggs, A.W., et al., 2010. A draft sequence of the

Carroll, S.B., 2003. Genetics and the making of Homo sapiens. Nature

Neandertal genome. Science 328 (5979), 710e722.

422, 849e857.

Hattori, M., Fujiyama, A., Taylor, T.D., et al., 2000. The DNA sequence of

Cela-Conde, C., Ayala, F.J., 2007. Human Evolution. Trails From the Past.

human chromosome 21. Nature 405 (6784), 311e319.

Oxford University Press, New York.

Cela-Conde, C.J., Gomila, A., Munar, E., et al., 2008. Taking Wittgenstein
seriously. Indicators of the evolution of language. In: Smith, D.M.A.,
Smith, K., Ferrer-Cancho, R. (Eds.), The Evolution of Language:
Proceedings of
the 7th International Conference (EVOLANG7),
Barcelona, pp. 407e408.

Chimpanzee Sequencing and Analysis Consortium, 2005. Initial sequence
of the chimpanzee genome and comparison with the human genome.
Nature 437 (7055), 69e87.

Choi, Y., Mango, S.E., 2014. Hunting for Darwin’s gemmules and
Lamarck’s ﬂuid: transgenerational signaling and histone methylation.
Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) e Gene Regulatory Mecha-
nisms 1839 (12), 1440e1453.

Coppens, Y., 1983a. Les plus anciens fossiles d’hominidés. Pontiﬁcal

Academy of Science. Scripta Varia 50, 1e9.

Coppens, Y., 1983b. Systématique, phylogénie, environnement et culture
des australopithèques, hypothèses et synthèse. Bulletin et Memoires
de la Societé d’Anthropologie. Paris 10, 273e284.

Coppens, Y., 1991. L’évolution des hominidés, de leur locomotion et de
leurs environnements. In: Coppens, Y., Senut, B. (Eds.), Origine(s) de
la Bipédie Chez les Hominidés. Centre National de la Rechérche
Scientiﬁque, Paris, pp. 295e301.

Hedges, D.J., Callinan, P.A., Cordaux, R., et al., 2004. Differential Alu
mobilization and polymorphism among the human and chimpanzee
lineages. Genome Research 14, 1068e1075.

Howells, W.W., 1973. Cranial Variation in Man: A Study by Multivariate
Analysis of Pattern of Differences Among Recent Human Populations.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Howells, W.W., 1989. Skull Shapes and the Map: Craniometric Analysis

of Modern Homo. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Hsieh, W.P., Chu, T.M., Wolﬁnger, R.D., et al., 2003. Mixed-model
reanalysis of primate data suggests tissue and species biases in oligo-
nucleotide-based gene expression proﬁles. Genetics 165, 747e757.

International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium, 2001.

Initial
sequencing and analysis of the human genome. Nature 409 (6822),
860e921.

Khaitovich, P., Hellmann, I., Enard, W., et al., 2005. Parallel patterns
of evolution in the genomes and transcriptomes of humans and
chimpanzees. Science 309 (5742), 1850e1854.

Kimura, T., Okada, M., Ishida, H., 1979. Kinesiological characteristics of
In:
primate walking:
Morbeck, M.R., Preuschoft, H., Gomberg, N. (Eds.), Environment,
Behavior and Morphology: Dynamic Interactions in Primates. Gustav
Fischer, New York, pp. 297e311.

human walking.

its

signiﬁcance

in

Mankind’s Origin: Chance or Necessity? Chapter | 1 15

Kramer, P.A., Eck, G.G., 2000. Locomotor energetics and leg length in

Sarich, V., Wilson, A.C., 1967a. Immunological time scale for hominid

hominid bipedality. Journal of Human Evolution 38, 651e666.

evolution. Science 158, 1200e1203.

Latimer, B., Lovejoy, C.O., 1989. The calcaneus of Australopithecus
afarensis and its implications in the evolution of bipedality. American
Journal of Physical Anthropology 78, 369e386.

Latimer, B., Ohman, J.C., Lovejoy, C.O., 1987. Talocrural joint in African
implications for Australopithecus afarensis. American

hominoids:
Journal of Physical Anthropology 74, 155e175.

Latimer, B., 1991. Locomotor adaptations in Australopithecus afarensis:
the issue of arboreality. In: Coppens, Y., Senut, B. (Eds.), Origine(s)
de la Bipédie Chez les Hominidés. Centre National de la Rechérche
Scientiﬁque, Paris, pp. 169e176.

Lovejoy, C.O., 1975. Biomechanical perspectives on the lower limb of
early hominids. In: Tuttle, R.H. (Ed.), Primate Functional Morphology
and Evolution. Mouton, The Hague, pp. 291e326.

Marqués-Bonet, T., Cáceres, M., Bertranpetit, J., et al., 2004. Chromo-
somal
rearrangements and the genomic distribution of gene-
expression divergence in humans and chimpanzees. Trends in
Genetics 20, 524e529.

McBrearty, S., Jablonski, N.G., 2005. First fossil chimpanzee. Nature 437

(7055), 105e108.

Mednikova, M.B., 2011. A proximal pedal phalanx of a Paleolithic
hominin from Denisova cave, Altai. Archaeology, Ethnology and
Anthropology of Eurasia 39 (1), 129e138.

Meyer, M., Kircher, M., Gansauge, M.-T., et al., 2012. A high-coverage
genome sequence from an archaic Denisovan individual. Science
338 (6104), 222e226.

Monod, J., 1970. Le hasard et la nécessité. Editions du Seuil, Paris.

English Ed., 1971, Chance and Necessity. Knopf, New York.
Monod, J., 1971. Chance and Necessity. Knopf, New York, NY.
Napier, J., 1967. The antiquity of human walking. Scientiﬁc American

216, 56e66.

Navarro, A., Barton, N.H., 2003. Accumulating postzygotic isolation
genes in parapatry: a new twist on chromosomal speciation. Evolution
57, 447e459.

Perry, G.H., Verrelli, B.C., Stone, A.C., 2005. Comparative analyses
reveal a complex history of molecular evolution for human MYH16.
Molecular Biology and Evolution 22, 379e382.

Sarich, V., Wilson, A.C., 1967b. Rates of albumin evolution in primates.

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 58, 142e148.

Sarmiento, E.E., Marcus, L.F., 2000. The os navicular of humans, great
apes, OH 8, Hadar, and Oreopithecus: function, phylogeny, and
multivariate analyses. American Museum Novitates 3288, 1e38.

Sarmiento, E.E., 1998. Generalized quadrupeds, committed bipeds, and the
shift to open habitats: an evolutionary model of hominid divergence.
American Museum Novitates 3250, 1e78.

Senut, B., Pickford, M., Gommery, D., et al., 2001. First hominid from the
Miocene (Lukeino Formation, Kenya). Comptes Rendus de l’Acadé-
mie des Sciences 332, 137e144.

Senut, B., 1991. Origine(s) de la bipédie humaine: approache paléon-
tologique. In: Coppens, Y., Senut, B. (Eds.), Origine(s) de la Bipédie
Chez les Hominidés. Centre National de la Rechérche Scientiﬁque,
Paris, pp. 245e258.

Sibley, C.G., Ahlquist, J.E., 1984. The phylogeny of the hominoid pri-
mates, as indicated by DNA-DNA hybridization. Journal of Molecular
Evolution 20, 2e15.

Smith, K., 2006. Homing in on the genes for humanity. Nature 442

(7104), 725.

Spoor, F., Wood, B., Zonneveld, F., 1994. Implications of early hominid
labyrinthine morphology for evolution of human bipedal locomotion.
Nature 369, 645e648.

Stedman, H.H., Kozya, B.W., Nelson, A., et al., 2004. Myosin gene mu-
tation correlates with anatomical changes in the human lineage. Nature
428, 415e418.

Stringer, C.B., Hublin, J.J., Vandermeersch, B., 1984. The origin
of anatomically modern humans in Western Europe. In: Smith, F.H.,
Spencer, F. (Eds.), The Origins of Modern Humans: A World Survey
of the Fossil Evidence. Alan R. Liss, New York, pp. 51e135.

Susman, R.L., Stern, J.T., 1991. Locomotor behavior of early hominids:
epistemology and fossil evidence. In: Coppens, Y., Senut, B. (Eds.),
Origine(s) de la Bipédie Chez les Hominidés. Centre National de la
Rechérche Scientiﬁque, Paris, pp. 121e131.

Tobias, P.V., 1965. Australopithecus, Homo habilis, tool-using and tool-

making. South African Archaeological Bulletin 20, 167e192.

Pollard, K.S., Salama, S.R., Lambert, N., et al., 2006. An RNA gene
expressed during cortical development evolved rapidly in humans.
Nature 443, 167e172.

Tuttle, R.H., Basmajian, J.V., 1974. Electromyography of brachial muscles
in Pan gorilla and hominid evolution. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology 41, 71e90.

Prufer, K., Racimo, F., Patterson, N., et al., 2014. The complete genome
sequence of a Neanderthal from the Altai Mountains. Nature 505
(7481), 43e49.

Pycraft, W.P., 1913. Ape-Man or Modern Man? Two Piltdown Skull

Reconstructions. The Illustrated London News (September).

Reynolds, T.R., 1985. Mechanics of increased support of weight by the
hindlimbs in primates. American Journal of Physical Anthropology
67, 335e349.

Rissman, E.F., Adli, M., 2014. Minireview: transgenerational epigenetic
inheritance: focus on endocrine disrupting compounds. Endocrinology
155 (8), 2770e2780.

Ruvolo, M., 2004. Comparative primate genomics:

the year of the
chimpanzee. Current Opinion in Genetics & Development 14,
650e656.

Tuttle, R.H., Webb, D., Tuttle, N.I., et al., 1990. Further progress on the

Laetoli trails. Journal of Archaeological Science 17, 347e362.

Vallender, E.J., Lahn, B.T., 2004. Effects of chromosomal rearrangements
on human-chimpanzee molecular evolution. Genomics 84, 757e761.
Washburn, S.L., 1967. Behaviour and the origin of man. Proceedings of
the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland 1967,
21e27.

Watanabe, H., Fujiyama, A., Hattori, M., et al., 2004. DNA sequence and
comparative analysis of chimpanzee chromosome 22. Nature 429
(6990), 382e388.

White, T.D., Asfaw, B., Beyene, Y., et al., 2009. Ardipithecus ramidus and

the paleobiology of early hominids. Science 326 (5949), 29e40.

Wood, B., Richmond, B.G., 2000. Human evolution:

taxonomy and

paleobiology. Journal of Anatomy 196, 19e60.

Chapter 2

Hominins: Context, Origins, and Taxic
Diversity

B. Wood and E. Boyle
George Washington University, Washington, DC, United States

HOMININS LOCATED IN THE TREE
OF LIFE

The idea that the evolutionary history of the living world
can be represented by a tree-like branching structure was
one of Charles Darwin’s many profound insights. All living
taxa are on the tips of the branches that reach the surface of
the Tree of Life (TOL) and all of the taxa that lived in the
past are on branches within the TOL. Not that long ago it
the extant great apesdchimpanzees,
was assumed that
bonobos, gorillas, and orangutansdwere more closely
related to each other than they were to modern humans.
This was reﬂected in the premolecular taxonomy that
placed modern humans in their own family, the Hominidae,
and the great apes in a different family, the Pongidae. To
reﬂect this family-level division, the informal term “hom-
inid” was used to refer to modern humans and any extinct
species considered to be more closely related to modern
humans than to any of the great apes. The equivalent
informal term for the great apes was “pongid.”

Sequencing rapidly replaced hybridization as

the
method of choice for analyzing DNA and the number of
sequence-based studies increases each year. There are now
good draft sequences of the nuclear genomes of the chim-
panzee (Consortium, 2005), orangutan (Locke et al., 2011),
gorilla (Scally et al., 2012), and bonobo (Prüfer et al.,
2012). Both DNA and morphological evidence (Shoshani
et al., 1996; Gibbs et al., 2002; Lockwood et al., 2004;
Diogo and Wood, 2011) can be used to generate hypoth-
eses about the relationships among living hominoids, and
both lines of evidence are consistent with the hypothesis
that chimpanzees/bonobos are more closely related to
modern humans than they are to gorillas. These new
relationships are reﬂected in postmolecular taxonomies.

The one we use in this review demotes modern humans
from their own family to their own tribe, the Hominini.
This means that the term “hominin” should now be used to
refer to modern humans and any extinct species considered
to be more closely related to modern humans than to any of
the great apes.

If these molecular differences are calibrated using
paleontological evidence for the split between the apes
and the Old World Monkeys, and if we make the
assumption that most of the DNA differences are neutral,
this suggests that the hypothetical ancestor of modern
humans and chimpanzees/bonobos lived between about 5
and 8 Ma and probably closer to 5 than to 8 Ma (Bradley,
2008). Estimates based on empirical data about generation
times (Langergraber et al., 2012) and mutation rates (Venn
et al., 2014) suggested that the date may closer to 8 and
13 Ma, respectively, but the most recent analysis of a
larger data set (Prado-Martinez et al., 2013) lends support
to the original estimate of c.5 Ma. Recalibration of the
molecular clock to take account of the Oligocene catar-
rhine Rukwapithecus ﬂeaglei, which has been argued to be
a basal hominoid (Stevens et al., 2013), could further
inﬂuence these estimates.

CANDIDATES FOR THE STEM HOMININ

Four different taxa have been proposed to be the stem
hominin (ie, most recent common ancestor of all later
hominins). We consider
their
discovery rather than in their temporal order as judged
from the date of their ﬁrst appearance in the fossil record.
For each species we will assess the claim that
it (1)
belongs to the hominin clade and that (2) it is the stem
hominin.

them in the order of

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00002-8
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

17

18 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

Ardipithecus ramidus
The ﬁrst putative hominin species we consider, Ardipithe-
cus ramidus, was established to accommodate cranial and
postcranial fossils recovered from c.4.5e4.4 Ma localities
at Aramis on the northeastern ﬂank of the Central Awash
Complex in the Middle Awash study area, Ethiopia. The
authors claimed Ar. ramidus shares some features with
living species of Pan, others with the African apes in
general, and, crucially, they suggest that several dental and
cranial features are shared only with later hominins such as
Australopithecus afarensis. The
initially
included within the genus Australopithecus (White et al.,
1994), but it was subsequently transferred to a new genus,
Ardipithecus (White et al., 1995). The ﬁrst reported addi-
tions to the Ar. ramidus hypodigm came from the Gona
study area (Semaw et al., 2005), but subsequently more
fossils, including the ARA-VP-6/500 associated skeleton
recovered from the Aramis locality (White et al., 2009), as
well as fossils from two other localities, Kuseralee Dora
and Sagantole, in the Central Awash Complex, have also
been added to the hypodigm (White et al., 2009).

taxon was

The chewing teeth of Ar. ramidus are relatively small
and the form of
the reconstructed pelvis and the
morphology of the lateral side of the foot have been cited as
evidence that the posture and gait of Ar. ramidus were,
respectively, more upright and bipedal than is the case in
the living apes. The enamel covering on the teeth is not as
thin as that of chimpanzees/bonobos, but it is not as thick as
that seen in archaic (sensu Wood, 2010) hominins such
as Au. afarensis Suwa et al. (2009), and according to Rak
et al. (2007) the morphology of the ramus of the mandible
is similar to that of Pan. Initial estimates based on the size
of the shoulder joint suggested that Ar. ramidus weighed
c.40 kg, but its discoverers claim the enlarged hypodigm
indicates an estimated mean body mass of c.50 kg (Lovejoy
et al., 2009). Estimates by Grabowski et al. (2015) and
Almécija et al. (2015) suggest a smaller (c.32 and c.36 kg,
respectively) rather than a larger body mass.

With hindsight, the remains from Aramis may not be
the ﬁrst evidence of this species to be found, for the
mandibular fragments from Lothagam (KNM-LT 329) and
Tabarin (KNM-TH 13150) in Kenya, dated to c.5 Ma and
4.8e4.4 Ma, respectively, may prove to belong to Ar.
ramidus.

Orrorin tugenensis
The next putative stem hominin is Orrorin tugenensis
(Senut et al., 2001), the genus and species established to
accommodate cranial and postcranial remains recovered
from c.6.0 Ma Lukeino Formation sediments exposed at
Aragai, Cheboit, Kapcheberek, and Kapsomin in the Bar-
ingo District, Kenya. The femoral morphology has been

tugenensis was at

interpreted to mean that O.
least a
facultative biped (Pickford et al., 2002; Richmond and
Jungers, 2008; Almécija et al., 2013) but other researchers
interpret the internal structure of the femoral neck as indi-
cating a mix of bipedal and nonbipedal locomotion (Galik
et al., 2004; Ohman et al., 2005). Almécija et al. (2010)
the palmar surface of the pollical distal
suggested that
01) shows evidence
phalanx of O. tugenensis (BAR 1901
of a ﬂexor pollicis longus insertion that is modern human-
like. Otherwise, the discoverers admit that much of the
taxonomically critical dental morphology is “ape-like”
(Senut et al., 2001, p. 6).

0

Sahelanthropus tchadensis
The third putative stem hominin is Sahelanthropus
tchadensis. Six fossils, including the type specimen, an
adult cranium (TM 266-01-060-1), and part of a mandible,
were recovered in 2001 from a single locality, TM 266, in
the Anthracotheriid Unit at Toros-Menalla in Chad (Brunet
et al., 2002). The initial biochronology-based age estimate
of between c.7e6 Ma was based on the good match be-
tween the fauna in the Anthrocotheriid Unit and the faunas
known from Lukeino and from the Nawata Formation at the
site of Lothagam in Kenya. More recently the results of
cosmogenic nuclide dating that uses isotopes of beryllium
(10Be/9Be) suggest that the Toros-Menalla locality is older
than 6.83  0.45 Ma and younger than 7.04  0.18 Ma
(Lebatard et al., 2008).

The cranium of S. tchadensis is chimp-sized and dis-
plays a novel combination of primitive and derived fea-
tures. Much about the cranial base and neurocranium is
chimp-like, with the exception that the foramen magnum
lies more anteriorly than is generally the case in chimpan-
zees, but its position is in the overlap of the range for
bonobos and modern humans (Ahern, 2005). The presence
of a supraorbital torus, a relatively ﬂat lateral proﬁle of the
face, small, apically worn, canines, low, rounded, molar
cusps,
relatively thick enamel, and a relatively thick
mandibular corpus, were all cited by its discoverers as
features that exclude S. tchadensis from any close rela-
tionship with the Pan clade.

More fossils assigned to S. tchadensis were recovered in
2001 and 2002. The additional specimens included an up-
per premolar tooth from TM 266, and mandibles, TM 247-
01-02 and TM 292-02-01, from two new localities (Brunet
et al., 2005). This additional evidence means that a mini-
mum of six, and a maximum of nine, individuals are known
from the Toros-Menalla region of Chad. The new data were
consistent with the hypothesis that a single species was
being sampled that showed a mix of derived (eg, small
canine crown, vertical mandibular symphysis) and primi-
tive (eg, mandibular premolar root form, an upper canine/
lower premolar honing mechanism) morphology with

respect to the hominin clade. According to Emonet et al.
(2014) the subocclusal morphology is ape-like.

Zollikofer et al. (2005) applied the techniques of virtual
reconstruction (images based on CT scans manipulated
using sophisticated computer software) to the TM 266
cranium and claimed that
the reconstructed cranium
strengthened the claim that S. tchadensis is an early hom-
inin. But their results can also be interpreted as weakening
the case for S. tchadensis being a hominin, for the logic of
their third “test” (p. 755 and Fig. 3) is ﬂawed. They show it
is not easy to convert TM 226 into either a Pan or a Gorilla
cranium, but although the researchers do not formally test
this, their data suggest that it would be even more difﬁcult
to convert TM 266 into a modern human.

The only reference to differences between O. tugenensis
and S. tchadensis in Brunet et al. (2002) is where the authors
note that S. tchadensis is distinct from the former taxon
because it has upper I1s “with multiple tubercles on the
lingual fossa” and because the latter’s upper canines are
“non chimp-like” and show “extensive apical wear” (p. 146).

Ardipithecus kadabba
The ﬁnal putative stem hominin is Ardipithecus kadabba.
Fossils recovered from four
localities (Saitune Dora,
Alayla, Asa Koma, and Digiba Dora) in the Western
Margin region of the Middle Awash study area were
initially assigned to Ar. ramidus as a separate subspecies,
Ardipithecus ramidus kadabba (Haile-Selassie, 2001), but
subsequently that initial hypodigm, plus some additional
specimens, were elevated to species rank (Haile-Selassie
et al., 2004, 2009). The initial hypodigm consisted of a
partial mandible, four isolated teeth, fragments of a left
upper limb, and a proximal foot phalanx. In 2004 six more
dental specimens recovered from ﬁve c.5.8e5.2 Ma local-
ities in the Middle Awash study area in Ethiopia were
added to the hypodigm.

The main differences between Ar. kadabba and Ar.
ramidus are that the apical crests of the upper canine crown
of the former taxon are longer and the P3 crown outline of
Ar. kadabba is more asymmetrical than is the case in Ar.
ramidus. Haile-Selassie et al. (2004) suggest there is a
morphocline in upper canine morphology with Ar. kadabba
exhibiting the most ape-like morphology (see Fig. 2.1D in
Haile-Selassie et al., 2004). Haile-Selassie (2001) also
suggests
in upper canine
morphology between Ar. kadabba and O. tugenensis with
the later having more “primitive” upper canine crowns
that “lack the elevated crown shoulders” of “Ardipithecus
and all other hominids” (p. 180). The formal diagnosis of
Ar. kadabba (Haile-Selassie et al., 2004) refers to differ-
ences between the upper canines of Ar. kadabba and
O. tugenensis, with the former having “a more circular
upper canine outline” (p. 1504), whereas the latter has an

there are differences

that

HomininseContext, Origins and Diversity Chapter | 2 19

upper canine crown that
is “relatively more elongate
mesiodistally” (p. 1505). It is also claimed that there are
differences with respect to the morphology of the lingual
face of the crown of the upper canine with that of Ar.
kadabba being “relatively ﬂat,” whereas there is “stronger
hollowing” on the only upper canine of O.
tugenensis
(Haile-Selassie et al., 2004, p. 1504). The proximal foot
phalanx (AME-VP-1/71) of Ar. kadabba is said to combine
an ape-like curvature with a proximal joint surface like that
of Au. afarensis (Haile-Selassie, 2001).

ASSESSING THE CLAIMS FOR HOMININ
STATUS

For a taxon to be a viable stem hominin, several aspects of
its morphology need to be features that we can be certain
are only seen in true hominins. There are an impressive
number of differences between the morphology of chim-
panzees/bonobos and modern humans, but the differences
between the earliest hominins and the late Miocene an-
cestors of chimpanzees/bonobos are likely to have been
much more subtle. So what paleoanthropologists have to do
is to focus on the features that distinguish modern humans
and chimpanzees/bonobos and then trace these back in
time. Some of these features, such as those linked with
bipedalism, can be traced back a long way. Others, such as
the relatively diminutive jaws and chewing teeth of modern
humans, were acquired more recently and thus cannot be
used to tell the difference between early hominins and the
ancestors of chimpanzees/bonobos. The presumption is that
the stem panin would have a projecting face, relatively
small chewing teeth, relatively and absolutely large, sexu-
ally dimorphic, honed canine teeth, and a locomotor system
adapted for arboreal quadrupedalism. The presumption
about the taxon at the base of the hominin clade, on the
other hand, is that it would have been distinguished by
cranial and other skeletal adaptations for a predominantly
upright posture and skeletal and other adaptations for a
locomotor strategy that
includes substantial bouts of
bipedalism. These features would be combined with a
masticatory apparatus
relatively larger
chewing teeth and more modest-sized canines. These in-
ferences are “working hypotheses” that will need to be
reviewed and tested as the appropriate evidence is uncov-
ered (Fig 2.1).

that combines

There is also the problem that the presence of only one,
or even a few, of the features that possibly distinguish early
hominins from early panins or from the members of any
closely related extinct clades may not be sufﬁcient
to
identify a fossil as a hominin or a panin. This is because
there is evidence that primates, like many other groups of
mammals, are prone to convergent evolution. This results
in homoplasy, which is morphology that is shared by two
or more taxa, but which is not seen in their most recent

20 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

Millions of years (Ma)

Millions of years (Ma)

FIGURE 2.1 The relationships among modern humans and the great apes. The approximate dates of each hypothetical common ancestor are based on
the references cited in the text. In version A the only options for a 5 Ma fossil species that shares more morphology with modern humans and chim-
panzees/bonobos than with gorillas is to be an ancestor of modern humans or chimpanzees/bonobos. In version B the species could also belong to an
extinct clade more closely related to modern humans, or to chimpanzees/bonobos, or to a closely related but completely separate clade.

common ancestor. The fact of convergent evolution means
that it is not impossible, indeed it may even be probable,
that some of what many have come to regard as key
morphological adaptations at
the base of the hominin
lineage may have arisen more than once. If that is the case,
then what characterizes hominins (and panins and the other
great ape lineages) may not be particular
items of
morphology, single characters, but particular combinations
of characters. There is also the problem that being an
ancestor of modern humans or chimpanzees/bonobos is not
the only option for the taxa described above. They could
also belong to a clade closely related to modern humans or
chimpanzees/bonobos that has no living representative. So
labeling any taxon, especially one that has a poor fossil
record and that only samples a few individuals, as one of
the earliest members of the hominin clade is always going
to be a risky enterprise.

Given this context and what we know of the size of the
fossil records of Ar. ramidus, O. tugenensis, S. tchadensis,
and Ar. kadabba, and how little of the skeleton and
dentition three of those hypodigms represent, the case for
any of the four species being the stem hominin is weak. In
addition, what we know of
the geological ages of
O. tugenensis and S. tchadensis would suggest that they are
on the old side for a stem hominin. The hypodigm of Ar.
ramidus is larger, and it includes an associated skeleton, but
apart from the regions such as the foot where much of the
morphology is difﬁcult to square with terrestrial biped-
alism, if Ar. ramidus is the ancestor of Australopithecus
anamensis,
to see how the substantial
morphological differences between Ar. ramidus and Au.
anamensis could have evolved in the short interval that
separates the youngest fossil evidence for Ar. ramidus from
the oldest evidence for Au. anamensis.

is difﬁcult

it

LADDER OR BUSH?

The only extinct species that have to be within the TOL are
the ones situated on the branches leading to living species.
In the case of the hominin twig of the TOL there is just one
living species, modern humans, so the only species that
need to be in the hominin clade are the species in the
lineage connecting modern humans with the hypothetical
common ancestor of modern humans and chimpanzees/
bonobos. We may also have nonancestral close relatives,
but they are not necessary for our existence. A consequence
of
throughout human
evolutionary history there only needs to be one hominin
species representing that single lineage, and all of the time-
successive species in that lineage would be ancestors of
modern humans. In this ladder-like model there would be
no hominin taxic diversity (ie, no evidence of more than
one contemporary species within the hominin clade) and
the appropriate null hypothesis about any new species

this minimalist scenario is that

HomininseContext, Origins and Diversity Chapter | 2 21

recognized in the hominin fossil record is that it is an
ancestor of modern humans. At
the other end of the
complexity spectrum are models of human evolution that
expect hominins to be as diverse and speciose as some
groups of large mammals (eg, Alcelaphines, Tragelaphines,
elephants). In these “bushy” scenarios close nonancestral
relatives outnumber ancestors. As a consequence, the null
hypothesis about a newly recognized species in the hominin
fossil record is very different. In a “bushy” scenario it is
assumed to be a nonancestral close relative of modern
humans until proved otherwise.

An example of a ladder-like scenario is the single spe-
cies hypothesis (Wolpoff, 1968, 1971). Wolpoff used the
principle of competitive exclusion (ie, only one species at a
time can occupy a speciﬁc ecological niche) to suggest that
human culture is such a specialized ecological niche that
“no more than one culture-bearing hominid could have
arisen and been maintained” (Wolpoff, 1968, p. 477).
Later, he argued that tool use could only have occurred if a
hominin was bipedal (Wolpoff, 1971) and both Washburn
(1950) and Mayr (1950) assumed that all hominins, and
only hominins, were bipedal, with the latter author sug-
gesting that “when the Homo-line acquired upright posture
it entered a completely different adaptive zone” (Mayr,
1950, p. 111). However, as more hominin fossils were
discovered during the late 1960s and early 1970s, espe-
cially in East Africa, most researchers interpreted the new
evidence as strengthening the case for the presence of two
forms of early hominin, referred to informally as “gracile”
and “robust.” Gracile hominin species were allocated to
either Homo, Telanthropus, or Australopithecus, and the
robust species were allocated to Paranthropus or Zinjan-
thropus. Wolpoff (1968) argued that the differences be-
tween the gracile and robust australopiths were the result of
sexual dimorphism in a single species, and thus they
merited no taxonomic distinction. He initially made these
arguments on the basis of evidence of australopiths from
Southern African sites, but
later he expanded them to
include the early East African discoveries (Wolpoff, 1971).
However, this interpretation of the fossil evidence implies
that in Southern Africa the males and females of the same
taxon were found at separate, though geographically close,
sites, estimated to be approximately half a million years
apart in time.

For many the discovery and recognition of Telan-
thropus was an effective refutation of the single species
hypothesis because it provided at a single site, Swartkrans,
evidence of a Homo erectuselike hominin alongside
Paranthropus robustus (Broom and Robinson, 1950). But
Wolpoff did not recognize Telanthropus as a distinct taxon,
nor was he convinced Telanthropus and Paranthropus
were synchronic. In 1976 came the demonstration that
an early African Homo erectus cranium (KNM-ER 3733)
and a Paranthropus boisei cranium (KNM-ER 406) had

22 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

been found effectively in situ in Koobi Fora in strata dated
to c.1.7 Ma. These two specimens are so different
in
morphology that there has been no rational dissent from the
hypothesis that they should be included in separate genera,
and for most, but evidently not all researchers (see Hunt,
2003), their discovery provided a convincing refutation of
the single species hypothesis.

The falsiﬁcation of the single species hypothesis as
applied to Plio-Pleistocene hominins, along with the
expansion of the hominin fossil record, the introduction of
new dating methods, and the widespread adoption of
phylogenetic methods, has led to the general acceptance
that at several periods in its evolutionary history the hom-
inin clade has consisted of more than one lineage (Wood
and Baker, 2011). But debates about hominin diversity in
early Homo, and prior to the origin of Homo, continue to be
polarized. Those on the diversity side of the scales cite
hominin fossil evidence consistent with multiple hominin
species in three time periods, between c.3.5e3.3 Ma
(Leakey et al., 2001; Spoor et al., 2010; Haile-Selassie
et al., 2015), c.2.5 Ma (Asfaw et al., 1999; Guy et al.,
2008), and c.2.0e1.8 Ma (Leakey et al., 2012; Spoor et al.,
2015). These interpretations have been challenged (eg,
White, 2003; Smith, 2005; Ackermann and Smith, 2007;
White et al., 2009; Lordkipanidze et al., 2013) by
researchers who suggest that those who support hominin
taxic diversity in those time periods did not successfully
demonstrate that the hypodigms of the proposed “new” taxa
lie outside the range of variation of existing taxa.

EVIDENCE OF TAXIC DIVERSITY WITHIN
THE HOMININ CLADE

refer

“Diversity” refers to difference, and most studies of taxo-
nomic diversity interpret difference to mean looking at the
factors that inﬂuence the numbers and variety of species
within a given space and time, or the numbers and variety
of species sampled through deep time (Rosenzweig, 1995).
But hominin taxic diversity, in the sense we discuss it here,
does not
to diachronic diversity (ie, differences
through time and space). Instead, it focuses on whether
there is evidence of synchronic taxonomic diversity (ie,
differences across time and space) at predetermined tem-
poral intervals between the origin of the hominin clade and
the present. In the main section of this review we assess
taxic diversity across the hominin clade as a whole
regardless of whether the species in a time interval are
sympatric or allopatric. This section is an abridged version
of Wood and Boyle (2016).

We assigned the species, site collections, and individual
specimens listed in Table 2.1 to one or more of the time
intervals described below. We exclude hypotheses about
some hominin species that have been proposed that we, and
to judge by the lack of citations, others consider to be

idiosyncratic. We assigned the nonidiosyncratic taxa to one
or more time intervals according to each taxon’s ﬁrst
appearance datum (FAD), which is the date of a taxon’s
ﬁrst appearance in the fossil record, and its last appearance
datum (LAD), which is the date of that
taxon’s last
occurrence in the fossil record. The time intervals have to
be long enough to capture several taxa, but not so long that
they are uninformative about diachronic changes in taxic
diversity. We are aware that decisions about the length and
the registration of the time intervals can potentially bias the
outcome of the analysis, but when we repeated the exercise
with the longer intervals (see below) registered 0.5 Ma
later, and with the shorter intervals registered at 0.25 and
0.75 Ma, the outcome was not materially different. So,
given this, plus the various reasons why the observed FADs
and LADs are always likely to underestimate the time span
of the species we consider (see Discussion), we suggest that
our results are as robust as the available data allow. The
allocations of species to time intervals are based on con-
servative versions of the FADs and LADs (Table 2.1,
columns 1 and 3) as determined from the published ages of
the fossils.

The ﬁrst time interval includes the fossil evidence be-
tween c.7 and 5 Ma. Although we are not convinced that
these taxa belong in the hominin clade (see earlier in this
section and Wood and Harrison, 2011), we consider the
three species in that time interval that have been claimed to
be early hominins. The next two time intervals each span
1 million years (ie, 5.0e4.0 Ma and 4.0e3.0 Ma), and the
next four span half a million years (ie, 3.0e2.5 Ma,
2.5e2.0 Ma, 2.0e1.5 Ma, and 1.5e1.0 Ma) to reﬂect the
larger numbers of hominin species proposed post-3 Ma.
We then consider evidence for diversity within the hominin
clade between 1.0 and 0.25 Ma, and ﬁnally in the interval
between 0.25 Ma and the present.
If a taxon spans
more than one of these time intervals we review the fossil
and other lines of evidence for it
time
interval.

in the earliest

After we have considered the hominin species, site
collections, or even individual
fossils that have been
recognized as, or suggested to be, discrete evolutionary
units within a time interval, we informally review the evi-
dence for diversity as pairwise comparisons. Our attempts
to rank these in terms of the degree of conﬁdence we have
in any proposed species difference reﬂect our interpretation
of the literature and own judgment about the strength of
each case. We readily concede that others may well come to
different decisions, but given the multiple variables
involved (eg, what anatomical regions are sampled by the
hypodigm, sample size, preservation, etc.)
it was not
immediately clear to us how such judgments, especially
when made across more than 5 million years of hominin
evolution, can be standardized. We are investigating ways
to do this (Fig. 2.2).

HomininseContext, Origins and Diversity Chapter | 2 23

TABLE 2.1 First Appearance Dates (FAD) and Last Appearance Dates (LAD) Used to Allocate Species and
Specimens to Time Intervals

Conservative
FAD

With Dating Error
FAD

Conservative
LAD

With Dating Error
LAD

6.7 Ma

4.6 Ma

3.89 Ma

4.02 Ma

4.37 Ma

3.85 Ma

3.596 Ma

e

2.05 Ma

3.47 Ma

50.63 ka

1.2 Ma

1.85 Ma

2.27 Ma

108 ka

e

2.6 Ma

e

e

197 ka

e

2.09 Ma

200 ka

3.65 Ma

2.85 Ma

6.14 Ma

2.73 Ma

2.5 Ma

2.27 Ma

7.43 Ma

e

5.2 Ma

4.3 Ma

3.0 Ma

2.4 Ma

3.9 Ma

3.58 Ma

3.3 Ma

2.45 Ma

1.98 Ma

3.4 Ma

29.2 ka

0.936 Ma

27 ka

1.4 Ma

17 ka

1.77 Ma

1.65 Ma

100 ka

80 ka

40 ka

300 ka

1.95 Ma

Present

3.35 Ma

2.75 Ma

5.7 Ma

2.3 Ma

1.3 Ma

1.0 Ma

6.8 Ma

427 ka

5.11 Ma

4.262 Ma

2.9 Ma

1.9 Ma

3.82 Ma

3.31 Ma

3.33 Ma

2.488 Ma

1.91 Ma

3.2 Ma

28.84 ka

e

e

0.87 Ma

16 ka

e

e

e

e

39.22 ka

e

1.78 Ma

e

e

2.65 Ma

5.52 Ma

2.23 Ma

1.15 Ma

0.87 Ma

6.38 Ma

415 ka

Taxon

Ardipithecus kadabba

Ardipithecus ramidus

Australopithecus afarensis

Australopithecus africanus

Australopithecus anamensis

6.3 Ma

4.51 Ma

3.7 Ma

3.0 Ma

4.2 Ma

Australopithecus bahrelghazali

3.58 Ma

Australopithecus deyiremeda

Australopithecus garhi

Australopithecus sediba

Burtele foot

Denisovans

Homo antecessor

Homo erectus

Homo ergaster

Homo ﬂoresiensisa

Homo georgicus

Homo habilis sensu stricto

Homo heidelbergensis

Homo helmei

Homo neanderthalensis

Homo rhodesiensis

Homo rudolfensis

Homo sapiens

Kenyanthropus platyops

Ledi-Geraru

Orrorin tugenensis

Paranthropus aethiopicus

Paranthropus boisei

Paranthropus robustus

Sahelanthropus tchadensis

Sima de los Huesos (SH)

3.5 Ma

2.5 Ma

1.98 Ma

3.4 Ma

48.65 ka

1.0 Ma

1.81 Ma

1.7 Ma

74 ka

1.85 Ma

2.35 Ma

700 ka

260 ka

130 ka

600 ka

2.0 Ma

195 ka

3.54 Ma

2.80 Ma

6.0 Ma

2.66 Ma

2.3 Ma

2.0 Ma

7.2 Ma

780 ka

For each hominin species, site collection, or individual fossil referred to in this review, we provide the ages that correspond to the consensus (column
one) and more conservative (column two) ﬁrst appearance dates, and to the consensus (column three) and more conservative (column four) last
appearance dates. For clarity, experimental errors for the ages are not included.
aMore recent dates suggest that H. ﬂoresiensis is closer to 100 ka.

7.0e5.0 MA

Evidence of Diversity

White et al. (2009) suggest that the morphological differ-
ences between Ar. ramidus and both O. tugenensis and

S. tchadensis do not justify either of the latter two species
being assigned to their own genus, so they proposed they
should be transferred to the genus with priority (ie,
Ardipithecus) as Ardipithecus tugenensis (Senut et al.,
2001; White et al., 2009) and Ardipithecus tchadensis

2
4

P
A
R
T

|

I

B
i
o
l
o
g
i
c
a
l

B
a
s
i
s

o
f

H
u
m
a
n
D
i
v
e
r
s
i
t
y

19

WITH DATING ERROR – 7 Ma to present

H. sapiens

H. neanderthalensis

Denisovans

H. heidelbergensis

H. helmei

H. rhodesiensis

H. floresiensis

Sima de 
los Huesos

H. antecessor

H. erectus

H. ergaster 

P. boisei

P. robustus

H. georgicus

H. habilis 

H. rudolfensis

K. platyops

Ledi Geraru

Au. afarensis

Au. anamensis 

Anatomically modern Homo

Pre-modern Homo

TransiƟonal hominins

Megadont and hyper-megadont archaic hominins

Archaic hominins

Possible early hominins

Au. sediba

Au. garhi

Au. africanus

P. aethiopicus

Burtele Foot

Au. deyiremeda

Au. bahrelghazali 

Ar. ramidus

O. tugenensis

Ar. kadabba 

S. tchadensis

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Millions of Years Ago

FIGURE 2.2 The hominin species, site collections, and individual fossils referred to in this review. The bottoms and tops of the continuous columns represent, respectively, the published ﬁrst and last
appearances dates. The tiles below and above many of the columns reﬂect the various sources of error that should be added to the mean ages that were used to locate the bottom and the top of each
continuous column.

HomininseContext, Origins and Diversity Chapter | 2 25

(Brunet et al., 2002; White et al., 2009), respectively.
However, because White et al. (2009) did not question the
decision to recognize O. tugenensis and S. tchadensis as
separate species their proposal does not affect our consid-
eration of taxic (ie, species level) diversity.

species differences (ie, taxic diversity) in this time interval
is not as strong as is commonly assumed. The case for
genus-level differences is even weaker.

5.0e4.0 MA

Since

its

initial

description

publications

about
S. tchadensis (eg, Zollikofer et al., 2005; Guy et al., 2005)
have mainly focused on defending its status as a hominin
rather than on defending the decision to recognize it as a
species distinct from O. tugenensis. Zollikofer et al. (2005)
and Guy et al. (2005) each emphasize the substantial
(2500 km) distance separating the localities where the
fossil evidence of the two taxa has been identiﬁed, but
there is no a priori reason why the same taxon could not
have existed in the two regionsdsee, for example, the later
discussion about taxonomic diversity between Au. afar-
ensis and Australopithecus bahrelghazali. When Brunet
et al. (2005) described two new mandibles belonging to
S. tchadensis they made no reference to how they compare
with what is preserved of the mandibular morphology of
O. tugenensis. However, apart from the mandible, and
some positions along the maxillary tooth row, there is little
overlap in the parts of the skeleton preserved in the two
hypodigms.

In the paper establishing Ar. kadabba as a separate
species (Haile-Selassie et al., 2004)
the authors drew
attention to differences between the crown morphology of
the upper canines of O. tugenensis and Ar. kadabba, but in
the summary they suggest that with respect to the dentition
“Sahelanthropus and Orrorin. are very similar to Ardi-
pithecus kadabba” (p. 1503). Also, when Haile-Selassie
et al. (2009) reviewed the fossil evidence for Ar. kadabba
they concluded that the mandibular morphology of Sahe-
lanthropus is “broadly compatible with that exhibited by
the ALA-VP-2/10 mandible (of A. kadabba)” (p. 208), but
no evaluation of any similarities or differences between the
mandibular morphology of O. tugenensis and Ar. kadabba
was offered “because of the lack of detailed information”
about O. tugenensis (p. 208). With respect to the postcanine
dentition, Haile-Selassie et al. (2009) concluded that “the
of
mandibular
Sahelanthropus
(TM266-02-154-2) closely matches
the ALA-VP-2/10
equivalent in the available P4 to M3 metrics” (p. 218), and
once again they offer no comparison with O. tugenensis.
Yet, despite these acknowledged similarities, Haile-Selassie
et al. (2009) do not advocate any change to the conven-
tional taxonomy that recognizes species- and genus-level
differences between O. tugenensis, S. tchadensis, and Ar.
kadabba.

postcanine

dentition

Given the small size of the hypodigms of the three
proposed species, and the lack of overlap in the parts of the
skeleton represented in those hypodigms, it would be un-
wise to assume that the fossils in this time interval sample
three separate species. In our opinion the evidence for

Australopithecus anamensis
Apart from the fossil evidence for Ar. ramidus reviewed
in the previous section, the only other species from the
5.0e4.0 Ma time interval is Au. anamensis (Leakey et al.,
1995). It was established to accommodate a left distal
humeral fragment (KNM-KP 271) recovered in 1965 by
Bryan Patterson at Kanapoi
in Kenya (Patterson and
Howells, 1967), plus cranial remains recovered in the
1990s from c.3.9e4.2 Ma localities at Allia Bay and
Kanapoi. Additional fossils from Allia Bay and Kanapoi
were described three years later (Leakey et al., 1998).
Leakey et al. (1995) claimed that aspects of the dental
morphology of the fossils collected at Allia Bay and
Kanapoi are more primitive than those of Au. afarensis
(eg, mandibular canine morphology, the asymmetry of
the premolar crowns, and the relatively simple crowns of
the deciduous ﬁrst mandibular molars). White et al.
(2006) attributed 31 fossils from the Middle Awash study
area in Ethiopia to Au. anamensis. One, a maxilla, was
found at Aramis, with the remainder coming from three
localities at Asa Issie, a collecting area 10 km/6 miles
west of Aramis, and biostratigraphic dating suggests an
age of c.4.2e4.1 Ma for both sets of Middle Awash
fossils. Craniodentally (eg, anterior tooth and postcanine
relative tooth size, crown morphology, enamel thickness,
etc.)
from the Middle Awash is
consistent with an attribution to Au. anamensis. Upper
limb remains have been recovered and were described as
being australopith-like (Leakey et al., 1998), but a tibia
(KNM-KP 29283) with features associated with obligate
bipedalism that was attributed to Au. anamensis was not
included in the list of paratypes. A specimen preserving
the proximal
shaft
from Asa Issie (ASI-VP-5/154)
looks like a slightly
more primitive version of
the Au. afarensis femoral
morphology.

three-quarters of a right

the new material

femur

Evidence of Diversity

Evidence of taxic diversity within the 5.0e4.0 Ma time
interval is dependent on being able to demonstrate signiﬁ-
cant differences between Ar. ramidus and Au. anamensis,
yet even recent comparisons of Ardipithecus and Austral-
opithecus (eg, White et al., 2009 and Suwa et al., 2009) are
still between Ar. ramidus and Au. afarensis.

In their diagnosis of Au. anamensis Leakey et al. (1995)
suggest that the new taxon “can be distinguished from
Ardipithecus” because it has “absolutely and relatively

26 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

thicker tooth enamel; upper canine buccal enamel thickened
apically; molars more buccolingually expanded; ﬁrst and
second lower molars not markedly different in size; tym-
panic tube extends only to the medial edge of the post-
glenoid process rather than to the lateral edge or beyond it;
lateral trochlear ridge of humerus weak” (p. 565). These
distinguishing features also occur in the list of inferred
shared-derived characters that White et al. (2009) claim
distinguish Ar. ramidus from Au. anamensis (Table 2.1: pp.
82e83).

Unlike the situation in the previous time interval there is
substantial overlap in the parts of the skeleton represented
by the hypodigms of Ar. ramidus and Au. anamensis with 7
out of 11 cranial and mandibular characters and 18 out of
34 dental characters that are in common in the two taxa
differing, this strengthens the case for taxic diversity in this
time interval.

4.0e3.0 MA

Australopithecus afarensis
The hominin species with historical priority in the
4.0e3.0 Ma time interval, Au. afarensis (Johanson et al.,
1978; ICZN, 1999), was established to accommodate the
c.3.7e3.0 Ma cranial and postcranial remains recovered
from Laetoli, Tanzania, and Hadar, Ethiopia. When White
et al. (1981) compared the hypodigms of Au. afarensis and
Australopithecus africanus they made a compelling case
for recognizing Au. afarensis as a distinct species whose
craniodental anatomy is generally more primitive than that
of Au. africanus. Kimbel et al. (1984, 2004) and Kimbel
and Delezene (2009) provide further information about the
morphological differences between Au. afarensis and Au.
africanus.

To judge from the evidence of the associated skeleton
AL 288-1, the hind limbs of Au. afarensis are substantially
shorter than those of a modern human of similar stature,
and the appearance of the pelvis and the relatively short
lower limb suggest that while Au. afarensis was capable of
bipedal walking it was poorly adapted for long-range
bipedalism. The upper limb, especially the hand and the
shoulder girdle, retains morphology that some workers
suggest reﬂects a signiﬁcant element of arboreal locomo-
tion, yet Drapeau (2012) suggests that the Au. afarensis
upper
the type of
manipulation needed to manufacture crude artifacts. Recent
body mass estimates for Au. afarensis range from c.30 to
c.65 kg (Grabowski et al., 2015), endocranial volumes
range between 385 and 550 cm3, and estimates of the
standing height of adult individuals range between 1.0 and
1.5 m. Reno et al. (2003) suggested that skeletal size sexual
dimorphism in Au. afarensis is modest, but most re-
searchers (eg, Gordon et al., 2008) accept that this taxon
shows a substantial level of sexual dimorphism.

limb morphology was capable of

Australopithecus bahrelghazali
The second hominin species in this time interval, Au.
bahrelghazali (Brunet et al., 1996), was established to
accommodate a tooth-bearing midline mandible fragment
plus an upper premolar
tooth, both recovered from
c.3.5e3.0 Ma sediments in the Bahr el Ghazal region,
Koro Toro, Chad. The mandibular fragment was originally
assigned to Australopithecus aff. Australopithecus afar-
ensis (Brunet et al., 1995), but Brunet et al. (1996)
assigned it to a new species because they claimed it had
thicker enamel than Ar. ramidus, a more vertically ori-
ented and more gracile symphysis than Au. anamensis,
more complex premolar roots than Au. afarensis, and
larger incisors and canines and more complex premolar
roots than Au. africanus.

Kenyanthropus platyops
The next hominin species in the 4.0e3.0 Ma time interval,
Kenyanthropus platyops (Leakey et al., 2001), was estab-
lished to accommodate cranial remains recovered from the
c.3.5 Ma Kataboi Member at Lomekwi, West Turkana,
Kenya. The initial report lists the holotype cranium and the
paratype maxilla. There also 34 other craniodental speci-
mens, but the researchers reserved their judgment about the
taxonomy of most of these remains (Leakey et al., 2001),
some of which had only recently been referred to Au.
afarensis (Brown et al., 2001). Leakey et al. (2001) did not
assign the Lomekwi material to Au. afarensis because of its
reduced subnasal prognathism, more anteriorly situated
zygomatic root, the ﬂatter and more vertically orientated
malar region,
thick-
enameled molars, and the unusually small M1 when
compared to the size of the P4 and M3. The authors note the
face of the new material resembles that of Homo rudol-
fensis, but they point out that the postcanine tooth row of
the latter is substantially longer than that of KNM-WT
40000.

the generally relatively small but

Australopithecus deyiremeda
The most recently proposed species in this time interval is
Australopithecus deyiremeda (Haile-Selassie et al., 2015).
It was established to accommodate several c.3.4 Ma cranial
fossils including a left maxilla, part of the right maxilla
from what might be the same individual, and two mandi-
bles, all recovered from the Burtele (BRT) and Waytaleyta
(WYT) collection areas in the Woranso-Mille study area in
Ethiopia. The authors claim that the fossils assigned to Au.
deyiremeda have thicker enamel, more complex P4 roots,
and a more robust mandibular corpus than Ar. ramidus, and
when compared to Au. anamensis it has a mandibular
symphysis that is more vertical, and a mandibular corpus
that is more robust. Haile-Selassie et al. (2015) also claim

that the mandibular corpus of Au. deyiremeda lacks the
lateral hollowing seen in Au. afarensis, the roots of the
mandibular ramus and the zygomatic process of the maxilla
are more anteriorly located, and the M1 crown is smaller
than is the case in Au. afarensis. They also suggest that the
mandibular corpus of Au. deyiremeda is more robust and
the root of the mandibular ramus is more anteriorly located
than is the case in most of the mandibles attributed to early
Homo. Dentally, Au. deyiremeda differs from K. platyops
in having a larger canine, and from Australopithecus garhi
because it has smaller canines and smaller postcanine tooth
crowns.

Burtele Foot

The ﬁnal evidence from this time interval is a partial foot
(BRT-VP-2/73) recovered in 2009 from Burtele in the
Woranso-Mille study area in Ethiopia (Haile-Selassie et al.,
2012). What is notable about the foot is its opposable
hallux, which, while obviously distinguishing it from the
pedal
remains of Au. afarensis (Haile-Selassie et al.,
2010a,b, 2015; Ward et al., 2011) aligns it with the
type of foot seen in Ar. ramidus (Lovejoy et al., 2009).
Haile-Selassie et al. (2015) admit that they cannot reject the
null hypothesis “that BRT-VP-2/73 belongs to Au. deyir-
emeda” (Supplementary Note 1), but the authors demur from
assigning the foot to the new taxon because none of the
fossil evidence for the latter “is clearly associated with BRT-
VP-2/73” (p. 483).

Evidence of Diversity

In the past several decades researchers have assembled the
substantial collection of fossils (now >400 specimens) that
makes up the hypodigm of Au. afarensis (Kimbel and
Delezene, 2009; Haile-Selassie et al., 2010a,b; Ward et al.,
2012). Although there have been suggestions that the Au.
afarensis hypodigm samples more than one taxon (Olson,
1981, 1985a,b; Senut, 1983; White et al., 1981; Tardieu,
1983), none of them have received support from the re-
searchers most familiar with the evidence. Thus, any pro-
posal for a new hominin species in the 4.0e3.0 Ma time
interval must demonstrate that the morphology of the new
fossil evidence lies outside of the envelope of morpholog-
ical variation expected within the species represented by the
various site samples of Au. afarensis.

When this test is applied to Au. bahrelghazali, while
Guy et al. (2008) claim that the symphyseal outline of Au.
bahrelghazali distinguishes it from Au. afarensis, others
interpret the modest-sized hypodigm of Au. bahrelghazali
as evidence of geographical variation within Au. afarensis.
We agree with this assessment.

The proposal to establish a new species and genus,
K. platyops, for fossil hominins discovered at West Tur-
kana in 1998 and 1999 was based on the hypothesis that

HomininseContext, Origins and Diversity Chapter | 2 27

two specimens,
the type, KNM-WT 40000, a 3.5 Ma
cranium, and the paratype, KNM-WT 38350, a 3.3 Ma
partial maxilla (Leakey et al., 2001) passed the test set out
above. The case for rejecting Au. afarensis as the appro-
priate taxon for this material is made more complicated
because the KNM-WT 40000 cranium is plastically
deformed and permeated by matrix-ﬁlled cracks. White
(2003) took the view that these factors are responsible for
the unusual facial morphology, and he interprets KNM-
WT 40000 as a taphonomically altered Au. afarensis
cranium. Spoor et al. (2010) responded by making what,
to us, is a convincing case that the matrix-ﬁlled cracking
and deformation are not responsible for the observed
differences. In any event the taphonomic alteration of the
bone cannot explain the dental differences between KNM-
WT 40000 and Au. afarensis.

The case made by Haile-Selassie et al. (2015) that Au.
deyiremeda lies outside of the envelope of Au. afarensis
has elements in common with the argument made by
Leakey et al. (2001) for K. platyops. The authors claim that,
compared with Au. afarensis, the mandibular corpus of Au.
deyiremeda is more robust and lacks lateral hollowing and
the roots of the mandibular ramus and the zygomatic pro-
cess of the maxilla are more anteriorly located. With respect
to the dentition they suggest
the postcanine tooth
crowns are smaller and, as was the case for K. platyops, it is
the M1 crown that is particularly small. However, for many
of the differences cited by Haile-Selassie et al. (2015) the
condition in Au. deyiremeda is close to, or at the edge of the
range of, the hypodigm of Au. afarensis. However, as good
as that hypodigm is, it does not circumscribe the range of
variation in that species. In our opinion the claim of
distinctiveness would be much stronger if Haile-Selassie
et al. (2015) had linked Au. deyiremeda with the foot
from Burtele.

that

In their initial description of the Burtele foot, Haile-
Selassie et al. (2012) noted that
the short, opposable,
hallux and overall morphology of the partial foot from
Burtele are sound evidence that it “does not belong to the
contemporaneous species Au. afarensis.” They suggest that
BRT-VP-2/73 retains “a grasping capacity that would allow
it to exploit arboreal settings” (Haile-Selassie et al., 2012,
p. 568), making it unlike the foot of Au. afarensis that has
been described as “functionally like that of modern
humans” and the foot of a “committed terrestrial biped”
(Ward et al., 2011, p. 750). Thus, although the Burtele foot
has not been formally assigned to a taxon, we suggest that
the profound structural, and inferred functional, differences
between BRT-VP-2/73 and the foot of Au. afarensis pro-
vide the strongest evidence for hominin taxic diversity in
the 4.0e3.0 Ma time interval.

Several researchers have drawn attention to dental,
facial, and mandibular differences between the early
component of the Au. afarensis hypodigm from Laetoli and
the geologically younger part of the hypodigm from Hadar,

28 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

and to similarities between the Laetoli remains and those of
Au. anamensis (eg, Ward et al., 1999; Kimbel et al., 2006).
It remains to be seen whether these similarities are sufﬁ-
cient evidence to sustain the hypothesis that Au. anamensis
evolved via anagenesis into Au. afarensis (eg, Haile-
Selassie et al., 2010a,b), but even if the taxa are related
in this way it would have no effect on any claims about
hominin taxic diversity because the fossil records of Au.
anamensis and Au. afarensis are not synchronic.

3.0e2.5 MA

Australopithecus africanus
The ﬁrst of the two species in the 3.0e2.5 Ma time interval,
Au. africanus (Dart, 1925), was established to accommo-
date an immature skull recovered in 1924 from the lime-
works at Taungs (now called Taung) in what is now South
Africa. In addition to Taung the Au. africanus hypodigm as
presently interpreted includes fossils from Member 4 at
Sterkfontein, Members 3 and 4 at Makapansgat, and Gla-
dysvale, all located in South Africa. It remains to be seen
whether the associated skeleton StW 573 from Sterkfontein
Member 2, and 12 hominin fossils recovered from the
Jakovec Cavern (Partridge et al., 2003) belong to Au.
africanus, or to a different species (Clarke, 2008). The
cranium, mandible, and dentition of Au. africanus are well
sampled and although the postcranial and the axial skeleton
are less well represented there is at least one specimen of
each long bone. However, many of the fossils have been
crushed and deformed before they were fully hardened by
fossilization.

Apart from the reduced canines the skull of Au. afri-
canus is relatively ape-like. Its mean endocranial volume is
c.460 cm3. Morphological and functional analyses suggest
that although Au. africanus was capable of walking
bipedally it was probably more arboreal than most other
archaic hominin taxa. The Sterkfontein evidence suggests
that males and females of Au. africanus differed substan-
tially in body size, but probably not to the degree they did
in Au. afarensis.

Several researchers have commented on the unusual
nature and degree of variation within the hypodigm of Au.
africanus (Lockwood and Tobias, 2002), but there has been
scant agreement on how the specimens that make up the
hypodigm would be partitioned. Clarke (1988, 1999, 2008)
has consistently argued that the Sterkfontein Member 4 and
Makapansgat hypodigm of Au. africanus samples a second,
more Paranthropus-like, taxon. He includes Sts 1 and 71,
StW 183, 252, 384, 498, and 505, and MLD 2 within the
second species, which he refers to as Australopithecus
prometheus (Granger et al., 2015), thus reviving the species
name Dart
the hominin fossils from
Makapansgat. The differences between the second taxon
and Au. africanus mainly relate to craniofacial structure and
dental size (Clarke, 2008).

(1948) used for

Paranthropus aethiopicus
The second species in the 3.0e2.5 Ma time interval
is Paraustralopithecus aethiopicus (Arambourg and Coppens,
1968), now Paranthropus aethiopicus (Chamberlain and
Wood, 1987). The latter is the species name used by re-
searchers who do not recognize Paraustralopithecus as a
separate genus, but who do consider that >2.3 Ma hyper-
megadont hominins from the Omo-Turkana Basin belong
to a species that is distinct from Paranthropus boisei. In
addition to the type specimen the hypodigm includes a well-
preserved adult cranium (KNM-WT 17000) and mandible
(KNM-WT 16005) from West Turkana and isolated teeth
from the Shungura Formation. Some also assign the juvenile
braincase, L. 338y-6, from the Shungura Formation to this
taxon. The only postcranial fossil considered part of the
hypodigm of P. aethiopicus is a proximal tibia from Laetoli.
Compared with P. boisei the face of P. aethiopicus is more
prognathic, the cranial base is less ﬂexed, the incisors, as
inferred from their preserved alveoli, are large, and the
postcanine teeth, especially the mandibular premolars, are
less morphologically specialized than those of P. boisei
(Suwa, 1988).

LD 350-1

The only other hominin from the 3.0e2.5 Ma time in-
terval is represented by a single specimen, LD 350-1, the
left side of a 2.8e2.75 Ma adult hominin mandible, found
in the Lee Adoyta region of the Ledi-Geraru research area
in the Afar Regional State in Ethiopia (Villmoare et al.,
2015). Before deciding to allocate the mandible, which
preserves the crowns and roots of the canine through to
the M3, to Homo sp. the researchers compared it with Au.
afarensis. Their judgment was that although it was within
the size range of Au. afarensis and shared with it features
such as a sloping symphysis and a robust inferior trans-
verse torus,
it differed from Au.
afarensis by having a less robust corpus that lacked lateral
hollowing, plus the height of the corpus was consistent
along the tooth row. Dentally, the P3 of LD 350-1 is
more symmetrical, the M1/M2 hypoconid is reduced, the
M1 has a C7, and the P3/molar wear pattern is reversed
(Villmoare et al., 2015). Villmoare et al. (2015) also
suggest that the isolated left and right P3-M2 crowns of a
single individual (KNM-ER 5431) from the upper Tulu
Bor Member (ie, between 3.0 and 2.7 Ma) at Koobi Fora
in Kenya, and nonrobust
teeth from Mbs B-C of the
Shungura Formation in Ethiopia, may belong to the same
taxon as LD 350-1.

they suggested that

Evidence of Diversity

There is an excellent case for distinguishing between
P. aethiopicus and both Au. afarensis and the LD 350-1
mandible. Villmoare et al. (2015) understandably focus on
whether LD 350-1 differs from the existing hypodigm of Au.

afarensis and although the mandible does not currently
overlap temporally with that hypodigm, for reasons we set
out below, we believe it was a sensible strategy. This case,
and the one for distinguishing between LD 350-1 and the
synchronic remains of Au. africanus from Southern Africa,
while weaker than the case for distinguishing between
P. aethiopicus and Au. afarensis and LD 350-1, respectively,
are both a good deal stronger than the case for taxic diversity
within the conventional hypodigm of Au. africanus.

2.5e2.0 MA

Paranthropus boisei
The hominin species with historical priority in the
2.5e2.0 Ma time interval is Zinjanthropus boisei (Leakey,
1959), now P. boisei (Robinson, 1960). It has a compre-
hensive craniodental fossil record that includes an espe-
cially complete and well-preserved skull from Konso in
Ethiopia (Suwa et al., 1997), several well-preserved crania,
and many mandibles and isolated teeth. P. boisei is the only
hominin species we know of that combines a massive,
wide, ﬂat, face, massive premolars and molars, and small
anterior teeth. The face of P. boisei is wider than that of
P. robustus, yet their endocranial brain volumes are similar.
The mandible of P. boisei has a large and wide body or
corpus and the tooth crowns apparently grow at a fast rate.
Apart from a partial upper limb from Olduvai Gorge and
two very fragmentary possible P. boisei partial skeletons
from Koobi Fora, no other postcranial evidence can be
attributed to P. boisei with any reliability, but some of the
postcranial fossils from Bed I at Olduvai Gorge tradi-
tionally linked with Homo habilis sensu lato (see below)
may belong to P. boisei
(Wood, 1974; Wood and
Constantino, 2007). The range of the size difference in the
P. boisei hypodigm suggests a substantial degree of body-
size dimorphism. The fossil record of P. boisei extends
across about one million years of time during which there
is little evidence of any consistent trends in the size or
shape of the cranium, mandible, and dentition (Wood and
Constantino, 2007).

Homo habilis sensu lato
The next species in this time interval, Homo habilis
(Leakey et al., 1964), was established to accommodate
non-megadont fossil hominins (OH 4, 6, 7, 8, 13, 14, and
16) recovered between 1959 and 1963 from Beds I and II
at Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania. The authors claimed that
the cranial and dental morphology and estimated endo-
cranial volume of that collection of specimens, plus in-
ferences made about the dexterity and locomotion of the
type of animal it sampled, were enough to both distinguish
the new taxon from Au. africanus and justify its inclusion
in Homo. Subsequent discoveries at Olduvai (eg, OH 24,
62, and 65) and from other sites (eg, Koobi Fora: KNM-
ER 1470, 1802, 1805, 1813, 3735; Sterkfontein: Stw 53;

HomininseContext, Origins and Diversity Chapter | 2 29

Swartkrans: SK 847; Hadar: AL 666-1) have also been
assigned to, or afﬁliated with, H. habilis. The hypodigm
set out above has a relatively wide range of cranial and
dental morphology (eg, endocranial volume ranges from
c.500 to c.800 cm3). All of the crania in this group are
wider across the base of the cranium than across the vault.
Facial and mandibular morphology varies (eg, KNM-ER
1470 has a ﬂat and wide midface, whereas KNM-ER
1813 is broadest across the upper face). Postcanine teeth
also differ in size and crown morphology, with some
mandibular premolars and molars being narrow bucco-
lingually (eg, OH 7), whereas other mandibular premolar
teeth within the hypodigm (eg, KNM-ER 1802) are buc-
colingually broader, and have larger talonids and more
complex root systems. Some researchers consider the
cranial variation within the hypodigm set out above to be
excessive in scale and unlike the pattern of intraspeciﬁc
variation seen in the African ape clade, and they suggest
that H. habilis sensu lato subsumes two taxa, Homo
habilis sensu stricto and H. rudolfensis.

Paranthropus aethiopicus
The third species in this time interval, P. aethiopicus, has
already been reviewed.

Australopithecus garhi
The ﬁnal species to be considered in the 2.5e2.0 Ma time
interval, Au. garhi, was established to accommodate a
fragmented cranium recovered from the c.2.5 Ma Hatayae
Member of the Bouri Formation at the Bouri, Gamedah,
and Matabaietu collection areas in the Middle Awash study
area of Ethiopia (Asfaw et al., 1999). It combines a prim-
itive cranium with large postcanine teeth, and especially
large P3s. However, unlike other hyper-megadont species
such as P. aethiopicus and P. boisei, the incisors and ca-
nines of Au. garhi are also large and the enamel apparently
lacks the extreme thickness seen in those taxa. A partial
skeleton combining a long femur with a long forearm was
found nearby, but it is not associated with the type of
cranium (Asfaw et al., 1999) and these fossils have not
been formally assigned to Au. garhi.

Evidence of Diversity

The effective synchronicity of P. boisei and H. habilis
sensu lato (Leakey and Walker, 1976; Wood, 1991) is
perhaps the single strongest evidence of taxic diversity in
the hominin fossil record. Even researchers who ﬁercely
criticize, and even deride, the notion of hominin taxic di-
versity (eg, White, 2003) are willing to accept this example.
There is only one fragmented cranium for Au. garhi,
but the skeletal and dental differences between it and the
cranial hypodigm of P. boisei suggest that the claim for a
distinction between that taxon and P. boisei
is also a
strong one.

30 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

However, for various reasons, including sample size, the
other claims for hominin taxic diversity in the 2.5e2.0 Ma
time interval are less compelling. That does not mean there
is no case, just that it is modest in comparison with the
number and scale of the craniodental differences between
P. boisei and H. habilis sensu lato that are inconsistent with
the sort of intraspeciﬁc variation one would predict based on
a comparative analysis of the African ape clade (Wood
et al., 1991). The case for distinguishing between
P. aethiopicus and P. boisei is much weaker than the case
for distinguishing the latter from H. habilis sensu lato, but
given that the fossil records of P. aethiopicus and P. boisei
presently do not overlap in geological time, any decision to
recognize these two taxa as separate species has no impact
on the issue of hominin taxic diversity.

2.0e1.5 MA

Homo erectus
The ﬁrst species to be considered in the 2.0e1.5 Ma time
interval is H. erectus. In his initial publication of the Trinil
remains, Dubois (1893) referred the skullcap to Anthro-
popithecus erectus, a choice of genus that reﬂected his
initial conviction that he had discovered the remains of a
fossil ape. But a year later he changed his mind and
transferred the new species to a novel genus, Pithecan-
thropus. The discovery of the Trinil calotte was signiﬁcant
because of its small cranial capacity (c.940 cm3),
low
brain case, and sharply angulated occipital region. Most of
the discoveries made by Ralph von Koenigswald at San-
giran, also in Indonesia, were added to the hypodigm of
Pithecanthropus erectus and fossils that had been recov-
ered from what was then called Choukoutien (now called
Zhoukoudian) and initially assigned to Sinanthropus
compared with the
pekinensis
P. erectus hypodigm. The researchers responsible for
analyzing the two collections suggested that the Indone-
sian and Chinese hypodigms were “related to each other.
in the same way as two different
races of present
mankind” (von Koenigswald and Weidenreich, 1939, p.
928) and a year later the latter author proposed the two
hypodigms should be formally merged within a single
genus and species, as Homo erectus pekinensis and Homo
respectively (Weidenreich, 1940).
erectus javanensis,
Subsequently Meganthropus palaeojavanicus
(Mayr,
1944, p. 14; Le Gros Clark, 1955, p. 86e87), Atlan-
thropus (Le Gros Clark, 1964, p. 112), and Telanthropus
(Robinson, 1961) were transferred to H. erectus. Some
researchers (eg, Kaifu et al., 2008) interpret H. erectus as a
chronospecies that evolves through time, whereas others
(eg, Widianto and Zeitoun, 2003) argue there are potential
species-level differences between the Sangiran/Trinil

(Black, 1927) were

hypodigms and the more recent evidence from Sam-
bungmacan and Ngandong.

Paranthropus robustus
The second species in this time interval, Paranthropus
robustus (Broom, 1938), was established to accommodate
fossil hominins recovered in 1938 from what was then
referred to as the “Phase II Breccia” (now called Member 3)
at Kromdraai B, in Gauteng Province, South Africa. Most
of the current hypodigm comes from Swartkrans (Mbs 1, 2,
and 3) with other fossil evidence coming from South
African caves called Cooper’s, Drimolen, and Gondolin.
Although the dentition is well represented in the hypodigm
of P. robustus, most of the mandibles are crushed or dis-
torted. The brain, face, and chewing teeth of P. robustus are
larger than those of Au. africanus, yet the incisors and
canines are smaller, and whereas P. robustus includes
crania with ectocranial crests, there are no Au. africanus
crania with unambiguous crests. What little is known about
the postcranial skeleton of P. robustus suggests that the
morphology of the pelvis and the hip joint are much like
that of Au. africanus.

Paranthropus boisei and Homo habilis
sensu lato
Both species were introduced in the previous time interval.

Homo ergaster
The next species in the 2.0e1.5 Ma time interval, Homo
ergaster (Groves and Mazák, 1975), was established to
accommodate fossil hominins recovered from Koobi Fora
that, in the judgment of the authors, did not belong in the
taxa known at the time. Wood (1994) used the taxon name
H. ergaster for hominin remains (eg, KNM-ER 730, 820,
and 992) that are generally more primitive and lack the
more extreme expressions of some of the derived features
(eg, thick inner and outer table, sagittal keeling, etc.) seen
in Asian H. erectus.

Homo rudolfensis
If the fossils assigned to H. habilis sensu lato (see above)
sample not one, but two species, and if that second species
includes KNM-ER 1470, then the next species with his-
torical priority in this time interval
is Pithecanthropus
rudolfensis, subsequently transferred to Homo (Groves,
1989) as H. rudolfensis. Leakey et al. (2012) described a
face (KNM-ER 62000) and two mandibles (KNM-ER 1482
and 60000) that match KNM-ER 1470, and Spoor et al.
(2015) make the case that the dental arcade of the enlarged

hypodigm of H. rudolfensis is distinctively different (eg,
more divergent tooth rows, ﬂatter anterior dental arch) from
the dental arcade of H. habilis sensu stricto.

Homo georgicus
The penultimate species in this time interval, Homo geor-
gicus (Gabounia et al., 2002), was established for the
hominin fossils recovered from Dmanisi. The holotype is
the mandible D2600. No paratypes were formally desig-
nated, but the mandible D211, the calvaria D2280, the
cranium D2282, and the skull and associated skeleton
D2700 were referred to as evidence that “will complete the
characteristics of the new species” (Gabounia et al., 2002,
p. 244). Although several of the authors of the original
publication (eg, Lordkipanidze et al., 2013) no longer
support a separate taxon for this material, we treat
it
separately in our discussion of the evidence in this time
interval because the circumstances of the site are that the
hominin evidence from Dmanisi provides a sense of the
range of variation within what some think is a relatively
short interval of time. Overall, the fossils are most similar
to H. erectus, and where there are differences they involve
morphology inferred to be more primitive than that seen in
that taxon.

species

Australopithecus sediba
in the 2.0e1.5 Ma time interval,
The ﬁnal
Australopithecus sediba (Berger et al., 2010), was estab-
lished to accommodate two associated skeletons, MH1, a
sub-adult presumed male, and MH2, an adult presumed
female, recovered from Malapa, Gauteng Province,
in
South Africa. Berger et al. (2010) suggested that Au.
sediba has cranial
(eg, more globular neurocranium,
gracile face), mandibular (eg, more vertical symphyseal
proﬁle, a weak mentum osseum), dental (eg, simple canine
crown, small anterior and postcanine tooth crowns), and
pelvic (eg, acetabulocristal buttress, expanded ilium, and
short ischium) morphology that departs from that seen in
Au. africanus, and which is only shared with early and
later Homo taxa. Carlson et al. (2011), Kivell et al.
(2011), and Zipfel et al. (2011), make similar claims for
Au. sediba’s endocranial, hand, and foot morphology,
respectively.

Evidence of Diversity

There is little doubt that the fossil evidence assigned to
H. erectus, P. robustus, and Au. sediba samples three
different species. There is also compelling evidence to
suggest that P. boisei is distinct from P. robustus (Tobias,
1967; Rak, 1983) and H. habilis sensu lato from H. erectus

HomininseContext, Origins and Diversity Chapter | 2 31

(contra Lordkipanidze et al., 2013), but the evidence for
these latter distinctions, as convincing as it is, is not as
clear-cut
recognizing H.
erectus,
P. robustus, and Au. sediba as separate species.

case

for

as

the

The case for making speciﬁc distinctions among
H. erectus, H. ergaster, and H. georgicus is weaker still.
Two categories of features are claimed to distinguish
H. ergaster from H. erectus. The ﬁrst comprises dental
features for which H. ergaster is more primitive than
H. erectus, the second includes features of the cranial vault
and cranial base that are less derived in H. ergaster than in
H. erectus. For example, it is claimed that H. ergaster lacks
some of the more derived features of H. erectus (eg,
thickened inner and outer tables and prominent sagittal and
angular tori (Wood, 1984, 1991)), but other researchers
dispute the distinctiveness of this material, and Spoor et al.
(2007) claim that the expression of some features is related
to the overall size of the cranium such that larger H. erectus
crania are more likely to show the derived morphology.

1.5e1.0 MA

Homo erectus, Paranthropus robustus,
Paranthropus boisei, Homo habilis, and
Homo ergaster
All of
intervals.

these species were reviewed in earlier

time

Homo antecessor
The sixth species in this time interval, Homo antecessor
(Bermúdez de Castro et al., 1997), was established to
accommodate hominins recovered from level 6 of the
Gran (or Trinchera) Dolina, a complex of caves in the
Atapuerca hills near Burgos, Spain. The modern human-
like morphology of the face and the apparent lack of
derived Homo neanderthalensis features, combined with
differences between the Gran Dolina hominins and
H. erectus, led Bermúdez de Castro et al. (1997) to pro-
pose that the former fossils should be assigned to a new
species, H. antecessor, which they suggest is probably the
most recent common ancestor of H. neanderthalensis and
H. sapiens. H. antecessor is included in this time interval
because a c.1.2e1.1 Ma partial mandible (ATE9-1) from
the Sima del Elefante was provisionally assigned to this
species (Carbonell et al., 2008), and because a reappraisal
of the Ceprano cranium has suggested that it may also
belong to H. antecessor (Manzi et al., 2001). But
H. antecessor is also included in the 1.0e0.25 Ma time
interval because Bermudez de Castro et al.
(2011)
concluded there was not enough evidence to assign the
Sima del Elefante mandible to H. antecessor.

32 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

Evidence of Diversity

The evidence for H. erectus and P. boisei, H. erectus and
P. robustus, and H. habilis sensu lato and P. boisei being
distinct species pairs is exceptionally strong. The case for
distinguishing P. boisei and P. robustus is strong, but the
scale of the morphological differences between them is
much less than the differences between the three species
comparisons listed above.

Despite the claims of Lordkipanidze et al. (2013),
the case for distinguishing between H. erectus and
H. habilis sensu lato is a strong one that involves detailed,
and not so detailed, cranial, mandibular, dental, and
postcranial differences. It is a substantially stronger case
than the ones for distinguishing between H. erectus and
H. ergaster, and between H. antecessor and H. erectus/
H. ergaster.

1.0e0.25 MA

Homo erectus
The species with historical priority, H. erectus, was
reviewed in an earlier time interval.

Homo heidelbergensis
The next species in this time interval, Homo heidelbergensis
(Schoetensack, 1908), was created to accommodate a hominin
mandible found in 1907 in a sandpit at Mauer, near Heidelberg
in Germany. Schoetensack concluded that the Mauer mandi-
ble’s mix of primitive (no chin, robust corpus, broad ramus, and
an anterioreposteriorly deep mandibular symphysis) and
derived (reduced canines and modern human-like dental pro-
portions) features was sufﬁcient to distinguish it from Homo
sapiens, H. neanderthalensis, and what was then called
P. erectus. But H. heidelbergensis attracted little interest until it
was suggested that it might be the most appropriate species
name for a group of Afro-European hominin fossils (eg, Arago,
Bodo, Kabwe, Mauer, Ndutu, and Petralona) that had tradi-
tionally been labeled as “archaic” H. sapiens (Rightmire, 1995).
Mounier et al. (2009) set out the morphological grounds for
recognizing H. heidelbergensis as a taxon separate from
H. neanderthalensis, H. sapiens, and H. erectus, as well as
providing a deﬁnition and a differential diagnosis (p. 243e244).
The “Afro-European” hypothesis interprets H. heidelbergensis
as a geographically widely dispersed species that gave rise to
H. neanderthalensis in Eurasia and H. sapiens in Africa,
whereas the “European” hypothesis sees H. heidelbergensis
restricted to Europe where
to
H. neanderthalensis (Mounier et al., 2009). Other researchers
(eg, Dean et al., 1998; Carbonell et al., 2005; Hublin, 2009)
interpret H. heidelbergensis as representing an early stage in the
accretion model for the origin of H. neanderthalensis (ie, it

is only ancestral

it

should be included in H. neanderthalensis if that taxon is
interpreted inclusively) as a chronospecies.

(Woodward, 1921), was

Homo rhodesiensis
The third species in the 1.0e0.25 Ma time interval, Homo
introduced to
rhodesiensis
accommodate the cranium and limb bones (Kabwe 1 or E
686) recovered from the Broken Hill lead mine at Kabwe,
in what
then was the British protectorate of Northern
Rhodesia, now Zambia. Woodward reasoned a new species
was needed because Kabwe 1 was not as primitive as what
we now refer to as H. erectus, nor as derived as either
H. sapiens or H. neanderthalensis. Morphologically similar
remains include fossils from Hopeﬁeld/Elandsfontein in
southern Africa, Ndutu in Tanzania, Sale in North Africa,
and Bodo in Ethiopia. The taxon H. rhodesiensis is used by
researchers who see H. heidelbergensis as an exclusively
European premodern Homo taxon (ie,
the “European”
hypothesis).

Homo helmei
The last formal species in the 1.0e0.25 Ma time interval,
Homo helmei (Dreyer, 1935), was established for the Flo-
risbad 1 partial cranium discovered in 1932 in Florisbad in
South Africa. Some researchers interpret the cranium as being
intermediate in morphology between H. heidelbergensis and
H. sapiens, with its more steeply inclined frontal bone dis-
tinguishing it from the former, and its large brow ridge, more
receding frontal, and low greatest breadth in the vault
distinguishing it from anatomically modern humans. Others
have suggested that Jebel Irhoud, Ngaloba (aka LH 18), and
Omo II belong to the same hypodigm.

Sima de los Huesos

The penultimate group in this time interval is the unusu-
ally complete and well-preserved collection of hominins
recovered from the Sima de los Huesos, one of the many
breccia-ﬁlled cave systems that make up the Cueva
Mayor-Cueva del Silo within the Sierra de Atapuerca, near
Burgos in northern Spain. To date, more than 6500
hominin specimens belonging to at least 28 individuals
(Bermúdez de Castro et al., 2004) have been recovered
from excavations in the main cave and in the ramp that
leads down to the cave. The hominin remains include
numerous crania, mandibles, hundreds of teeth, a nearly
complete pelvis, vertebrae, ribs, hand and foot bones, and
multiple specimens of
long bones. The cranial and
mandibular sample shows a number of derived features
of H. neanderthalensis (eg, pronounced mid-facial prog-
nathism,
the form of the brow ridge, a ﬂat articular

eminence of the glenoid fossa, a retromolar space, and an
asymmetrical conﬁguration of the ramus of the mandible).
In contrast, the cranial vault is generally more plesio-
morphic (eg, large, projecting, mastoid processes, rounded
neurocranium), with some incipient derived traits of
H. neanderthalensis (eg, weak expression of the suprai-
niac
fossa). The dentition is generally typical of
H. neanderthalensis (Gómez-Robles et al., 2015).

Homo antecessor
This species was reviewed in the previous time interval.

Evidence of Diversity

site

sample

erectus

in China

and Southeast Asia

The best evidence for taxic diversity in the 1.0e0.5 Ma
time interval is the coexistence in time, if not in space,
of H.
and
H. heidelbergensis in Europe. As for hominin taxonomic
diversity within Europe, researchers most familiar with the
evidence from the Sima de los Huesos make a distinction
between that
and the hypodigm of
H. neanderthalensis, but even though they assigned the
Sima de los Huesos hominins to H. heidelbergensis
(Arsuaga
that
H. heidelbergensis is related to the Neandertals in the
same way that Au. anamensis is related to Au. afarensis
(see earlier). Those who treat the fossils from the Sima de
los Huesos as evidence of an early stage of an
H. neanderthalensis chronospecies include them within
that taxon (Hublin, 2009). As for H. heidelbergensis and
H. rhodesiensis, the jury is still out on whether the latter is
a junior synonym of the former, or a distinct taxon that
was the common ancestor of both H. neanderthalensis and
modern humans (see Fig. 2.1 in Hublin, 2009).

acknowledged

they

et

al.,

1997)

While some researchers suggest that Florisbad 1 could
serve as the holotype of H. helmei, most take the view there
is no satisfactory diagnosis for such a taxon that separates it
from H. heidelbergensis (or from H. rhodesiensis if the
distinction between H. heidelbergensis and H. rhodesiensis
is accepted) or H. sapiens.

Finally, the case for distinguishing between H. erectus/
H. ergaster and H. antecessor is inevitably weak because of
the small hypodigm of the latter taxon.

0.25 MA TO THE PRESENT

Homo sapiens
The species with historical priority in this time interval is
H. sapiens (Linnaeus, 1758). The ﬁrst widely accepted
fossil evidence of modern humans came in 1868 when a
series of
the

remains was discovered at

skeletal

HomininseContext, Origins and Diversity Chapter | 2 33

Cro-Magnon rock-shelter at Les Eyzies de Tayac in
France. Since then, discoveries of H. sapienselike fossils
had been made elsewhere in Europe (eg, Mladec, Pre-
dmosti, and Brno), Asia and Southeast Asia (eg, Wadjak,
Zhoukoudian Upper Cave, and Niah Cave), the Near East
(eg, Skhul and Djebel Qafzeh), and Australia (eg, Will-
andra Lakes). The ﬁrst African fossil evidence for
H. sapiens came in 1924 from Singa in the Sudan, with
subsequent evidence coming from Border Cave and
Klasies River Mouth in South Africa; Dar es Soltane in
Morocco; and Dire-Dawa, Herto, and Omo-Kibish in
Ethiopia. With the exception of the c.190 ka date for
Omo-Kibish (McDougall et al., 2005) and the c.170 ka
date for Herto (Clark et al., 2003) there is no ﬁrm evi-
dence to suggest that any of the above sites is likely to be
older than 150 ka, and most are probably younger than
100 ka.

Homo neanderthalensis
The next species for consideration in this time interval,
H. neanderthalensis (King, 1864), was established for the
partial
skeleton recovered in 1856 from the Kleine
Feldhofer Grotte in the part of the Düssel valley named
after Joachim Neander. Excavations of the same sediments
in 1997 and thereafter resulted in the recovery of fauna,
artifacts, and some 80 hominin fragments from at least two
hominin individuals were recovered. Discoveries made
before 1856, such as the infant’s cranium from Engis in
1828, and the partial cranium from Forbes’ Quarry,
Gibraltar,
in 1848, were subsequently recognized as
belonging to H. neanderthalensis. In the following half-
century remains attributed to H. neanderthalensis were
discovered at other European sites, including La Naulette
and Spy in Belgium, Sipka in Moravia, Krapina in Croatia,
and Malarnaud, La Chapelle-aux-Saints, Le Moustier
(lower shelter), La Ferrassie, and La Quina, among others,
in France. In 1924e6 the ﬁrst H. neanderthalensis remains
were found outside of Western Europe at Kiik-Koba in the
Crimea, and thereafter came discoveries at Tabun cave on
Mount Carmel in the Levant, at Teshik-Tash in central
Asia. Further evidence was added after World War II, ﬁrst
from Shanidar in Iraq, then from Amud and Kebara in
Israel, and from Dederiyeh in Syria. New fossiliferous lo-
calities continue to be discovered in Europe (eg, Saint-
Césaire and Moula-Guercy in France, Zafarraya in Spain,
Vindija in Croatia, and Lakonis in Greece) and Western
Asia (eg, Mezmaiskaya and Denisova in Russia). To date,
Neandertal remains have been found throughout much of
Europe below 55
N, in the Near East. and in Western Asia,
but no evidence has been found in North Africa.



The

as
H. neanderthalensis are from OIS 5 (ie, c.130 ka): beyond

fossils most

researchers

earliest

accept

34 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

that there is no consensus. For example, some (eg, Hublin,
2009) interpret the fossil evidence from Swanscombe (OIS
ie, c.425e375 ka) and the Sima de los Huesos
11,
ie, c.475e425 ka) as
(possibly as early as OIS 12,
showing enough Neandertal-like morphology to justify
inclusion in H. neanderthalensis, whereas others see a
distinction between these specimens, which they would
include in H. heidelbergensis, and later “true” Neandertals
they claim do not appear until OIS 6 (eg, Rosas et al.,
2006).

Nuclear and mtDNA have been used to generate esti-
mates of
the date of divergence of H. sapiens and
H. neanderthalensis. An estimate using mtDNA and based
on an assumed divergence time of c.6e7 Ma for the
modern human and chimpanzees/bonobo lineages suggests
a coalescence age of 660  140 ka (Green et al., 2008).
Estimates of the divergence time of the ancestral modern
human and Neandertal populations based on the nuclear
genome range from 440 ka (this assumes an 8.3 Ma
divergence date for chimpanzees/bonobos and modern
humans) to 270 ka (assuming a later, 5.6 Ma, divergence
date) (Green et al., 2010). The evidence of the timing of the
split between modern humans and Neandertals suggest it
was c.600 ka.

Homo erectus and Homo heidelbergensis
Both species were reviewed in earlier time intervals.

Homo ﬂoresiensis
The next species, Homo ﬂoresiensis (Brown et al., 2004),
was established to accommodate LB1, a partial adult
hominin skeleton, and LB2, an isolated left P3, recovered in
2003 from the Liang Bua cave on the island of Flores in
Indonesia. More material belonging to LB1 and evidence
allocated to individuals LB4e9, including LB6, a partial
skeleton lacking a cranium, was recovered in 2004
(Morwood et al., 2005). The hypodigm now includes
close to 100 individually numbered specimens that are
estimated to represent fewer than 10 individuals.

The taxon was immediately controversial for at least
two reasons. First, its estimated geological age of between
c.17 and c.74 ka (it is probably closer to the latter age)
substantially overlapped with the estimated ages of evi-
dence of the presence of modern humans in the region.
Second, its discoverers and describers interpreted its small
overall size (the stature of LB1 is estimated to be c.105 cm
and its body mass to be roughly between 25 and 30 kg),
small brain (c.420 cm3), and primitive morphology as ev-
idence of a novel endemically dwarfed Homo species.
Initially it was suggested that H. ﬂoresiensis was a dwarfed
H. erectus, but the burden of subsequent analyses suggests
that it may be more closely related to a more primitive

hominin such as H. habilis sensu lato (Tocheri et al., 2007;
Argue et al., 2009; Brown and Maeda, 2009; Morwood and
Jungers, 2009).

Denisovans

(Denisova 8)

The ﬁnal evidence to be considered in this time interval is
based on the analysis of ancient DNA recovered from the
distal phalanx of the ﬁfth (little ﬁnger) digit of a hominin
hand (Denisova 3) recovered from the c.48e30 ka layer 11
in Denisova Cave in the Altai Mountains in Russia. When
mtDNA from the distal phalanx was compared with the
mtDNA of 54 modern humans, one chimpanzee and one
bonobo, six Neandertals, and a single fossil H. sapiens
from Kostenki (Krause et al., 2010) it was concluded that it
came from a hominin that, while distinct from both modern
humans and Neandertals, shared a common ancestor with
both species c.1.0 million years ago. Reich et al. (2010)
sequenced the nuclear genome of the Denisova hominin
phalanx and more mtDNA from a large-crowned maxillary
molar
found in the cave whose crown
morphology is distinct from both modern humans and
Neandertals. Meyer et al. (2015) recently published a high-
coverage sequence from the same individual. Subse-
quently, a deciduous molar (Denisova 2) and another
maxillary molar (Denisova 4) have been identiﬁed as
Denisovans (Sawyer et al., 2015; Slon et al., 2015). The
nuclear genome sequence showed that Denisovans and
Neandertals split from each other after their common
ancestor had separated from the line leading to modern
humans, but conﬁrmed that Denisovans and Neandertals
split from each other after their common ancestor had
separated from the lineage leading to modern humans. It
also conﬁrmed the hypothesis that Denisovans and Nean-
dertals were distinct populations, because DNA recovered
from different Neandertals across Europe was consistently
more similar to one another than any was to the Denisovan
DNA. One study of mitochondrial DNA of an individual
from Sima de los Huesos (Meyer et al., 2014) has shown a
closer afﬁnity between the mtDNA of Denisovans and
Sima de los Huesos than between Denisovans and Nean-
dertals or modern humans. The implications of this ﬁnding
remain to be tested with nuclear DNA data from Sima de
los Huesos.

Evidence of Diversity

Any proposal for a hominin species other than modern
humans in the 0.25 Ma to the present time interval that
uses morphological evidence must demonstrate that the
fossil evidence lies outside the envelope of the morpho-
logical variation documented for H. sapiens. And, if more
than one set of fossil evidence meets that challenge, then
the proposers must demonstrate that each set of fossil

evidence is distinctive enough to be referred to a separate
species.

Those who claim that H. neanderthalensis is specif-
ically distinct from H. sapiens recognize morphological
autapomorphies that distinguish the former
from both
earlier
(eg, H. erectus and H. heidelbergensis) and
contemporary (ie, H. sapiens) Euro-Asian hominin taxa.
These features are found in the cranium (eg, large, rounded
discrete brow ridges, projecting mid-face, angled cheeks,
small mastoid process, suprainiac fossa, and occipital
bun), mandible (eg, long corpus, retro-molar space, and
asymmetric mandibular notch), dentition (eg, large shovel-
shaped incisors, distinctive occlusal morphology of molars
and premolars, a high incidence of taurodontism), and in
the postcranial skeleton (eg,
teres minor
groove extending onto the dorsal surface of the scapula,
large infraspinous fossa, long, thin pubic ramus, and large
joints). There are also reports that
the ontogeny of
H. neanderthalensis differs from that of modern humans
(Tillier, 1982; Nelson and Thompson, 2005; Coqueugniot
and Hublin, 2007; Ponce de León et al., 2008; Gunz et al.,
2010; Smith et al., 2010).

long clavicle,

The taxon H. neanderthalensis is currently the only
extinct hominin for which ancient DNA evidence has been
recovered from many individuals across several sites. The
draft sequence of the Neandertal nuclear genome (Green
et al., 2010), which focused on three individuals (Vi33.16,
25, and 26) from Vindija, was compared with smaller
amounts of sequence data from Neandertal specimens from
El Sidron, Kleine Feldhofer Grotte, and Mezmaiskaya, as
well as the sequenced nuclear genomes of ﬁve modern
humans. The results show that whereas the modern human
sample from sub-Saharan Africa contained no evidence of
Neandertal DNA, the three modern humans from outside of
Africa showed similar, low (between 1% and 4%) amounts
of DNA shared with Neandertals. These results are
compatible with either a deep split within Africa between
the population that gave rise to modern Africans and a
second one that gave rise to present-day non-Africans plus
Neandertals, or with the hypothesis that there was hybrid-
ization between Neandertals and modern humans soon after
the latter left Africa, perhaps in Western Asia. In summary,
the morphological and the genetic differences between
modern humans and Neandertals are both consistent with a
species-level distinction.

With respect to the alpha taxonomy of H. ﬂoresiensis,
views are sharply polarized. The consensus is that if you
take the hypodigm as a whole it is most parsimoniously
interpreted as evidence of a novel endemically dwarfed
premodern Homo, or early Homo, species. Less than a
handful of researchers, literally, cling to the view that the
“H. ﬂoresiensis hypodigm”
sapiens
populationdmost
likely related to the small-statured
Rampasasa people who live on Flores todaydall of

samples

an H.

HomininseContext, Origins and Diversity Chapter | 2 35

which are afﬂicted by either an endocrine disorder (see
Obendorf et al., 2008 and a rebuttal by Brown, 2012) or
one or more of a range of syndromes that include micro-
cephaly. Both explanations, a novel dwarfed early hominin
species, or a pathological population of modern humans,
are exotic, but those who espouse a pathological explana-
tion for the individuals represented by LB1e15 need to
explain what pathology results in a phenotype that re-
sembles an early Homo-like cranial vault, primitive
mandibular, dental, carpal, and pedal morphology, and a
brain that, while very small, apparently has none of the
morphological features associated with the majority of
types of microcephaly (Vannucci et al., 2011). We sub-
scribe to the interpretation that the fossil evidence from
Liang Bua is a dwarfed early Homo species that is clearly
phenotypically distinct from all of the other taxa in this time
interval.

Differences between the ancient mtDNA and nuclear
DNA extracted from the distal phalanx of the ﬁfth (little
ﬁnger) digit of a hominin hand, and the mtDNA
extracted from a large-crowned maxillary molar, both
found in Denisova Cave, and the DNA of modern
humans and Neandertals, are consistent with the Deni-
sovans and modern humans belonging to different spe-
cies (Reich et al., 2011; Patterson et al., 2012; Prüfer
et al., 2014). Denisovans and Neandertals were also
likely to have been separate species given that DNA
recovered from Neandertals across Europe was consis-
tently more similar to one another than any was to the
Denisovan DNA.

So within the time interval between 0.25 Ma to the
present time, there seems sound evidence for hominin
taxic diversity in the form of species-level differences
among H. sapiens, H. neanderthalensis, H. erectus, and
H. ﬂoresiensis. There is also less strong, but still potential,
evidence for two more taxa, H. heidelbergensis and the
Denisovans. It is also possible that the H. heidelbergensis
hypodigm and the Denisovan DNA sample the same taxon
(Meyer et al., 2014), especially if mtDNA results were to
be conﬁrmed by the results of future nuclear DNA ana-
lyses, but the substantial morphological and metric dif-
ferences between one of the upper molars from Denisovan
and equivalent teeth from the Sima de los Huesos cast
doubt on that scenario.

DISCUSSION

The assessment of taxic diversity depends on generating
hypotheses about the existence of hominin species and how
long-lived they are (Fig. 2.1). Both types of proposal are
bedeviled by sampling problems. Namely, how close are
the available data to the type and scale of data one would
need in order to generate reliable hypotheses about the
presence and time span of each proposed hominin species?

36 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

are

Turning ﬁrst to the realm of taxonomy, the criteria that
should be used to determine if a newly discovered fossil
sample falls outside the range of variation of an existing
species are the same ones researchers should use when they
determine if a newly discovered evidence about a living
animal
justiﬁes the erection of a new species. They
compare the newly discovered phenotype with museum
collections that sample the species closest to it, and if the
researchers
convinced the new specimen falls
comfortably outside the range of variation of existing
species, they have grounds for erecting a new species. The
equivalent exercise involving the hominin fossil record
would be to use the observed range of variation for the
relevant variables of the reference taxon (eg, Au. afarensis)
in the time interval occupied by the newly discovered
fossils (eg, c.3.4 Ma) and if the newly discovered fossils
fall comfortably outside that range of variation, then there
are grounds for erecting a new fossil species. But while
museum collections of most living animals comprise sam-
ples of complete specimens numbered in the hundreds, we
do not have the equivalent of these comprehensive museum
collections to estimate the parameters of the reference fossil
hominin species, just the fossils that make up the hypo-
digms of
those species. To go back to our hominin
example, researchers have access to what in relative terms
is a respectable sample of Au. afarensis from Hadar, with
important but much smaller samples from other sites, but
that becomes a much smaller sample when you restrict it to
the parts of the hypodigm known from c.3.4 Ma. But even
if one relaxes the time constraint, and considers the regions
of the skeleton (eg, dentition and mandible) that are best
represented in the Au. afarensis hypodigm, we are still
talking about sample sizes that would be considered un-
acceptably low in studies of extant primates. If the new
fossil evidence happens to preserve an anatomical region in
which the ratio of inter- to intraspeciﬁc variation is favor-
able, and if the specimens are relatively complete, it is
possible to demonstrate taxic diversity even with relatively
small sample sizes. Indeed, there are several instances in
the hominin fossil record where just one new fossil (eg, OH
7) is so different from the fossil evidence of a synchronic
species (eg, OH 5, the type specimen of P. boisei) that the
case for taxonomic distinctiveness is obvious. But not all
claims for new hominin taxa are as securely based as this
example (see Smith, 2005).

How can the situation be improved? The obvious so-
lution is to ﬁnd additional hominin fossil evidence from
new and existing sites and localities, and then provide, in a
timely fashion, detailed information about the new evi-
dence. This will serve to expand our knowledge of existing
fossil hominin taxa. But while we await the assembly of
these much larger hypodigms, is there anything else we can
do? One strategy is to expand our understanding of varia-
tion within closely related extant taxa and apply any lessons

learned to interpreting the hominin fossil record. Compar-
ative studies that collect data for a particular anatomical
region from large samples of the great apes, such as
the studies of dental morphology by Uchida (2004) and
Pilbrow (2010), are especially helpful because they allow
us to conduct the thought experiment of imagining what
variation in a large sample of an early hominin species
might look like. Another strategy is to look at patterns of
inter- and intraspeciﬁc variation within and among the
extant taxa most closely related to fossil hominins. If there
are any common patterns, and if we make the reasonable
working assumption that the hominin clade shares the same
pattern (ie, using the principle of the phylogenetic bracket,
see Witmer, 1995), parsimony suggests the observed
pattern should also apply to fossil hominin taxa. Sound
comparative evidence about inter- and intraspeciﬁc varia-
tion could then be used to generate additional criteria to
help researchers make judgments about
the taxonomic
signiﬁcance of morphological differences between small
samples of fossil hominins (eg, Wood, 1975; Wood et al.,
1991). But until we have larger hypodigms for fossil
hominin taxa, the procedures traditionally used in paleo-
anthropology are likely to lead to the “over-reporting” of
new taxa.

The assessment of taxic diversity also depends on the
ability to determine how long-lived taxa are. Studies that
looked at the time span of mammalian taxa in the Ceno-
zoic resulted in estimates of the median duration of a
species that range from 1.7 Ma (Foote and Raup, 1996) to
0.6 Ma (Barnosky et al., 2011). Two early hominin spe-
cies, Au. afarensis and P. boisei, have a good fossil record
with well-dated samples from several sites, and their
hypodigms span c.0.7 and c.1.0 Ma, respectively. Taken
overall these data suggest it is a reasonable working hy-
pothesis to assume that the median duration of an early
hominin species was in the order of one million years, plus
or minus 0.25 Ma years.

We can also work with the data we have for each
hominin species. To assign species, site samples, and in-
dividual fossils to time intervals, we used conservative
versions of the FAD and LAD of each species based on
their published ages (Table 2.1). We also assembled a
second version that, where applicable,
incorporates the
published error of the age of the nearest underlying dated
horizon in the case of the FAD, and the published error of
the age of the nearest overlying dated horizon in the case of
the LAD (Table 2.1; for details see Appendix A in Wood
and Boyle, 2016). For various reasons even this observed
FAD of a taxon is almost certainly later than the time the
taxon actually originated in, or migrated into, that region,
just as the equivalent observed LAD of a taxon is almost
certainly earlier than the time the taxon became extinct or
emigrated from that region. Just how much earlier than the
observed FAD the actual origination or migration occurred,

HomininseContext, Origins and Diversity Chapter | 2 37

and just how much later than the observed LAD of a taxon
the actual extinction or emigration occurred, is determined
by many factors. These include technical considerations
such as dating error, but a much more potent factor is the
nature of the relevant mammalian fossil record before and
after the current observed FAD and LAD. The problem is
the old adage “absence of evidence is not evidence of
absence”din other words it is a sampling problem. At most
sites early hominins are such a rare component of the
mammalian faunal record (c.1e2%) that researchers need
to ﬁnd a substantial number of nonhominin mammalian
fossils (at least several hundred) without ﬁnding any evi-
dence of a particular hominin species before it can be
reasonably assumed any hominin species was not part of
the faunal assemblage being sampled. And at sites such as
Koobi Fora where there is a major break in sedimentation
that spans several hundred thousand years prior to the FAD
of several hominin species (ie, there is no fossil record
during that time) we have little basis for concluding there
were no hominins prior to their FAD at that site (Bobe and
Leakey, 2009). We know even less about the time span of
the early hominin species that are presently found only at
Southern African sites.

There are uncertainties about the temporal span of all of
the fossil hominin taxa we reviewed above, especially those
with small hypodigms sampled at just one or two sites. But
what we can say about these uncertainties is that because it
is impossible for a FAD to occur before a species actually
originated, or for a LAD to occur after a species actually
went extinct, any species recognized in the hominin fossil
record is likely to extend into more, rather than fewer, time
intervals. So, all of the species we reviewed, especially the
ones with modestly sized hypodigms, will almost certainly
have had longer temporal spans than the ones we used,
leading to the systematic underestimation of hominin taxic
diversity.

CONCLUSIONS

We summarize our assessment of the strength of the
existing evidence for species distinctions in the form of
pairwise comparisons of species, or species equivalents, for
each of the time intervals (Table 2.2). In each time interval
we list the species, or species equivalents, in order of their
proposal or discovery and score the case for each of the
comparisons into one of three conﬁdence categories: high,
medium, or low. It will be obvious, but in any event we
want to emphasize the obvious, that these are subjective
assessments others can challenge, but at least these pro-
posals for hominin taxonomic diversity are “on the table”
for debate. As can be seen from Table 2.2, apart from the
period prior to 5 Ma, in all of the time intervals we sampled
there is at least one example of diversity that enjoys what
we judge to be a high level of conﬁdence. These examples

TABLE 2.2 Assessment of the Strength of the
Evidence for Taxic Diversity Within the Time
Intervals Described in the Text

7e5 Ma

High Conﬁdence

N/A

Moderate Conﬁdence

Orrorin tugenensis vs Sahelanthropus tchadensis

Orrorin tugenensis vs Ardipithecus kadabba

Sahelanthropus tchadensis vs Ardipithecus kadabba

Low Conﬁdence

N/A

5e4 Ma

High Conﬁdence

Ardipithecus ramidus vs Australopithecus anamensis

Moderate Conﬁdence

N/A

Low Conﬁdence

N/A

4e3 Ma

High Conﬁdence

Australopithecus afarensis vs Burtele foot

Moderate Conﬁdence

Australopithecus afarensis vs Kenyanthropus platyops

Low Conﬁdence

Australopithecus afarensis vs Australopithecus
bahrelghazali

Australopithecus afarensis vs Australopithecus
deyiremeda

Kenyanthropus platyops vs Australopithecus
deyiremeda

Kenyanthropus platyops vs Burtele foot

Burtele foot vs Australopithecus deyiremeda

3.0e2.5 Ma

High Conﬁdence

Australopithecus africanus vs Paranthropus
aethiopicus

Australopithecus africanus vs LD 350-1

Paranthropus aethiopicus vs LD 350-1

Moderate Conﬁdence

N/A

Low Conﬁdence

N/A

Continued

38 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

TABLE 2.2 Assessment of the Strength of the
Evidence for Taxic Diversity Within the Time
Intervals Described in the Textdcont’d
2.5e2.0 Ma

High Conﬁdence

TABLE 2.2 Assessment of the Strength of the
Evidence for Taxic Diversity Within the Time
Intervals Described in the Textdcont’d

Low Conﬁdence

Homo erectus vs Homo ergaster

Australopithecus africanus vs Paranthropus boisei

Homo erectus vs Homo antecessor

Paranthropus boisei vs Homo habilis sensu lato

1.0-0.25 Ma

Australopithecus garhi vs Homo habilis sensu lato

High Conﬁdence

Moderate Conﬁdence

Homo erectus vs Homo heidelbergensis

Australopithecus africanus vs Homo habilis sensu lato

Homo erectus vs Homo rhodesiensis

Australopithecus africanus vs Australopithecus garhi

Homo erectus vs Homo helmei

Paranthropus boisei vs Australopithecus garhi

Homo erectus vs Sima de los Huesos

Homo habilis sensu stricto vs Homo rudolfensis

Homo heidelbergensis vs Sima de los Huesos

Low Conﬁdence

N/A

2.0e1.5 Ma

High Conﬁdence

Homo erectus vs Paranthropus robustus

Homo rhodesiensis vs Sima de los Huesos

Homo helmei vs Sima de los Huesos

Moderate Conﬁdence

N/A

Low Conﬁdence

Homo erectus vs Paranthropus boisei

Homo heidelbergensis vs Homo rhodesiensis

Homo erectus vs Australopithecus sediba

Homo heidelbergensis vs Homo helmei

Paranthropus robustus vs Homo habilis sensu lato

Paranthropus robustus vs Australopithecus sediba

0.25 Maepresent

High Conﬁdence

Paranthropus boisei vs Homo habilis sensu lato

Homo sapiens vs Homo neanderthalensis

Paranthropus boisei vs Australopithecus sediba

Homo sapiens vs Homo erectus

Homo habilis sensu lato vs Australopithecus sediba

Homo sapiens vs Homo heidelbergensis

Moderate Conﬁdence

Homo sapiens vs Homo ﬂoresiensis

H.omo erectus vs Homo habilis sensu lato

Homo sapiens vs Denisovans

Paranthropus robustus vs Paranthropus boisei

Homo erectus vs Homo heidelbergensis

Homo habilis sensu stricto vs Homo rudolfensis

Homo erectus vs Homo ﬂoresiensis

Low Conﬁdence

Homo erectus vs Homo ergaster

Homo erectus vs Homo georgicus

1.5e1.0 Ma

High Conﬁdence

Homo neanderthalensis vs Homo erectus

Homo neanderthalensis vs Homo ﬂoresiensis

Homo heidelbergensis vs Homo ﬂoresiensis

Moderate Conﬁdence

Homo neanderthalensis vs Denisovans

Homo erectus vs Paranthropus robustus

Homo erectus vs Denisovans

Homo erectus vs Paranthropus boisei

Low Conﬁdence

Paranthropus robustus vs Homo habilis sensu lato

Homo neanderthalensis vs Homo heidelbergensis

Paranthropus robustus vs Homo antecessora

Paranthropus boisei vs Homo antecessora

Homo habilis sensu lato vs Homo antecessora

Moderate Conﬁdence

Homo erectus vs Homo habilis sensu lato

Paranthropus robustus vs Paranthropus boisei

Homo heidelbergensis vs Denisovans

For each of the nine time intervals relevant to the hominin
fossil record, we assess the strength of the evidence for taxic
diversity among hominin species by allocating each pairwise
comparison to one of three categories of conﬁdence, high,
moderate or low.
aIf the partial mandible (ATE9-1) from the Sima del Elefante does not
belong to Homo antecessor, then these “high conﬁdence” pairwise
comparisons fall away.

Continued

are likely to grow as hypodigms expand and new sites
extend the time ranges of the existing species. There is also
the potential for ﬁnding fossil evidence of additional spe-
cies such as Homo naledi (Berger et al., 2015). Our very
preliminary assessment of the evidence recovered from the
Dinaledi chamber of the Rising Star system suggests that
the claim that this is a new species needs to be taken
seriously. But even if the discoveries in the Dinaledi
Chamber add to the evidence for taxonomic diversity, until
researchers can determine its age (Dirks et al., 2015) we
will not know which time interval, or intervals, would be
affected by this new evidence.

As for the future, researchers who ﬁnd new fossil
evidence that lies outside the envelope of the hypodigms
of closely related species should at least convince them-
selves that the new material is unlikely to be sampled from
the species from which the existing sample (ie, hypodigm)
has been drawn. That is a very different investigation from
the usual one that decides whether the new fossils are
outside the range of the hypodigms of existing hominin
species from approximately the same time period. We
must guard against the tendency in all of us to “focus on
the strength or extremeness of the available evidence” and
to have “insufﬁcient regard for its weight or credence”
(Grifﬁn and Tversky, 1992, p. 411). This tendency may
explain why people in general, and perhaps paleoanthro-
pologists in particular, are “often more conﬁdent
in
their judgments than is warranted by the facts” (Grifﬁn
and Tversky, 1992, p. 411). Devising a formal strategy to
take account of this tendency for overconﬁdence is a
challenge that faces all researchers involved in fossil
discovery.

What this evidence for taxic diversity means for lineage
diversity within the hominin clade is outside the scope of this
review, but while lineage diversity cannot exist without
taxonomic diversity, taxonomic diversity does not always
mean there is lineage diversity. For example, although we
suggest there is evidence of a species-level distinction between
Au. anamensis and Au. afarensis, and between P. aethiopicus
and P. boisei, there is also evidence that at least one of these
pairs of taxa (Kimbel et al., 2006) belong to the same lineage.
Also, we are not as convinced as some of our colleagues that
current phylogenetic hypotheses are sound enough to make
convincing inferences about lineage diversity.

It is evident from this review that proposals to recognize
new hominin taxa are not equally convincing. However, our
interpretation of the fossil evidence suggests that for at least
the past four and a half million years there is compelling
evidence for taxic diversity within the hominin clade.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank Andrew Barr, Aida Gómez-Robles, Bill
Kimbel, and Richard Smith for their insightful comments on an

HomininseContext, Origins and Diversity Chapter | 2 39

earlier version, and Brenda Bradley for her help with interpreting the
DNA literature. Needless to say, any remaining errors are our re-
sponsibility, not
theirs. Bernard Wood would like to thank the
Provost of George Washington University for his continuing support
for the George Washington University Professorship of Human
Origins and via the George Washington Signature Program for his
support of CASHP. Eve Boyle was supported by the NSF-IGERT
DGE-0801634 and is now supported by a GW Provost’s Diversity
Fellowship.

Sponsorship: GW Provost’s Signature Program Funding (award
to BW), GW Provost’s Diversity Graduate Fellowship (award to EB)

REFERENCES

Ackermann, R.R., Smith, R.J., 2007. The macroevolution of our ancient
lineage: what we know (or think we know) about early hominin di-
versity. Evolutionary Biology 34, 72e85.

Ahern, J.C., 2005. Foramen magnum position variation in Pan troglodytes,
Plio-Pleistocene hominids, and recent Homo sapiens: implications for
recognizing the earliest hominids. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology 127 (3), 267e276.

Almécija, S., Moyà-Solà, S., Alba, D.M., 2010. Early origin for human-
like precision grasping: a comparative study of pollical distal pha-
langes in fossil hominins. Public Library of Science 5, e11727.

Almécija, S., Tallman, M., Alba, D.M., et al., 2013. The femur of Orrorin
tugenensis exhibits morphometric afﬁnities with both Miocene apes
and later hominins. Nature Communications 4, 2888.

Almécija, S., Smaers, J.B., Jungers, W.L., 2015. The evolution of human

and ape hand proportions. Nature Communications 6, 7717.

Arambourg, C., Coppens, Y., 1968. Découverte d’un australopithecien
nouveau dans les Gisements de L’Omo (Ethiopie). South African
Journal of Science 64, 58e59.

Argue, D., Morwood, M.J., Sutikna, T., et al., 2009. Homo ﬂoresiensis: a

cladistic analysis. Journal of Human Evolution 57, 623e639.

Arsuaga, J.L., Martinez, I., Garcia, A., et al., 1997. The Sima de los
Huesos crania (Sierra de Atapuerca, Spain). A comparative study.
Journal of Human Evolution 33, 219e281.

Asfaw, B., White, T., Lovejoy, O., et al., 1999. Australopithecus garhi:
a new species of early hominid from Ethiopia. Science 284, 629e635.
Barnosky, A.D., Matzke, N., Tomiya, S., et al., 2011. Has the Earth’s sixth

mass extinction already arrived? Nature 471, 51e57.

Berger, L.R., de Ruiter, D.J., Churchill, S.E., et al., 2010. Australopithecus
sediba: a new species of Homo-like australopith from South Africa.
Science 328, 195e204.

Berger, L.R., Hawks, J., de Ruiter, D.J., et al., 2015. Homo naledi, a new
species of the genus Homo from the Dinaledi Chamber, South Africa.
eLife 4, e09560.

Bermúdez de Castro, J.M., Arsuaga, J.L., Carbonell, E., et al., 1997.
A hominid from the lower Pleistocene of Atapuerca, Spain: possible
ancestor to Neandertals and modern humans. Science 276, 1392e1395.
Bermudez de Castro, J.M., Martinon-Torres, M., Gómez-Robles, A., et al.,
2011. Early Pleistocene human mandible from Sima del Elefante (TE)
cave site in Sierra de Atapuerca (Spain): a comparative morphological
study. Journal of Human Evolution 61, 12e25.

Bermúdez de Castro, J.M., Martinón-Torres, M., Lozano, M., et al., 2004.
Paleodemography of the Atapuerca: Sima De Los Huesos Hominin
Sample: A Revision and New Approaches to the Paleodemography of
the European Middle Pleistocene Population. Journal of Anthropo-
logical Research 60, 5e26.

40 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

Black, D., 1927. On a lower molar hominid tooth from Chou-kou-tien

deposit. Palaeontologica Sinica 7, 1e28.

Bobe, R., Leakey, M.G., 2009. Ecology of Plio-Pleistocene mammals in
the Omo-Turkana basin and the emergence of Homo. In: Grine, F.E.,
Fleagle, J.G., Leakey, R.E. (Eds.), The First Humans e Origin and
Early Evolution of the Genus Homo. Vertebrate Paleobiology and
Paleoanthropology. Springer, Dordrecht, pp. 173e184.

Bradley, B.J., 2008. Reconstructing phylogenies and phenotypes: a
molecular view of human evolution. Journal of Anatomy 212,
337e353.

Broom, R., Robinson, J.T., 1950. Man contemporaneous with the
Swartkrans ape-man. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 8,
151e156.

Broom, R., 1938. The Pleistocene anthropoid apes of South Africa. Nature

142, 377e379.

Brown, P., Maeda, T., 2009. Liang Bua Homo ﬂoresiensis mandibles and
mandibular teeth: a contribution to the comparative morphology of a
hominin species. Journal of Human Evolution 57, 571e596.

Brown, B., Brown, F.H., Walker, A., 2001. New hominids from the Lake

Turkana Basin, Kenya. Journal of Human Evolution 41, 29e44.

Brown, P., Sutikna, T., Morwood, M.J., et al., 2004. A new small-bodied
hominin from the Late Pleistocene of Flores, Indonesia. Nature 431,
1055e1061.

Brown, P., 2012. LB1 and LB6 Homo ﬂoresiensis are not modern
human (Homo sapiens) cretins. Journal of Human Evolution 62,
201e224.

Brunet, M., Beauvilain, A., Coppens, Y., et al., 1995. The ﬁrst australo-
pithecine 2,500 kilometers west of the Rift Valley (Chad). Nature 376,
273e275.

Brunet, M., Beauvilain, A., Coppens, Y., et al., 1996. Australopithecus
bahrelghazali, une nouvelle espèce d’Hominidé ancien de la région de
Koro Toro (Tchad). Comptes Rendus de l’Académie des Sciences
322, 907e913.

Brunet, M., Guy, F., Pilbeam, D., et al., 2002. A new hominid from the

Upper Miocene of Chad, Central Africa. Nature 418, 145e151.

Brunet, M., Guy, F., Pilbeam, D., et al., 2005. New material of the earliest

Clarke, R.J., 2008. Latest information on Sterkfontein’s Australopithecus
skeleton and a new look at Australopithecus. South African Journal of
Science 104, 443e449.

Consortium TCSA, 2005. Initial sequence of the chimpanzee genome and

comparison with the human genome. Nature 437, 69e87.

Coqueugniot, H., Hublin, J., 2007. Endocranial volume and brain growth

in immature Neandertals. Periodicum Biologorum 109, 379e385.

Dart, R., 1925. Australopithecus africanus: the man-ape from South Af-

rica. Nature 115, 195e199.

Dart, R.A., 1948. The Makapansgat proto-human Australopithecus
prometheus. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 6,
259e284.

Dean, D., Hublin, J.-J., Holloway, R., et al., 1998. On the phylogenetic
position of the pre-Neandertal specimen from Reilingen, Germany.
Journal of Human Evolution 34, 485e508.

Diogo, R., Wood, B., 2011. Soft-tissue anatomy of the primates: phylo-
genetic analyses based on the muscles of the head, neck, pectoral
region and upper limb, with notes on the evolution of these muscles.
Journal of Anatomy 219, 273e359.

Dirks, P.H.G.M., Berger, L.R., Roberts, E.M., et al., 2015. Geological and
taphonomic context for the new hominin species Homo naledi from
the Dinaledi Chamber, South Africa. eLife 4, e09561.

Drapeau, M.S.M., 2012. Forelimb adaptations in Australopithecus afar-
ensis. In: Reynolds, S.C., Gallagher, A. (Eds.), African Genesis.
Perspectives on Hominin Evolution. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp. 223e247.

Dreyer, T.F., 1935. A human skull from Florisbad, Orange Free State,
with a note on the endocranial cast, by C.U. Ariëns Kappers. Pro-
ceedings of the Royal Academy of Sciences of Amsterdam 38,
119e128.

Dubois, E., 1893. Palaeontologische onderzoekingen op Java. Verslag

Mijnwezen (Batavia) 10, 10e14.

Emonet, E.-G., Andossa, L., Mackaye, H.T., et al., 2014. Subocclusal
dental morphology of Sahelanthropus tchadensis and the evolution
of teeth in hominins. American Journal of Physical Anthropology
153 (1), 116e123.

hominid from the Upper Miocene of Chad. Nature 434, 752e755.

Foote, M., Raup, D.M., 1996. Fossil preservation and the stratigraphic

Carbonell, E., Bermúdez de Castro, J.M., Arsuaga, J.L., et al., 2005. An
Early Pleistocene hominin mandible from Atapuerca-TD6, Spain.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 102, 5674e5678.

Carbonell, E., Bermúdez de Castro, J.M., Parés, J.M., et al., 2008. The ﬁrst

hominin of Europe. Nature 452, 465e469.

Carlson, K.J., Stout, D., Jashashvili, T., et al., 2011. The endocast of MH1,

Australopithecus sediba. Science 333, 1402e1407.

Chamberlain, A.T., Wood, B.A., 1987. Early hominid phylogeny. Journal

of Human Evolution 16, 119e133.

Clark, J.D., Beyene, Y., WoldeGabriel, G., et al., 2003. Stratigraphic,
chronological and behavioural contexts of Pleistocene Homo sapiens
from middle Awash, Ethiopia. Nature 423, 747e752.

Clarke, R.J., 1988. A new Australopithecus cranium from Sterkfontein and
its bearing on the ancestry of Paranthropus. In: Grine, F.E. (Ed.),
Evolutionary History of the “Robust” Australopithecines. Evolu-
tionary History of
the “Robust” Australopithecines. Aldine de
Gruyter, New York, pp. 285e292.

ranges of taxa. Paleobiology 22, 121e140.

Gabounia, L., de Lumley, M.-A., Vekua, A., et al., 2002. Découverte d’un
nouvel hominidé à Dmanissi (Transcaucasie, Géorgie). Comptes
Rendus Palevol 1, 243e253.

Galik, K., Senut, B., Pickford, M., et al., 2004. External and internal
morphology of the BAR 1002’00 Orrorin tugenensis femur. Science
305, 1450e1453.

Gibbs, S., Collard, M., Wood, B.A., 2002. Soft-tissue anatomy of the
extant hominoids: a review and phylogenetic analysis. Journal of
Anatomy 200, 3e49.

Gómez-Robles, A., Bermúdez de Castro, J.M., Martinon-Torres, M., et al.,
2015. A geometric morphometric analysis of hominin lower molars.
Evolutionary implications and overview of postcanine dental varia-
tion. Journal of Human Evolution 82, 34e50.

Gordon, A.D., Green, D.J., Richmond, B.R., 2008. Strong postcranial size
dimorphism in Australopithecus afarensis: results from two new
resampling methods for multivariate data sets with missing data.
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 135, 311e328.

Clarke, R., 1999. Discovery of complete arm and hand of the 3.3 million-
year-old Australopithecus skeleton from Sterkfontein. South African
Journal of Science 95, 477e480.

Grabowski, M., Hatala, K.G., Jungers, W.L., et al., 2015. Body mass es-
timates of hominin fossils and the evolution of human body size.
Journal of Human Evolution 85, 75e93.

Granger, D.E., Gibbon, R.J., Kuman, K., et al., 2015. New cosmogenic
burial ages for Sterkfontein Member 2 Australopithecus and Member
5 Oldowan. Nature 522, 85e88.

Green, R.E., Malaspinas, A.S., Krause, J., et al., 2008. A complete
Neandertal mitochondrial genome sequence determined by high-
throughput sequencing. Cell 134, 416e426.

Green, R.E., Krause, J., Briggs, A.W., et al., 2010. A draft sequence of the

Neandertal genome. Science 328, 710e722.

Grifﬁn, D., Tversky, A., 1992. The weighing of evidence and the de-

terminants of conﬁdence. Cognitive Psychology 24, 411e435.

Groves, C.P., Mazák, V., 1975. An approach to the taxonomy of the
Hominidae: gracile Villafranchian hominids of Africa. Casopis pro
Mineralogii a Geologii 20, 225e247.

Groves, C.P., 1989. A Theory of Human and Primate Evolution. Clar-

endon Press, Oxford.

Gunz, P., Neubauer, S., Maureille, B., et al., 2010. Brain development after
birth differs between Neanderthals and modern humans. Current
Biology 20 (21), R921eR922.

Guy, F., Lieberman, D.E., Pilbeam, D., et al., 2005. Morphological af-
ﬁnities of the Sahelanthropus tchadensis (Late Miocene hominid from
Chad) cranium. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 102, 18836e18841.

Guy, F., Mackaye, H.-T., Likius, A., et al., 2008. Symphyseal shape
variation in extant and fossil hominoids, and the symphysis of
Australopithecus bahrelghazali. Journal of Human Evolution 55,
37e47.

Haile-Selassie, Y., Suwa, G., White, T.D., 2004. Late Miocene teeth from
Middle Awash, Ethiopia, and early hominid dental evolution. Science
303, 1503e1505.

Haile-Selassie, Y., Suwa, G., White, T., 2009. Hominidae. In: Haile-
Selassie, Y., WoldeGabriel, G. (Eds.), Ardipithecus kadabba Late
Miocene Evidence From the Middle Awash, Ethiopia. University of
California Press, Berkeley, pp. 159e236.

Haile-Selassie, Y., Latimer, B., Alene, M., et al., 2010a. An early Aus-
tralopithecus afarensis postcranium from Woranso-Mille, Ethiopia.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 107, 12121e12126.

Haile-Selassie, Y., Saylor, B., Deino, A., et al., 2010b. New hominid
fossils from Woranso-Mille (Central Afar, Ethiopia) and taxonomy of
early Australopithecus. American Journal of Physical Anthropology
141, 406e417.

Haile-Selassie, Y., Saylor, B.Z., Deino, A., et al., 2012. A new hominin
foot from Ethiopia shows multiple Pliocene bipedal adaptations.
Nature 483, 565e569.

Haile-Selassie, Y., Gibert, L., Melillo, S.M., et al., 2015. New species from
Ethiopia further expands Middle Pliocene hominin diversity. Nature
521, 483e488.

Haile-Selassie, Y., 2001. Late Miocene hominids from the Middle Awash,

Ethiopia. Nature 412, 178e181.

Hublin, J.J., 2009. The origin of Neandertals. Proceedings of the National
the United States of America 106,

Academy of Sciences of
16022e16027.

Hunt, K.D., 2003. The single species hypothesis: truly dead and pushing
twitching and ripe for resuscitation? Human

up bushes, or still
Biology 75, 485e502.

I.C.Z.N, 1999. Opinion 1941: Australopithecus afarensis Johanson, 1978
(Mammalia, Primates): speciﬁc name conserved. The Bulletin of
Zoological Nomenclature 56, 223e224.

HomininseContext, Origins and Diversity Chapter | 2 41

Johanson, D.C., Taieb, M., Coppens, Y., et al., 1978. Expedition inter-
nationale de l’Afar Ethiopie (4m et 5e campagnes 1975e1977) :
nouvelle decouvertes d’Hominides et decouvertes d’industries lith-
iques Pliocenes a Hadar. Comptes Rendus de l’Académie des Sciences
287, 237e240.

Kaifu, Y., Aziz, F., Indriati, E., et al., 2008. Cranial morphology of Ja-
vanese Homo erectus: new evidence for continuous evolution,
specialization, and terminal extinction. Journal of Human Evolution
55, 551e580.

Kimbel, W.H., Delezene, L.K., 2009. “‘Lucy’” redux: a review of research
on Australopithecus afarensis. American Journal of Physical An-
thropology 140, 2e48.

Kimbel, W.H., White, T.D., Johanson, D.C., 1984. Cranial morphology of
Australopithecus afarensis: a comparative study based on a composite
reconstruction of the adult skull. American Journal of Physical An-
thropology 64, 337e388.

Kimbel, W., Rak, Y., Johanson, D.C., 2004. The Skull of Australopithecus

afarensis. Oxford University Press, New York.

Kimbel, W.H., Lockwood, C.A., Ward, C.V., et al., 2006. Was Austral-
opithecus anamensis ancestral to A. afarensis? A case of anagenesis
in the hominin fossil
record. Journal of Human Evolution 51,
134e152.

King, W., 1864. The reputed fossil man of the Neanderthal. Quarterly

Journal of Science 1, 88e97.

Kivell, T.L., Kibii, J.M., Churchill, S.E., et al., 2011. Australopithecus
locomotor and

sediba hand demonstrates mosaic evolution of
manipulative abilities. Science 333, 1411e1417.

Krause, J., Fu, Q., Good, J.M., et al., 2010. The complete mitochondrial
DNA genome of an unknown hominin from southern Siberia. Nature
464, 894e897.

Langergraber, K.E., Prüfer, K., Rowney, C., et al., 2012. Generation times
in wild chimpanzees and gorillas suggest earlier divergence times in
great ape and human evolution. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America 109, 15716e15721.

Le Gros Clark, W.E., 1955. The Fossil Evidence for Human Evolution: An
Introduction to the Study of Paleoanthropology. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago.

Le Gros Clark, W.E., 1964. The Fossil Evidence for Human Evolution: An
Introduction to the Study of Paleoanthropology, second ed. University
of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Leakey, L.S.B., Tobias, P.V., Napier, J., 1964. A new species of the genus

Homo from Olduvai Gorge. Nature 202, 7e9.

Leakey, M.G., Feibel, C.S., McDougall, I., et al., 1995. New four-million-
year-old hominid species from Kanapoi and Allia Bay, Kenya. Nature
376, 565e571.

Leakey, M.G., Feibel, C.S., McDougall, I., et al., 1998. New specimens
and conﬁrmation of an early age for Australopithecus anamensis.
Nature 393, 62e66.

Leakey, M.G., Spoor, F., Brown, F.H., et al., 2001. New hominin genus
from eastern Africa shows diverse middle Pliocene lineages. Nature
410, 433e440.

Leakey, M.G., Spoor, F., Dean, M.C., et al., 2012. New fossils from Koobi
Fora in northern Kenya conﬁrm taxonomic diversity in early Homo.
Nature 488, 201e204.

Leakey, L.S.B., 1959. A new fossil skull from Olduvai. Nature 184,

491e493.

Leakey, R.E.F., Walker, A.C., 1976. Australopithecus, Homo erectus and

the single species hypothesis. Nature 261, 572e574.

42 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

Lebatard, A.E., Bourlès, D.L., Duringer, P., et al., 2008. Cosmogenic nuclide
dating of Sahelanthropus tchadensis and Australopithecus bahrelghazali:
Mio-Pliocene hominids from Chad. Proceedings of the National Acad-
emy of Sciences of the United States of America 105, 3226e3231.

Linnaeus, C., 1758. Systema Naturae. Laurentii Salvii, Stockholm.
Locke, D.P., Hillier, L.W., Warren, W.C., et al., 2011. Comparative and
analysis of orangutan genomes. Nature 469,

demographic
529e533.

Lockwood, C.A., Tobias, P.V., 2002. Morphology and afﬁnities of new
hominin cranial remains from Member 4 of the Sterkfontein Forma-
tion, Gauteng Province, South Africa. Journal of Human Evolution 42,
389e450.

Lockwood, C.A., Kimbel, W.H., Lynch, J.M., 2004. Morphometrics and
hominioid phylogeny: support for a chimpanzee-human clade and
differentiation among great ape subspecies. Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 101,
4356e4360.

Olson, T.R., 1981. Basicranial morphology of the extant hominoids and
Pliocene hominids :
the new material from the Hadar Formation,
Ethiopia and its signiﬁcance in early human evolution and taxonomy.
In: Stringer, C.B. (Ed.), Aspects of Human Evolution. Taylor &
Francis, London, pp. 99e128.

Olson, T.R., 1985a. Cranial morphology and systematics of the Hadar
formation hominids and Australopithecus africanus. In: Delson, E.
(Ed.), Ancestors: The Hard Evidence. Alan R. Liss, Inc., New York,
pp. 102e119.

Olson, T.R., 1985b. Taxonomic afﬁnities of the immature hominid crania

from Hadar and Taung. Nature 316, 539e540.

Partridge, T.C., Granger, D.E., Caffee, D.E., et al., 2003. Lower Pliocene

hominid remains from Sterkfontein. Science 300, 607e612.

Patterson, B., Howells, W.W., 1967. Hominid humeral fragment from

early Pleistocene of northwest Kenya. Science 156, 64e66.

Patterson, N., Moorjani, P., Luo, Y., et al., 2012. Ancient admixture in

human history. Genetics 192, 1065e1093.

Lordkipanidze, D., Ponce de León, M.S., Margvelashvili, A., et al., 2013.
A complete skull from Dmanisi, Georgia, and the evolutionary
biology of early Homo. Science 342, 326e331.

Pickford, M., Senut, B., Gommery, D., et al., 2002. Bipedalism in Orrorin
tugenensis revealed by its femora. Comptes Rendus Palevol 1, 1e13.
Pilbrow, V., 2010. Dental and phylogeographic patterns of variation in

Lovejoy, C.O., Suwa, G., Simpson, S.W., et al., 2009. The great divides:
Ardipithecus ramidus reveals the postcrania of our last common an-
cestors with African apes. Science 326, 73e106.

Manzi, G., Mallegni, F., Ascenzi, A., 2001. A cranium for the earliest
Europeans: Phylogenetic position of the hominid from Ceprano, Italy.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 98, 10011e10016.

gorillas. Journal of Human Evolution 59, 16e34.

Ponce de León, M.S., Golovanova, L., Doronichev, V., et al., 2008.
Neanderthal brain size at birth provides insights into the evolution of
human life history. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America 105, 13764e13768.

Prado-Martinez, J., Sudmant, P.H., Kidd, J.M., et al., 2013. Great ape

genetic diversity and population history. Nature 499, 471e475.

Mayr, E., 1944. On the concepts and terminology of vertical subspecies and
species. National Research Council Committee on Common Problems
of Genetics, Paleontology, and Systematics Bulletin 2, 11e16.

Prüfer, K., Munch, K., Hellmann, I., et al., 2012. The bonobo genome
compared with the chimpanzee and human genomes. Nature 486,
527e531.

Mayr, E., 1950. Taxonomic categories in fossil hominids. Cold Spring

Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology 15, 109e118.

McDougall, I., Brown, F.H., Fleagle, J.G., 2005. Stratigraphic placement
and age of modern humans from Kibish, Ethiopia. Nature 433,
733e736.

Meyer, M., Fu, Q., Aximu-Petri, A., et al., 2014. A mitochondrial genome
sequence of a hominin from Sima de los Huesos. Nature 505,
403e406.

Meyer, M., Kircher, M., Gansange, M.-M., et al., 2015. A high-coverage
genome sequence from an archaic Denisovan individual. Science 338,
222e226.

Prüfer, K., Racimo, F., Patterson, N., et al., 2014. The complete genome
sequence of a Neanderthal from the Altai Mountains. Nature 505,
43e49.

Rak, Y., Ginsburg, A., Geffen, E., 2007. Gorilla-like anatomy on Aus-
tralopithecus afarensis mandibles suggest Au. afarensis link to robust
australopiths. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 104, 6568e6572.

Rak, Y., 1983. The Australopithecine Face. Academic Press, New York.
Reich, D., Green, R.E., Kircher, M., et al., 2010. Genetic history of an
archaic hominin group from Denisova Cave in Siberia. Nature 468,
1053e1060.

Morwood, M.J., Jungers, W.L., 2009. Conclusions: implications of the
Liang Bua excavations for hominin evolution and biogeography.
Journal of Human Evolution 57, 640e648.

Reich, D., Patterson, N., Kircher, M., et al., 2011. Denisova admixture and
the ﬁrst modern human dispersals into Southeast Asia and Oceania.
The American Journal of Human Genetics 89, 1e13.

Morwood, M.J., Brown, P., Jatmiko, et al., 2005. Further evidence for
small-bodied hominins from the Late Pleistocene of Flores, Indonesia.
Nature 437, 1012e1017.

Mounier, A., Marchal, F., Condemi, S., 2009. Is Homo heidelbergensis a
distinct species? New insight on the Mauer mandible. Journal of
Human Evolution 56, 219e246.

Nelson, A.J., Thompson, J.L., 2005. In: Ullrich, H. (Ed.), The Neandertal
Adolescent Le Moustier. Staatliche Museen zu Berlin, Berlin,
pp. 328e338.

Obendorf, P.J., Oxnard, C.E., Kefford, B.J., 2008. Are the small human-
like fossils found on Flores human endemic cretins? Proceedings of
the Royal Society B 275, 1287e1296.

Ohman, J.C., Lovejoy, C.O., White, T., 2005. Questions about Orrorin

tugenensis. Science 307, 845.

Reno, P.L., Meindl, R.S., McCollum, M.A., et al., 2003. Sexual dimor-
phism in Australopithecus afarensis was similar to that of modern
humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 100, 9404e9409.

Richmond, B.G., Jungers, W.L., 2008. Orrorin tugenensis femoral
morphology and the evolution of hominin bipedalism. Science 319,
1662e1665.

Rightmire, G.P., 1995. Geography, time and speciation in Pleistocene

Homo. South African Journal of Science 91, 450e454.

Robinson, J.T., 1960. The afﬁnities of the new Olduvai australopithecine.

Nature 186, 456e458.

Robinson, J.T., 1961. The australopithecines and their bearing on the
origin of man and of stone tool-making. South African Journal of
Science 57, 3e13.

HomininseContext, Origins and Diversity Chapter | 2 43

Rosas, A., Bastir, M., Martínez-Maza, C., et al., 2006. Inquiries into
Neanderthal craniofacial development and evolution: “accretion”
versus “organismic” models. In: Harvati, K., Harrison, T. (Eds.),
Neanderthals Revisited: New Approaches and Perspectives. Springer,
Dordrecht, pp. 37e70.

Tardieu, C., 1983. L’articulation du genou des Primates catarhiniens et
Hominidés fossiles.
taxinomique.
Bulletins et Mémoires de la Société d’anthropologie de Paris 10
(Internet). Available from: http://www.persee.fr/web/revues/home/
prescript/article/bmsap_0037-8984_1983_num_10_3_3908.

Implications phylogénétique et

Rosenzweig, M.L., 1995. Species Diversity in Space and Time. Cambridge

Tillier, A., 1982. Les enfants Néanderthaliens de Devil’s Tower (Gibraltar).

University Press, Cambridge.

Zeitschrift für Morphologie und Anthropologie 73, 125e148.

Sawyer, S., Renaud, G., Viola, B., et al., 2015. Nuclear and mitochondrial
DNA sequences from two Denisovan individuals. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
doi:10:1073/pnas.1519905112 (Early Edition).

Scally, A., Dutheil, J.Y., Hillier, L.W., et al., 2012. Insights into hominid

evolution from the gorilla genome sequence. Nature 483, 169e175.

Tobias, P.V., 1967. The Cranium and Maxillary Dentition of Austral-
(Zinjanthropus) boisei. Cambridge University Press,

opithecus
Cambridge.

Tocheri, M.W., Orr, C.M., Larson, S.G., et al., 2007. The primitive wrist
of Homo ﬂoresiensis and its implications for hominin evolution.
Science 317, 1743e1745.

Schoetensack, O., 1908. Der Unterkiefer des Homo heidelbergensis aus

Uchida, A., 2004. Craniodental Variation Among the Great Apes. Harvard

den Sanden von Mauer bei Heidelberg. W. Engelmann, Leipzig.

University Press, Cambridge.

Semaw, S., Simpson, S.W., Quade, J., et al., 2005. Early Pliocene homi-

nids from Gona, Ethiopia. Nature 433, 301e305.

Senut, B., Pickford, M., Gommery, D., et al., 2001. First hominid from the
(Lukeino Formation, Kenya). Comptes Rendus de

Miocene
l’Académie des Sciences 332, 137e144.

Senut, B., 1983. Les hominides Plio-Pleistocenes: essai taxinomique et
phylogenetique a partis de certains os longs. Bulletins et mémoires de
la Société d’Anthropologie de Paris 10, 325e334.

Shoshani, J., Groves, C.P., Simons, E.L., et al., 1996. Primate phylogeny:
morphological vs. molecular results. Molecular Phylogenetics and
Evolution 5, 101e153.

Slon, V., Sawyer, S., Renaud, G., et al., 2015. Proceedings of the European

Society for the study of Human Evolution 207.

Smith, T.M., Tafforeau, P., Reid, D.J., et al., 2010. Dental evidence for
ontogenetic differences between modern humans and Neanderthals.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 107, 20923e20928.

Smith, R.J., 2005. Species recognition in paleoanthropology; implications
of small sample sizes. In: Lieberman, D.E., Smith, R.J., Kelley, J.
(Eds.), Interpreting the Past: Essays on Human, Primate, and Mammal
Evolution in Honor of David Pilbeam. Brill Academic Publishers,
Boston, pp. 207e219.

Spoor, F., Leakey, M.G., Gathogo, P.N., et al., 2007. Implications of new
early Homo fossils from Ileret, east of Lake Turkana, Kenya. Nature
448, 688e691.

Spoor, F., Leakey, M.G., Leakey, L.N., 2010. Hominin diversity in
the Middle Pliocene of eastern Africa: the maxilla of KNM-WT 40000.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 365, 3377e3388.
Spoor, F., Gunz, P., Neubauer, S., et al., 2015. Reconstructed Homo
habilis type OH 7 suggests deep-rooted species diversity in early
Homo. Nature 519, 83e86.

Stevens, N.J., Seiffert, E.R., O’Connor, P.M., et al., 2013. Palaeontological
evidence for an Oligocene divergence between Old World monkeys
and apes. Nature 497, 611e614.

Vannucci, R.C., Barron, T.F., Holloway, R.L., 2011. Craniometric ratios
of microcephaly and LB1, Homo ﬂoresiensis, using MRI and endo-
casts. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 108, 14043e14048.

Venn, O., Turner, I., Mathieson, I., et al., 2014. Strong male bias drives

germline mutation in chimpanzees. Science 344, 1272e1275.

Villmoare, B., Kimbel, W.H., Seyoum, C., et al., 2015. Early Homo at 2.8

Ma from Ledi-Geraru, Afar, Ethiopia. Science 347, 1352e1355.

Von Koenigswald, G.H., Weidenreich, F., 1939. The relationship between

Pithecanthropus and Sinanthropus. Nature 144, 926e929.

Ward, C.V., Kimbel, W.H., Harmon, E.H., et al., 2012. New postcranial fossils
of Australopithecus afarensis from Hadar, Ethiopia (1990e2007).
Journal of Human Evolution 63, 1e51.

Ward, C., Leakey, M., Walker, A., 1999. The new hominid species
7,

anamensis. Evolutionary Anthropology

Australopithecus
197e205.

Ward, C.V., Kimbel, W.H., Johanson, D.C., 2011. Complete fourth
metatarsal and arches in the foot of Australopithecus afarensis. Sci-
ence 331, 750e753.

Washburn, S.L., 1950. The analysis of primate evolution with particular
reference to the origin of man. Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on
Quantitative Biology 15, 67e78.

Weidenreich, F., 1940. Some problems dealing with ancient man. Amer-

ican Anthropologist 42, 375e383.

White, T.D., Johanson, D.C., Kimbel, W.H., 1981. Australopithecus
africanus: its phyletic position reconsidered. South African Journal of
Science 77, 445e470.

White, T.D., Suwa, G., Asfaw, B., 1994. Australopithecus ramidus, a new
species of early hominid from Aramis, Ethiopia. Nature 371,
306e312.

White, T.D., Suwa, G., Asfaw, B., 1995. Australopithecus ramidus, a new
species of early hominid from Aramis, Ethiopia e a corrigendum.
Nature 375, 88.

White, T.D., WoldeGabriel, G., Asfaw, B., et al., 2006. Asa Issie, Aramis

Suwa, G., Asfaw, B., Beyene, Y., et al., 1997. The ﬁrst skull of Austral-

and the origin of Australopithecus. Science 440, 883e889.

opithecus boisei. Nature 389, 489e492.

Suwa, G., Kono, R.T., Simpson, S.W., et al., 2009. Paleobiological im-
plications of the Ardipithecus ramidus dentition. Science 326, 69e99.
Suwa, G., 1988. Evolution of the “robust” australopithecines in the Omo
succession: evidence from mandibular premolar morphology. In:
Grine, F.E. (Ed.), Evolutionary History of the “Robust” Australo-
pithecines. Aldine de Gruyter, New York, pp. 199e222.

White, T.D., Asfaw, B., Beyene, Y., et al., 2009. Ardipithecus ramidus and

the Paleobiology of Early Hominids. Science 326, 64e86.

White, T., 2003. Early hominids e diversity or distortion? Science 299,

1994e1997.

Widianto, H., Zeitoun, V., 2003. Morphological description, biometry and
phylogenetic position of the skull of Ngawi 1 (east Java, Indonesia).
International Journal of Osteoarchaeology 13, 339e351.

44 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

Witmer, L.M., 1995. The extant phylogenetic bracket and the importance
of reconstructing soft tissues in fossils. In: Thomason, J.J. (Ed.),
Functional Morphology in Vertebrate Paleontology. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge, pp. 19e33.

Wood, B.A., 1974. Olduvai Bed I post-cranial fossils: a reassessment.

Journal of Human Evolution 3, 373e378.

Wood, B.A., 1975. An Analysis of Sexual Dimorphism in Primates (Ph.D.

thesis). The Unversity of London.

Wolpoff, M.H., 1968. ‘Telanthropus’ and the single species hypothesis.

Wood, B.A., 1991. Koobi Fora Research Project, Volume 4: Hominid

American Anthropologist 70, 477e493.

Cranial Remains. Clarendon Press, Oxford.

Wolpoff, M.H., 1971. Competitive exclusion among lower Pleistocene

hominids: the single species hypothesis. Man 6, 601e614.

Wood, B., 1984. The Origin of Homo errectus. Courier Forschungsinstitut

Senckenberg, 69, 99e111.

Wood, B., Baker, J., 2011. Evolution in the genus Homo. Annual Review

of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics 42, 47e69.

Wood, B., Boyle, E.K., 2016. Hominin taxic diversity: fact or fantasy?
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 159 (Suppl. 61), S37eS78.
Wood, B.A., Constantino, P., 2007. Paranthropus boisei: ﬁfty years of
evidence and analysis. Yearbook of Physical Anthropology 50,
106e132.

Wood, B., Harrison, T., 2011. The evolutionary context of the ﬁrst hom-

inins. Nature 470, 347e352.

Wood, B.A., Li, Y., Willoughby, C., 1991. Intraspeciﬁc variation and
sexual dimorphism in cranial and dental variables among higher pri-
mates and their bearing on the hominid fossil record. Journal of
Anatomy 174, 185e205.

Wood, B.A., 1994. Taxonomy and evolutionary relationships of Homo
erectus. In: 100 Years Pithecanthropus Homo erectus Problem, 171,
pp. 159e165.

Wood, B.A., 2010. Systematics, taxonomy, and phylogenetics: ordering
life, past and present. In: Larsen, C.S. (Ed.), A Companion to Bio-
logical Anthropology. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford, pp. 56e73.

Woodward, A.S., 1921. A new cave man from Rhodesia, South Africa.

Nature 108, 371e372.

Zipfel, B., DeSilva, J.M., Kidd, R.S., et al., 2011. The foot and ankle of

Australopithecus sediba. Science 333, 1417e1420.

Zollikofer, C.P.E., Ponce de León, M.S., Lieberman, D.E., et al., 2005.
Virtual cranial reconstruction of Sahelanthropus tchadensis. Nature
434, 755e759.

Chapter 3

The History of Early Homo

D. Lordkipanidze
Georgian National Museum, Tbilisi, Georgia

For centuries humankind has sought the answer to what
exactly makes us human: when did our history really
begin?

Since 1776, when Linnaeus deﬁned our genus as Homo
(Linnaeus, 1735), scientists have identiﬁed several mem-
bers of this genus, and in current encyclopedias of human
evolution more than 50 members have been identiﬁed
(Wood, 2011) and the number continues to rise (Berger
et al., 2015). The debates intensify as the public becomes
more interested in the issues of our human origins.
Discoveries in this ﬁeld frequently make the headlines as
scientists announce the discovery of new Homo species.
However, ﬁnding a balance between concrete evidence and
theoretical claims has become a key task for all sciences,
and particularly for paleoanthropology. The media is
particularly interested in this ﬁeld of sciences, which often
causes premature claims of new species to be made.

There are several deﬁnitions for the human genus, but
how can we sort out which is correct? It is simple enough to
determine whether the deﬁnition is nonbiological or bio-
logical, and here we would not stop at Platonic notions or
Biblical deﬁnitions of either man or species. When the
theological and philosophical approaches are left aside, the
scientiﬁc approach to human evolution clearly identiﬁes
stages in the development of this genus. Data that is based
on theoretical biology, human fossils, and recent molecular
studies all provide scientiﬁc insights into human evolution.
This said, as human cultural beings, scientists will bring to
the table discussions and methodological approaches that
reﬂect known data, but also the foundations and pre-
suppositions of their own knowledge, and with which they
create models.

In the 19th century the dominant theory that the chim-
panzee or gorilla was the ancestor of humans gradually
became an obsessiondto ﬁnd the “missing link.” This, in
turn, created another misconception: that since man and ape

are related, there must be a transitional fossil that could be
found to prove it.

Today, scientists have reached a consensus that humans
have much in common, anatomically and behaviorally,
with other primates. This close biological relationship is
supported by DNA evidence revealing that our closest
living relatives are bonobos and chimpanzees. There is only
about a one percent difference between the chimpanzee
genome and our own, suggesting that we share a common
ancestor. We thus have a relationship with the great apes
that
is more one of cousin-to-cousin than grandparent-
to-grandchild, as was formerly believed.

The term “hominins” is now used to describe living
humans and all other species from the lineage that diverged
from that of chimpanzees around 7 Ma. Different hominins
are represented by current and fossil records. The most ancient
hominins became extinct without giving rise to new species.
Although the relationships between different hominins are
complex and often unresolved, aspects of their fossil remains
have enabled us to place them,
into
groupsdor generadto which our own species, Homo sapi-
ens, belongs (Roberts, 2011; Potts and Sloan, 2010).

including Homo,

At the end of the 18th century, the German physiologist
and anatomist, Johann Friedrich Blumenbach distinguished
ﬁve races of the human species, and was one of the ﬁrst
scientists to study the identities of different species of pri-
mates (Blumenbach, 1969). In the 19th century, Charles
Darwin stated that when the fossils of our ancestors were
found, “light will be thrown on the origin of man and his
history” (Darwin, 1871). His prediction has come true.
Human fossils found in 1856 in the Neanderthal Valley
(Germany) had strong eyebrows and a retreating forehead,
which distinguished the species from modern man. In 1891,
another important event in human evolutionary research
brought to light the fossil Pithecanthropus in Java, which
became known as Homo erectus.

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00003-X
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

45

46 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

A central turning point for the history of the genus
Homo occurred in 1964 with the announcement by Louis
Leakey, Phillip Tobias, and John Napier (Leakey et al.,
1964). Their declaration from the Olduvai Gorge in Africa
describing Homo habilis profoundly changed our under-
standing of human evolution. Several more landmark dis-
coveries have provided new and critical information, yet
many questions remain (Spoor, 2013; Spoor et al., 2015).
It is impossible to discuss the origin of the genus Homo
without including “prehumans.” Fossil evidence suggests
that the ﬁrst hominins appeared in Africa between 6 and
8 Ma, with many species appearing after this time. Their
genetic relationships probably formed a complex web,
some of which survived until relatively recently, and with
several hominin species existing at the same time.

Specimens, such as Sahelanthropus tchadensis and
Orrorin tugenensis, suggest that the earliest hominin spe-
cies were modest in size, with brains no larger than those of
modern apes, and exhibited a unique set of physical char-
acteristics that allowed both upright walking and climbing.
The discovery in Chad of a 7 million year old hominin
by Michel Brunet,
the oldest known to date.
S. tchadensis, nicknamed “Tumai,u has revealed that this
hominin already used semiterrestrial locomotion, judging
by the time spent on the ground (Brunet et al., 2005; Brunet
et al., 2002).

is

Over time, and in the context of changing selection
pressures, populations appeared with new characteristics,
and a number of evolutionary trends can be identiﬁed.
Powerful jaws and large back teeth, ideal for chewing tough
or ﬁbrous foods, appear in some species. Brains that are
large relative to body size, with smaller jaws and teeth,
appear in others. Bipedalism became the dominant mode of
locomotion, and all later hominins were characterized by
their use of stone-tool technology.

The discovery of a 4.5 million year old Ardipithecus
from Hadar, Ethiopia, brought new perspectives on how
our earliest hominin ancestorsdand our closest
living
relativesdevolved. The study of the Ardipithecus fossils,
lead by Tim White, represents one of the best cases of
detailed interdisciplinary study of early hominin specimens
in the context of developmental biology, anatomy, ecology,
biogeography, and geology (White et al., 2009).

Before ﬁnding Ardipithecus,

fossils belonging to
Australopithecus were regularly interpreted in a framework
that used living African apes, especially chimpanzees, as
proxies for the immediate ancestors of the human clade.
Such projections were largely nulliﬁed by the discovery of
Ardipithecus (White et al., 2015).

In today’s scientiﬁc literature one can ﬁnd different
names for Australopithecus including Australopithecus
africanus, Australopithecus afarensis, Australopithecus
aethiopicus, A. anamensis, Australopithecus garhi, Aus-
tralopithecus bahrelghazali, and Australopithecus sediba.

Australopithecus can no longer be viewed as a short-lived
transition between apes and humans. Instead, it represents
an adaptive plateau occupied for w3 million years by the
lineages of four species of small-brained African bipeds
(Roberts, 2011).

Although the half-million year interval between 2.5 and
3 Ma was a period of heightened morphological,
taxo-
nomic, and diet-driven adaptive diversity in extinct homi-
nins, all of the known taxa from this interval are of
Australopith grade. Au. africanus in South Africa, studied
by R. Dart
in 1924, showed that despite having small
brains, early hominins could walk upright. The name
“Australopithecus” means “southern ape” and was ﬁrst
given after the discovery of a remarkably preserved baby
hominin skull known as the Taung Child.

While many specimens are fragmented or distorted,
nearly all skeleton parts have been found in the Au. afri-
canus fossils. Evidence points to a hominin whose growth
and maturation were more similar to modern apes than to
humans. Some adult skulls appear to have been much larger
than others, which may indicate differences between the
sexes and perhaps a harem-like social organization similar
to that of modern gorillas. Alternatively, this variability in
skull size may represent two different groups (Roberts,
2011; Potts and Sloan, 2010; Wood, 2011) (Fig. 3.1).

Australopithecus afarensis is one of the best-known
early hominins, exempliﬁed by the 3.2 million year old
iconic skeleton known as “Lucy,” found in 1974 in Hadar
(Johanson), Ethiopia. The fragmented remains of several

FIGURE 3.1 “Skull 5”, D4500, from Dmanisi, Georgia.

including males,

hundred Au. afarensis individuals have been discovered in
East Africa,
females, and juveniles.
Research has revealed evidence for both terrestrial and
arboreal lifestyles, and extreme sexual dimorphism. The
braincase is small compared to the body size, but the face
and jaws are large. The thorax has an erect posture, and the
shape of the legs suggests the species could walk upright,
while other features, such as the length of the arms suggest
good climbing ability. This group of fossils includes very
large and very small individuals and there is debate as to
whether this variation reﬂects the presence of two species,
or one in which males and females have very different body
size (Wood, 2011).

Hominins were widely distributed in Africa millions of
years ago. Australopithecus bahrelghazali was found in
Chad over 2500 km west of other hominin fossil sites in the
Rift Valley (Brunet et al., 1995). Recent discoveries in
South Africa of the Au. sediba species brought on more
discussions around a possible “missing link” possessing a
mixture of primitive (Australopith-like) and a derived
(Homo-like) morphology (Berger et al., 2010). This was an
attempt to promote Au. sediba as an ancestor of Homo, but
it has not yet been accepted by the scientiﬁc community.
Indeed, it is impossible to present an overview of the
entire history of research on our genus in this chapter.
Symposia,
review articles, exhibitions, etc. have been
devoted to it at length, and syntheses are found in major
scientiﬁc journals. The most recent reviews admit that there
are many unresolved problems on the topic of our origins,
and that although more fossils and archeological ﬁnds will
continue to enhance our understanding of the evolution of
early Homo,
comparative biology of mammals
(including humans) will also continue to provide valuable
frameworks for the interpretation of existing material. This
comparative approach has been used to formulate and test
robust models of the relationships between energy, life
history, brain and body size, diet, mortality, and resource
variability, and will yield a deeper understanding of human
evolution (Schwartz and Tattersall, 2015; Aiello and
Antón, 2012; Antón et al., 2014; Wood and Collard, 1999;
Wood, 2014).

the

In my humble opinion, a main problem remains that of
incomplete data. We now have great fossil discoveries, but
very rarely do we ﬁnd sites where we can integrate data on
human anatomy (eg, both cranial and postcranial), clear
stratigraphy and absolute age, or paleontological and
archeological records.

THE FIRST HOMO

Homo habilis, considered the ﬁrst member of the genus
Homo that appears in fossil records, is associated with the
earliest stone-tool technology. This species is characterized
by a moderately large brain (Leakey et al., 1964)

The History of Early Homo Chapter | 3 47

and exempliﬁes the lower end of the range of Homo fossil
brain size (600 cm3), with medium-sized molars and pre-
molars compared to earlier hominins. It was a species that
was usually relatively small in stature and more lightly
built than most australopithecines but had a larger brain
and a body capable of bipedal locomotion. The arms were
longer and perhaps stronger than those of modern humans.
However, there is enough variation in these traits across
specimens to generate controversy. Some anthropologists
have argued that these specimens should be placed within
the genus Australopithecus, or that the taxon should be
split into subgroups (Wood and Collard, 1999; Villmoare
et al., 2015).

The type specimen (a specimen used to name and deﬁne
a new species) of H. habilis consists of only one juvenile
mandible. Other, more complete specimens are variably
afﬁliated with H. habilis, but there is no consensus about
their afﬁliations. Today scholars identify Homo rudolfensis
by using only one specimen. Other candidates include an
earlier specimen claimed by Villmoare et al. (2015), iden-
tiﬁed as a w2.8 Ma mandible with some teeth (LD350-1)
from Ethiopia’s Ledi-Geraru, as being the earliest member
of Homo. Another known fossil candidate is a 2.3 partial
AL-666 (Kimbel et al., 1996; Berger et al., 2015), AL-
666-1 (Hadar Formation, Ethiopia c. 2.3 Ma). This spec-
imen, found in 2.3 million-year-old sediments at Hadar,
Ethiopia, is a maxilla, most likely of a male individual, with
most of the dentition (Kimbel et al., 1997).

Fossils differing from Australopiths appear

in the
Turkana Basin and in the Middle Awash region dating ca.
2.3 Ma, and it is very likely that Homo evolved in Africa.
The earliest representatives of our genus are still poorly
documented. Following the announcement of H. habilis in
1964, a number of specimens from Olduvai and other lo-
calities have been referred to this species. In addition, it
has been argued that a second,
larger-brained taxon is
present in the record. Unfortunately, most of the remains
are incomplete or damaged. It has proved especially difﬁ-
cult to deﬁne H. rudolfensis, as the proposed hypodigm
includes only one intact cranium and nothing is known of
the postcranial skeleton (Bromage et al., 1995). Whether
one or two species should be recognized, and whether they
are sufﬁciently like later humans to merit placement within
Homo, are questions for which there is no clear consensus.
Another early hominin found in this area includes the
Kenyanthropus platyops (Leakey et al., 2012).

Most scientists consider that a major shift to humanlike
patterns of cranial anatomy, body size, and behavior
occurred with the emergence of H. erectus (eg, Antón,
2003; Shipman and Walker, 1989). Many researchers
considered that H. erectus had numerous anatomical and
life history hallmarks that are seen in modern humans. As
the earliest nonerect Homo and Australopithecus were
reconstructed as
to some

essentially bipedal

apes,

48 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

researchers the gap between these groups suggested that
earlier species, such as H. habilis should be excluded from
Homo (Collard and Wood, 2007; Wood and Collard, 1999).
The recent idea that habilis should belong to its own genus
is also claimed (Wood, 2014).

THE DISCOVERY OF HOMO ERECTUS

Homo erectus was the ﬁrst hominin species to be identiﬁed
outside of Europe. With a type specimen from Java,
Indonesia, it has been recognized from many sites across
Asia, yet there is considerable disagreement as to whether
European or African fossils should be included in this
species. The Asian fossils, presented as the core fossil re-
cords of H. erectus from East and Southeast Asia, are
dominated by skulls, jaws, and teeth. The few remains
from other parts of the body are fragmented, show signs of
disease, or are questionably dated, however taking these
clues into account, it appears that H. erectus was a large-
bodied,
fully modern bipedal with a relatively large
brain. The face and cranial vault were distinctive, with a
strong brow region and wide cheekbones. Morphological
variations in this species may be attributable to differences
between the sexes, regional changes, or variations over
time. The Javan H. erectus is remarkable for how long it
lived there; evidence shows its presence as early as
1.8e1.7 Ma, and until only 25,000 years ago (Potts and
Sloan, 2010).

China is also remarkable for its records of H. erectus.
No fewer than 40 individuals were found at one site, the
famous Zhoukoudian site near Beijing.

A large-brained skull of what was most likely an adult
female H. erectus was discovered in Kenya. It was about
1.8 million years old, which shows that our own genus
lived at the same time as other hominins. It is classiﬁed as
H. erectus, but some scientists suggest that it, and other
early African H. erectus fossils, should have their own
species name, Homo ergaster (Kimbel et al., 2014; Kimbel,
2009; Wood, 2009).

The skulls and jawbones currently included in this
species show a wide variation in shape and size. KNM-ER
WT 15,000 is the most complete skeleton ascribed to
H. ergaster, and in many respects (apart from the skull) it is
very similar to modern humans: slender body frame and tall
in stature, with relatively shorter arms and longer legs than
any earlier hominin species. This change in limb and body
proportions probably reﬂects the development of fully
terrestrial bipedalism (Walker and Leakey, 1993).

H. erectus is usually thought

to have originated in
Africa before 1.80 MYA,
therefore overlapping with
H. habilis both temporally and geographically. However,
recently some have questioned the species’ African origins,
suggesting that a more primitive form of Homo initiated the
colonization of Eurasia.

Recently Homo naledi specimens have been discovered
in South Africa. Opinions differ as to the phylogenetic
(evolutionary) position of this species and its relevance to
our understanding of the origins of the genus Homo,
especially to the emergence of H. erectus. This incredibly
rich collection of human fossils has been attributed by
discoverers to previously unknown species of extinct
hominin. Homo naledi is characterized by body mass and
stature similar to small-bodied human populations, but with
a small endocranial volume (around 400 c3) similar to
Australopiths. The cranial morphology of H. naledi
is
unique, but similar
to early Homo species including
H. erectus, H. habilis, and H. rudolfensis. Although prim-
itive, the dentition is generally small and simple in occlusal
morphology. H. naledi has humanlike manipulatory adap-
tations of the hand and wrist and a humanlike foot and
lower limb. These humanlike aspects contrast in the post-
crania with more primitive or Australopith-like features
(Berger et al., 2015). Scientists who oppose accepting
H. naledi as a new species stress that the same character-
istics are found in other Homo species, particularly
H. erectus. Main problems remain a lack of clear dating and
the ambiguous geological contexts of the site.

DMANISI

As a case for the early Homo, I would like to present the
story of hominins from Dmanisi, Georgia, in more detail.
Since I have been working at the site since 1991, I believe
that in Dmanisi we have very complete evidence about
anatomy, paleoenvironment, way of life, and behavior of
early Homo (Fig. 3.2).

For a long time, scientists thought that the ﬁrst hominin
out-of-Africa migrants were those with large brains and a
stature approaching human dimensions. This group was
widely assumed to have stepped out of Africa into the
world around 1 Ma, once their greater intelligence, more
modern and humanlike body proportions had evolved, and
once they had invented more advanced stone tools.

Georgia, in the Caucasus, is known as the country of the
Golden Fleece and of the earliest wine culture. The wealth
of prehistoric ﬁnds from Dmanisi has put it on the scientiﬁc
map in terms of the earliest Paleolithic period. Dmanisi is in
Southern Georgia about 85 km from the capital Tbilisi, and
was a medieval city situated on a hilltop.
In 1983,
archeological excavations in the ruins of the old city led to
the fortuitous discovery of Plio-Pleistocene sediments
containing animal bones. Following this, stone tools and
hominin remains were recovered from the site (Fig. 3.3).

The archeological site is on a promontory overlooking
the conﬂuence of the Pinazauri and Mashavera Rivers.
These rivers eroded through 80e100 m of basalt beginning
in the early Pleistocene, leaving the site high above the
rivers today. Scientists dated the age of the fossils using

The History of Early Homo Chapter | 3 49

FIGURE 3.2 Aerial photo of Dmanisi Archaeological Museum-Reserve.

radiometric techniques from deposits directly atop a thick
layer of volcanic rock dating from 1.85 Ma. The fresh,
unweathered contours of the basalt indicate that little time
had passed before the fossil-bearing sediments blanketed it.
Paleomagnetic analyses show that sedimentation occurred
around 1.77 Ma, when Earth’s magnetic polarity reversed,
a phenomenon called the “Matuyama Reversal” (Gabunia
et al., 2000).

Remains of known prehistoric animals accompany the
hominin fossils found hereda rodent called Mimomys, for
instance, only lived between 1.6 and 2.0 Ma. The
1.76 million year old layer of basalt at a nearby site caps the
same stratigraphy. Dmanisi is a snapshot of time, like a
time capsule (Fig. 3.4).

HOMININS

The Dmanisi site has offered up the remains of several
hominin individuals (5 skullsd4 with maxillas; 4 mandi-
bles; and 100 postcranial remains). This is the richest and
most complete collection of indisputable early Homo re-
mains from any single site with a comparable stratigraphic
context. The Dmanisi sample comprises variations ac-
cording to age: subadult D2700/D2735 with erupting M3s.
The cast of this skull and mandible can be seen in the
exhibit; adults D2280, D2282/D211, D4500/D2600; old

FIGURE 3.3 Reconstruction of the “Skull 5” from Dmanisi by Paleo-
Artist John Gurche.

individuals D3444/D3900 and sexual dimorphism. Despite
certain anatomical differences between the Dmanisi speci-
mens, we do not presently see sufﬁcient grounds to assign
them to more than one hominin taxon. Thus, the Dmanisi
assemblage offers a unique opportunity to study variability
within an early Homo population.

Our analyses show that the Dmanisi people were small
(c. 150 cm). Related to body size, their brains were smaller
(545e760 cm3) than those of “classic” H. erectus from
Africa and Asia (800e1000 cm3) (Lordkipanidze et al.,
2007; Rightmire and Lordkipanidze, 2009). In this respect,
they are closer to the very ﬁrst representatives of the genus
Homo (H. habilis from Africa, c. 2 Ma) than to their later
conspeciﬁcs. Dmanisi people were almost modern in their
body proportions, and were highly efﬁcient walkers and
runners, but their brains were tiny compared to ours, and
their arms moved in a different way.

The Skull 5 cranium with its mandible,

found
earlier, represents the world’s ﬁrst completely preserved
adult hominin skull from the early Pleistocene. It has the
smallest braincase of the Dmanisi individuals (546 cm3, or
about one-third that of a modern human), but the largest

50 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

FIGURE 3.4 Possible migration roots of early homo.

fossil humans, but

face and teethda combination previously unknown for
early Homo. The skull’s face, large teeth, and small brain
size resemble those of earlier
the
detailed anatomy of its braincase, which gives clues to
the “wiring” of the brain, is similar to that of the more
recent early human species, H. erectus. The Dmanisi site
has fueled an ongoing discussion over whether the Dmanisi
humans were an early form of H. erectus, a distinct species
called Homo georgicus, or something else (Fig. 3.5).

PALEOENVIRONMENT

Faunal and paleobotanical evidence makes it possible to
reconstruct the ecology of the Dmanisi hominins. At the
time of occupation, the site was near a lake shore that
formed when the Masavera lava ﬂow dammed the Masa-
vera and Pinasaouri Rivers. At the Dmanisi site more than
50 groups of animals have been identiﬁed; faunal remains
include several large carnivores, bovids, an equid, and other

FIGURE 3.5 Dmanisi Hominins, from left to right D4500 cranium, 2600 mandible, 211 mandible and D2700 cranium.

open-steppe and gallery-forest taxa. In Dmanisi we found
bones of saber-tooth cats, giraffes, rhinos, elephants, and
other extinct animals. The data reﬂect a paleoenvironment
that spread like a mosaic over a large area around the
site: woodland and gallery forests, bush land, tree savan-
nahs, open grasslands, and semidesert-like rocky terrains
with shrub vegetation. Generally, Dmanisi was a forested,
relatively humid habitat in a temperate zone, with cool
winters. In contrast, East Africa had a relatively dry and hot
steppic environment.

STONE TOOLS

The Dmanisi site is very rich archeologically, where more
than 10,000 stone tools have been discovered. The site
preserves a complex archeological record of numerous
reoccupations, measured by both stratigraphic and spatial
concentrations of artifacts and faunal remains across all
areas of the site.

While ﬂakes comprise the majority of tools recovered,
some cores and choppers have also been found. The raw
materials for lithic artifacts come from nearby rivers. The
differences in technology are not only observed in the
changes in the material composition of the assemblages, but
also the techniques. Before the Dmanisi ﬁnds, experts
believed that humans could not have left Africa before
having developed an advanced technology,
such as
Acheulean types of tools that were symmetrically shaped,
manufactured, and standardized. The tools found at Dma-
nisi, however, are simple ﬂakes and choppers, much the
same as the primitive Oldowan tradition that hominins in
Africa practiced nearly a million years earlier.

We found many unmodiﬁed stones at the site origi-
nating from elsewhere; there was no possible way they
could have arrived there naturally. The larger rocks were
likely used as tools for pounding ﬂesh, cutting meat, or
smashing bones, while certain smaller stones might have
served different purposes, such as enabling aggressive
scavenging. Small hominins who lived there stuck together
for protection and perhaps threw rocks to pilfer food from
carnivores (Ferring et al., 2011).

Evidence including lithics and fossil human anatomy
supports the hypothesis that the initial evolution of “elite
human throwing” arose as part of power-scavenging and/or
hunting adaptation. The capacity to throw with elite skill
is expected to have had important social consequences and
to have driven the evolution of a uniquely human type of
kinship-dependent social cooperation. The evolution of
elite
catalytic
“accident” or “preadaptation” that set off a social revolution
producing a uniquely human species
(Bingham and
Souza, 2011).

throwing for power-scavenging is

a

Other indirect evidence of social cooperation comes
from the human skull D-3444 cranium and jaw. These
fossils belonged to an individual who had lost all but one of
his teeth before he died. How could a toothless person

The History of Early Homo Chapter | 3 51

survive for years in a cold environment, without using
ﬁre to cook food? The consumption of soft animal tissues,
such as marrow and brains is indicated by associated
mammal bones and pounding tools. Even more compelling
is the possibility that he was cared for (Lordkipanidze
et al., 2005).

POSTeHOMO ERECTUS EVIDENCE

No complete skeletons have been found for Homo ante-
cessor, but some parts of the body, including the skull,
thorax, and feet, are well represented in the disarticulated
and mixed fossil collection from Gran Dolina, Spain
(Carbonel et al.). Together, these fossils suggest that the
H. antecessor population was of a similar average stature to
modern humans and fully bipedal, but with longer, more
slender arms and wider chests. The skull of the species was
rounded and quite lightly built, with an average brain ca-
pacity of approximately 1000 cc. This species’ face would
have had a remarkably modern appearance, including a
prominent nose, but receding chin.

Many skulls from Europe and Africa are ascribed to
Homo heidelbergensis, but much of what is known about
the rest of the body comes from the Sima de los Huesos
fossil collection. This includes the remains of at least 30
individuals, mostly young adult men, women, and juve-
niles. Bone analyses have shown that H. heidelbergensis
was robust and relatively tall, with adult males averaging
1.75 m (5 ft, 9 in.). Some skeletons show evidence of
disease and healed injuries, perhaps reﬂecting the harsh
conditions of Pleistocene Europe.

The path to our modern physical form is anything but
clear, yet there are many fossil clues and theories about
how it happened. One of the most controversial issues is
whether H. sapiensdour speciesdevolved and eventually
replaced all other hominins, or whether there was instead a
global blending of genes that led to our species evolving
everywhere more or less at the same time.

Key players in this process were H. heidelbergensis and
an archaic H. sapiens. Some scientists view these two as
in two different directions:
species that evolved later
(Homo nean-
H. heidelbergensis
derthalensis); and archaic H. sapiens, at least the African
form also known as Homo rhodesiensis, led to H. sapiens.
The oldest human DNA comes from 300,000 to 400,000
year old human bones classiﬁed as H. heidelbergensis
found in Spain’s Sima de los Huesos site.

led to Neandertals

Genetic studies and new African fossil ﬁnds, such as
Homo sapiens idaltu, a hominin that has both archaic and
anatomically modern H. sapiens features, suggest
that
Neandertals and modern humans went their separate ways
genetically about 600,000 years ago. Many scientists see
this evidence as strong support for the view that H. sapiens
evolved in Africa and then completely replaced the Nean-
dertals and any other hominins living at the same time. This
view, however, is still debated.

52 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

HOBBIT

Scholars were stunned a decade ago to learn that H. erectus
might have survived on the island of Java in Indonesia until
25,000 years ago, well after the arrival of H. sapiens in the
region and even after
the disappearance of Europe’s
Neandertals.

The recent revelation that a third hominin, dubbed
just
Homo ﬂoresiensis, also lived in the area until
12,000 years ago has proven even more provocative.
Archeologists recovered the remains of H. ﬂoresiensis from
a large limestone cave known as Liang Bua located in
western Flores. H. ﬂoresiensis, nicknamed “Hobbit,” has
been estimated to have a height of about 1e1.10 m, and a
body weight of 25 kg, with a remarkably small brain of less
than 400 cm3. The critics of establishing the new species
argue that peculiarities are a result of diseases, particularly
microcephaly, and that H. ﬂoresiensis is a small H. sapiens.
No one knows exactly how humans ﬁrst reached the
island of Javadthey may have made the sea crossings by
boat, or may have drifted from natural rafts by accident. For
me, the most logical explanation is that we have a case of
insular dwarﬁsm previously unknown in humans.

Geographically, the Javan H. erectus is a good candi-
date for being the ancestor of H. ﬂoresiensis; however, its
resemblance to specimens from Africa and from Dmanisi
raise the question of whether H. ﬂoresiensis stemmed from
a different hominin migration into Southeast Asia than the
one that evolved into the Javan H. erectus. Future exca-
vations on Flores and other Indonesian islands may cast
light on these mysteries.

CONCLUSION: WHAT WE LEARNED
FROM THE DMANISI CASE

The main components distinguishing Homo and more
primitive hominins are brain and body size, posture, loco-
motion, and of course culture. Tool manufacture is
considered under culture, and there are several claims of
tool use in non-Homo hominins, claims fueled by the dis-
covery of 3.3 million-year-old tools (Harmand et al., 2015).
The brain size of 600 cm for Homo was a long-standing
distinguishing element; however the Naledi, Flores, and
Dmanisi fossils invalidate this.

The Question: Is Homo habilis the First
Homo?

Considering its brain and body proportions, the character-
istics of its jaws and teeth, and features related to loco-
motion, H. habilis
than
previously thought. The emergence of H. erectus (without
distinguishing either H. ergaster or H. georgicus) could be
considered as the birth of our genus. I think it’s premature

is more Australopith-like

to classify H. naledi, however. I am sure that soon we will
learn the age of these fantastic fossils, and then will be able
to place them in the evolutionary tree.

So if H. erectus is indeed the ﬁrst representative of our
genus,
the best hard evidence we have comes from
Dmanisi. We have never had such accurately dated mate-
rial, so many well-preserved human fossilsdboth cranial
and postcranialdor such a rich fauna and thousands of
stone tools from any other single site.

Here we discovered Skull 5, the world’s ﬁrst completely
preserved adult hominin skull from the early Pleistocene. It
has a small braincase of 546 cm3 (about one-third of a
modern human’s), but the largest face and teeth, a combi-
nation previously unknown for early Homo. Dmanisi has
indeed yielded multiple fossils of the same geological age
and from a single locality. This provides the ﬁrst oppor-
tunity to actually quantify and test hypotheses about intra-
and interspeciﬁc variation in early Homo. Skull 5 is key to
these analyses because it unites features that have been
used to deﬁne different species of early Homo. In other
words, had the braincase and the face of Skull 5 been found
as separate fossils in Africa, they might have been attrib-
uted to different species (Fig. 3.6).

Comparing variations in the Dmanisi sample with var-
iations in modern human and chimpanzee populations now
shows that all the Dmanisi individuals belong to a popu-
lation of a single early Homo species. Indeed, the ﬁve
Dmanisi individuals are conspicuously different from each
other, but not more different than any ﬁve modern human
individuals, or ﬁve chimpanzee individuals from a given
population. Dmanisi has let us capture a clear snapshot of
the evolution of early Homo.

What is the most complete portrait of representative of
the genus Homo? As we mentioned already Dmanisi draws
the most complete picture.

We have a group of creatures with small brains, small
limbs, and highly

stature, with very developed lower

FIGURE 3.6
Elisabeth Daynes.

Reconstruction of Dmanisi hominins by Paleo-Artist

efﬁcient walkers and runners with almost modern body
proportions; and though their arms moved in a different
way,
they use primitive stone tools and have a social
system; also, they live in a temperate environment, very
different from Africa.

Yet, in spite of these exciting discoveries, the early
evolution of the genus Homo and the number of species is
still shrouded in mystery. The hypothesis that early Homo
represents one variable species versus multiple species is
still in progress (Spoor, 2013). We are not rejecting the
possibility of a number of Homo species, but I do not think
this issue should be considered a simple discussion between
“splitters” and “lumpers.” Indeed, the senior authors of our
article on Skull 5 (See Lordkipanidze et al., 2013 and
Zollikofer et al., 2014), which is considered an additional
“lumping” paper, were among the ﬁrst to showdthrough
quantitative datadthat Neandertals and modern humans are
two separate species.

The extraordinary preservation of Dmanisi specimens
from different biological ages has enabled us to use ap-
proaches from population biology. Thus,
the Dmanisi
ﬁnds have brought new standards to these discussions. I
am sure that the discovery of new fossils and the further
development of scientiﬁc methods will shed more light on
why and how both of these seemingly divergent ap-
to taxonomydand perhaps uniquely new
proaches
paradigmsdwill contribute to understanding the history of
our species.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This publication was prepared in the framework of the Humboldt
Research Award.

REFERENCES

Aiello, L.C., Antón, S.C., 2012. Human biology and the origins of Homo:
an introduction to Supplement 6. Current Anthropology 53 (Suppl. 6),
S269eS277. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00003-X.
Antón, S., 2003. A natural history of Homo erectus. Yearbook of Physical

Anthropology 46, 126e170.

Antón, S., Potts, R., Aiello, L., 2014. Evolution of early Homo: an inte-

grated biological perspective. Science 345 (6192).

Berger, L.R., de Ruiter, D.J., Churchill, S.E., et al., 2010. Australopithecus
sediba: a new species of Homo-like Australopith from South Africa.
Science 328 (5975), 195e204.

Berger, C., Lee, R., Hawks, J., Ruiter, D., et al., 2015. A new hominin
from the Upper Miocene of Chad, Homo naledi, a new species of the
genus Homo from the Dinaledi Chamber, South Africa. eLife 4. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00003-X.

Bingham, P.M., Souza, J., 2011. Death from a Distance and the Bird of the
Humane Universe: Human Evolution, History and Your Future,
Kindle ed. BookSurge, South Carolina.

Blumenbach, J.F., 1969. On the Natural Varieties of Mankind (De Generis
Humani Varietate Nativa). Bergman, New York, vol. 1775 and 1795
treatises.

The History of Early Homo Chapter | 3 53

Bromage, T.G., Schrenk, F., Zonneveld, F.W., 1995. Paleoanthropology of
the Malawi Rift. An early hominin mandible from the Chiwondo
Beds, northern Malawi. Journal of Human Evolution 28, 71e108.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00003-X.

Brunet, M., Beauvilain, A., Coppens, Y., et al., 1995. The ﬁrst australo-
pithecine recovered west of the Rift Valley (Koro Toro region,
Republic of Chad). Nature 378, 273e275.

Brunet, M., Guy, F., Pilbeam, D., et al., 2002. A new hominin from the

Upper Miocene of Chad, central Africa. Nature 418, 145e151.

Brunet, M., Guy, F., Pilbeam, D., et al., 2005. New material of the
earliest hominin from the Upper Miocene of Chad. Nature 434,
753e755.

Collard, M., Wood, B., 2007. Hominin homoiology: an assessment of the
impact of phenotypic plasticity on phylogenetic analyses of humans and
their fossil relatives. Journal of Human Evolution 52 (5), 573e584.

Darwin, C., 1871. The Descent of Man. John Murray, London.
Ferring, R., Oms, O., Agust, J., et al., 2011. Earliest human occupations at
Dmanisi (georgian Caucasus) dated to 1.85e1.78 Ma. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
108, 10432e10436.

Gabunia, L., Vekua, A., Lordkipanidze, D., et al., 2000. Early Pleistocene
hominin cranial remains from Dmanisi, Republic of Georgia: taxon-
omy, Geological Setting and age. Science 288, 1019e1025.

Harmand, S., Lewis, J.E., Feibel, C.S., et al., 2015. 3.3-million-year-old
stone tools from Lomekwi 3, west Turkana, Kenya. Nature 521,
310e315.

Kimbel, W.H., et al., 1996. Late Pliocene Homo and Oldowan tools from
the Hadar Formation (Kada hadar member), Ethiopia. Journal of
Human Evolution 31, 549e561. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-
420190-3.00003-X.

Kimbel, W.H., Johanson, D.C., Rak, Y., 1997. Systematic assessment to
maxilla of Homo from Hadar, Ethiopia. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology 103, 235e262.

Kimbel, W.H., Suwa, G., Asfaw, B., et al., 2014. Ardipithecus ramidus
and the evolution of the human cranial base. Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 111 (3),
948e953.

Kimbel, W.H., 2009. In: Grine, F.E., Fleagle, J.G., Leakey, R.E. (Eds.),
The First Humans: Origin and Early Evolution of the Genus Homo,
Vertebrate Paleontology and Paleoanthropology Series. Springer,
Dordrecht, Netherlands, pp. 31e38.

Leakey, L.S.B., Tobias, P.V., Napier, J.R., 1964. A new species of the

genus Homo from Olduvai Gorge. Nature 202, 7e9.

Leakey, M.G., et al., 2012. New fossils from Koobi Fora, northern
Kenya, conﬁrm taxonomic diversity in early Homo. Nature 488,
201e204.

Linnaeus, C., 1735. System a Natura Eperregnatrianaturae, Secundum
Classes, Ordines, Genera, Species Cum Char e Acteribus, Differ-
entiis, Synonymis, Locis. Laurentii Salvii, Stockholm.

Lordkipanidze, D., Vekua, A., Rightmire, G.P., et al., 2005. The ﬁrst

edentulous hominin skull. Nature 434, 717e718.

Lordkipanidze, D., Jashashvili, T., Vekua, A., et al., 2007. Postcranial
evidence from early Homo from Dmanisi, Georgia. Nature 449,
305e310.

Lordkipanidze, D., Ponce de León, M.S., Margvelashvili, A., et al., 2013.
Complete skull from Dmanisi, Georgia, reveals evolutionary biology
of early Homo. Science 342, 326e331.

Potts, R., Sloan, C., 2010. What Does it Mean to Be Human? National

Geographic, ISBN 978-1-4262-0606-1.

54 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

Rightmire, G.P., Lordkipanidze, D., 2009. In: Grine, F.E., Fleagle, J.G.,
Leakey, R.E. (Eds.), The First Humans: Origin and Early Evolution of
the Genus Homo, Vertebrate Paleontology and Paleoanthropology
Series. Springer, Dordrecht, Netherlands, pp. 39e48.

Roberts, A., 2011. In: Guerrero, A.G. (Ed.), Evolution, the Human Story.

ISBN:978-1-4053-6165-1.

Shipman, P., Walker, A., 1989. The costs of being a predator. Journal of

Human Evolution 18, 373e392.

Schwartz, J.H., Tattersall, I., 2015. Deﬁning the genus Homo. Science 349

(6251), 931e932.

Spoor, F., Gunz, P., Neubauer, S., et al., 2015. Reconstructed Homo
habilis type OH 7 suggests deep-rooted species diversity in early
Homo. Nature 83e86.

Spoor, F., 2013. Palaeoanthropology: small-brained and big-mouthed.
Nature 502, 452e453. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-
3.00003-X. PMID: 24153292.

Villmoare, B., Kimbel, V., Seyoum, C., 2015. Early Homo at 2.8 Ma from

Ledi-Geraru, Afar, Ethiopia. Science 347 (6228), 1352e1355.

Walker, A., Leakey, R. (Eds.), 1993. The Nariokotome Homo Erectus

Skeleton. Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge, MA.

White, T.D., et al., 2009. Ardipithecus ramidus and the paleobiology of

early hominins. Science 326 (5949), 75e86.

White, T., Lovejoy, O., Asfaw, B., et al., 2015. Neither chimpanzee nor
human, Ardipithecus reveals the surprising ancestry of both. PNAS
112 (16), 4877e4884.

Wood, B., Collard, M., 1999. The human genus. Science 284, 65e71.
PMID:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00003-X.
10102822.

Wood, B., 2009. In: Grine, F.E., Fleagle, J.G., Leakey, R.E. (Eds.), The
First Humans: Origin and Early Evolution of the Genus Homo,
Vertebrate Paleontology and Paleoanthropology Series. Springer,
Dordrecht, Netherlands.

Wood, B. (Ed.), 2011. Wiley-Blackwell Encyclopedia of Human Evolu-

tion. Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN 978-1-4051-5510-6.

Wood, B., 2014. Fifty years after Homo habilis. Nature 508, 31e33.
Zollikofer, C., Ponce de Leon, M.S., Margvelashvili, A., et al., 2014.
Response to comment on “a complete skull
from Dmanisi,
Georgia, and the evolutionary biology of early Homo”. Science
344e360.

Chapter 4

The Contribution of Genetic Ancestry
From Archaic Humans to Modern
Humans

M. Stoneking
Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany

MODELS OF HUMAN ORIGINS

For many years, many anthropologists, archaeologists,
geneticists, and other researchers were kept busy trying to
answer the following question: what were the circumstances
leading to the origins of our own species, anatomically
modern humans (hereafter referred to as AMH)? Although
there were various models proposed over the years, begin-
ning in the 1980s three models dominated this discussion,
as reviewed in more detail elsewhere (Stoneking, 2008): a
recent African origin (RAO) with complete replacement of
non-African archaic humans; an RAO with assimilation of
non-African archaic humans; and multiregional evolution.
All three models (Fig. 4.1) take as their starting point the
paleontological evidence that indicates that archaic species
of Homo began migrating out of Africa around 1.8e2.0 Ma,
and spread throughout the Old World, evolving into various
different groups of archaic humans. According to both RAO
models, modern humans subsequently arose in Africa more
recently, around 250 Ka, and began dispersing from Africa
to the rest of the world beginning around 60e90 Ka. The
two RAO models then differ in terms of what happened
next: according to the RAO with replacement (RAO-R)
model, AMH completely replaced all non-African archaic
humans with no interbreeding; according to the RAO with
assimilation (RAO-A) model, AMH interbred with some
archaic humans. There are different versions of the RAO-A
model, positing different amounts of interbreeding between
archaic humans and AMH in different parts of the world.
For example, one version suggests that
interbreeding
occurred only between Neandertals and AMH, while
another version suggests
interbreeding occurred

that

between AMH and archaic humans in Australasia but
nowhere else. The crucial distinction between the RAO-R
model and these various RAO-A models is that the RAO-
R model predicts that there is no non-African archaic hu-
man ancestry in AMH, whereas the RAO-A models predict
that there is some archaic human ancestry in AMH in some
parts of the world.

In contrast to the various RAO models, which posit a
single distinct origin of AMH in Africa and then spread
throughout the Old World, multiregional evolution instead
holds that there was no single distinct origin of AMH
anywhere in the world (Wolpoff et al., 1984). Instead,
following the initial dispersal of Homo from Africa some
1.8e2.0 Ma, the entire Old World population of archaic
humans (encompassing Africa, Europe, Asia, and Austral-
asia) evolved in concert, via gene ﬂow between populations
as well as regional developments due to selection,
to
become modern humans, without any major exodus from
Africa (or any other region in the world).

Thus, according to the RAO model, all modern human
populations should show a genetic signature of highest
genetic diversity in Africa (since this is the source of all
modern populations); diversity outside of Africa should be
a subset of that within Africa; and human populations
should be closely related, having diverged only in the past
60e90 Ka. By contrast, the multiregional evolution model
predicts that there should be no indication of a single source
of genetic diversity in modern populations, as all Old
World populations of archaic hominins contributed to the
genetic diversity of modern populations, and moreover the
genetic divergence among human populations should be
quite old, as much as 1.5e2 Ma.

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00004-1
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

55

56 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

Africa

Asia

Australasia

Europe

Africa

Asia

Australasia

Europe

Africa

Asia

Australasia

Europe

AFRICA

AFRICA

AFRICA

RAO - replacement

RAO - assimilaƟon

MulƟregional evoluƟon

FIGURE 4.1 Models for the origins of modern humans. Adapted, with permission, from Stoneking, M., 2008. Human origins. The molecular
perspective. EMBO Report 9 (Suppl. 1), S46eS50.

Although all of these models were originally proposed
based on fossil and archaeological evidence (Stringer and
Andrews, 1988; Wolpoff et al., 1984), distinguishing
among them based on such evidence proved very difﬁcult.
The resolution of the at times contentious debate over these
models was ultimately provided by genetic evidence, ﬁrst
from contemporary humans, and then more recently
with the addition of genomic data from archaic humans.
A simple prediction of the RAO models is that human
populations should show a genetic signature of highest
genetic diversity in Africa (since this is the source of all
modern populations), and moreover the genetic diversity
outside of Africa should be a subset of that within Africa. In
addition, all human populations should be relatively closely
related, having diverged only in the past 60e90 Ka. By
contrast, the multiregional evolution model predicts that
there should be no strong indication of a single source of
genetic diversity in modern populations, as all Old World
populations of archaic hominins contributed more or less
equally to the genetic diversity of modern populations, and
moreover the genetic divergence among human populations
should be quite old, as much as 1.8e2.0 Ma. Thus, these
different models make contrasting predictions that can be
tested with genetic evidence.

The ﬁrst genetic evidence to bear on this issue came
from mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), a small, circular
genome found in the mitochondria (structures that produce
energy) of cells. MtDNA has the convenient property of
being strictly maternally inherited, so it
reﬂects the
maternal history of human populations (Pakendorf and
Stoneking, 2005). Beginning in the late 1980s, a series of
studies convincingly and consistently showed that the roots
of human mtDNA diversity were in Africa, that the mtDNA
variation outside of Africa is a subset of that in Africa, and
that human mtDNA variation arose within the past
150e250 Ka (Cann et al., 1987; Ingman et al., 2000;

Vigilant et al., 1991). Thus, human mtDNA variation
appears to support the RAO models.

Analyses of variation in the Y-chromosome (which is
the male counterpart to mtDNA, as the Y-chromosome is
passed on from fathers to sons and hence reﬂects the
paternal history of human populations) came to similar
conclusions, namely greatest diversity within Africa; vari-
ation outside Africa is a subset of that within Africa; and
human Y-chromosome variation has a recent origin
(Underhill et al., 2000). Analyses of dense genome-wide
datasets (consisting of thousands to millions of genetic
markers distributed all across the genome, and more
recently, whole genome sequences) have come to similar
conclusions (1000 Genomes Consortium, 2012; Li et al.,
2008; Prugnolle et al., 2005; Rosenberg et al., 2002). In
sum, there is a strong and consistent signature of an RAO
all across our genome, which supports the RAO model and
refutes the multiregional evolution model
(Stoneking,
2008).

However, distinguishing between RAO-R versus RAO-
A proved more difﬁcult with genetic data only from
contemporary populations. Several studies attempted to
address this question by looking for unusual patterns of
genetic variation that could not be accounted for by the
RAO-R model. For example, genes that show deeper
divergences among non-African populations than between
African and non-African populations could be the signature
of interbreeding between modern humans and non-African
archaic hominins (Wall and Hammer, 2006), and some
studies claimed to ﬁnd such evidence (Garrigan et al., 2005;
Harding et al., 1997; Harris and Hey, 1999). However, the
results were equivocal, as it is extremely difﬁcult to rule out
that such unusual patterns are not simply due to inadequate
sampling of African genetic diversity,
the inﬂuence of
natural selection, or even just chance (Fagundes et al.,
2007).

Archaic Human Ancestry in Modern Humans Chapter | 4 57

The advent of new methods

for obtaining and
sequencing DNA from ancient
remains (reviewed in
Stoneking and Krause, 2011) provided an opportunity to
address the question of admixture by directly screening
AMH genomes for segments of DNA that might have come
from archaic humans. Indeed, the ﬁrst such ancient DNA
analysis, of mtDNA from the Neandertal type specimen
(Krings et al., 1997), found that Neandertal mtDNA falls
outside the range of modern human mtDNA variation. All
subsequent studies of Neandertal mtDNA have conﬁrmed
the original observation (Briggs et al., 2009); thus there is
no evidence that Neandertals contributed their mtDNA to
modern humans.

However, while mtDNA is extremely informative, it is
only a single genetic locus and hence may not reﬂect the
entire genome. With the development of powerful new
methods for sequencing DNA, it became possible to obtain
a whole genome sequence from a Neandertal (Green et al.,
2010), and thus to examine if there is any indication of any
genetic contribution from Neandertals to modern humans.
Three different analyses were used to address this question,
based on different predictions as to what would be found in
the genomes of modern humans if their ancestors had
interbred with Neandertals. All three analyses gave the
same answer: there is a consistent signal of about 1e4%
Neandertal DNA in the genome of every non-African
studied, but not in the genome of any African studied
(Green et al., 2010).

Although this result was widely hailed as indicating
that the ancestors of modern humans had indeed interbred
with Neandertals,
there is another potential explanation
for the signal of Neandertal ancestry in the genomes of
non-African AMH, namely ancient substructure in African
populations (Durand et al., 2011; Green et al., 2010). The
idea is that since Neandertals have descended from an
earlier migration from Africa, if the same African popula-
tion that gave rise to Neandertals also later gave rise to the
AMH that migrated out of Africa, then Neandertals and
non-African AMH are expected to share some ancestry
because they stem from the same African source popula-
tion. The analyses that were performed in the Neandertal
genome study (Green et al., 2010) do not distinguish
between these two possible explanations. However, ap-
proaches were subsequently developed that could distin-
guish between these competing explanations of Neandertal
interbreeding versus ancient substructure in Africa, and
these all unequivocally indicated that Neandertal
inter-
breeding was the most likely explanation (Sankararaman
et al., 2012; Yang et al., 2012). Thus, the conclusion is that
all modern non-African human populations seem to be
descended from a single non-African population that
interbred with Neandertals, and this conclusion is rein-
forced by an additional, high-quality Neandertal genome
sequence (Prufer et al., 2014). Hence, the spread of AMH

from Africa did not involve complete replacement of the
non-African archaic humans; Neandertal genes live on in
modern populations, and so the RAO-R model is rejected in
favor of the RAO-A model.

OTHER ARCHAIC HUMAN GENOMES

During the course of screening fossils that might be suitable
for Neandertal genome sequencing, a portion of a ﬁngertip
bone from Denisova Cave in Southern Siberia was
analyzed. Remarkably,
the mtDNA sequence from this
fossil revealed that it was neither from a modern human nor
from a Neandertal, but rather from something different
(Krause et al., 2010). The complete genome sequence was
subsequently obtained, and revealed that the population
represented by this fossildcalled Denisovansdwas a sister
group to Neandertalsdthat is, Denisovans and Neandertals
both descend from a common ancestor
is more
distantly related to modern humans (Reich et al., 2010). In
addition to the ﬁngertip bone,
the only other currently
known fossils of Denisovans are a few teeth; thus, what
little we know of Denisovans comes largely from the
genome sequence, which was subsequently much improved
in quality due to additional improvements in extracting and
sequencing ancient DNA (Meyer et al., 2012).

that

Did Denisovans contribute any ancestry to AMH?
Comparison of
the Denisovan genome sequence to a
worldwide sample of modern humans indicated that
w4e8% Denisovan DNA is found in populations from
New Guinea and Bougainville, but nowhere else (Reich
et al., 2010). This result is quite surprising, as Denisova
Cave is over 7000 km from New Guinea. A follow-up
study conﬁrmed this result (Reich et al., 2011), and the
implications are discussed in more detail
later in this
chapter. The important conclusion is that we see evidence
of ancestry in AMH from both archaic humans from which
we have genomic data (namely, Neandertals and Deniso-
vans), providing further support for the RAO-A model of
human origins. Moreover, the archaic genomes provide
some extremely useful insights into other aspects of AMH
(beyond the sexual habits of our ancestors); archaic
ancestry is a source of information about the dispersals of
AMH, and about particular genes that were subject
to
positive selection during the evolution of AMH; I turn now
to a discussion of these topics.

ARCHAIC GENOMES AND MODERN
HUMAN DISPERSALS

We have previously seen that all non-African AMH carry a
similar signal of Neandertal ancestry. This result strongly
implies that there was a single major dispersal of AMH
from Africa that met and interbred with Neandertals shortly
after leaving Africa. Where and when this interbreeding

58 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

took place is still a matter of conjecture; however the Near
East is viewed as a likely place, as it is close to Africa and
fossils of both Neandertals and early AMH have been
found there. Some attempts have been made to date
the interbreeding, and these indicate dates of about 60e
70 Ka, with large conﬁdence intervals (Fu et al., 2014;
Sankararaman et al., 2012), consistent with other genetic
evidence for the dispersal of AMH from Africa.

Given that interbreeding took place between AMH and
Neandertals at least once, it seems likely that additional
interbreeding events must have occurred. The current maps
of the distribution of Neandertal ancestry in modern human
genomes are too crude to allow this question to be
addressed, but further reﬁnementsdas well as additional
Neandertal genome sequencesdshould permit an estimate
of the number of different interbreeding events that are
represented by traces of Neandertal ancestry in AMH ge-
nomes. Indeed, the ﬁnding that Oase 1, an early AMH
fossil from Romania, had high amounts of Neandertal
ancestry but apparently did not contribute to the ancestry of
modern Eurasians, already indicates an additional episode
of interbreeding (Fu et al., 2015).

Moreover, studies indicate that East Asians have a small
amount of additional Neandertal ancestry (on the order of
0.5e1%) compared to Europeans (Prufer et al., 2014; Wall
et al., 2013). This result seems counterintuitive, as Nean-
dertals overlapped with AMH for a longer period of time in
Europe than in Asia and thus there should have been more
opportunity for
interbreeding in Europe. A potential
explanation is that
there was stronger selection against
Neandertal ancestry in European genomes than in East
Asian genomes; according to this explanation, ancestral
populations of Europeans and East Asians started with the
same amount of Neandertal ancestry, but selection removed
more Neandertal ancestry from Europeans than from
Asians, resulting in more Neandertal ancestry in East
Asians than in Europeans. However, other studies refute
this explanation, and instead favor additional interbreeding
between Neandertals and the ancestors of East Asians (Kim
and Lohmueller, 2015; Vernot and Akey, 2015); where,
when, and how many times this interbreeding might have
occurred is presently a matter for conjecture.

The Denisovan ancestry in AMH has also been inves-
tigated in more detail, and used to make inferences about
AMH dispersals. The original study that
found that
Denisovan DNA was limited to populations from New
Guinea and Bougainville included only a sparse sampling
of populations from East Asia, no populations from island
Southeast Asia, and only these two populations from
Oceania. It thus became of interest to survey additional
populations from Southeast Asia and Oceania for signals of
Denisovan ancestry, and a follow-up study was carried out
of genome-wide data from across Southeast Asia and
Oceania (Reich et al., 2011). This study found signiﬁcant

evidence of Denisovan admixture in another population
from New Guinea; aboriginal Australians; several groups
from Eastern Indonesia; Fiji and Polynesia; and a Philip-
pine Negrito group, the Mamanwa. However, no evidence
of Denisovan gene ﬂow was found in populations from
western Indonesia, mainland East Asia, or South Asia
(Reich et al., 2011).

The Australians and New Guineans possess similar
levels of Denisovan DNA (about 4e8%), consistent with a
common ancestry for Australians and New Guineans
(McEvoy et al., 2011). Many of the other groups that show
Denisova admixture are thought to have recent ancestry
and/or gene ﬂow from New Guinea (in particular, Eastern
Indonesia, Fiji, and Polynesia), which raises the question as
to whether the Denisova admixture in these groups could be
explained by shared ancestrydand hence a shared signal of
Denisova admixturedwith New Guinea. To test
this
hypothesis,
the amount of New Guinea ancestry was
estimated for each population showing signiﬁcant evidence
of Denisova admixture (Reich et al., 2011). The predicted
outcome of this analysis is that if New Guinea ancestry is
accounting for the signal of Denisova admixture in a
population,
then the amount of New Guinea ancestry
should be correlated with the amount of Denisova admix-
ture. The results of this analysis showed that for all of the
Eastern Indonesian groups, Fiji, and Polynesia, the amount
of Denisova admixture was indeed correlated with the
amount of New Guinea ancestry. Thus, as expected from
previous studies showing New Guinea ancestry in these
groups (Kayser et al., 2006; Mona et al., 2009), shared New
Guinea ancestry accounts for their Denisova admixture
signal. However,
the
Mamanwa, have signiﬁcant Denisova admixture but no
detectable New Guinea ancestry. Hence, recent ancestry or
gene ﬂow from New Guinea does not account for the
Denisova admixture in the Mamanwa.

the Philippine Negrito group,

Important

information can also be gleaned from
populations who do not show signiﬁcant evidence of
Denisova gene ﬂow. In particular, there is no evidence of
Denisova gene ﬂow in two groups thought to be related to
the Mamanwa, New Guineans, and Australians: a Malay-
sian Negrito group, the Jehai; and in the Andamanese Onge
(Reich et al., 2011). A modeling approach called Admix-
ture Graph Analysis (Reich et al., 2009) was then applied to
the data, to come up with a model of population history that
best explains all of these results. In Admixture Graph
Analysis, various statistics are estimated from the genome-
wide data as well as from a graph that represents the
divergence pattern and gene ﬂow between the populations;
the graph that provides the best ﬁt between the observed
data and the statistics estimated from the model is taken as
the most likely model of population history. The results
from applying Admixture Graph Analysis to the genome-
wide data (Reich et al., 2011) indicate that the ancestors

Archaic Human Ancestry in Modern Humans Chapter | 4 59

of the Onge, Jehai, Mamanwa, Australians, and New
Guineans are all descended from an earlier migration to
Southeast Asia and Near Oceania than are the ancestors of
all other East and Southeast Asians (Fig. 4.2). The ances-
tors of the Onge and Jehai diverged ﬁrst, followed by
admixture with Denisovans in a population that was
ancestral to the Mamanwa, Australians, and New Guineans.
The Mamanwa then diverged, followed by divergence
between Australians and New Guineans. This was followed
by a second dispersal to East and Southeast Asia, and the
ancestors of this second dispersal also admixed heavily
with the Jehai and Mamanwa, but not the Onge (Reich
et al., 2011).

This scenario, while by no means proven, strongly
supports multiple dispersals to Asia and Oceania. The
number of dispersals to Asia and Oceania has been disputed
by researchers; some studies have argued for multiple
dispersals (Lahr and Foley, 1994), while others have argued

for a single major dispersal of modern humans to this re-
gion (Abdulla et al., 2009). The admixture signals in
modern humans from Denisovans argue strongly for mul-
tiple dispersals. Another analysis of genome-wide data
from populations from Asia and New Guinea, which was
not based on admixture with extinct hominins but instead
used a different approach to ﬁt a model of population
history to the genome-wide data, also concluded that the
best-ﬁtting model involved multiple dispersals (Wollstein
et al., 2010). Moreover, an analysis of the genome sequence
of an aboriginal Australian, obtained from 100-year-old
hairs, also supports separate dispersals of Australians and
East Asians (Rasmussen et al., 2011). The current evidence
from genome-wide studies thus strongly and convincingly
supports multiple dispersals of modern humans to Asia and
Oceania.

The second implication of the scenario outlined above is
that it implies that admixture with Denisovans most likely

FIGURE 4.2 A putative scenario depicting human migration history as revealed by signals of archaic human admixture (Reich et al., 2011). The X
marks the location of Denisova Cave. Modern humans arise in Africa, migrate from Africa, and soon after, admix with Neandertals. This is followed by a
dispersal from this non-African source population that presumably followed a southern route (solid line) as the ﬁrst populations to diverge are ancestors of
the Onge and Jehai. There is then admixture with Denisovans, followed by divergence of the ancestors of the Mamanwa, Australians, and Papuans. The
ancestors of other east Asian populations, such as Han Chinese, are descended from subsequent migrations from this non-African source population,
perhaps along a more northerly route (dashed line). This ﬁgure ﬁrst appeared in, and is re-used with permission from: Stoneking, M., 2016. Archaic
genomes and the peopling of South Asia. In: Schug, G.R., Walimbe, S. (Eds.), A Companion to South Asia in the Past, Wiley-Blackwell.

60 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

TABLE 4.1 Genes Exhibiting Potential Signals of Adaptive Introgression

Candidate
Gene
HLA A, B, C

Archaic
Source

N, D

AMH Populations
Inﬂuenced

Eurasians, Oceanians

Gene
Function

Immune
response

Immune
response

Immune
response

Putative Reason for
Selection

References

Disease resistance

Abi-Rached et al. (2011)

Disease resistance

Mendez et al. (2012)

Disease resistance

Sankararaman et al. (2014)

Oceanians

Europeans

STAT2

OAS2

SLC16A11

EPAS1

HYAL2

N

N

N

D

N

Native Americans

Lipid
metabolism

Diet

SIGMA Type 2 Diabetes Con-
sortium (2014)

Tibetans

East Asians

Hypoxia
response

UV
response

High altitude

Huerta-Sanchez et al. (2014)

Skin pigmentation

Ding et al. (2014)

AMH, Anatomically modern human; N, Neandertal; D, Denisovan.

occurred somewhere in the eastern islands in Southeast
Asia. If that is indeed the case, then Denisovans were
spread across an enormous geographic and environmental
range. Denisova Cave is some 7000e8000 km from where
the admixture is inferred to have occurred with modern
humans (Fig. 4.2), and this range encompasses environ-
ments that range from the taiga forests of Southern Siberia
to tropical Southeast Asia. The inference is that Denisovans
must have been capable of existing in a wide variety of
environmentsdmore so than any other hominin known to
date, with the exception of our own species. Thus, the
admixture analysis not only informs us about modern
humans, but also sheds some light on the abilities of the
Denisovans.

However, studies have added further layers of compli-
cation to the already complicated picture in Fig. 4.2. It now
appears that Denisovan ancestry is much more widespread
across East Asia and extends into the Americas, at a barely
detectable level of w0.2% (Prufer et al., 2014; Skoglund
and Jakobsson, 2011). Moreover,
this widespread East
Asian Denisovan ancestry appears to be related to the
Denisovan ancestry that is at higher frequency in Oceania
(Qin and Stoneking, 2015). There are two potential sce-
narios that could account for these results. First, a popu-
lation ancestral to East Asians and Oceanians interbred
somewhere with Denisovans and then spread across East
Asia and Oceania. This was followed by a later migration to
East Asia of people without Denisovan ancestry;
these
people interbred with the East Asians and thereby reduced
the amount of their Denisovan ancestry, but this migration
did not extend to Oceania, and so Oceanians retain the
higher signal of Denisovan ancestry. Second, a population
ancestral speciﬁcally to Oceanians interbred with Deniso-
vans (eg, as depicted in Fig. 4.2) and then there was a

back-migration to East Asia whose descendants interbred
with East Asian populations, thereby contributing a smaller
amount of Denisovan ancestry. Further workdin partic-
sequencesdwill be needed to
ular, whole genome
distinguish between these two scenarios.

ARCHAIC GENOMES AND SELECTION

is,

region that

In addition to providing information about migrations, the
archaic genomes have been a source of insights into genes
that have been subject to positive selection during the
origin and dispersal of AMH. The basic idea is that if one
looks at the landscape of archaic human ancestry across the
chromosomes of AMH genomes, one can identify “de-
serts” and “islands” of archaic ancestry (Sankararaman
et al., 2014; Vernot and Akey, 2014). That
in the
absence of selection, archaic ancestry should be distributed
at
random across the chromosomes of an individual.
However, a chromosomal
is signiﬁcantly
depauperate in archaic ancestry (when analyzing many
individuals from a population; there is not enough infor-
mation in the genome of a single individual to carry out
this analysis) could indicate that the archaic form of some
gene(s) in this region were selected against, presumably
because the AMH form had a signiﬁcant selective advan-
tage. Thus, genes important in the evolution of AMH may
reside in such deserts of archaic ancestry. Conversely,
there may also be chromosomal
regions which have
signiﬁcantly more archaic ancestry (again, when analyzing
many individuals) than would be expected if archaic
ancestry is distributed randomly across chromosomal re-
gions. These islands of archaic ancestry may harbor
gene(s) for which the archaic form conferred a signiﬁcant
selective advantage in AMH.

Archaic Human Ancestry in Modern Humans Chapter | 4 61

Currently, the methods for accurately identifying such
genomic deserts and islands are still
in their infancy.
However, some intriguing signals have been identiﬁed.
For example, one desert of Neandertal ancestry in the
genomes of all non-Africans contains a gene called
FOXP2 (Vernot and Akey, 2014). Defects in this gene
interrupt
the normal production of speech (Lai et al.,
2001), and while AMH and Neandertals share the same
form of the FOXP2 protein, there may be signiﬁcant dif-
ferences in the regulation of FOXP2 gene expression be-
tween AMH and Neandertals (Maricic et al., 2013). It is
thus tempting to speculate that
there may have been
important differences in speech production (or related
cognitive abilities) between Neandertals and AMH, but
currently this is just speculation.

There are, however, some very intriguing cases where it
does appear that the archaic form of a gene was contributed
to some AMH population(s) by interbreeding and subse-
quently was selected for because it conferred some advan-
tage. These cases are summarized in Table 4.1 and include a
few surprises as well as some that make more sense. An
example of a very surprising ﬁnding is that the form of a
gene called EPAS1, which is associated with adaptation
to high altitude in Tibetans (Simonson et al., 2010; Yi
et al., 2010), appears to have come from Denisovans
(Huerta-Sanchez et al., 2014). How this came about is still a
matter of conjecture, but may certainly indicate that
interbreeding with Denisovans occurred over a wider area
than initially suspected, as discussed previously. A ﬁnding
that is less surprising is that some genes associated with
resistance/susceptibility to infectious diseases seem to have
been contributed from both Neandertals and Denisovans to
some AMH populations (Table 4.1). If one thinks about it,
this “adaptive introgression” (Racimo et al., 2015) does
make sense: after all,
the ancestors of Neandertals and
Denisovans spread out of Africa hundreds of thousands of
years ago, spread across the Old World, and were successful
in adapting genetically to the new environments, climates,
diseases, parasites, sources of nutrition, etc.,
they
encountered. Then, 60e90 Ka, our ancestors start spreading
out of Africa and have to do the same thing all over again.
So if by interbreeding with archaic humans the AMH an-
cestors were able to pick up genes that helped them adapt to
the new circumstances out of Africa, this would have given
them a leg up. Who knows: maybe in the absence of such
interbreeding, our ancestors would not have been able to
survive out of Africa. This is admittedly pure speculation,
but for sure the advantageous genes contributed to our an-
cestors by interbreeding with archaic humans must have
beneﬁtted our ancestorsdotherwise, we would not see the
signiﬁcant signals of positive selection associated with such
genes.

that

CONCLUDING REMARKS

In summary, the overall picture of recent human evolution
is not one of long-term continuity and isolation, but rather
multiple events of migration and interbreeding, the latter
involving not
just AMH and archaic humans, but also
among various AMH populations (Pugach and Stoneking,
2015). It
is quite likely that every human population,
including African populations, which probably interbred
with some as-yet-unknown archaic human(s) (Hammer
et al., 2011), has some history of interbreeding. The fact
that humans have such a long history of migration is
perhaps an important fact that governments grappling with
current
issues surrounding migration and immigration
would do well to remember; the spread of our own species
across and out of Africa, and the ensuing contacts with
archaic humans, may have been the ﬁrst migration
“problem.”

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I thank my students and colleaguesdin particular, the members of the
Neandertal Genome Sequence Consortium and the Denisova Genome
Sequence Consortiumdfor carrying out the work described herein
and for useful and enlightening discussions. Research by my labora-
tory is supported by the Max Planck Society.

REFERENCES

Abdulla, M.A., Ahmed, I., Assawamakin, A., et al., 2009. Mapping human

genetic diversity in Asia. Science 326, 1541e1545.

Abi-Rached, L., Jobin, M.J., Kulkarni, S., et al., 2011. The shaping of
modern human immune systems by multiregional admixture with
archaic humans. Science 334, 89e94.

Briggs, A.W., Good, J.M., Green, R.E., et al., 2009. Targeted retrieval and
analysis of ﬁve Neandertal mtDNA genomes. Science 325, 318e321.
Cann, R.L., Stoneking, M., Wilson, A.C., 1987. Mitochondrial DNA and

human evolution. Nature 325, 31e36.

Ding, Q., Hu, Y., Xu, S., et al., 2014. Neanderthal introgression at chro-
mosome 3p21.31 was under positive natural selection in East Asians.
Molecular Biology and Evolution 31, 683e695.

Durand, E.Y., Patterson, N., Reich, D., Slatkin, M., 2011. Testing for
ancient admixture between closely related populations. Molecular
Biology and Evolution 28, 2239e2252.

Fagundes, N.J., Ray, N., Beaumont, M., et al., 2007. Statistical evaluation
of alternative models of human evolution. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 104,
17614e17619.

Fu, Q., Hajdinjak, M., Moldovan, O.T., et al., 2015. An early modern
human from Romania with a recent Neanderthal ancestor. Nature 524
(7564), 216e219 (accepted).

Fu, Q., Li, H., Moorjani, P., et al., 2014. Genome sequence of a 45,000-
year-old modern human from western Siberia. Nature 514, 445e449.
Garrigan, D., Mobasher, Z., Severson, T., et al., 2005. Evidence for archaic
Asian ancestry on the human X chromosome. Molecular Biology and
Evolution 22, 189e192.

62 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

1000 Genomes Consortium, 2012. An integrated map of genetic variation

from 1,092 human genomes. Nature 491, 56e65.

Green, R.E., Krause, J., Briggs, A.W., et al., 2010. A draft sequence of the

Neandertal genome. Science 328, 710e722.

Hammer, M.F., Woerner, A.E., Mendez, F.L., et al., 2011. Genetic evi-
dence for archaic admixture in Africa. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 108,
15123e15128.

Prufer, K., Racimo, F., Patterson, N., et al., 2014. The complete genome
sequence of a Neanderthal from the Altai Mountains. Nature 505,
43e49.

Prugnolle, F., Manica, A., Balloux, F., 2005. Geography predicts neutral
genetic diversity of human populations. Current Biology 15,
R159eR160.

Pugach, I., Stoneking, M., 2015. Genome-wide insights into the genetic

history of human populations. Investigative Genetics 6, 6.

Harding, R.M., Fullerton, S.M., Grifﬁths, R.C., et al., 1997. Archaic
African and Asian lineages in the genetic ancestry of modern humans.
The American Journal of Human Genetics 60, 772e789.

Qin, P., Stoneking, M., 2015. Denisovan ancestry in East Eurasian and
Native American populations. Molecular Biology and Evolution 32,
2665e2674.

Harris, E.E., Hey, J., 1999. X chromosome evidence for ancient human
histories. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 96, 3320e3324.

Racimo, F., Sankararaman, S., Nielsen, R., Huerta-Sanchez, E., 2015.
Evidence for archaic adaptive introgression in humans. Nature
Reviews Genetics 16, 359e371.

Huerta-Sanchez, E., Jin, X., Asan, et al., 2014. Altitude adaptation in
Tibetans caused by introgression of Denisovan-like DNA. Nature 512,
194e197.

Rasmussen, M., Guo, X., Wang, Y., et al., 2011. An Aboriginal Australian
genome reveals separate human dispersals into Asia. Science 334,
94e98.

Ingman, M., Kaessmann, H., Paabo, S., Gyllensten, U., 2000. Mitochon-
drial genome variation and the origin of modern humans. Nature 408,
708e713.

Reich, D., Green, R.E., Kircher, M., et al., 2010. Genetic history of an
archaic hominin group from Denisova Cave in Siberia. Nature 468,
1053e1060.

Kayser, M., Brauer, S., Cordaux, R., et al., 2006. Melanesian and Asian
origins of Polynesians: mtDNA and Y chromosome gradients across
the Paciﬁc. Molecular Biology and Evolution 23, 2234e2244.

Reich, D., Patterson, N., Kircher, M., et al., 2011. Denisova admixture and
the ﬁrst modern human dispersals into Southeast Asia and Oceania.
The American Journal of Human Genetics 89, 516e528.

Kim, B.Y., Lohmueller, K.E., 2015. Selection and reduced population size
cannot explain higher amounts of Neandertal ancestry in East Asian
than in European human populations. The American Journal of
Human Genetics 96, 454e461.

Reich, D., Thangaraj, K., Patterson, N., et al., 2009. Reconstructing Indian

population history. Nature 461, 489e494.

Rosenberg, N.A., Pritchard, J.K., Weber, J.L., et al., 2002. Genetic

structure of human populations. Science 298, 2381e2385.

Krause, J., Fu, Q., Good, J.M., et al., 2010. The complete mitochondrial
DNA genome of an unknown hominin from southern Siberia. Nature
464, 894e897.

Sankararaman, S., Mallick, S., Dannemann, M., et al., 2014. The genomic
landscape of Neanderthal ancestry in present-day humans. Nature 507,
354e357.

Krings, M., Stone, A., Schmitz, R.W., et al., 1997. Neandertal DNA

sequences and the origin of modern humans. Cell 90, 19e30.

Lahr, M., Foley, R., 1994. Multiple dispersals and modern human origins.

Evolutionary Anthropology 3, 48e60.

Lai, C.S., Fisher, S.E., Hurst, J.A., et al., 2001. A forkhead-domain gene is
mutated in a severe speech and language disorder. Nature 413,
519e523.

Li, J.Z., Absher, D.M., Tang, H., et al., 2008. Worldwide human
relationships inferred from genome-wide patterns of variation. Science
319, 1100e1104.

Maricic, T., Gunther, V., Georgiev, O., et al., 2013. A recent evolutionary
in the human FOXP2 gene.

change affects a regulatory element
Molecular Biology and Evolution 30, 844e852.

Sankararaman, S., Patterson, N., Li, H., et al., 2012. The date of inter-
breeding between Neandertals and modern humans. PLoS Genetics 8,
e1002947.

Sigma Type 2 Diabetes Consortium, 2014. Sequence variants

in
SLC16A11 are a common risk factor for type 2 diabetes in Mexico.
Nature 506, 97e101.

Simonson, T.S., Yang, Y., Huff, C.D., et al., 2010. Genetic evidence for

high-altitude adaptation in Tibet. Science 329, 72e75.

Skoglund, P., Jakobsson, M., 2011. Archaic human ancestry in East Asia.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 108, 18301e18306.

Stoneking, M., 2008. Human origins. The molecular perspective. EMBO

Report 9 (Suppl. 1), S46eS50.

McEvoy, B.P., Lind, J.M., Wang, E.T., et al., 2011. Whole-genome
genetic diversity in a sample of Australians with deep Aboriginal
ancestry. The American Journal of Human Genetics 87, 297e305.

Stoneking, M., Krause, J., 2011. Learning about human population history
from ancient and modern genomes. Nature Reviews Genetics 12,
603e614.

Mendez, F.L., Watkins, J.C., Hammer, M.F., 2012. A haplotype at STAT2
Introgressed from Neanderthals and serves as a candidate of positive
selection in Papua New Guinea. The American Journal of Human
Genetics 91, 265e274.

Meyer, M., Kircher, M., Gansauge, M.T., et al., 2012. A high-coverage
genome sequence from an archaic Denisovan individual. Science
338, 222e226.

Stringer, C.B., Andrews, P., 1988. Genetic and fossil evidence for the

origin of modern humans. Science 239, 1263e1268.

Underhill, P.A., Shen, P., Lin, A.A., et al., 2000. Y chromosome sequence
variation and the history of human populations. Nature Genetics 26,
358e361.

Vernot, B., Akey, J.M., 2014. Resurrecting surviving Neandertal lineages

from modern human genomes. Science 343, 1017e1021.

Mona, S., Grunz, K.E., Brauer, S., et al., 2009. Genetic admixture history
of Eastern Indonesia as revealed by Y-chromosome and mitochondrial
DNA analysis. Molecular Biology and Evolution 26, 1865e1877.

Vernot, B., Akey, J.M., 2015. Complex history of admixture between
modern humans and Neandertals. The American Journal of Human
Genetics 96, 448e453.

Pakendorf, B., Stoneking, M., 2005. Mitochondrial DNA and human
evolution. Annual Review of Genomics and Human Genetics 6,
165e183.

Vigilant, L., Stoneking, M., Harpending, H., et al., 1991. African pop-
ulations and the evolution of human mitochondrial DNA. Science 253,
1503e1507.

Archaic Human Ancestry in Modern Humans Chapter | 4 63

Wall, J.D., Hammer, M.F., 2006. Archaic admixture in the human genome.

Current Opinion in Genetics & Development 16, 606e610.

Wall, J.D., Yang, M.A., Jay, F., et al., 2013. Higher levels of Neanderthal
ancestry in East Asians than in Europeans. Genetics 194, 199e209.
Wollstein, A., Lao, O., Becker, C., et al., 2010. Demographic history of
Oceania inferred from genome-wide data. Current Biology 20,
1983e1992.

Wolpoff, M.H., Wu, X.Z., Thorne, A.G., 1984. Modern Homo sapiens
origins: a general theory of hominid evolution involving the fossil

evidence from east Asia. In: Spencer, F.H., Smith, F. (Eds.), The
Origins of Modern Humans. Alan R. Liss, New York, pp. 411e483.
Yang, M.A., Malaspinas, A.S., Durand, E.Y., Slatkin, M., 2012.
Ancient structure in Africa unlikely to explain Neanderthal and non-
African genetic similarity. Molecular Biology and Evolution 29,
2987e2995.

Yi, X., Liang, Y., Huerta-Sanchez, E., et al., 2010. Sequencing of 50
human exomes reveals adaptation to high altitude. Science 329,
75e78.

Chapter 5

World Dispersals and Genetic Diversity
of Mankind: The Out-of-Africa Theory
and Its Challenges

A.R. Templeton1,2
1Washington University, St. Louis, MO, United States; 2University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel

INTRODUCTION
A human individual is born, perhaps moves around during
her or his lifetime, perhaps has children a few times, and
ultimately dies. The existence of
the human species,
however, transcends that of a human individual in both
time and space. The total human population has a contin-
uous turnover of individuals as some die and others are
born. Through reproduction, the population persists over
time for periods far longer than that of any individual.
Because the population consists of many individuals at
any given time,
the population can exist over a wide
geographical space that is far greater than the space that any
individual will live in during his or her lifetime. Each hu-
man individual also bears three genomes: one nuclear
genome inherited from the father, another nuclear genome
from the mother, and a mitochondrial genome from the
mother. This genetic material also has an existence in both
space and time that transcends the individuals that tempo-
rally bear it. Because DNA can replicate, the genes found in
an individual’s genomes have come from the past and
can be passed on to the future. The individual is mortal,
but her or his genes can travel into the future through
replication and reproduction. Because of DNA replication,
several
identical copies of a speciﬁc type of gene can
simultaneously exist in multiple individuals. Although an
individual can only be at one place at one time, the identical
copies of the genes that this individual bears can be at many
places at one time. Hence, a gene’s existence transcends
that of an individual in time and space. The fate of human
genes through time and space is the primary concern of this
chapter.

Genes do not move through space on their own, but
rather depend upon individuals to move them. Biological
dispersal is the movement of individuals (and in some
species, their gametes) that has the potential for moving
genes through space; that is, an individual disperses when
he or she moves from their place of birth to other places
where they might reproduce, thereby causing the movement
of genes. The movement of gene copies through space
across generations is called gene ﬂow.

Gene ﬂow can occur through individual dispersal, but in
social species such as humans, individuals often disperse as
part of a larger group. This group could be a family, a clan,
a tribe, or even some larger group. Dispersal of populations
of humans also results in gene ﬂow and can greatly amplify
the magnitude of that gene ﬂow beyond what a single
individual dispersing would cause. When populations
disperse,
they sometimes come into contact with other
populations with which there had been little or no previous
gene ﬂow for many generations. When populations have
little or no gene ﬂow for many generations, they tend to
become genetically differentiated. Mutations that arose in
one population may be absent from the other. The sampling
effects
cause
random changes in the frequencies of even those genes
shared by both populationsda phenomenon called genetic
drift. Finally, natural selection can only operate upon the
genetic variation available in the gene pool of the popula-
tion, so differences caused by mutation and genetic drift
can be ampliﬁed by natural selection. This is particularly
important when the dispersing population had previously
that favored different
inhabited a different environment
local
selection. When

associated with Mendelian inheritance

adaptations

through

natural

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00005-3
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

65

66 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

population dispersal results in two or more genetically
differentiated populations to come into contact,
inter-
breeding between these populations can ensue. The
gene ﬂow caused by interbreeding between previously
genetically differentiated populations is called admixture.
An alternative to admixture when populations meet is that
one population drives the other to extinction without any
interbreeding. This process is called replacement.

The basic models of human evolution over the last
2 million years are primarily deﬁned by the hypothesized
patterns, amounts and timing of individual and population
dispersal, gene ﬂow, admixture, and replacement. There is
a strong consensus that
the human lineage originally
evolved in Sub-Saharan Africa and remained there until the
expansion of Homo erectus populations out of Africa into
Eurasia about 1.9 to 1.8 Ma. The models differ in the events
that occurred after that original expansion of H. erectus out
of Africa.

hominin

subdivided

populations

The “classic” model of human evolution that was
popular in the ﬁrst half of the 20th century is that the Old
World
into many
divergent evolutionary branches, with one branch expand-
ing out into the regions inhabited by the others, driving
them to complete extinction (Dobzhansky, 1944). Some
anthropologists regarded these regional branches as so
divergent as to constitute different species of humans
(Howells, 1942). The classic model has no role for gene
ﬂow or admixture, only for population dispersal and
replacement. At ﬁrst it was not clear which regional branch
of humanity was the “winner,” but subsequent fossil ﬁnds
indicated that many anatomical features associated with
living humans ﬁrst arose in Sub-Saharan Africa and only
later spread out of Africa. Accordingly, the classic model
became the out-of-Africa replacement
(OAR) model
(Stringer and Andrews, 1988). This model posits that
anatomically modern humans arose ﬁrst in Sub-Saharan
Africa, and then around 60,000 to 70,000 years ago
(although some argue for 100,000 to 130,000 years ago),
expanded out of Africa, driving to complete extinction all
the other human populations encountered in Eurasia
(Fig. 5.1A). The modern populations that replaced the
archaic Eurasian populations then split into the modern
“races.” This modern version of the classic model also has
no role for gene ﬂow or admixture, only population
dispersal and replacement. It also predicts that all living
humans trace all of their genetic ancestry to Sub-Saharan
Africa, with no genetic input at all from other regions of
the Old World.

In the 1940s, Weidenreich proposed the multiregional
hypothesis (Fig. 5.1B) as an alternative to the classic
model
(Weidenreich, 1946). The multiregional model
posits that human populations living in both Africa and
Eurasia evolved into their modern forms as a single
species, with gene ﬂow interconnecting them throughout

the process. Consequently, there is no evolutionary tree of
human populations, as in the classic model (Fig. 5.1A),
but rather a trellis indicating genetically interconnected
regional populations. These regional populations still
showed local genetic differentiation due to the gene ﬂow
being restricted and/or natural
local
adaptation. Even under restricted gene ﬂow, a mutation
arising anywhere in the Old World could spread to all
populations, particularly if
In great
contrast to the OAR hypothesis, there is no single place of
origin for
living humans
represent a genetic amalgam from many ancestral regions.
Gene ﬂow is a major evolutionary force in the multire-
gional model.

living humans, but

it were selected.

selection for

rather

regions that

in the candelabra model

The diametric opposite of the multiregional model is
the candelabra model
(Fig. 5.1C; Coon, 1962). This
model posits that the human populations established in
Africa, Europe, and Asia at the time when H. erectus
became fragmented from one another, with no gene ﬂow
or admixture, just as with the OAR model. However, there
was no replacement;
instead, each regional population
living
evolved independently into a modern race of
humans in the same geographical
they
inhabited throughout the Pleistocene. Hence, as with the
classic model, there is no role for gene ﬂow or admixture,
but unlike the classic model
there is also no role for
population dispersal and replacement. The candelabra
model is also similar to the classic model in positing that
the modern races of humans are separate branches on an
evolutionary tree, but the time of separation differs greatly
in these two models. In the OAR model, this split is
relatively recent;
this split
occurred at the time of the expansion of H. erectus out of
Africa, now regarded as about 1.9 to 1.8 Ma. However,
because the candelabra model also posited a multiregional
ancestry for living humans, it has also frequently been
called a “multiregional” model. This dual use of the word
multiregional has caused great confusion. Theodosius
Dobzhansky, a great population geneticist and one of the
major architects of the 20th century evolutionary syn-
thesis, attempted to clarify the evolutionary differ-
ence between the Weidenreich multiregional model and
the candelabra model. Dobzhansky (1944) argued for the
implausibility of
the candelabra model and even the
classic model on the basis of their assumption of complete
reproductive isolation for 1 million years or more, with
the candelabra model being particularly implausible from
an evolutionary perspective as it required an extremely
unlikely degree of parallel evolution during the evolution
of human modernity from a H. erectuselike ancestor.
Dobzhansky came down on the side of Weidenreich’s
model on the basis of these population genetic principles
because gene ﬂow would eliminate the need for parallel
evolution and the unlikely persistence of reproductive

World Dispersals and Genetic Diversity of Mankind: The Out-of-Africa Theory and Its Challenges Chapter | 5 67

(A)

Africans

Europeans

Asians

(B)

Africans

Europeans

Asians

(C)

Africans

Europeans

Asians

60,000 to
130,000
Years Ago

Dispersal of
Homo erectus
out of Africa
at 1.9 Ma

FIGURE 5.1 Three models of human evolution. All three models show that the human lineage was conﬁned to Africa until about 1.9 Ma, when Homo
erectus expanded into Eurasia. In the out-of-Africa replacement model, Panel A, humanity then split into three branches. Anatomically modern humans
evolved in the African branch, which then spread out-of-Africa into Eurasia between 60,000 and 130,000 years ago. All the archaic Eurasian populations
were driven to complete genetic extinction, indicated by the broken branches in Eurasia. In Weidenreich’s multiregional model, Panel B, the African and
Eurasian populations were interconnected by gene ﬂow after the expansion of H. erectus, as indicated by a trellis-like structure. All humans evolved into
modernity together because of gene ﬂow, with no single location being the origin of all modern humans. Panel C shows Coon’s candelabra model which
posits that humanity split into three branches after the expansion of H. erectus, and all three branches independently evolved into their current forms with
no gene ﬂow interconnecting them.

isolation over long periods of time. Dobzhansky (1944, p.
262) also argued that, contrary to the classic model, ge-
netic mixing negates the “a priori need to assume that the
character and gene complexes which are collectively
known as the modern species Homo sapiens arose in any
one place or at any particular time.” Instead, the gene
complexes of modern humans were put together through
gene ﬂow and natural selection from mutations arising in
“different parts of the distribution area of a species”
(Dobzhansky, 1944, p. 262). However, Dobzhansky was
not against the idea of one regional population expanding
into the territories of other populations, but he envisioned
that such a population expansion would result in admix-
ture, not replacement. In a direct attack on the classic
model, Dobzhansky (1944, pp. 262e263) wrote “The
conception that the modern Homo sapiens arose in some
deﬁnite place,
then spread the world over destroying
outright all other hominid strains, and ﬁnally split up into
races which in turn proceeded to diverge from each other,
is probably an oversimpliﬁcation of the actual story.” His
concession to the classic model was that “The ‘classic’
theory is probably justiﬁed to the extent that some of the
races of the past have contributed more germ plasm
than others to the formation of the present humanity”
(Dobzhansky, 1944, p. 263). Dobzhansky’s suggestion
has morphed into what is now known as the “mostly out-
of-Africa hypothesis” (Relethford, 2001), which posits
that the recent human population expansion out of Africa

resulted in limited admixture with Eurasian populations
and not complete replacement. Under this model, much,
but not all, of our genetic ancestry traces to Sub-Saharan
Africa, but there is still a smaller component of Eurasian
origin. An even greater role for admixture and gene ﬂow
arose from analyses of genetic data that indicated a mid-
Pleistocene population expansion from Sub-Saharan
Africa into Eurasia that also resulted in admixture, not
replacement, and the establishment of restricted gene ﬂow
between African and Eurasian populations by the
mid-Pleistocene that resulted in a trellis-like structure
from that point onwards in human evolution (Fig. 5.2)
(Templeton, 2002, 2007, 2013, 2015).

The differences between the models shown in Figs. 5.1
and 5.2 are in the role, timing and location of gene ﬂow,
admixture, population dispersal, and replacement. Hence,
these are the central issues in addressing the various models
of the evolution of modern humanity.

PHYLOGEOGRAPHY AND MODELS OF
HUMAN EVOLUTION

Coalescent Theory and Mitochondrial Eve
The models of human evolution shown in Fig. 5.1 were
motivated primarily from the fossil
record, although
theoretical population genetic considerations did play a role
in some of these models (Dobzhansky, 1944). As genetic

68 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

Time

Africa S. Europe N. Europe S. Asia

N. Asia

Pacific

Americas

Gene Flow with

Isolation by Distance

and Some Long

Distance Dispersal

0.13 Ma

(0.10 to 0.17)

0.65 Ma

(0.39 to 0.97)

            Range Expansions Into New Areas

Male-Mediated Out of Asia Expansion

with Admixture

Out of Africa Expansion of Homo sapiens
with Admixture with Eurasian Populations

Gene Flow with Isolation by Distance
and Some Long Distance Dispersal

Acheulean Out of Africa Expansion with

Admixture with Eurasian Populations

Failure to Reject Null Hypothesis of

Isolation (no gene flow)

Out of Africa Expansion of Homo erectus

1.90 Ma

(0.99 to 3.10)

Africa

S. Europe

S. Asia

FIGURE 5.2 A model of human evolution arising from statistical hypotheses testing of genomic regions showing little to no recombination. Thin
vertical lines indicate genetic descent within a local region, and diagonal lines indicate gene ﬂow between regions. Population expansion events are
indicated by thick arrows. No lines of descent are broken by these expansion events as the hypothesis of replacement is always rejected.

technologies developed and became more powerful,
genetics began to play an increasingly important role in our
understanding of human evolution over the last 2 million
years, starting with the landmark publication of a study on
mitochondrial DNA variation in living human populations
(Cann et al., 1987). Moreover, a new area of theoretical
population genetics, known as coalescent theory (Kingman,
1982a,b), had developed that produced a new framework
for analyzing DNA variants in the present to understand the
past.

As mentioned in the introduction, DNA can replicate
and pass on identical copies of itself to the next generation,
albeit for the occasional mutation that produces a new
genetic variant. A forward perspective of looking toward
the next generation dominated the initial modeling of
evolution by population geneticists. However,
in most
the DNA that could be
evolutionary genetic studies,

surveyed for variation was the DNA sampled from living
individuals, with the inferences often being directed toward
the past, not the future; that is, how did the evolutionary
process create the amount and patterns of genetic variation
observed today? The essence of coalescent theory is to look
at DNA replication backward in time. When DNA
replicates, it produces two copies of itself. But starting with
the two copies and looking backward in time, these two
DNA molecules “coalesce” into a single DNA molecule.
Hence, DNA coalescence is the time-inverse of DNA
replication. Any two homologous pieces of DNA observed
today coalesced into a single molecule of DNA at some
time in the past. Coalescent theory is concerned with the
dynamics of the coalescent process in which all the ho-
mologous molecules of DNA observed today merge into a
single ancestral molecule in the past through a series of
coalescent events between DNA lineages. DNA is in

World Dispersals and Genetic Diversity of Mankind: The Out-of-Africa Theory and Its Challenges Chapter | 5 69

essence a living fossil; each piece of DNA contains many
nucleotide sequences that came from previous generations
through the process of DNA replication. Some parts of the
sequence have changed through the process of mutation
and recombination, but coalescent theory allows the current
DNA variation to make inferences about the past.

Consider a sample of n copies of a homologous gene
that are surveyed from a living population. As one looks
backward in time, eventually two of these n DNA lineages
will coalesce; that is, a DNA replication event is encoun-
tered that produced the two present-day DNA lineages.
This coalescent event reduces the number of DNA lineages
to n   1. As one looks further and further back in time,
additional coalescent events are encountered, each one
reducing the number of DNA lineages by one, until ﬁnally
the n present-day DNA lineages in the original sample
coalesce into a single DNA molecule that is the ancestral
molecule of all the n DNA copies sampled in the present.
The time in generations to coalesce of all n copies of a gene
to the common ancestral gene is 2xNef(1   1/n) where x is
the ploidy level and Nef is the inbreeding effective size
(Kingman, 1982a,b). The inbreeding effective size is an
idealized parameter in population genetics that measures
the power of genetic drift as an evolutionary force. It is not
the census size of a population. In a species such as humans
that has a long history of sustained growth in population
size (Coventry et al., 2010), the inbreeding effective size is
expected to be much smaller than the census size, often by
orders of magnitude (Templeton, 2006).

and Y-chromosomal DNA (Y-DNA)

For a large sample (n large), the expected coalesce time
is approximately 2xNef. Most genes in the human genome
are autosomal, and since we are a diploid species, x ¼ 2.
Hence, human autosomal genes have an expected time to
coalesce for all copies of 4Nef. Mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA)
are
inherited as a haploid (x ¼ 1). In addition, both of these
types of DNA are inherited only through one sex; females
for mtDNA and males for Y-DNA. The Nef that is appli-
cable to autosomal DNA is not applicable to unisexually
inherited DNA. Instead,
the expected time to ultimate
coalescence of mtDNA is inﬂuenced only by the inbreeding
effective size of females, say Nef\. Thus, with x ¼ 1, the
expected coalescence time of mtDNA is 2Nef\. Similarly,
Y-DNA is inherited as a paternal haploid, so its expected
coalescent time is 2Nef_, the inbreeding effective size for
males. Because the sex ratio is close to 50:50 in humans, it
is commonplace to approximate the sex-speciﬁc inbreeding
sizes by ½Nef such that the expected coalesce time for mt-
and Y-DNA is Nef. Coalescence theory also indicates that
there can be a large amount of variation around these ex-
pected values.

The complete historical pattern of coalescent events that
reduces the n copies of DNA sampled in the present to a
single ancestral DNA molecule deﬁnes a gene tree.

Recombination can greatly complicate the evolutionary
history of a gene (Templeton et al., 2000), but fortunately
much of the human genome, including all of the mtDNA,
has little to no recombination. It is in such regions of no to
little recombination that the evolutionary history of DNA is
written most clearly. Another complication to reconstruct-
ing the gene tree is that when current copies of DNA are
identical in sequence, there is no way to order their coa-
lescent events historically. However, one or more mutations
occurring in a DNA lineage provides the necessary genetic
markers to observe past coalescent events among DNA
lineages. The n copies of sampled DNA are sorted into
haplotypes; that is, a genetically distinct set of nucleotide
states over all variable sites in the DNA region being
sampled. Standard phylogenetic techniques can then be
used to estimate a haplotype tree that depicts the evolu-
tionary relationships among the haplotypes as marked by
mutational events. The haplotype tree is a lower resolution
version of the gene tree, with the limit of resolution
dependent on the number of mutations that have occurred
since the ultimate coalescent event to the ancestral DNA
molecule. It turns out that mtDNA has an exceptionally
high mutation rate in humans, making it an ideal candidate
for producing high-resolution haplotype trees.

(Cann et al., 1987). Indeed,

Much was made of the fact that all human mtDNA
coalesces back to a single ancestral molecule born by a
single female individual (given that mtDNA is maternally
inherited)
this inference
captured the public imagination, and the female bearing
the ancestral mtDNA of all of humanity was soon called
“mitochondrial Eve” in both general public and scientiﬁc
articles, thereby linking mitochondrial coalescence to the
Biblical story of the mother of us all. However,
the
equations for coalescence time given above are applicable
to all samples of homologous DNA in all organismsd
coalescence of a sample of homologous genes is a uni-
versal phenomenon. Thus, the coalescence of all human
mtDNA to a common ancestral molecule borne by a
woman is of no special signiﬁcance per se, and is
completely uninformative about models of human evolu-
tion. Moreover, mitochondrial Eve was not the mother of
us all, only the ancestor for one small element of our total
genetic legacy.

More informative was the inference that the root of the
mtDNA haplotype tree was located in Sub-Saharan Africa
between 140,000 and 290,000 years ago (Cann et al.,
1987). This inference was regarded as strongly supporting
the OAR model and falsifying the multiregional model.
This was done by regarding mitochondrial Eve as a mem-
ber of a distinct African population that was ancestral to all
modern humans with no genetic input from any outside
populations. This interpretation of mitochondrial Eve is
unjustiﬁable by coalescent theory or population genetics.
First, a single individual does not deﬁne a population. Did

70 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

a point on a

the population in which mitochondrial Eve live have
sharply deﬁned genetic boundaries, or was her local pop-
ulation just
continuum of genetic
differentiation over a continuously distributed meta-
population? These and other questions simply cannot be
answered from the inference of a single individual being
the ancestral carrier of all modern mtDNA. Unfortunately,
this
scientiﬁcally indefensible elevation of a single
individual to population status continues even in the recent
literature on human evolution, as will be pointed out in the
section dealing with ancient DNA. Second, because of gene
ﬂow,
and assortment of
chromosomes, coalescent theory does not predict that the
ancestral individual for a particular piece of DNA, such as
mtDNA, was a member of a population that was ancestral
for all modern DNA. Subsequent studies clearly show that
different components of the human genome coalesce to a
common ancestral DNA sequence in different places (both
Africa and Eurasia) and across millions of years of time
(Templeton, 2007). This pattern vindicates Dobzhansky’s
insight that modern humans arose genetically from many
different places and times and not a single population
(Dobzhansky, 1944).

admixture,

recombination,

the multiregional model,

Hypothesis Compatibility Versus
Hypothesis Testing
The original genetic evidence in favor of the OAR model
was that there is a female ancestor of all modern mtDNA
(mitochondrial Eve) who lived in Africa between 140,000
and 290,000 years ago (Cann et al., 1987). All of these
inferences are indeed compatible with the OAR hypothesis,
but they are also compatible with other models of human
evolution. As noted earlier in this chapter, the existence of a
mitochondrial Eve is a universal consequence of coales-
cence that is true under all models of human evolution.
Under
the coalescence to a
common mtDNA ancestral molecule could occur anywhere
hominins were living, proportional
regional
population size. Since most hominins lived in Africa at that
time (Relethford, 1998), Africa is the most likely place for
this coalescent event under
the multiregional model.
Finally, as Dobzhansky (1944) so clearly pointed out, the
DNA descendants of this ancestral mtDNA could spread
throughout the world via gene ﬂow or admixture long after
the original expansion of H. erectus to Eurasia, so the date
of coalescence between 140,000 and 290,000 years ago is
also compatible with the multiregional model. The mtDNA
coalescence time is also compatible with the mostly out-of-
Africa model and the model shown in Fig. 5.2. The support
for the OAR model could therefore also be regarded
as support for many models of human evolution, but the
data were generally presented as supporting only the

to their

replacement model. Indeed, throughout the debate about
these models of human evolution, there was a strong ten-
dency to avoid the scientiﬁc approach of hypothesis testing
in favor of the weaker inference of hypothesis compatibility
(Templeton, 1994). Again and again, proponents of the
replacement model would search out for data compatible
with their favored model, but not address the issue of
whether or not these data actually tested the model in the
sense of falsifying the alternatives. In this way, much data
were assembled that gave the appearance of strong
genetic support for the OAR model, but in reality none of
these genetic data sets falsiﬁed most alternative models
(Templeton, 1994, 2007).

(1987), supporters of

There were some data sets that could be used to falsify
some of the models of human evolution, including the
original mtDNA data set of Cann et al. (1987). Cann et al.
pointed out that a coalescence time between 140,000 and
290,000 years ago was incompatible with the candelabra
model (Fig. 5.1C) as that model predicts that the common
ancestral mtDNA of all living humans must have lived
nearly 2 Ma (regarded as 1 Ma at the time of publication
in 1987). Unfortunately, Cann et al. (1987) called the
candelabra model (Fig. 5.1C) the “multiregional model”
(Fig. 5.1B) even though these two models are diametrical
opposites (Templeton, 2007). This misrepresentation was
understandable given the long-established tendency in the
anthropology literature to call both models multiregional.
Indeed, one of the main goals of Dobzhansky’s 1944
paper was to clarify the profound differences between
these two models. Shortly after the publication of Cann
et al.
the multiregional model
pointed out this misrepresentation (Wolpoff et al., 1988).
Nevertheless, this misrepresentation continued, as did the
effort
the misrepresentation (Wolpoff and
Thorne, 1991; Wolpoff et al., 1994, 2000; Wolpoff,
1996). After repeated corrections, the proponents of the
OAR model began to present the “multiregional model”
as a candelabra model with a few arrows interconnecting
the three major lineages to depict weak gene ﬂow be-
tween them (Fig. 5.3). However, unlike the original
multiregional model
that had no separate lineages of
humans but only locally differentiated populations in a
geographical continuum due to gene ﬂow (Fig. 5.1B),
Fig. 5.3 portrays humanity as split
into three major
evolutionary lineages after H. erectus expanded out of
Africa connected by only very limited genetic inter-
change. To avoid confusion with Weidenreich’s no-
lineage model, the model in Fig. 5.3 will be called the
multiregional lineage model. However, even a weak gene
ﬂow model cannot be falsiﬁed by a coalescent date of
mtDNA between 140,000 and 290,000 years ago, so now
there was no genetic support in favor of rejecting even
this multiregional model.

to correct

World Dispersals and Genetic Diversity of Mankind: The Out-of-Africa Theory and Its Challenges Chapter | 5 71

Africans

Europeans

Asians

many other nuclear DNA regions were found to coalesce in
Eurasia in this time range (Templeton, 2007). Each one of
these old Eurasian coalescent events represents an absolute
falsiﬁcation of the OAR model. Hence, the genetic data
clearly falsiﬁed the replacement model, but was compatible
with the multiregional and multiregional lineage models, as
well as the model shown in Fig. 5.2.

Indeed,

even when proponents of

readily embraced the falsiﬁcation of

Although the proponents of the out-of-Africa replace-
ment model
the
candelabra model on the basis of time to coalescence in
Africa of mtDNA that was too recent for that model, the
multiple observations of times to coalescence in Eurasia
that falsiﬁed replacement had little to no impact on the
dominance of the OAR model among much of the scientiﬁc
community.
the
replacement model discovered old Eurasian coalescent
events themselves, they ignored the logical implications of
this discovery and continued their support for African
replacement. For example, Takahata et al. (2001) examined
15 X-linked and autosomal DNA regions and inferred the
geographical root for 10 of these, with 9 being in Africa
and 1 in Asia. Thus, the results reported in this paper
patently falsiﬁed the OAR model (which they called “uni-
regionality”) and indicated that roughly 10% of the nuclear
genome of living humans was of non-African origin.
However, they still supported “uniregionality” by claiming
(Takahata et al., 2001, p. 174), “However, emphasizing the
overwhelming genetic contribution of only one founding
population is equivalent to uniregionality.” Thus, Takahata
et al. (2001) dismissed the falsiﬁcation of the replacement
model by their own analysis by redeﬁning the OAR model
to be “equivalent” to the mostly out-of-Africa model.
However, as pointed out long ago by Dobzhansky (1944), a
model that has most but not all of modern human genetic
ancestry coming from one region is actually a special case
of the multiregional model because it
incorporates the
evolutionary forces of gene ﬂow and/or admixture and re-
sults in a mixed genetic ancestry for modern humans across
space and time.

Some types of computer simulation were also used to
access hypothesis compatibility without hypothesis testing.
This approach is illustrated by two papers that came out
within a week of each other, but with opposite conclusions.
Eswaran et al. (2005) simulated the OAR model and an
isolation by distance model extending over Africa and
Eurasia with some selective sweeps, in accordance with the
multiregional model. They concluded that the isolation by
distance model with selection explains well the observed
patterns of genetic distances and diversities, whereas the
replacement model does not. Indeed, the title of their paper
was “Genomics refutes an exclusively African origin of
humans.” About one week later, Ray et al. (2005) simulated
the OAR model and the “multiregional” model (actually,

Dispersal of
Homo erectus
out of Africa
at 1.9 Ma

FIGURE 5.3 The multiregional lineage model of human evolution.
Humanity is subdivided into three major lineages, shown by thick arrows,
as under the candelabra model (Fig. 5.1C). However, the three lineages are
now interconnected by weak and sporadic gene ﬂow, shown by thin
double-headed arrows between lineages.

There is one strong prediction of the replacement model
that is testable with the same type of logic used by Cann
et al. (1987) to falsify the candelabra model. Under the
replacement model, all genome elements of modern
humans are hypothesized to stem from a Sub-Saharan
population that expanded out of Africa no earlier than
130,000 years ago, with no genetic input from archaic
Eurasian populations. Hence, it is impossible under the
replacement model for any DNA region in the human
genome to coalesce to a Eurasian location at a time greater
than 130,000 years ago but less than 1.9 Ma since those
populations are hypothesized to have made no genetic
contribution to modern humans. In contrast, under the
multiregional model or multiregional lineage model, most
genomic DNA regions should coalesce in Africa (where
most hominins lived), but some could coalesce in Eurasia
(Dobzhansky, 1944). The early phylogeographic studies
(the geography of haplotype trees) almost always used
mtDNA because this molecule was small and abundant,
making it more amenable to study with the technology
available at the time. Moreover, because mtDNA did not
recombine, it was relatively easy to estimate haplotype
trees. However, as DNA technology advanced and it was
discovered that
recombination in the nuclear human
genome is concentrated into hotspots that separate areas of
low to no recombination, it became increasingly common
to study haplotype trees in the nuclear genome as well.
Harding et
the
beta-hemoglobin locus that were of Asian origin and older
than 200,000 years but much less than 1.9 Ma, and soon

reported haplotypes

(1997)

al.

at

72 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

the multiregional
lineage model; see Fig. 5.3). They
claimed that their simulations strongly favored the OAR
model over the multiregional lineage model. One way of
resolving these apparently contradictory results is to notice
that both simulations are consistent with the ordering:
multiregional with isolation by distance > OAR > multi-
regional lineage with weak gene ﬂow. That is, although
both papers simulated a multiregional model, they were not
the same multiregional model. Hence, there is no necessary
contradiction between these two sets of simulations.
However, a more fundamental problem is that neither paper
presents any formal tests of alternative hypotheses. Instead,
both papers give a heuristic assessment of goodness of ﬁt of
the data to the simulated models but with no evaluation of
whether the goodness of ﬁt measures among the various
models are signiﬁcantly different or not. Thus, both papers
merely show hypothesis compatibility with a favored
scenario with no hypothesis testing.

Computer Simulations With Bayesian
Hypothesis Testing
One method of combining hypothesis
testing with
computer simulation is through the method of approxi-
mate Bayesian computation (ABC). In ABC, a detailed
model or models of the evolutionary history of a group of
interest is constructed. Such detailed models often depend
upon many parameters whose values are not known. A
prior probability distribution is
assigned to these
parameters, and the evolutionary scenarios are simulated
many times, drawing parameter values from the prior
distributions. Various summary statistics are calculated at
the end of each simulation that are chosen to be infor-
mative about the models to be tested, and the results of
repeated simulations can be used to approximate the
posterior probabilities on the parameters and summary
statistics. These posterior probabilities can then be used in
a variety of ways, both to estimate parameters and to test
hypotheses.

Fagundes et al. (2007) purported to provide statistical
evidence in favor of the OAR model. They simulated three
basic types of models of human evolution: the replacement
model (Fig. 5.1A); a model identical to Fig. 5.1A except it
allowed for admixture of the expanding African population
with Eurasian populations by adding an admixture param-
eter M to the OAR model
that can vary from 0 (no
admixture) to 1 (complete admixture); and the multire-
gional lineage model (Fig. 5.3). The resulting posterior
probabilities on these three models were 0.781 for the
replacement model, 0.001 for the model allowing admix-
ture, and 0.218 for the multiregional lineage model. There
are two important features of these probabilities. First, their
ABC simulations did not discriminate between the OAR

model and the multiregional lineage model with weak gene
ﬂow. The probability of 0.218 for the model with gene ﬂow
is not regarded as low enough to reject a model in the
general scientiﬁc literature. Commonly, a threshold of 0.05
or smaller is required. The probability of 0.001 for the
model with admixture seemingly would reject the hypoth-
esis of any admixture of the expanding African population
with Eurasian populations, but
there is a fundamental
problem with this probability. Fagundes et al. (2007)
explicitly treated these three models as mutually exclusive
alternatives, but the replacement model is actually a special
case of their admixture model that occurs when M ¼ 0; that
is, the replacement model is logically nested within their
admixture model. One of the fundamental properties of
probability measures is that the probability of an event
nested within a more general event must be less than or
equal to the probability of the general event. Obviously,
0.781 is not less than or equal to 0.001da mathematically
impossible result for a probability measure. Such a viola-
tion of elementary probability theory and Boolean logic is
called incoherence, so their rejection of admixture is an
incoherent inference (Templeton, 2010) that was a mathe-
matical artifact of erroneously treating a nested model as if
it were an exclusive model. By using the same posterior
probabilities generated by these simulations with a well-
established coherent Bayesian test, the null hypothesis of
no admixture (M ¼ 0; that is, the OAR model) was rejected
relative to the more general admixture model with a
probability less than 0.025 (Templeton, 2010)da reversal
of the relative probabilities of these two models by ﬁve
orders of magnitude! It
this
reversal is not a ﬂaw of the ABC method per se because the
reversal is based on the same ABC posterior probabilities;
rather, it reﬂects a serious statistical and logical ﬂaw in how
Fagundes et al. (2007) used their priors before the simu-
lations were performed and the posterior probabilities after
the simulations. Hence, contrary to the claims of Fagundes
et al. (2007), the ABC approach when used in a coherent
fashion rejects replacement in favor of limited admixture of
the expanding African population with populations in
Eurasia. This result is compatible with the falsiﬁcation of
replacement by Eurasian coalescent events in haplotype
trees, that also indicated limited admixture (Templeton,
2007).

to note that

is important

Building Models Through Hypothesis
Testing
The early phylogeographic studies in both humans and
other species were mostly based on overlaying a haplotype
tree (usually a mtDNA tree) upon geography and
describing a scenario compatible with that overlay. This
was strictly an exercise in hypothesis compatibility. There

World Dispersals and Genetic Diversity of Mankind: The Out-of-Africa Theory and Its Challenges Chapter | 5 73

was no hypothesis testing, and there was not even any
testing to see if the sample sizes were large enough to result
in a haplotype tree that had signiﬁcant geographic associ-
ations. Nested clade phylogeographic analysis (NCPA) was
developed to address these deﬁciencies (Templeton, 1998b;
Templeton et al., 1995),
thereby initiating the ﬁeld of
statistical phylogeography. Once a haplotype tree has been
estimated [allowing uncertainty, which is quantiﬁed using a
Bayesian procedure (Templeton and Sing, 1993)],
the
association of the haplotype tree with geography is quan-
tiﬁed by distances that measure the geographical extent of a
haplotype and of clades (a branch in the haplotype tree) and
the geographical distances between haplotypes and clades
that are evolutionarily close together on the haplotype tree.
A statistical
is then performed to identify those
distances that are signiﬁcantly large or small. If none of the
distances are signiﬁcant, there is no signiﬁcant association
of the haplotype tree with geography. If there are signiﬁcant
geographical associations, these signiﬁcant associations are
interpreted using coalescent
theory to make phylogeo-
graphic inferences. The validity of this inference structure
was tested against many known cases of phylogeographic
events, making NCPA the most validated method of
phylogeographic inference (Templeton, 2008, 2009b).

test

the human genome has

The original NCPA was a single-DNA region analysis,
reﬂecting the empirical fact that almost all phylogeographic
studies at the time were based only on mtDNA. As DNA
technology advanced, it became possible to include nuclear
DNA regions. One major limitation of NCPA is that it re-
quires a haplotype tree of the DNA region, which in turn
requires a DNA region with little or no recombination.
Fortunately,
recombination
concentrated into hotspots separated by stretches of no or
little recombination. The low recombination stretches are
regions at which evolutionary history is most clearly
written and are the most informative about past human
evolutionary events. Accordingly, a multilocus version of
NCPA was developed (MLNCPA) (Templeton, 2002). A
cross-validation and expanded hypothesis testing frame-
work was developed (Templeton, 2002, 2004a,b, 2009a)
allowing direct statistical testing of all phylogeographic
hypotheses. The strength and validity of MLNCPA was
conﬁrmed
and
Maddison (2002) simulated a difﬁcult phylogeographic
scenario
phylogeographic
approaches that they favored did not perform well with
these simulations, but neither did NCPA. However, they
used the single-locus, 1998 version of NCPA despite the
fact that MLNCPA had been published nine months earlier.
Moreover,
the single-locus NCPA inference structure
explicitly excludes microvicariance (Templeton et al.,
1995), so the poor performance of single-locus NCPA was
not surprising. However, when the 2002 version of
MLNCPA was applied to the simulation outputs of

of microvicariance. The

simulations. Knowles

computer

by

Knowles and Maddison (2002), a 100% accurate phylo-
geographic reconstruction was possible without any false
positives or false negatives (Templeton, 2009b), thereby
illustrating the ability to make accurate inference in the
most difﬁcult of phylogeographic situations that was
impossible with single locus analyses. Panchal and
Beaumont (2010) directly tested MLNCPA using computer
simulations of a variety of phylogeographic situations, and
concluded that
there was a high false positive rate.
However,
this conclusion was due exclusively to their
treatment of gene ﬂow. Panchal and Beaumont (2010)
claimed that there was no statistical test for concordance of
gene ﬂow inferences, so they performed no tests and
obtained a high error rate only for gene ﬂow inferences.
However, these tests do exist and were given in the papers
that Panchal and Beaumont (2010) cited as their sources for
how to implement MLNCPA (Eq. 12 in Templeton, 2004a;
Eq. 2 in Templeton, 2009a). Once this patently false claim
of Panchal and Beaumont
the
actual false positive error rate in their simulations is always
below the nominal rate of 5% (Templeton, 2013, 2015).
Hence, the computer simulations of Panchal and Beaumont
(2010)
statistical validity of
MLNCPA.

strongly vindicate

is corrected,

(2010)

the

(Templeton, 2015). One great

Fig. 5.2 shows all the statistically signiﬁcant inferences
arising from an MLNCPA of 25 regions of human genomes
with little to no recombination (for details, see Templeton,
2004a, 2009a, 2015). Although some have presented
MLNCPA and ABC phylogeographic analysis as antago-
nistic opposites (Beaumont and Panchal, 2008), in reality
they are highly synergistic techniques that complement one
another
strength of
MLNCPA over ABC is that MLNCPA does not require a
prior model; rather,
the model, such as that shown in
Fig. 5.2, emerges naturally through statistical hypothesis
testing. In contrast, a detailed model(s) has to be speciﬁed a
priori with ABC, and all inference is limited to just the
models simulated. Because no prior model
is needed,
MLNCPA can discover unanticipated features of human
evolution not found in any of the prior-model approaches.
For example, MLNCPA discovered a signiﬁcant range
expansion out of Africa
into Eurasia during the
mid-Pleistocene that occurred at a signiﬁcantly different
time than the expansion of H. erectus out of Africa and that
of anatomically modern humans out of Africa, indicating
that there were at least three out-of-Africa expansions, not
two (Fig. 5.2). This middle expansion is consistent with the
archaeological and paleontological record that indicates a
major cultural transition, the Acheulean, that ﬁrst arose in
Africa in the Early Pleistocene and then spread into Eurasia
during the mid-Pleistocene during a favorable climatic
regime (Alperson-Aﬁl et al., 2009; Cuenca-Bescós et al.,
2011; Pei et al., 2015; Potts et al., 2004; Rightmire, 2009;
Scott and Gibert, 2009), although there may have been a

74 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

In terms of

in favor of admixture of

more limited expansion in the Early Pleistocene into India
(Pappu et al., 2011) not detected by MLNCPA. Moreover,
the null hypothesis that the Acheulean expansion was a
replacement event is rejected at the 5% level of signiﬁcance
(p ¼ 0.003)
the Acheulean
population with Eurasian hominin populations. Despite all
this genetic, archeological, paleontological, and paleocli-
matic evidence favoring a mid-Pleistocene expansion out of
Africa, this expansion was totally ignored in the simula-
tions of Fagundes et al. (2007) even though most of this
evidence was available before 2007.
the
Bayesian framework used in their paper, they assumed a
prior probability of zero (absolute certainty)
that an
Acheulean expansion never occurred, without a single
citation explaining their certainty and their rejection of the
prior genetic, archeological, and fossil evidence for the
Acheulean expansion. Bayesian approaches have and
continue to be controversial because, as pointed out by the
statistician B. Efron (2013), “The trouble and the
subsequent busts [of Bayesian approaches] came from
overenthusiastic application of the theorem in the absence
of genuine prior information.” Efron therefore recommends
“to use Bayesian analysis in the presence of genuine prior
information.” In this case, much genuine prior information
did exist, and the prior probability invoked by Fagundes
et al. (2007) was incompatible with all prior information.
This is indefensible within a Bayesian framework.

Many of the other features portrayed in the MLNCPA
model in Fig. 5.2 represent a mixture of features found in
the prior models described earlier. After the expansion of
H. erectus out of Africa at 1.9 Ma, there is no statistically
signiﬁcant evidence for gene ﬂow between the African and
Eurasian populations, consistent with the candelabra
model. After the Acheulean expansion, the null hypothesis
of no gene ﬂow between African and Eurasian populations
is rejected in favor of a hypothesis of gene ﬂow restricted
by isolation by distance in which individuals or groups
mostly interbred with nearby populations but with no
permanent barriers to gene ﬂow within the range of the
species, as under the multiregional model. This recurrent
gene ﬂow after the Acheulean expansion (perhaps only
recurrent on a time scale of tens of thousands of years as the
resolution of MLNCPA is coarse)
is consistent with
frequent “green Sahara” periods after the mid-Pleistocene
until about 80,000 years ago, when the Sahara entered
into its most consistent desert-like phase in the past
350,000 years (Larrasoña, 2012). Around 130,000 years
ago, anatomically modern humans expanded into Eurasia
out of Africa (Fig. 5.2), as under the OAR model, but the
null hypothesis of no admixture (replacement) is strongly
 16. However,
rejected with a statistical signiﬁcance of 10
the admixture was at a low level as under the mostly out-of-
Africa model (Templeton, 2002). Recall
the ABC
procedure also rejected the hypothesis of replacement in

that

favor of admixture when analyzed coherently, but with a
much weaker p-value of 0.025. Part of this weaker rejection
of replacement stems from the priors used by Fagundes
et al. (2007). As already noted, they used a prior probability
of zero for the Acheluean expansion in spite of diverse
prior information to the contrary. They also had a prior
probability of zero (absolute certainty) for no gene ﬂow at
all between Africa and Eurasia throughout the Pleistocene
despite the previously published MLNCPA results that
indicated such gene ﬂow. Finally,
they placed prior
probabilities on the size of the Eurasian population that was
several fold too small given the prior publication of nuclear
DNA coalescence times that are directly proportional to
inbreeding effective sizes, as pointed out earlier. The
impact of all these “priors” that were incompatible with the
prior information available at the time was to strongly bias
their simulation results against admixture and in favor of
replacement (Templeton, 2010). Despite this strong bias,
the resulting posterior probabilities still rejected replace-
ment and favored a mostly out-of-Africa model when
analyzed in a statically coherent fashion.

MLNCPA makes it clear that some aspects of all the
prior-models of human evolution are defensible within a
hypothesis-testing framework, but none of the prior-models
has all of its elements justiﬁed via hypothesis testing.
Moreover, all of the prior models of human evolution
missed important
the Acheulean
expansion.

such as

features,

Ancient DNA Studies
All of the genetic studies described up to now used
samples of living peoples to make inferences about the
past. As DNA technology has advanced, it has become
possible to look directly at DNA from human fossils,
thereby providing a direct window into our evolutionary
past.

The oldest hominin ancient DNA is mtDNA from a
fossil in Northern Spain that is over 300,000 years old
(Meyer et al., 2014), and perhaps 400,000 years old
(Orlando, 2014). The skeletal
remains display distinct
Neandertal features and other traits associated with its
European location, but the mtDNA is closely related to
mtDNA genomes from Eastern Eurasia. This indicates that
archaic human populations across the Eurasian continent
were not genetically isolated. Ancient DNA from a 24,000-
year-old fossil
this pattern of genetic
interconnectedness across large distances continued such
that a single metapopulation stretched from Europe to Asia
in the Upper Paleolithic (Seguin-Orlando et al., 2014).
These results support the inference from MLNCPA that
gene ﬂow, although restricted by isolation by distance, has
existed since the mid-Pleistocene and continues to the
present.

indicates

that

World Dispersals and Genetic Diversity of Mankind: The Out-of-Africa Theory and Its Challenges Chapter | 5 75

By far the most controversial inference from MLNCPA
was the strong rejection of replacement in favor of limited
admixture, about 10%. This inference has been strongly
vindicated by ancient DNA studies. DNA has been isolated
and sequenced from Neandertal fossils (Green et al., 2010),
a population of archaic humans that lived in the western
half of Eurasia and that coexisted with anatomically mod-
ern humans after their expansion out of Africa, thereby
providing the opportunity for gene ﬂow or admixture. The
ancient DNA studies on Neandertals clearly show that
genetic interchange with modern humans occurred with an
admixture rate of 3.4e7.3% (Lohse and Frantz, 2014).
DNA was extracted from another archaic individual found
in Denisova Cave in Southern Siberia (Meyer et al., 2012),
and some 4e6% of the DNA found in modern Melanesians
traces to DNA from the Denisovan specimen (Reich et al.,
2010), with
Indonesian
populations showing evidence of some genetic introgres-
sion as well (Mendez et al., 2012; Povysil and Hochreiter,
2014). Hence, as inferred originally through MLNCPA
hypothesis testing, replacement has been falsiﬁed in favor
of limited admixture.

other modern Asian

and

The original depiction of the ancient DNA studies was
as if two isolated events of admixture occurred that allowed
introgression of archaic hominin genes into modern pop-
ulations (Reich et al., 2010). However, with more data and
analysis, this picture has proven to be too simple. The
ancient DNA is sparse in time and space and with limited
sample sizes, and this makes it difﬁcult
to distinguish
between an admixture event versus recurrent genetic
interchange, including isolation by distance (Eriksson and
Manica, 2014). With additional sampling from modern
populations, it became evident that Neandertals contributed
more to East Asian populations than to Europeans, and that
Neandertal and Denisovan DNA is also found in Sub-
Saharan African populations (Povysil and Hochreiter,
2014; Wall et al., 2013), indicating a broad spread of these
archaic genes throughout modern humanity. Additional
ancient DNA sequences indicated that several gene ﬂow
events occurred among Neandertals, Denisovan-related
individuals, and early modern humans (Prufer et al.,
2014). Indeed, it is now apparent from ancient DNA studies
that our ancestors were part of a web of “populations linked
by limited, but intermittent or sometimes perhaps even
persistent, gene ﬂow” (Paabo, 2015, p. 313), exactly as
inferred from MLNCPA (Templeton, 2002, 2015).

Although the evidence indicates that multiple gene
ﬂow/admixture events occurred between modern humans
and archaic Eurasian populations, the results clearly show
that this was a mostly out-of-Africa model. Recall that
Dobzhansky (1944) regarded such a model as a multire-
gional model rather than a replacement model. Dobzhan-
sky, through his own work on fruit ﬂies, was well aware
that even limited genetic interchange can have dramatic

evolutionary consequences, so that there is an important
qualitative evolutionary difference between no gene ﬂow or
admixture (replacement) versus even small amounts of
gene ﬂow or admixture. Even limited genetic interchange
can introduce genetic variation into a population’s gene
pool at a rate far greater than that possible through muta-
tion, and genetic variation is the raw material of all
evolutionary change. Long ago, Workman et al. (1963)
demonstrated in modern human populations that admixture
is a very dynamic and heterogeneous evolutionary force,
with neutral genes introgressing at the gene ﬂow/admixture
rate, other genes being stopped from introgression by se-
lection against
them in their new gene background or
environment, and yet other genes increasing rapidly in
frequency due to positive selection once introduced by gene
ﬂow or admixture. The ancient DNA studies make it clear
that the same was true when modern humans came out of
Africa and began to interbred with Eurasian populations.
Some Neandertal alleles have been selected against, perhaps
due to decreased male fertility when placed on a modern
human genetic background, whereas other Neandertal al-
leles have been selected for and have helped modern
humans adapt to non-African environments (Racimo et al.,
2015; Sankararaman et al., 2014), such as skin phenotypes
(Vernot and Akey, 2014), response to ultraviolet radiation B
(UVB) irradiation that varies with latitude (Ding et al.,
2014), and high altitude adaptation (Huerta-Sanchez et al.,
2014).
Interestingly, modern humans and the archaic
Eurasian populations shared most of the same alleles for
cognitive genes (Paixão-Côrtes et al., 2013).

FOSSILS, ARCHAEOLOGY, AND MODELS
OF HUMAN EVOLUTION

One Human Lineage or Multiple Species?
The human fossil record is more complete than that for
many other taxa, but it is still sparse over both time and
space with a few exceptions. This sparseness causes many
difﬁculties in the interpretation of the hominin fossil
record over the last 2 million years. The paleoanthropo-
logical
literature varies from having just one hominin
species at any given time during the Pleistocene to having
multiple species coexisting until modern humans became
dominant (Curnoe and Thorne, 2003; Hunt, 2003), with
estimates as high as 27 archaic species (Bokma et al.,
2012). Although this variety of opinion is often described
as a debate between “lumpers” versus “splitters” (Bokma
et al., 2012), a more accurate distinction is between
essentialistic or typological
thinking versus population
thinking (Wolpoff and Caspari, 2000). Essentialism
regards species as natural types that can be represented by
a “type specimen,” with individual variation from the type
being nonessential or accidental (Mayr, 1994). In contrast,

76 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

population thinking regards
individuals as uniquely
different, with this individual variation being the critical
biological feature of the species that allows evolution to
occur, including the origin of the species itself (Mayr,
1994). With the acceptance of Darwinian evolution,
population thinking should completely displace typolog-
ical thinking in biology (Mayr, 1982), but typological
thinking is still common in paleoanthropology and has
played a critical role in the debate about models of human
evolution (Wolpoff and Caspari, 2000). Typological
thinking is well illustrated by the elevation of the Deni-
sovan specimen to species status (Bokma et al., 2012).
This “species” is deﬁned by two teeth and a part of one
ﬁnger at one site, and by ancient DNA studies on this one
individual. From the most elementary principles of pop-
ulation genetics and statistics, such a sample is inadequate
to make an inference of a “species” or even a distinct
population or hominin lineage within a species. What are
the boundaries of this species or population temporally
and geographically? Indeed, is it a population at all in any
meaningful sense, or is this an individual fossil and
genome from a continuum of populations interconnected
by gene ﬂow without distinct population-level bound-
aries? Of course, one cannot answer these questions from
a single specimen. Yet the literature generally refers to the
Denisovans rather than the Denisovan specimen and por-
trays “them” as a distinct lineage or species of archaic
hominins that “split” from the rest of humanity, complete
with an estimated time of this ancient “population sepa-
ration” (Reich et al., 2010).

The Denisovan specimen illustrates the fundamental
problem of much of paleoanthropology: the fossil record
is often so sparse in time and space that it is difﬁcult to
implement population thinking because there exists only
one or very few specimens. Two methods have been used
to overcome this extreme sparseness. First, one can use
living species (typically modern humans, chimpanzees,
gorillas, or baboonsdthe other primate species in addition
to humans that adapted to a terrestrial, savanna environ-
ment) as models of intraspeciﬁc variation and test the null
hypothesis that the variation found in fossil specimens,
often at widely scattered sites and times, falls within these
modern models of intraspeciﬁc variation (Ackermann,
2002; Ackermann and Smith, 2007; Thackeray, 2007;
Thackeray et al., 1997). When this hypothesis-testing,
population approach is applied to the human fossil record
over the past 2 million years, the null hypothesis of a
single species can rarely be rejected for roughly contem-
poraneous fossils even when they are pooled together
from both Africa and Eurasia (Ackermann, 2002, 2005;
Baab, 2008; Van Arsdale and Wolpoff, 2013; Villmoare,
2005). This is also true for “anatomically modern humans”
versus contemporaneous “archaic humans,” which are

In reality,

“modern”

the human evolution literature.

generally treated as distinct, well-deﬁned groups in much
of
the
morphology of these groups is highly variable in the fossil
record (including being highly variable in living humans),
with different
traits displaying disparate
geographical and temporal patterns, resulting in indistinct
borders between “archaic” and “modern” fossil specimens
(Pearson, 2008). Treating “anatomically modern humans”
and “archaic humans” as separate species reinforced the
idea of replacement rather than admixture, as a new
“species” came out of Africa and displaced a more prim-
itive, separate “species.” With population thinking, this
scenario turns into a differentiated but variable human
population coming out of Africa that encountered other
human populations of the same species in Eurasia. This
later scenario makes genetic interchange seem much more
reasonable, and as shown in the previous section, that is
what the genetic data indicate.

The second way of addressing the problem of the
sparseness of the fossil record is to make use of the few
exceptions: that is, sites that yield large numbers of indi-
vidual specimens found in a narrow time range. Such sites
allow a direct implementation of population thinking. For
example, the Dmanisi site in Georgia provides the earliest
evidence for H. erectus outside of Africa, dating to 1.85 to
1.78 Ma (Ferring et al., 2011). This site has produced
crania from ﬁve individuals over a time range of
centuriesda small sample for living populations, but large
for a human fossil site this old. These ﬁve skulls span a
large morphological range and encompass the range of
variation previously used to deﬁne
separate
contemporaneous species of Homo from Africa and Eur-
asia (Lordkipanidze et al., 2013). Productive sites from the
Middle and Late Pleistocene reveal a similar pattern, with
extreme variability within a site coupled with remarkable
similarity between sites that are roughly contemporaneous.
These discoveries at the handful of rich fossil sites imply
“sporadic, but continuing multi-directional migrations and
gene ﬂow” (Simmons, 1999, p. 107).

three

In light of these two lines of evidence and a preference
for hypothesis testing and population thinking, there are
no convincing fossil data to reject the null hypothesis of a
single hominin species at any given time throughout the
entire Pleistocene. Different species only exist
in the
sense of chronospecies; that is, the evolution over time of
a named species into a differently named species because
of the accumulation of many evolutionary changes over
time. There certainly could have been isolated populations
throughout this period, but there is no evidence subject to
a hypothesis testing framework to suggest that any such
isolated population speciated into a novel hominin species
that coexisted at
the same time with other hominin
species.

World Dispersals and Genetic Diversity of Mankind: The Out-of-Africa Theory and Its Challenges Chapter | 5 77

Concordance of Fossils and Archaeology
With Models of Human Evolution
The failure to reject the null hypothesis of only a single
hominin species throughout the Pleistocene is difﬁcult to
reconcile with the OAR model (Fig. 5.1A) or the cande-
labra model (Fig. 5.1C), as both of these models have
human populations isolated from one another for over
1.7 million years. However, a single hominin species is
compatible with
original multiregional model
(Fig. 5.1B), the multiregional model with weak gene ﬂow
(Fig. 5.3), or the model
that emerges from MLNCPA
(Fig. 5.2).

the

(Fig. 5.2)

is

The MLNCPA analysis

remarkably
concordant with the fossil, archaeological, and paleocli-
matic data in many of its details (Templeton, 2015). Its ﬁrst
statistically signiﬁcant inference is an expansion out of
Africa into Eurasia that dates to 1.9 Ma just using the ge-
netic data alone. This is consistent with the fossil record
that ﬁnds H. erectus fossils exclusively in Africa until 1.85
to 1.78 Ma when they ﬁrst appear in Eurasia (Ferring et al.,
2011). Next, there is a limited period of potential isolation
that certainly ends in the mid-Pleistocene with the Acheu-
lean expansion and its resulting admixture. As discussed
earlier, the Acheulean expansion is also supported by the
fossil, archaeological, and paleoclimatic records. The
establishment of statistically signiﬁcant levels of gene ﬂow
restricted by isolation by distance by the mid-Pleistocene is
consistent with the fossil pattern of much variation within
sites with little differentiation between sites found in this
time period (Simmons, 1999) and with the recurrent green
Sahara paleoclimatic phases in this time period (Larrasoña,
2012). The next statistically signiﬁcant
inference from
MLNCPA is an expansion with admixture of modern
humans out of Sub-Sahara Africa dated at 130,000 years
ago with the genetic data (Fig. 5.2). This date is consistent
with this being an expansion of anatomically modern
humans as the fossil record shows that many anatomically
modern traits ﬁrst appeared in Sub-Saharan Africa around
200,000 years ago (McDougall et al., 2005). However, the
date of 130,000 for
the out-of-Africa expansion was
another source of controversy about the model emerging
from MLNCPA because most of the advocates of the OAR
model dated this expansion to about 60,000 to 70,000 years
ago (eg, Fagundes et al., 2007). The fossil and archeo-
logical
the older date suggested by
MLNCPA, indicating that anatomically modern humans
appeared outside of Sub-Saharan Africa in Northern Africa,
the Arabian Peninsula, and the Levant between 130,000
and 125,000 years ago (Armitage et al., 2011; Grun et al.,
2005; Vanhaeren et al., 2006). This evidence has been
dismissed by advocates of the more recent out-of-Africa
expansion as a temporary excursion of anatomically

records support

records

indicate that

modern humans into this region that
is close to Sub-
Saharan Africa but that did not expand into the rest of
Eurasia (Soares et al., 2012). However, this explanation is
inconsistent with the archeological record that indicates
modern humans were in India by at least 74,000 years ago
(Haslam et al., 2011) and by the discovery of modern hu-
man fossils in far eastern Asia at least by 110,000 years ago
(Jin et al., 2009; Liu et al., 2010). Hence, the fossil and
archeological
the expansion of
anatomically modern humans began at 130,000 years ago
and had reached the eastern part of the Eurasian continent
by 110,000 years ago or earlierda result consistent with
MLNCPA. The MLNCPA dating has also been supported
by more recent genetic analyses. After recalibrating the
molecular clock by direct estimates of human mutation
rates using next-generation sequencing, Scally and Durbin
(2012) dated the origin of non-African modern humans to
90,000 to 130,000 years ago, and an analyses of Y-DNA
dated this origin to 115,000 years ago (Scozzari et al.,
2014). A genetic and cranial morphological analysis
(Reyes-Centeno et al., 2014) also supports the older date of
130,000 years ago, as well as the inference from MLNCPA
(Fig. 5.2) that
the out-of-Africa expansion of modern
humans was a two-stage process, with the initial expansion
being primarily along the southern part of Eurasia followed
by an expansion into Northern Eurasia around 50,000 years
ago.

IMPLICATIONS OF RECENT HUMAN
EVOLUTION FOR CURRENT PATTERNS
OF HUMAN GENETIC DIVERSITY

The Impact of Gene Flow and Admixture
on Genetic Diversity
By taking a strict hypothesis testing approach, all models of
human evolution that do not incorporate gene ﬂow and
admixture since at least the mid-Pleistocene can be rejected.
Repeated episodes of admixture overlaid upon recurrent
gene ﬂow since the mid-Pleistocene have resulted in
humans evolving into their current state as a single evolu-
tionary lineage with most genetic diversity found among
individuals within populations and modest levels of genetic
differentiation among populations, even those on different
continents (Templeton, 2013). Indeed, humans are one of
the most genetically homogeneous species across space
despite our global geographical range (Templeton, 1998a).
There is still some genetic differentiation among human
populations. Most of the gene ﬂow inferred in recent hu-
man evolution has been restricted by isolation by distance,
with some long distance gene ﬂow (Fig. 5.2). Isolation by
distance does lead to genetic differentiation among pop-
ulations, particularly those that are located far apart from

78 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

each other, but this level of genetic differentiation is still
modest in humans, even between geographically distant
populations (Templeton, 2013). Another aspect of the
impact of isolation by distance upon the distribution of
human genetic diversity is that
the genetic differences
between human populations accumulate gradually with
distance, with no obvious breaks once one adjusts for the
fact that until recently, most human movements were over
land and avoided long distances over water (Fig. 5.4, based
on a ﬁgure from Ramachandran et al., 2005). Gene ﬂow
and admixture obviously play a major role in determining
how genetic diversity is distributed within and between
human populations.

Much stronger genetic differentiation is possible be-
tween human populations for speciﬁc alleles favored by
natural selection to local environmental conditions. For
example, human populations living in malarial regions
have high frequencies of alleles that confer resistance to
malaria, such as the sickle-cell allele that is in high fre-
quency in the malarial regions of Africa,
the Arabian
Peninsula, and India. The sickle-cell allele is in low fre-
quency in human populations living in nearby areas that
do not have malaria (Templeton, 2006). When local en-
vironments change gradually over space, human adapta-
tions to those environments often result in gradual clines.
For example, skin color is an adaptation to the level of
UVB in the environment, representing a balance between
natural selection favoring dark skin to protect the indi-
vidual from the damage that UVB can induce versus
natural selection favoring light skin to allow the produc-
tion of vitamin D (Hochberg and Templeton, 2010;
Jablonski and Chaplin, 2013). UVB is most intense in the
tropics and falls off with increasing latitude away from the
tropics. Human skin color shows gradual clinal variation

0.20

t
s

f

0.10

0.00

0

5000

10,000

15,000

20,000

25,000

Geographic Distance Using Waypoints (km)

FIGURE 5.4 Isolation-by-distance in human populations. The x-axis
is the geographical distance between two populations, as measured through
waypoints that minimize travel over oceans. The y-axis is the pairwise fst
between two populations, a standard measure of genetic distance. Modiﬁed
from Ramachandran, S., Deshpande, O., Roseman, C.C., et al., 2005.
Support from the relationship of genetic and geographic distance in hu-
man populations for a serial founder effect originating in Africa. PNAS
102, 15942e15947.

that tracks these latitudinal differences, with darker skin in
the tropics versus lighter skin in the higher latitudes
(Jablonski and Chaplin, 2013).

To Tree or Not to Tree, That Is the
Question
It is commonplace in the human evolutionary literature to
portray human populations as long-standing evolutionary
lineages that deﬁne branches on an evolutionary tree of
human populations (eg, see Figs. 5.1A,C and 5.3). Popu-
lation trees occur when populations “split” from one
another, followed by long-term isolation with no or very
weak gene ﬂow with other “branches.” Many computer
programs exist that will construct such trees, often esti-
mating the times of the splits as well. However, these
programs will construct such trees from any genetic data
set regardless of whether or not the underlying genetic data
are actually compatible with a tree-like structure of pop-
ulation splits and isolation. Hence, Smouse (1998) wrote a
paper entitled “To tree or not to tree, that is the question.”
His answer was simple: when dealing with intraspeciﬁc
samples, populations generally deﬁne a multiply inter-
connected network due to gene ﬂow and admixture rather
than a strict evolutionary tree (Smouse, 1998, 2000). Why,
then, do population trees dominate the human evolutionary
literature and not network diagrams?

The frequent presentation of human population trees is
certainly not because of hypothesis testing. One of the
earliest measures of how well a genetic data set ﬁt the
constraints of a tree-like structure was the cophenetic
correlation. This correlation measures the ﬁt between the
observed genetic distances between populations with the
expected genetic distances assuming an optimized tree
(Rohlf, 1993). Many human data sets were scored with
this measure, all of which had come from publications that
presented population trees based on these data, but not a
single data set ﬁt the constraints of an evolutionary tree
with this measure (Templeton, 1998a). A statistical test of
the null hypothesis of a population tree was presented by
Cavalli-Sforza and Piazza (1975). Long and Kittles (2003)
updated this test and applied it to genetic data drawn from
global human populations. The test of the null hypothesis
of a strict population tree was rejected with a p-level of
3.8  10
 49. The ﬁt to a relaxed tree that allowed different
rates of genetic divergence on each branch was also
rejected with a p-level of 1.3  10
 9. Hence, there is an
overwhelming rejection of the null hypothesis that human
populations ﬁt a population tree of splits and isolation. A
population tree is also impossible to reconcile with the
genetic distance data shown in Fig. 5.4. If a human

World Dispersals and Genetic Diversity of Mankind: The Out-of-Africa Theory and Its Challenges Chapter | 5 79

step-like

population tree did exist, there would be strong breaks and
a
to genetic distance versus
geographical distance plots (Templeton, 2013). Fig. 5.4
shows that this is not the case.

appearance

Do Human Races Exist?
Human races certainly exist in a cultural, social, economic,
and political sense, but are they biologically meaningful
categories? Races, or subspecies, are geographically cir-
cumscribed populations within a species that have sharp
genetic boundaries that separate them from the remainder
of the species (Templeton, 2013). The boundary can be
deﬁned either quantitatively as exceeding some threshold
level of genetic differentiation, or qualitatively as arising
from separate evolutionary lineages or branches of a pop-
ulation tree within the species (Templeton, 2013). The
concept of race is inapplicable to humans because there are
no sharp genetic boundaries of any sort in humans, as
shown in Fig. 5.4 for neutral genetic variation. Adaptive
traits, such as skin color that is also used to deﬁne races
culturally, mostly show clinal variation and not sharp
boundaries. In some parts of the world, a history of colo-
nization sometimes creates
sharp
boundaries in skin color. For example, the colonization
history of North America placed together three human
populations from distant geographical
locations (Native
American, Western European, and Western, tropical Afri-
can) with few individuals coming from geographically in-
termediate areas. These “sharp” boundaries are simply a
historical artifact of colonization and do not reject
the
biological reality observed from more complete geograph-
ical sampling, such as that shown in Fig. 5.4. Another
aspect of Fig. 5.4 is that even the maximum genetic dis-
tances observed between human populations at the global
level are below the thresholds used in the nonhuman
literature to identify subspecies (Templeton, 2013). As
noted in the section on population trees, the hypothesis that
humans are subdivided into distinct, mostly isolated
branches is overwhelmingly falsiﬁed when put
into a
hypothesis-testing framework.

the appearance of

MLNCPA can also be used to test for separate evolu-
tionary lineages in both positive and negative senses.
Nested clade analysis is particularly powerful at detecting
fragmentation events (splits followed by isolation, although
weak levels of gene ﬂow are not excluded) as shown both
by the analysis of known fragmentation events (Templeton,
1998b, 2004b) and simulated fragmentation events (Tem-
pleton, 2009b). Yet, the null hypothesis of no fragmenta-
tion events in human evolutionary history over the last
2 million years cannot be rejected (Templeton, 2015).
Because the temporal resolution of MLNCPA is coarse,

isolated populations could have existed on the order of tens
of thousands of years, but there is no evidence for longer
periods of fragmentation in our species. Alternatively,
MLNCPA can test the null hypothesis that the populations
from a speciﬁc geographical area have been signiﬁcantly
isolated from other populations in the species over a
speciﬁed time interval (Templeton, 2009a). Using this test,
the null hypothesis of
isolation between African and
Eurasian populations cannot be rejected for
the early
Pleistocene, but the null hypothesis of isolation is rejected
from the mid-Pleistocene to the present
(Fig. 5.2).
Combining the results of testing both of these null hy-
potheses, there have been no long-term human isolates
since the mid-Pleistocene. Hence, there are no biological
races in modern humans.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

Hypothesis Testing in Scientiﬁc Inference
Testing hypotheses, and in particular the falsiﬁcation of a
hypothesis, is often regarded as one of the strongest types
of scientiﬁc inference (Popper, 1959). Yet, after the pub-
lication of Cann et al. (1987), the OAR hypothesis domi-
nated the human evolutionary genetic literature for almost a
quarter of a century despite the fact that not a single genetic
data set ever supported it within a hypothesis testing
framework and several genetic data sets overwhelmingly
rejected and falsiﬁed it, as shown throughout this article.
Moreover, advocates of the replacement model did not
attempt any statistical hypothesis testing of replacement
versus other models with only one exception, the ABC
analysis of Fagundes et al. (2007). Although this paper was
presented as support for replacement, even a complete
acceptance of their results does not support this conclusion
as the posterior probability of replacement was 0.78 and
that of the multiregional lineage model was 0.22. Using the
norms for statistical inference, the only conclusion that is
justiﬁed from their published analysis is that their data are
compatible with both replacement and the multiregional
lineage model. Moreover, the strong rejection of any model
with nonzero admixture (a posterior probability of 0.001)
was based on a failure to properly account for the logical
relationships of the models being tested, resulting in a
mathematically impossible, incoherent result. When this
mistake was corrected by using a coherent statistic with the
same posterior probabilities, the replacement model was
rejected with a probability value of 0.025 for replacement
compared to an admixture model
(Templeton, 2010).
Hence, by 2010, multiple genetic data sets and analyses had
falsiﬁed or signiﬁcantly rejected the replacement hypothe-
test supported it. Yet
sis, and not a single statistical

80 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

African

French

Han

Melanesian

Neanderthal

Denisova

FIGURE 5.5 A population tree of humans with arrows indicating admixture from archaic human populations in the past. Modiﬁed from Reich, D.,
Green, R.E., Kircher, M., et al., 2010. Genetic history of an archaic hominin group from Denisova Cave in Siberia. Nature 468, 1053e1060.

remained the dominant model

replacement
for human
evolution. Only with the publication of direct evidence for
admixture with ancient DNA did the support for the
replacement model ﬁnally begin to erode.

This erosion still did not

lead to an acceptance of
hypothesis testing in the area of human evolutionary
studies. For example, Fig. 5.5 is based on Fig. 5.3 from
Reich et al. (2010), the paper that reported the inference of
admixture from the Denisovan specimen. Note that this
ﬁgure presents human evolution as a population tree with
just two admixture events; one from Neandertals and one
inferred from the Denisovan specimen. Note that
the
Denisovan specimen has been elevated to the status of a
long-standing and isolated evolutionary lineage of hu-
manity despite the absence of data to support this depiction.
Moreover, the modern populations of humans are depicted
as isolated branches on an evolutionary tree, with Africans
in particular being portrayed as a completely genetically
isolated lineage from the rest of humanity for 3000 gen-
erations (75,000 years, assuming a generation length of
25 years). The authors claim that this ﬁgure is “compatible”
with their data, but this statement is false since they per-
formed no test of the testable hypothesis of a tree-like
structure for modern human populations. Moreover, every
time a population tree structure has been tested for humans,
the hypothesis of a tree has been rejected. Indeed, the idea
that Africans have been genetically isolated from the rest of
the world from 75,000 years ago unto the present is clearly
false as simulations based just on historical data indicate
that all living humans, both Africans and non-Africans,
share a common ancestor just a few thousand years ago
(Rohde et al., 2004).

Figures similar to Fig. 5.5 have appeared repeatedly
not only in the scientiﬁc literature, but also in newspapers
and websites (Templeton, 2013). Such ﬁgures convey the
message that humanity is subdivided into distinct lineages
or races, even though that hypothesis has been strongly
rejected by hypothesis testing. Contrast the message of
discrete human lineages found in Fig. 5.5 with the

continuity of human genetic diversity found in the data
plot shown in Fig. 5.4 or the trellis structure shown in
Fig. 5.2. Human diversity can be portrayed in a manner
compatible with hypothesis testing (Fig. 5.2). If authors,
reviewers, and/or editors insisted upon testing testable
hypotheses, ﬁgures like Fig. 5.5 would disappear from
journals and textbooks, and hopefully from newspapers
and websites. Only then would our pictorial representa-
tions of human evolution educate and not mislead the
general public.

THE EVOLUTIONARY AND GENETIC
UNITY OF THE HUMAN SPECIES
The one overwhelming message that emerges from hy-
pothesis testing in the area of human evolution is the
importance of gene ﬂow and admixture in keeping the
human species together as a single, evolving entity, both
now and in the past. This is exactly the opposite message
conveyed by the OAR hypothesis (Fig. 5.1A) that had no
role for gene ﬂow or admixture, only expansion and
replacement.

Although all human populations represent a single
evolutionary lineage, there are some genetic differences
between human populations. These differences are minor
compared to the interpopulation differences observed in
most other species. We are not subdivided into discrete
groups and clusters, as most of our diversity displays
gradual changes (eg, Fig. 5.4), including such traditional
“racial” traits such as skin color. The few genetic changes
that show a more discrete distribution have distributions
that
races. For
example, sickle cell is found in high frequency in malarial
regions and is not a disease of “blacks,” as it is in high
frequency in many non-African populations that live in
malarial regions. The vast majority of genetic diversity in
humans exists between us as individuals, not members of a
population, making each of us genetically unique.

local selective agents and not

reﬂect

World Dispersals and Genetic Diversity of Mankind: The Out-of-Africa Theory and Its Challenges Chapter | 5 81

REFERENCES

Ackermann, R.R., 2002. Patterns of covariation in the hominoid cranio-
facial skeleton: implications for paleoanthropological models. Journal
of Human Evolution 43, 167e187.

Ackermann, R.R., 2005. Variation in Neandertals: a response to Harvati

(2003). Journal of Human Evolution 48, 643.

Ackermann, R.R., Smith, R.J., 2007. The macroevolution of our ancient
lineage: what we know (or think we know) about early hominin
diversity. Evolutionary Biology 34, 72e85.

Alperson-Aﬁl, N., Sharon, G., Kislev, M., et al., 2009. Spatial organization
of hominin activities at Gesher Benot Ya’aqov, Israel. Science 326,
1677e1680.

Armitage, S.J., Jasim, S.A., Marks, A.E., et al., 2011. The southern route
out of Africa: evidence for an early expansion of modern humans into
Arabia. Science 331, 453e456.

Baab, K.L., 2008. The taxonomic implications of cranial shape variation in

Homo erectus. Journal of Human Evolution 54, 827e847.

Beaumont, M.A., Panchal, M., 2008. On the validity of nested clade

phylogeographical analysis. Molecular Ecology 17, 2563e2565.

Bokma, F., van den Brink, V., Stadler, T., 2012. Unexpectedly many

extinct hominins. Evolution 66, 2969e2974.

Cann, R.L., Stoneking, M., Wilson, A.C., 1987. Mitochondrial DNA and

human evolution. Nature 325, 31e36.

Cavalli-Sforza, L.L., Piazza, A., 1975. Analysis of evolution: evolutionary
rates, independence, and treeness. Theoretical Population Biology 37,
3e25.

Coon, C.S., 1962. The Origin of Races. Knopf, New York.
Coventry, A., Bull-Otterson, L.M., Liu, X., et al., 2010. Deep rese-
quencing reveals excess rare recent variants consistent with explosive
population growth. Nature Communications 1, 131.

Cuenca-Bescós, G., Melero-Rubio, M., Rofes, J., et al., 2011. The Early-
Middle Pleistocene environmental and climatic change and the human
expansion in Western Europe: a case study with small vertebrates
(Gran Dolina, Atapuerca, Spain). Journal of Human Evolution 60,
481e491.

Curnoe, D., Thorne, A., 2003. Number of ancestral human species: a
molecular perspective. Homo e Journal of Comparative Human
Biology 53, 201e224.

Ding, Q., Hu, Y., Xu, S., Wang, J., Jin, L., 2014. Neanderthal introgression
at chromosome 3p21.31 was under positive natural selection in East
Asians. Molecular Biology and Evolution 31, 683e695.

Dobzhansky, T., 1944. On species and races of living and fossil man.

American Journal of Physical Anthropology 2, 251e265.

Efron, B., 2013. Bayes’ theorem in the 21st century. Science 340,

1177e1178.

Eriksson, A., Manica, A., 2014. The doubly conditioned frequency
spectrum does not distinguish between ancient population structure
and hybridization. Molecular Biology and Evolution 31, 1618e1621.
Eswaran, V., Harpending, H., Rogers, A.R., 2005. Genomics refutes an
exclusively African origin of humans. Journal of Human Evolution
49, 1e18.

Fagundes, N.J.R., Ray, N., Beaumont, M., et al., 2007. Statistical
evaluation of alternative models of human evolution. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 104, 17614e17619.

Ferring, R., Oms, O., Agustí, J., et al., 2011. Earliest human occupations at
Dmanisi (Georgian Caucasus) dated to 1.85e1.78 Ma. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 108, 10432e10436.

Green, R.E., Krause, J., Briggs, A.W., et al., 2010. A draft sequence of the

Neandertal genome. Science 328, 710e722.

Grun, R., Stringer, C., McDermott, F., et al., 2005. U-series and ESR
analyses of bones and teeth relating to the human burials from Skhul.
Journal of Human Evolution 49, 316e334.

Harding, R.M., Fullerton, S.M., Grifﬁths, R.C., et al., 1997. Archaic
African and Asian lineages in the genetic ancestry of modern humans.
American Journal of Human Genetics 60, 772e789.

Haslam, M., Roberts, R.G., Shipton, C., et al., 2011. Late Acheulean
hominins at the Marine Isotope Stage 6/5e transition in north-central
India. Quaternary Research 75, 670e682.

Hochberg, Z., Templeton, A.R., 2010. Evolutionary perspective in skin
color, vitamin D and its receptor. Hormones e International Journal of
Endocrinology and Metabolism 9, 307e311.

Howells, W.W., 1942. Fossil man and the origin of races. American

Anthropologist 44, 182e193.

Huerta-Sanchez, E., Jin, X., Asan, et al., 2014. Altitude adaptation in
Tibetans caused by introgression of Denisovan-like DNA. Nature 512,
194e197.

Hunt, K., 2003. The single species hypothesis: truly dead and pushing
twitching and ripe for resuscitation? Human

up bushes, or still
Biology 75, 485e502.

Jablonski, N.G., Chaplin, G., 2013. Epidermal pigmentation in the human
lineage is an adaptation to ultraviolet radiation. Journal of Human
Evolution 65, 671e675.

Jin, C., Pan, W., Zhang, Y., et al., 2009. The Homo sapiens Cave
hominin site of Mulan Mountain, Jiangzhou District, Chongzuo,
Guangxi with emphasis on its age. Chinese Science Bulletin 54,
3848e3856.

Kingman, J.F.C., 1982a. The coalescent. Stochastic Processes and Their

Applications 13, 235e248.

Kingman, J.F.C., 1982b. On the genealogy of large populations. Journal of

Applied Probability 19A, 27e43.

Knowles, L.L., Maddison, W.P., 2002. Statistical phylogeography.

Molecular Ecology 11, 2623e2635.

Larrasoña, J.C., 2012. A Northeast Saharan perspective on environmental
variability in North Africa and its implications for modern human
origins. In: Hublin, J.-J.M., Shannon, P. (Eds.), Modern Origins:
A North African Perspective. Springer, Dordrecht, Heidelberg,
New York, London, pp. 19e34.

Liu, W., Jin, C.-Z., Zhang, Y.-Q., et al., 2010. Human remains
from Zhirendong, South China, and modern human emergence in East
Asia. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 107,
19201e19206.

Lohse, K., Frantz, L.A.F., 2014. Neandertal admixture in Eurasia
three genomes.

conﬁrmed by maximum-likelihood analysis of
Genetics 196, 1241e1251.

Long, J., Kittles, R., 2003. Human genetic diversity and the nonexistence

of biological races. Human Biology 75, 449e471.

Lordkipanidze, D., Ponce de León, M.S., Margvelashvili, A., et al., 2013.
A complete skull from Dmanisi, Georgia, and the evolutionary
biology of early Homo. Science 342, 326e331.

Mayr, E., 1982. The Growth of Biological Thought: Diversity, Evolution,
and Inheritance. The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA.

Mayr, E., 1994. Darwin’s impact on modern thought. Proceedings of the

American Philosophical Society 139, 317e325.

82 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

McDougall, I., Brown, F.H., Fleagle, J.G., 2005. Stratigraphic placement
and age of modern humans from Kibish, Ethiopia. Nature 433,
733e736.

Mendez, F.L., Watkins, J.C., Hammer, M.F., 2012. Global genetic varia-
tion at OAS1 provides evidence of archaic admixture in Melanesian
populations. Molecular Biology and Evolution 29, 1513e1520.

Meyer, M., Fu, Q., Aximu-Petri, A., et al., 2014. A mitochondrial genome
sequence of a hominin from Sima de los Huesos. Nature 403e406.
Nature Publishing Group, a division of Macmillan Publishers Limited.
Meyer, M., Kircher, M., Gansauge, M.-T., et al., 2012. A high-coverage
genome sequence from an archaic Denisovan individual. Science
338, 222e226.

Orlando, L., 2014. A 400,000-year-old mitochondrial genome questions
phylogenetic relationships amongst archaic hominins. BioEssays 36,
598e605.

Paabo, S., 2015. The diverse origins of the human gene pool. Nature

Reviews Genetics 16, 313e314.

Paixão-Côrtes, V.R., Viscardi, L.H., Salzano, F.M., Cátira-Bortolini, M.,
Hünemeier, T., 2013. The cognitive ability of extinct hominins:
bringing down the hierarchy using genomic evidences. American
Journal of Human Biology 25, 702e705.

Panchal, M., Beaumont, M.A., 2010. Evaluating nested clade phylogeo-
graphic analysis under models of restricted gene ﬂow. Systematic
Biology 59, 415e432.

Pappu, S., Gunnell, Y., Akhilesh, K., et al., 2011. Early Pleistocene presence

of Acheulian hominins in South India. Science 331, 1596e1599.

Pearson, O.M., 2008. Statistical and biological deﬁnitions of “anatomically
modern” humans: suggestions for a uniﬁed approach to modern
morphology. Evolutionary Anthropology 17, 38e48.

Pei, S., Niu, D., Guan, Y., et al., 2015. Middle Pleistocene hominin
occupation in the Danjiangkou Reservoir Region, Central China:
studies of formation processes and stone technology of Maling 2A
site. Journal of Archaeological Science 53, 391e407.

Popper, K.R., 1959. The Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery. Hutchinson,

London.

Potts, R., Behrensmeyer, A.K., Deino, A., Ditchﬁeld, P., Clark, J., 2004.
Small mid-Pleistocene hominin associated with East African Acheu-
lean technology. Science 305, 75e78.

Povysil, G., Hochreiter, S., 2014. Sharing of very short IBD segments
between humans, Neandertals, and Denisovans. bioRxiv. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1101/003988.

Relethford, J., 1998. Genetics of modern human origins and diversity.

Annual Review of Anthropology 27, 1e23.

Relethford, J.H., 2001. Genetics and the Search for Modern Human

Origins. John Wiley & Sons, New York.

Reyes-Centeno, H., Ghirotto, S., Détroit, F., et al., 2014. Genomic and
cranial phenotype data support multiple modern human dispersals
from Africa and a southern route into Asia. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 111, 7248e7253.

Rightmire, G.P., 2009. Middle and later Pleistocene hominins in Africa
and Southwest Asia. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences 106, 16046e16050.

Rohde, D.L.T., Olson, S., Chang, J.T., 2004. Modelling the recent com-

mon ancestry of all living humans. Nature 431, 562e566.

Rohlf, F.J., 1993. NTSYS-pc: Numerical Taxonomy and Multivariate

Analysis System. Version 1.80 Exeter Software, Setauket, NY.

Sankararaman, S., Mallick, S., Dannemann, M., et al., 2014. The genomic
landscape of Neanderthal ancestry in present-day humans. Nature 507,
354e357.

Scally, A., Durbin, R., 2012. Revising the human mutation rate: impli-
cations for understanding human evolution. Nature Reviews Genetics
13, 745e753.

Scott, G.R., Gibert, L., 2009. The oldest hand-axes in Europe. Nature 461,

82e85.

Scozzari, R., Massaia, A., Trombetta, B., et al., 2014. An unbiased
resource of novel SNP markers provides a new chronology for the
human Y chromosome and reveals a deep phylogenetic structure in
Africa. Genome Research 24, 535e544.

Seguin-Orlando, A., Korneliussen, T.S., Sikora, M., et al., 2014. Genomic
structure in Europeans dating back at least 36,200 years. Science 346,
1113e1118.

Simmons, T., 1999. Migration and contact zones in modern human origins:
baboon models for hybridization and species recognition. Anthro-
pologie 37, 101e109.

Smouse, P.E., 1998. To tree or not to tree. Molecular Ecology 7, 399e412.
Smouse, P.E., 2000. Reticulation inside the species boundary. Journal of

Classiﬁcation 17, 165e173.

Soares, P., Alshamali, F., Pereira, J.B., et al., 2012. The expansion of
mtDNA Haplogroup L3 within and out of Africa. Molecular Biology
and Evolution 29, 915e927.

Stringer, C.B., Andrews, P., 1988. The origin of modern humans. Science

239, 1263e1268.

Prufer, K., Racimo, F., Patterson, N., et al., 2014. The complete genome
sequence of a Neanderthal from the Altai Mountains. Nature 505,
43e49.

Takahata, N., Lee, S.-H., Satta, Y., 2001. Testing multiregionality of
modern human origins. Molecular Biology and Evolution 18,
172e183.

Racimo, F., Sankararaman, S., Nielsen, R., Huerta-Sanchez, E., 2015.
Evidence for archaic adaptive introgression in humans. Nature
Reviews Genetics 16, 359e371.

Ramachandran, S., Deshpande, O., Roseman, C.C., et al., 2005. Support
from the relationship of genetic and geographic distance in human
populations for a serial founder effect originating in Africa. PNAS
102, 15942e15947.

Ray, N., Currat, M., Berthier, P., Excofﬁer, L., 2005. Recovering the
geographic origin of early modern humans by realistic and spatially
explicit simulations. Genome Research 15, 1161e1167.

Reich, D., Green, R.E., Kircher, M., et al., 2010. Genetic history of an
archaic hominin group from Denisova Cave in Siberia. Nature 468,
1053e1060.

Templeton, A.R., 1994. “Eve”: hypothesis compatibility versus hypothesis

testing. American Anthropologist 96, 141e147.

Templeton, A.R., 1998a. Human races: a genetic and evolutionary

perspective. American Anthropologist 100, 632e650.

Templeton, A.R., 1998b. Nested clade analyses of phylogeographic data:
testing hypotheses about gene ﬂow and population history. Molecular
Ecology 7, 381e397.

Templeton, A.R., 2002. Out of Africa again and again. Nature 416,

45e51.

Templeton, A.R., 2004a. A maximum likelihood framework for cross
validation of phylogeographic hypotheses. In: Wasser, S.P. (Ed.),
Evolutionary Theory and Processes: Modern Horizons. Kluwer
Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, pp. 209e230.

World Dispersals and Genetic Diversity of Mankind: The Out-of-Africa Theory and Its Challenges Chapter | 5 83

Templeton, A.R., 2004b. Statistical phylogeography: methods of evalu-
ating and minimizing inference errors. Molecular Ecology 13,
789e809.

Templeton, A.R., 2006. Population Genetics and Microevolutionary

Theory. John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey.

Templeton, A.R., 2007. Perspective: genetics and recent human evolution.

Evolution 61, 1507e1519.

Templeton, A.R., 2008. Nested clade analysis: an extensively validated
method for strong phylogeographic inference. Molecular Ecology 17,
1877e1880.

Templeton, A.R., 2009a. Statistical hypothesis testing in intraspeciﬁc
phylogeography: nested clade phylogeographical
analysis vs.
approximate Bayesian computation. Molecular Ecology 18, 319e331.
Templeton, A.R., 2009b. Why does a method that fails continue to be

used: the answer. Evolution 63, 807e812.

Templeton, A.R., 2010. Coherent and incoherent

geography and human evolution. Proceedings of
Academy of Sciences 107, 6376e6381.

inference in phylo-
the National

Thackeray, J.F., Bellamy, C.L., Bellars, D., et al., 1997. Probabilities of
conspeciﬁcity e application of a morphometric technique to modern
taxa and fossil specimens attributed to Australopithecus and Homo.
South African Journal of Science 93, 195e196.

Van Arsdale, A.P., Wolpoff, M.H., 2013. A single lineage in early
Pleistocene Homo: size variation continuity in early Pleistocene Homo
crania from East Africa and Georgia. Evolution 67, 841e850.

Vanhaeren, M., d’Errico, F., Stringer, C., et al., 2006. Middle Paleolithic

shell beads in Israel and Algeria. Science 312, 1785e1788.

Vernot, B., Akey, J.M., 2014. Resurrecting surviving Neandertal lineages

from modern human genomes. Science 343, 1017e1021.

Villmoare, B., 2005. Metric and non-metric randomization methods,
geographic variation, and the single-species hypothesis for Asian
and African Homo erectus. Journal of Human Evolution 49,
680e701.

Wall, J.D., Yang, M.A., Jay, F., et al., 2013. Higher levels of Neanderthal
ancestry in East Asians than in Europeans. Genetics 194, 199e209.
Weidenreich, F., 1946. Apes, Giants, and Man. University of Chicago

Templeton, A.R., 2013. Biological races in humans. Studies in History and

Press, Chicago.

Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences 44, 262e271.

Wolpoff, M., Thorne, A., 1991. The case against Eve. New Scientist 22,

Templeton, A.R., 2015. Population biology and population genetics of
Pleistocene hominins. In: Henke, W., Tattersall, I. (Eds.), Handbook
of Paleoanthropology. Springer, Heidelberg, New York, Dordrecht,
London, pp. 2331e2370.

Templeton, A.R., Routman, E., Phillips, C., 1995. Separating population
structure from population history: a cladistic analysis of
the
geographical distribution of mitochondrial DNA haplotypes in the
Tiger Salamander, Ambystoma tigrinum. Genetics 140, 767e782.

Templeton, A.R., Sing, C.F., 1993. A cladistic analysis of phenotypic
associations with haplotypes inferred from restriction endonuclease
mapping.
IV. Nested analyses with cladogram uncertainty and
recombination. Genetics 134, 659e669.

Templeton, A.R., Weiss, K.M., Nickerson, D.A., Boerwinkle, E.,
Sing, C.F., 2000. Cladistic structure within the human lipoprotein
lipase gene and its implications for phenotypic association studies.
Genetics 156, 1259e1275.

Thackeray, J.F., 2007. Approximation of a biological species constant?

South African Journal of Science 103, 489.

37e41.

Wolpoff, M., Thorne, A.G., Smith, F.H., Frayer, D.W., Pope, G.G., 1994.
for modern
Multiregional
human populations. In: Nitecki, M.H., Nitecki, D.V. (Eds.), Origins of
Anatomically Modern Humans. Plenum Press, New York,
pp. 175e200.

a world-wide

evolution:

source

Wolpoff, M.H., 1996. Interpretations of multiregional evolution. Science

274, 704e706.

Wolpoff, M.H., Caspari, R., 2000. The many species of humanity. Prze-

glad Antropologiczny e Anthropological Review 63, 3e17.

Wolpoff, M.H., Hawks, J., Caspari, R., 2000. Multiregional, not
multiple origins. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 112,
129e136.

Wolpoff, M.H., Spuhler, J.N., Smith, F.H., et al., 1988. Modern human

origins. Science 241, 772e773.

Workman, P.L., Blumberg, B.S., Cooper, A.J., 1963. Selection, gene
migration and polymorphic stability in a U.S. White and Negro
population. American Journal of Human Genetics 15, 71e84.

Chapter 6

Human Population Variability and Its
Adaptive Signiﬁcance

M. Tibayrenc
Maladies Infectieuses et Vecteurs Ecologie, Génétique, Evolution et Contrôle, MIVEGEC (IRD 224-CNRS 5290-UM1-UM2), IRD Center,
Montpellier, Cedex 5, France

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AFA African American
AFR African
AIM Ancestry informative marker
AJ Ashkenazi Jew
ASA Asian American
Bp Base pair (the elementary unit of the DNA sequence)
CV Common variant
EUR European
EURA European American
GWAS Genome-wide association study
HGDP Human Genome Diversity Project
HISP Hispanic
LFV Low- frequency variant
MAF Minor allele frequency
ME Middle East
NAM Native American
OOA Out of Africa
PCA Principal component analysis
RV Rare variant
SEA South East Asian
SRA Self-reported ancestry
SV Structural variation

Baby-boomer biologists (myself included) have lived a
professional dream. Their whole career has been accom-
panied with the advent and incredible improvement of
amazing technologies. All the more admirable is the genius
of our elders, Gregor Mendel, Thomas Hunt Morgan, and
Theodozius Dobzhansky,
among many others, who
founded genetics and population genetics with only peas
and fruit ﬂy salivary gland chromosomes to sink their teeth
into. From the very start, the spoiled baby boomers have
been able to play with isoenzyme markers, and, not long
after, with a wealth of DNA technologies:
restriction
random ampliﬁed
fragment

polymorphism,

length

polymorphic DNA, ampliﬁcation fragment
length poly-
morphism, microsatellites, and the alike. To spoil us even
more, we have beneﬁted from the advent and exponential
development of computers. All these breakthroughs have
been massively applied to the study of human genetics and
evolution. The ﬁeld is a burning one. Several key papers
come out weekly, and data published only a few years ago
might be severely outdated. This is why in the present
chapter, I have attempted to privilege the most recent
advances in the ﬁeld. The chapter focuses on population
rather than individual variation. It does not aim to be a
comprehensive review of the ﬁeld, but rather, to catch the
main currents of research in the ﬁeld.

it

is convenient

A MANKIND POPULATION GENETICS
FRAMEWORK FOR APPLIED RESEARCH
Where applied research is concerned (exploring genes and
variants of interest),
to ﬁrst draw an
exhaustive population genetic framework of the species
under study in its whole ecogeographical range. Then the
relevant genes and variants are mapped onto this general
picture. This makes it possible to compare the speciﬁc
evolution of these genes to the overall evolution of the
whole species (phylogenetic character mapping; Avise,
2004). This approach is highly recommended when
performing applied research in humans (Tibayrenc, 2007a).
Moving toward this goal, a wealth of data have been
gathered by three major international projects, namely the
HapMap project
the
Human Genome Diversity project (HGDP; http://www.
hagsc.org/hgdp/), and the 1000 Genomes Project (http://
www.1000genomes.org/). These multicontinental projects
are completed by geographically restricted programs, such

(http://hapmap.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/),

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00006-5
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

85

86 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

as the “UK10K consortium” (http://www.uk10k.org/). These
projects, together with many outstanding pioneering studies,
have made it possible to reach the main results summarized
in the following sections.

Most Genetic Variation Occurs Within
Continental Groups
Before direct DNA analysis was possible, the only reliable
genetic tools were blood groups and isoenzymes. These
pioneering markers made it possible to evidence a key fact
that has been fully conﬁrmed by the most recent tech-
nologies:
taking the set of markers as a whole, when
considering the native inhabitants of major continental
regions (Europe, the Americas, Africa, Asia, and Oceania),
the intragroup variability far exceeds the intergroup vari-
ability: about 0.85 versus 0.15 (Lewontin, 1972). Inter-
group differences are conveniently measured by the Fst
statistic (Wright, 1978; see box 1). This remarkable feature
has been conﬁrmed by all subsequent studies, based on
various molecular markers, with some ﬂuctuations, but
always the same strong tendency: 30 microsatellites and
79 RFLP: Fst ¼ 0.10 (Barbujani et al., 1997); micro-
satellites: 0.10; RFLP: 0.13; Alu insertion sequences: 0.14
(Lachance and Tishkoff, 2013); gene sequences: 0.159;
microsatellites: 0.057 (Long et al., 2009); Alu insertion
sequences: 0.127 (Romualdi et al., 2002); microsatellites:
0.153 (Rosenberg et al., 2005); and single nucleotide
polymorphisms
(SNPs): 0.052 (Auton et al., 2009);
0.132 (Shriver et al., 2004). Depending on the poly-
morphism considered, Jakobsson et al. (2008) have found
different ﬁgures for percentages of variants that are not
shared among continents:
the value for SNPs roughly
ﬁtted the classical feature (18.7%). However, for haplo-
type clusters and copy-number variants (CNVs), the re-
sults were 87.57% and 38.81%, respectively. These ﬁgures
do not represent Fst statistics, strictly speaking. However,
they show that the percentage of unshared polymorphisms
among continental regions is highly dependent upon the
polymorphism considered. Conrad and Hurles (2007)
found a Fst ¼ 0.11 for CNVs.
This result concerning Fst patterns among populations
involve common variants (CVs; frequency 5%) and what
can be called “historical markers,” markers that do not
undergo natural selection, whose polymorphism is pro-
portional to the time elapsed since population separation.
The pattern is very different when rare variants
(frequency 0.5%) and adaptive polymorphisms are
considered (see later in this chapter and in Chapter 38).

Clines, Clusters, Clinal Clusters, Trees?
In spite of this limited intergroup variability, another strong
result has emerged since human populations started to be

surveyed with genetic markers: populations could be reli-
ably grouped according to their geographical origin. This
was already possible with isoenzymes, although this marker
has a relatively limited resolution and undergoes homo-
plasy. Fig. 6.1 shows a phylogenetic tree depicting the
genetic distances for 11 isoenzyme loci and 11 blood
groups among major human continental groups (Nei,
1978). This early study can be considered as the ﬁrst,
pioneering attempt to build an overall genealogical tree of
the genetic diversity of our species. A more recent study,
relying on 29 isoenzyme loci, gave a more precise picture
of this diversity (Nei and Roychoudhury, 1993, Fig. 6.2).
General clustering in both studies match the generally
recognized geographical populations well
(Europeans,
Asians, Africans, Native Americans, Oceanians). Both trees
show that Africans constitute a speciﬁc cluster that
is
clearly separated from another cluster encompassing all
non-African populations. These pioneering studies using
rustic, low-resolution markers, and very simple phyloge-
netic methods
is untrue to state that
geographical groupings can be evidenced only through the
use of carefully selected modern markers and sophisticated
analyses (Jordan, 2008, Chapter 6). The results of these
early studies have been conﬁrmed by many others relying
on various markers and different population samples.
Modern DNA-based tools greatly reﬁned the picture, but
did not upset
the results gathered by protein markers
(Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman, 2003). Hierarchical relation-
ships among geographical groups have been slightly
modiﬁed by more recent studies, and at nowadays, modern
DNA tools are able to accurately identify the region of
origin of individuals, not only populations, which was
impossible with isoenzymes and blood groups. However,
the main features (clear groupings according to geograph-
ical ancestries, and separation between Africans and
non-Africans) remain (Fig. 6.3).

show that

it

This tree-based approach has been criticized because
(1) “it has been falsiﬁed whenever tested, so this practice is
scientiﬁcally indefensible”; (2) “it
is also socially irre-
sponsible as these pictorial representations of human evo-
lution have more impact on the general public than nuanced
phrases in the text of a scientiﬁc paper” (Templeton, 2013).
However,
tree representations of human diversity are
widely used by many, if not most, authors working in the
ﬁeld and constantly yield convergent results. It is obvious
that such trees do not show, strictly speaking, clades. They
should be merely considered as population trees, a
convenient visual
species’ genetic
diversity. Such trees do not mean that geographical pop-
ulations are strictly separated; they are not. Ethical and
semantic issues concerning human diversity are presented
in detail in Chapter 38.

summary of our

Together with this tree approach, there is now a ten-
dency to use “unsupervised,” model-free, nonphylogenetic

Human Population Variability and Its Adaptive Signiﬁcance Chapter | 6 87

CHINESE

JAPANESE

AINU

NEW GUINEAN

MICRONESIAN

N. AMERIND

S. AMERIND

INDIAN (ASIA)

ENGLISH

ITALIAN

GHANA

BANTU

.0

(120,000 yrs)

(60,000 yrs)

.10

.05

FIGURE 6.1 A phylogenetic tree of the main human ethnic groups designed from 11 isoenzyme markers and 11 blood groups. Nei, M., 1978. The theory
of genetic distance and evolution of human races. Japanese Journal of Human Genetics 23, 341e369.

methods, in which the unit of analysis is not the population
instead the individual: principal
(deﬁned a priori), but
component analysis
(PCA), ADMIXTURE, FRAPPE
(Alexander et al., 2009), and STRUCTURE (Pritchard
et al., 2000). These methods, although they are rooted in
totally different assumptions, give quite convergent results
with trees and phylogenies. They present the advantage of
yielding a precise estimation of admixture rates within
populations. STRUCTURE infers a subdivision of the
samples into K clusters and explores which K number ﬁts
the data best. Individuals are ranked into given clusters.
They can belong to several clusters, with membership
coefﬁcients summing to 1 across clusters (Rosenberg et al.,
2002). As is the case for any approach, the reliability of the
results is dependent upon sampling quality (populations
and molecular markers).
In the seminal article by
Rosenberg et al.
(2002), based on 1056 individuals
worldwide (from the panel of the HGDP) and 377 micro-
satellite loci, STRUCTURE uncovered six major clusters,
of which ﬁve corresponded to major continental regions
(Africa, Europe, the part of Asia south and west of the
Himalayas, East Asia, Oceania, and the Americas). The
sixth grouping largely corresponded to the Kalash, an
Indo-Iranian-speaking population of Pakistan, whose origin
is debated. It has been claimed that his clustering pattern
was partly artifactual, due to sampling biases (Serre and
Pääbo, 2004). However, this hypothesis has been refuted by
Hunley et al. (2009) and by the authors themselves, who

fully conﬁrmed their results with a broader range of genetic
markers (783 microsatellite loci and 210 insertion-deletion
sequences [“indels”: see CNV]) (Rosenberg et al., 2005).
In the latter study, the role played by geographical dis-
persion was clariﬁed: within the clusters, genetic dis-
tances are correlated with geographical distances (clinal
variation). However, among clusters, major geographical
obstacles (the Sahara, oceans, Himalayas) play a role,
and have an impact on genetic distances equivalent
to
3100 km. The authors concluded that both clines and
clusters were evidenced in their study. Pigliuci (2013)
has emphasized the fact that ﬁve clusters could appear
somewhat arbitrary, since, according to the level of anal-
ysis, K could be either 3 or 5. However, K ¼ 5 is the ﬁgure
that ﬁts the data better (Cavalli-Sforza, 2007). Tishkoff and
Kidd (2004) characterized 37 populations with 80 loci (41
haplotyped loci, 36 biallelic loci, and three short tandem
repeat polymorphisms, and found the same continental
groups as Rosenberg et al. (2002, 2005)). Interestingly,
African-Americans (AFAs) are clearly within the African
cluster, although it is generally considered that AFAs have
a European admixture rate ranging from 7% to 20%,
depending on the location (González Burchard et al., 2003).
Although in their study, “clusters correlate with the
common concept of ‘races,’ ” the authors cautiously warned
that “the distribution of genetic variation is quasi contin-
uous in clinal patterns related to geography.” They stated
that if there were more intermediary populations, clustering

88 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

(A)

100

75

Bantu

89

San

Pygmy

Nigerian

Lapp

Finn

German

English

76

56

64

92

75

(B)

86

Italian

Iranian

Northern Indian

45
56

Japanese

Tibetan

(C)

73

Korean

Mongolian

29

43

11

25
28

30

42

83

Southern Chinese

Thai

Filipino

Indonesian

Polynesian

Micronesian

(E)

91

(D)

89

52

North Amerindian

South Amerindian

Eskimo

Australian

Papuan

0.01

FIGURE 6.2 A phylogenetic tree of the main human ethnic groups designed from 29 isoenzyme markers (after Nei, M., Roychoudhury, A.K., 1993.
Evolutionary relationships in human populations on a global scale. Molecular Biology and Evolution 10, 927e943.). Subdivisions are supported by
strong bootstrap values, although they do not correspond to strictly deﬁned clades.

would be less clear. Still the fact remains that, with such
large and diversiﬁed samples, the presence of the ﬁve major
continental populations seems to be robust. There is a clear
phylogenetic
among geographically separated
populations, although they are not strictly separated and
have diverged from one another relatively recently (the
“out-of-Africa”
dated
at  50,000 to  60,000 years). The ﬁve major continental

hypothesis,

signal

[OOA]

generally

populations have been corroborated by many different
markers. The polymorphism of structural variation (SV; see
further) is congruent with that of SNPs (Armengol et al.,
2009; Conrad and Hurles, 2007; Sudmant et al., 2015a).
Contrary to what
is stated by Barbujani and Colonna
(2010), in the study reported by Jakobsson et al. (2008), the
phylogenies inferred from SNP, CNV and haplotypes show
fair parity for the major continental groupings, and are

Human Population Variability and Its Adaptive Signiﬁcance Chapter | 6 89

FIGURE 6.3 Least-squares tree for 37 populations based on 80 independent loci (41 haplotyped loci, 36 biallelic loci, and 3 short tandem repeat
polymorphisms [STRPs]) (Tishkoff and Kidd, 2004).

corroborated by nonphylogenetic, Bayesian clustering
(Fig. 6.4). The CNV phylogeny differs only in the
hierarchization of lower branches.

Li et al. (2008) typed 938 individuals from the HGDP
with 650,000 common SNPs. With the FRAPPE software,
at K ¼ 5, they found the same groupings as Rosenberg
et al. (2002, 2005). At K ¼ 7, the populations clustered into
Africa, the Middle East, Europe, Central/South Asia, East
Asia, Oceania, and America. This clustering pattern was
fully conﬁrmed by a maximum likelihood tree. López
Herráez et al. (2009), with nearly 1 million SNPs, found an
optimum K ¼ 6 on HGDP populations as well. Continental

groupings were Africa, America, Europe/North Africa/
Middle East, Central and South Asia, and East Asia
and Oceania. With a very speciﬁc sample based on
the POPRES collection (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
projects/gap/cgi-bin/study.cgi?study_id¼phs000145.v4.p2),
encompassing admixed and urban populations identiﬁed by
self-reported ancestry (SRA), by using 443,434 SNPs,
Auton et al. (2009) found groupings that parallel those of
the HapMap and HGDP samples. Long et al. (2009) found
that trees based on either sequences or microsatellites were
in agreement with each other and with previously published
trees.

90 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

FIGURE 6.4 (A) Neighbor-joining trees of population relationships. Internal branch lengths are proportional to bootstrap support. Lines of intermediate
thickness represent internal branches with more than 50% bootstrap support, and the thickest lines represent more than 95% support. (B) Population
structure inferred by Bayesian clustering. Each individual is shown as a thin vertical line partitioned into K colored components representing inferred
membership in K genetic clusters. The bottom row provides inferred population structure for each geographic region (Jakobsson et al., 2008).

This convergence of various methods and sampling
strategies suggests that this pattern (clustering following
major continental ancestries) is a robust one, according to
one criterion of the “principles of genealogical concor-
dance,” namely the congruence across independent gene
trees in delineating the geographical position of a major
phylogeographical break between sets of populations
(Avise, 2004). The convergence between phylogenetic and
nonphylogenetic clustering approaches, between radically
different kinds of markers (isoenzymes, microsatellites,
is an especially
SNPs, haplotypes, CNVs, sequences)
telling illustration of
this clustering
pattern (Tibayrenc and Ayala, 2012).

the robustness of

The pattern is clinal when migration routes throughout
continents are used as a sampling strategy (Barbujani and
Colonna, 2010). However,
this approach imperfectly
reﬂects the overall structure of populations. At the level of
worldwide populations, major geographical obstacles

(Himalaya, oceans, Sahara)
introduce some clustering
together with the clinal variation (Rosenberg et al., 2005),
as already noted by Dobzhansky (1966). Shiao et al. (2012)
have proposed the concept of “clinal classes” to describe
this pattern.

The clustering is at ﬁrst glance somewhat unexpected
when considering the limited intergroup differences pre-
sented earlier. This is explained by the fact that Fst statistics
considers each locus independently, while the allelic fre-
quency differences among geographical populations are
correlated (Mitton, 1977, 1978; Edwards, 2003; Jorde and
Wooding, 2004).

Now this gross clustering pattern represents a bird’s
eye view, so to speak, of the genetic variability of our
species. More detailed studies uncover a great deal of
additional stratiﬁcation within each of the ﬁve major pop-
ulations, which has immense evolutionary and biomedical
implications.

Human Population Variability and Its Adaptive Signiﬁcance Chapter | 6 91

It

Russian Dolls Everywhere
Francisco J. Ayala and I have proposed the “Russian doll
model” (Tibayrenc and Ayala, 2013) for microbial patho-
gens. Brieﬂy, the model says that within clusters, there are
smaller clusters, within which there are even smaller clus-
ters, etc.
looks like the same obtains in human
populations. When microbes are concerned, this pattern is
explained by in-built genetic properties leading to pre-
dominant clonal evolution. In humans, the dolls are caused
mainly by allopatry, additionally by cultural factors, in
particular languages (Cavalli-Sforza et al., 1992). It seems
that separation by distance is able to operate at very small
geographical scales. This human “micro-population ge-
netics” has been made possible by the advent of markers
with an increased resolution (SNPs, microsatellites) and a
massive use of them: studies relying on several hundreds of
thousands of markers are today not exceptional. Stratiﬁca-
tion and Russian doll patterns within main geographical
populations are chieﬂy due to low-frequency variants
(“Goldilocks variants”; frequency 0.5e5%; Nelson et al.,
2012) and even more, rare variants (frequency 0.5%). As
a matter of fact, the rarer the variant, the more its tendency
to be geographically localized. This explains why stratiﬁ-
cation within populations can be strong even when Fst
among major populations are not. Fst are computed from
CVs. Allele sharing of rare variants is limited, even be-
tween close populations (Mathieson and McVean, 2012).
As we will see below, rare variants have a strong inﬂuence
on phenotypic polymorphisms.

Lewontin and Hartl (1991) warned about the risk of not
taking into account additional genetic structuration within
major ethnic groups in forensic analyses: the rough US
census categories (African, European, Asian, Native Amer-
icans, etc.) are far from being genetically homogeneous.

framework of

the genographic project

Elhaik et al. (2014) applied the geographic population
structure algorithm to the study of populations collected in
the
(https://
genographic.nationalgeographic.com/). The populations
were selected for not having undergone migrations for
several centuries. The authors were able to assign 83% of
individuals to their birth country, and 66% to speciﬁc re-
gions. In the speciﬁc case of Sardinia, 25% of individuals
were assigned to their village of origin, and most of the rest
within 100 km of their birthplace.

Using SNPs, Leslie et al. (2015) characterized 2039
rural British individuals and 6209 individuals from other
European countries, all of European ancestry. The British
subjects were selected so that their four grandparents had
lived in the same area, in order to lower the impact of very
recent migrations. The authors found a clear structuration
linked to geography and natural obstacles in both the
United Kingdom and other European countries. A clear
clustering pattern was evidenced in the British sample.

The genetic contribution of the Saxons was estimated at
10e40%. Scandinavian contribution was limited except
on Okney Island. While English people appeared to be
genetically homogeneous, individuals of Celtic ancestry
were not. Data are consistent with ancestry of British
people mainly from Germany, Belgium, and Northwest
France. Another study (The UK10K Consortium, 2015)
relying on a different sampling strategy (people were not
selected according to their grandparents’ birthplace)
still found that populations were structured according to
rare and very rare variants, but to a lesser extent than
in the study by Leslie et al. (2015). This shows that
modern times increasingly cause growing homogenization
in people.

López Herráez et al. (2009) found a clear structuration
of European populations, correlated to geographical dis-
tance. This correlation was not observed in Africa and the
Americas, although the populations of these regions were
obviously genetically heterogenous. In Africa and the
Americas, populations instead clustered according to the
ethnic origin (Bantus, Yorubas, San, Mbuti, and Biaka
Pygmies in Africa; Piapoco, Curripaco, Maya, Pima,
Karitiana, and Suriu in the Americas). Interestingly, these
results were not changed when retrieving the SNPs with the
10% highest Fst values. This shows that these Russian doll
patterns reﬂect genome-wide properties, and are not caused
by just a few, highly differentiated SNPs.

Moreno-Estrada et al. (2014) surveyed 511 Native
Mexicans pertaining to 20 different tribes, and admixed
Mexicans from Mexico and Los Angeles, with 1 million
SNPs. They found that Native Mexican genetic variability
followed a NorthwesteSoutheast cline. Interestingly, this
particular population structure was conserved in admixed
Mexicans from Mexico, but not in those from Los Angeles.
Nelson et al. (2012) have found that rare variants in
Europe were stratiﬁed following a north-south gradient.
Finnish populations had one-third of
the rare variant
diversity of Southern Europeans.

By typing 3192 individuals of the POPRES collection
with 500,000 SNP, Novembre et al. (2008) and Novembre
and Ramachandran (2011) found that genetic polymorphism
closely followed geography in Europe. Iberic peninsula, Italy,
Southeast Europe, Turkey, and Cyprus were clearly individ-
ualized. Micro-population genetics was able to go down to the
village scale,
Interestingly, German-,
French-, and Italian-speaking Swiss were separated from one
another, which suggested that linguistic separation, together
with allopatry, plays a role in Russian dolling.

the authors said.

The work by Longobardi et al. (2015) seems to support
this hypothesis. The authors found signiﬁcant correlations
between genomic and linguistic diversity in Europe (both
Indo-European
languages).
Language appeared to be a better predictor of genomic
differences than geography. Similarly, Wang et al. (2012)

non-Indo-European

and

92 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

found that Bantu-speaking populations were grouped
together by genetic markers, even if they were separated by
large geographical distances.

This Russian doll structure explains why the number of
races described by classical anthropology may vary greatly
from one author to another, depending on the level of
resolution the authors wish to address. Vallois (1976)
describes four “groups” (also called grand races, or great
races) and 27 races. He also notes that some authors
describe “subraces” and “populations.” This terminology is
a reﬂection of the Russian doll structure of human pop-
ulations. As stated by Dobzhansky (1966), differences
among races are objective facts, while the number of races
the authors describe is a matter of convenience and depends
upon the goal of the study. These points will be extensively
discussed in Chapter 38.

The concept of “clinal classes” (Shiao et al., 2012;
Shiao, 2014) clearly describes this pattern. The clinal
classes are compared to watersheds, some ones being large
(the Mississippi watershed), other ones being smaller,
within the large ones. The STRUCTURE approach, with its
ﬂexible number of K categories, makes it possible to
evidence large and lesser clinal classes, if the marker’s level
of resolution and the population sampling are sufﬁcient.

The main geographic clusters of the human species and
their Russian-doll lesser subdivisions are to some extent
similar to the “near-clade” concept we forged to describe
the genetic variability of human pathogens (Tibayrenc and
Ayala, 2012): evolutionary lines imperfectly separated from
one another, whose discreteness is clouded by occasional
genetic exchange. Now again in microbes, genetic isolation
is caused by predominant clonal evolution, while in
humans, it is due to isolation by distance and geographical
obstacles, reinforced by cultural differences. In both cases,
humans and micropathogens, imperfect discreteness makes
that applying excessively strict cladistic demands would be
misleading. For pathogens, we have proposed to use a
ﬂexible phylogenetic approach instead, based on a
congruence criterium, namely that adding relevant data will
lead to increasing evidence, whenever
the working
hypothesis is valid. This works with human genetic data:
the use of more and more discriminative and diversiﬁed
markers on more and more populations has made the
overall picture of mankind genetic variability far more
precise.

All Admixed
Not only do human populations exhibit this highly stratiﬁed
Russian doll structure, but they also prove to have under-
gone thorough and complex admixtures. This corroborates
the view of classical anthropology, which divided human
populations into “primary races” resulting only from the
action of evolutionary forces, and “secondary races”

resulting from long-continued intermixture of two or more
primary races within an area of relative isolation. Second-
ary races (admixed) were considered as representing most
of the present populations in the world, while primary races
were considered as relictual populations (Hooton, 1926).
This does not mean that present human populations are
homogeneous, either phenotypically or genetically. On the
contrary, the data summarized above show that they are
clearly
genetic
exchange throughout history has been the rule rather than
the exception. “Pure” populations (primary races; Hooton,
1926) virtually do not exist.

diversiﬁed. Nevertheless,

extensive

The revolutionary use of ancient DNA makes it possible
to reliably uncover ancient admixture. It has evidenced that
the European populations of today are a result of a mixture
of three ancient populations related to Mesolithic Western
Hunter-Gatherers (WHG), Early European Farmers (EEF),
and steppe pastoralists (Yamnaya)/Ancient North Eurasians
(ANE) (Haak et al., 2015; Lazaridis et al., 2014; Mathieson
et al., 2015). Present European people have different
dosages of the ancestral populations: in the Baltic region,
WHG ancestry is stronger, and there is only 30% of EEF
ancestry. In Mediterranean populations the EEF ancestry is
90% (Lazaridis et al., 2014). The Yamnaya ancestry is
stronger in Northern than in Southern Europe (Haak et al.,
2015).

Gallego et al. (2015) have sequenced the DNA of a
4500-year-old Ethiopian hunter-gatherer. By comparing
this sequence with that of present-day Ethiopians and other
Africans, they found an indication of ancient migrations
from the Middle East to remote people such as the South
African Khoisans and Congo Pygmies.

All populations studied by Elhaik et al. (2014) within
the framework of the genographic project proved to be
admixed. The least admixed population was the Yoruba
from Nigeria. Puerto Rico and the Bermudas exhibited the
highest rate of admixture.

In the framework of the African Genome Variation
project, Gurdasani et al. (2015) characterized the dense
genotypes from 1481 individuals and whole-genome se-
quences from 320 individuals across sub-Saharan Africa.
They found complex, regionally distinct hunter-gatherer
and Eurasian admixture
sub-Saharan African
populations.

across

Hellenthal et al. (2014) have analyzed 1490 individuals
including 53 populations
from worldwide populations,
from the HGDP. Populations were typed with 474,491
autosomal SNPs. The authors found complex patterns of
admixture in most populations, and were able to corrobo-
rate historical events such as the Bantu expansion, the Arab
slave trade, and the Mongol empire.

The so-called Hispanic US census category is a set of
admixed populations, with European, Native American,
and African ancestries (Risch et al., 2002). The percentage

Human Population Variability and Its Adaptive Signiﬁcance Chapter | 6 93

of these ancestries varies among countries and populations.
In Colombia, the European contribution is stronger in the
Andean part of the country, while the African ancestry is
stronger on the coast (Cardona-Castro et al., 2015).

Lastly, the percentage of European ancestry in AFAs
generally ranges from 7% to 20% (González Burchard
et al., 2003).

Ancestry informative markers (AIM) make it possible to
evaluate the degree of admixture even at the individual
level (Sarich and Miele, 2004, Chapter 1).

Admixed populations are precious in elucidating the
genetic background of phenotypes, including pathological
traits, through the approach of admixture mapping (Leroi,
2005; see Chapter 10).

Toward Homogenization?
These multiple admixture events could lead to the belief
that humankind is on the way to thorough homogenization,
since human populations
are becoming increasingly
admixed (Dobzhansky, 1966; Mersha and Abebe, 2015).
However, this belief could prove to be only partially true.
Indeed, cultural obstacles (language, and most probably
racial prejudice) limit gene ﬂow among populations of
different ancestries living in sympatry. Since 2000, the US
census has abandoned the “one-drop rule” (people had to
attribute themselves to only one ancestry). People are
allowed to declare two or more ancestries. It is interesting
to note that 97.5% of people have declared that they belong
to only one race. If mixed marriages were random, the
result should have been 42% (Risch et al., 2002). The rate
of mixed marriages between European and AFAs in the
United States, according to the 2000 census, was 0.3% in
European Americans (EURAs) and 4% in AFAs (Ousley
et al., 2009). Data are not available for France, since ethnic
statistics are against the law in that country. Perhaps cul-
tural obstacles are not the only explanation for the rarity of
mixed marriages in the United States. A biological phe-
nomenon of homogamy might play a role. People tend to
marry to people who look like them to some extent. It is
rare to see very tall men who marry very short women and
the opposite is even rarer. Risch et al. (2009) evidenced
assortative mating in admixed Mexican and Puerto Rican
populations analyzed with 104 AIMs. Correlations were
not attributable to variation in socioeconomic status or
geographic heterogeneity. So the tendency to look for
partners of
something
biological.

ancestry could have

similar

Ancestry Informative Markers Versus
Self-Reported Ancestry
If one wants to identify the geographical origin of
individuals involved in a given study, two approaches are

possible: either a genetic identiﬁcation is performed by
using adequate markers or subjects are directly asked from
which geographical group they originate.

the individual

AIMs are variants whose frequency is very different
from one geographical population to another. The use of a
carefully selected set of AIMs makes it possible to reliably
identify populations of origin as well as degrees of
level. AIMs are not
admixture, even at
“tautological constructs” (Morning, 2014);
they are not
selected a priori
to ﬁt ethnic classiﬁcations. They are
selected a posteriori after natural groupings have been fully
conﬁrmed by randomly selected markers and blind,
unsupervised, working hypothesis-free approaches such as
with the STRUCTURE model. Lahn and Ebenstein (2009)
have noted that the attribution of any individual to one of
the major geographic groups was almost 100% reliable
with DNA markers. AIMs are very powerful
tools to
evaluate admixture rates in populations (Pfaff et al., 2001).
According to Sarich and Miele (2004), Chapter 1,
DNAPrint Genomics (ceased operations in 2009) used to
propose a kit of 73 AIMs able to evaluate the percentage of
admixture at the individual level. On 3000 blind assays,
there was no mistake. Galanter et al. (2012) have designed
AIM kits to evaluate contributions of African, European,
and Native American ancestries
in Latin America.
Admixture quantiﬁcation was reliable for 314, 194, and 88
AIMs, and less reliable with lower numbers. Admixture
patterns were variable in the same country, even in the
same region. This approach is crucial
for association
studies of medical traits (see Chapter 10). Parra et al. (2004)
measured the correlation between skin pigmentation
(estimated with a spectrometer) and level of admixture
in ﬁve populations of admixed
(estimated by AIMs)
ancestry. The authors stated that the correlation was quite
 3 in four
variable. However, it was constantly high (p < 10
populations out of ﬁve, the weakest p being 8  10
 3,
which still is quite signiﬁcant). The authors recommended
the use of AIMs as the most reliable means for evaluating
the degree of admixture.

In conclusion, AIMs are a method of choice to identify
the ancestry of a given individual, including in admixed
populations. However, their use remains costly and requires
a rather high level of expertise. Scientists may prefer to rely
on SRA. This is especially adequate in multiracial countries
such as the United States (and France), where a limited
number of populations with rather dissimilar ancestries live
in sympatry. People are offered to identify themselves
using the categories of the US census, and can declare
several ancestries (no use of the “one-drop rule,” which was
designed for red tape, not science). It is obvious that genetic
markers are preferable (Bustamante et al., 2011), especially
in the case of admixed populations such as Hispanics.
However the “poor man’s method” SRA is better than
nothing and is widely used in biomedical research. Risch

94 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

et al. (2002) consider it as a very reliable approach.
González Burchard et al. (2003) found a fair match between
the ﬁve continental groups identiﬁed by microsatellites and
SNPs on the one hand, and SRA on the other. Tang et al.
(2005) have compared the results obtained from genetic
clustering using 326 microsatellite markers and SRA in 15
localities in the United States and Taiwan. The rate of
erroneous attributions by SRA was 0.14% only. Although it
has been heavily criticized, especially by social scientists,
SRA is considered by many as a useful proxy for
biomedical research (Auton et al., 2009; Guha et al., 2012;
Li et al., 2008; Mountain and Risch, 2004; Need et al.,
2009; Nelson et al., 2012; Novembre et al., 2008;
Rosenberg et al., 2002; Shiao et al., 2012).

The Contribution of Ancient DNA: Archaic
Adaptative Introgression
The sequencing of ancient DNA is a fearsome technolog-
ical challenge (Pickrell and Reich, 2014). Although the
DNA molecule is extremely stable, old DNAs are
degraded. Climate conditions play an important role. Dry,
cold climates are favorable for preserving DNA. Moreover,
the risk of contamination by modern DNA is high. In spite
of these obstacles, advanced laboratories have been able to
gather impressive results in the recent years. The present
limit is  400,000 years (Pickrell and Reich, 2014).

As we have seen earlier (“All admixed”), ancient DNA
was able to elucidate several events of past admixture by
comparing DNA from ancient humans with that of
contemporary populations. Old debates have been reignited
by ancient DNA (Pickrell and Reich, 2014): (1) the origin
of the Basques and the Indo-Europeans; (see later in
this chapter); (2) “pots versus people”: are culture and
technology spread by cultural contacts only, or also by
physical migrations? (3) demographic stasis (present pop-
ulations descend directly from ancient populations) versus
rapid demographic changes. Against the demographic stasis
hypothesis the following cases can be cited: (a) ancient
DNA has revealed that Paleosiberians were closer
to
present-day Native Americans than to present-day Sibe-
rians; both modern Europeans and Native Americans may
have partly originated from an ancient North Eurasian
population;
(b) ancient, 4000-year-old inhabitants of
Greenland were closer to modern Siberians than to present-
day Greenlanders; (c) 5000-year-old Swedish populations
showed that Swedish hunter-gatherers of the time were
closer to present-day Northern Europeans, while Swedish
farmers were closer to modern southern Europeans; and
ﬁnally,
replacement/
admixture. The serial founder effect is a classic and popular
model for retracing human demography: small populations
invade a new, empty territory. They grow, then send out

founder effect versus

(4)

serial

new, small groups of emigrants, and so on (Prugnolle et al.,
2005). Ancient DNA data seem to favor the replacement/
admixture model most (Pickrell and Reich, 2014). The
analysis of ancient DNA can yield direct evidence for
recent selection, provided that local populations have not
been replaced (Wilde et al., 2014; see below:
recent
evolution).

The analysis of archaic humans’ DNA somewhat
revolutionized our view on human evolution. Archaic
adaptive introgression (AAI; the capture of adaptive ge-
netic variants by modern humans from archaic cousins
through occasional crossbreeding) may have provided
moderns with many favorable traits, not only for climatic
adaptation and resistance to pathogens, but also possibly
cognitive properties. This would partly explain the “cre-
ative explosion” of the upper Paleolithic in Europe and
Asia (Cochran and Harpending, 2009, Chapter 2 and
conclusion). Of course this audacious hypothesis about the
capture of cognitive traits remains speculative. However,
clear indications of AAI for other traits are available. The
contribution of archaic genomes to present-day humans
would be 1.2e4% Neanderthal in European, Asian, and
Native American populations; 3e6% Denisovan in native
populations of Papua New Guinea, Australia, and
Melanesia; and 0.2% Denisovan in Asian populations
(Alves et al., 2012; Novembre and Ramachandran, 2011;
Racimo et al., 2015; Stoneking and Krause, 2011).
Modern Africans do not show (yet?) any Neanderthal
or Denisovan introgression. Apart from introgressions
favoring defense against pathogens (see Chapter 10), AAI
has been evidenced for: (1) brain genes (see “Brain
Genes” in this chapter) and (2) the adaptation of Tibetans
to altitude (see “Mountaineers” in this chapter). According
to Racimo et al. (2015), AAI is a rich reservoir of new
genetic diversity, providing a considerable source of
adaptation to new environments. The knowledge of new
sequences from archaic humans could help understand the
genetic background of phenotypic differences among
human populations.

Abundant indication of AAI refutes the hypothesis that
Neanderthals did not interbreed with our ancestors (Currat
and Escofﬁer, 2004; Jordan, 2008, Chapter 2).

Old Debates Revisited: Basques,
Indo-Europeans, and Jews
Modern population genetics tools and ancient DNA allow
us to revisit long-standing historical and linguistic debates
dealing with the origin of present and past populations.
Many populations have been reexamined this way. We will
focus on Basques, Indo-Europeans, and Jews.

Present-day Basques live in Northwest Spain and
Southwest France. They are a proud people who feel very

Human Population Variability and Its Adaptive Signiﬁcance Chapter | 6 95

different from their Spanish and French neighbors. They
call their country “Euzkadi” in their mysterious language,
which does not have an Indo-European origin and is
distinct from Spanish and French. They claim that they
have a very ancient, common origin. Ancient DNA has
recently shed some light on this enigma (Günther et al.,
2015). The study dealt with eight individuals from the El
Portalón cave in Spain. The age of the individuals ranged
from  5500 to  3500 years (from the Chalcolithic to the
Bronze era). They have been compared with various
present European populations. Unlike other Iberian pop-
ulations, present-day Basques showed little or no admixture
from North Africa and Caucasus/Central Asia and were the
closest populations to the eight cavemen. Modern Basques,
therefore, are hypothesized to be the direct descendants of
early Iberian farmers, and their language, which has no
proven relationships with any other language, could be a
retention of the preagricultural linguistic diversity in that
region.

The cradle of the Indo-European languages is another
long recognized close
old enigma. Linguists have
relationships between most European languages (except
Basque and Finno-Hungarian languages), and Indo-Iranian
languages. The ﬁrst debate questions the explanation of this
kinship: pots or people (see earlier)? Spread mostly by
cultural contacts (Demoule, 2014) or by migrations? If the
migration hypothesis is retained, what was the geographical
origin of
the proto-Indo-Europeans? Two places were
candidates: Anatolia and the Russian steppes. Ancient
DNA has provided new information to the debate (Haak
et al., 2015). Ninety-four ancient Europeans were compared
to 2345 present-day individuals within 203 populations.
About 400,000 SNPs were used. Modern Europeans are
believed to originate from two major migrations: (1) from
the Middle East during the early Neolithic era and (2) from
the Yamnaya steppe during the recent Neolithic era. This
study therefore favors migration rather
than cultural
contacts only (people rather than pots), and supports the
steppe hypothesis rather than the Anatolia hypothesis.
However, it does not explain the origin of Indo-Iranian and
Southeastern European languages.

The origin of modern Jews has long been discussed.
Data from high-resolution genetic markers show that
modern Jews share common polymorphisms that help to
identify them at the population and, to a certain extent, at
the individual level (Cochran et al., 2006; Cochran and
Harpending, 2009, Chapter 7; Guha et al., 2012; Need
et al., 2009; Novembre and Ramachandran, 2011; Ostrer
and Skorecki, 2013). Guha et al. (2012) have focused on
Ashkenazi Jews (AJs), who are assumed to be of recent
origin (about 1000 years). They characterized 1394 AJs
from Israel with 95,600 SNPs (a relatively low number
compared to other studies based on up to 1 million SNPs;
López Herráez et al., 2009). AJs were compared with

populations from Europe, the Middle East, and Central/
South Asia. The ADMIXTURE analysis clearly differen-
tiated AJs from the other populations under study. PCA
showed that AJs occupied a position between Europe and
the Middle East, but with a speciﬁc dimension, orthogonal
to the two other populations. The authors insisted on the
value of AJ population genetics for disease gene mapping
(see Chapter 10). Need et al. (2009) considered a random
sample of 611 unrelated self-described Caucasian subjects
mostly residing in America. The subjects reported them-
selves whether they were of Jewish ancestry and if so, how
many Jewish grandparents they had. Individuals reporting
four Jewish grandparents were categorized as full Jewish
ancestry (FJA). Most people of Jewish ancestry were AJs.
No less than 550,000 SNPs were used. Relationships
among populations were visualized using PCA. FJA sub-
jects were clearly separated from non-Jewish individuals.
As expected, subjects with one to three Jewish grandparents
showed intermediary positions on the PCA representation.
On a PCA representation of all the populations studied,
Jewish subjects were intermediary between European and
Middle Eastern populations. These studies suggest
that
present-day Jews have kept a notable component of their
original Middle Eastern ancestry.

Out-of-Africa and That’s It? Not So Simple
We now clearly see the main features of population
structure of modern humans at the world level. The dogma
for many years has been that this population structure was
the result of the so-called OOA hypothesis (Stringer and
Andrews, 1988): non-African populations are reportedly
the outcome of migrations
from East Africa some
100,000 yeas ago, and modern humans would have entirely
replaced local archaic hominids. However, little by little, a
more complex picture is emerging.

First of all, the OOA ancestry of modern humans some
100,000 years ago (as evaluated by Templeton, 2012; this
would instead be  130,000 years) has not been the
only one. Homo erectus went OOA about 1.3e1.7 million
years ago and spread throughout the world (Cavalli Sforza
and Feldman, 2003; Templeton, 2012), as far as the Island
of Java (the Pithecanthropus) and China (the Sinan-
thropus). Then the Acheulean expansion took place some
650,000 years ago (Templeton, 2012).

Moreover, we have seen above that some interbreeding
took place between modern humans and their archaic
cousins, which seems to have been crucial for the adapta-
tions of OOA emigrants to new environments. The
replacement
therefore has not been 100% (Templeton,
2012). This is why the OOA has been considered “over-
simpliﬁed” (Vasseur and Quintana-Murci, 2013). At least
two admixture processes have occurred, with Neanderthals
(all non-African populations) and with Denisovans (mainly

96 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

Oceanian populations) (Alves et al., 2012; Racimo et al.,
2015; Stoneking and Krause, 2011). Taking these archaic
admixtures into account is very relevant for population
genetic analyses. Not doing so leads to overestimating
population size and the antiquity of most recent common
ancestors. If admixtures are better known, migration pat-
terns will be better evidenced (Alves et al., 2012).

of

human

The multiregional model

evolution
(Weidenreich, 1946) proposed a unique OOA some 1.9
million years ago,
followed by continuous gene ﬂow
among geographically separate populations. Coon (1962)
has proposed the candelabra model, in which, following an
ancient OOA, different H. erectus populations would have
separately reached the Homo sapiens stage without genetic
exchange among them, and would thus be at the origin of
major races. Lastly, the OOA replacement model with no
archaic admixture was classically the accepted model
(Stringer and Andrews, 1988). Nested-clade analysis,
which uses information extracted from haplotypes, shows
that gene ﬂow has played and continues to play an
important role in human evolution, resulting in all modern
humans
evolutionary lineage.
Moreover, this approach makes it possible to reject the
multiregional and candelabra models, and to conﬁrm
archaic interbreeding (Templeton, 2012).

representing a

single

The present

state-of-the art on OOA might be
profoundly modiﬁed in the near future by more reﬁned
population genetics analyses taking more into account the
variability of rare and low-frequency variants, which will
give a better estimate of recent and present gene ﬂow in
human populations. The analysis of more ancient DNA
samples could also reveal unexpected archaic admixtures,
such as between Neanderthals and Denisovans (Gibbons,
2015), or maybe between different H. erectus populations,
or between H. erectus and Neanderthals, Denisovans, or
H. sapiens. It should be recalled that AAI seems to play a
major role in human evolution and adaptation. In science,
especially in human evolution, never say “it didn’t
happen” but rather “it has not been evidenced until now.”
The discovery of Homo ﬂoresiensis (the “Hobbit”) in
2003 (Morwood and van Oosterzee, 2007) shows that
prehistoric science can still be upset by new discoveries.
Fossil DNA is a fantastic tool. However, (1) until now,
few individuals have been conveniently analyzed; (2)
fossils are rare and are by no means random samplings of
ancient
times. The French prehistorian Father Henri
Breuil used to say: “the cradle of mankind is a cradle on
wheels.”

The present-day advances

in human population
structure might be still much reﬁned. However, it is quite
unlikely that the main features will be upset, namely: (1) at
least when common historical variants are considered, the
genetic diversity within geographical populations is far
greater than that between populations; (2) major continental

groupings can be evidenced by both phylogenetic and
nonphylogenetic (unsupervised, working-hypothesis free)
approaches; (3) when enough markers (for example: up to
0.5e1 million SNPs) are used, a highly stratiﬁed, Russian
doll structure is visible within major continental groupings,
at an extremely reduced geographical scale; (4) thorough
admixture, but not homogenization, can be evidenced in
most present populations. When recent admixture is
considered (AFAs, Hispanics), the degree of admixture of
populations and individuals can be evaluated by AIMs;
(5) AIMs can trace the ancestry of any individual; (6) SRA
can be a useful ersatz to identify the ancestry of subjects in
multiracial societies.

We now have handy the reliable population genetic
framework on which it will be possible to map adaptive,
selected genetic, and phenotypic traits
(phylogenetic
character mapping or PCM; Avise, 2004). Let us now
consider some features that are highly relevant for the study
of human adaptation.

RARITY MATTERS: RARE VARIANTS AND
LOW FREQUENCY VARIANTS
Human population genetics has long relied on common
variants, more speciﬁcally, neutral, historical markers. CVs
tend to be shared among geographical populations, and only
some frequency differences make it possible to evidence
continental groupings. When phenotypes, and more specif-
ically, disease risks, are considered, the common disease/CV
hypothesis states that disease susceptibility was caused by the
cumulative action of CVs whose individual penetrance was
weak (Keita et al., 2004; see Chapter 10). The massive use of
whole genome sequencing, DNA microarrays, and high-
resolution markers (for example: up to 1 million SNPs) has
upset our view on human genetic variation. CVs are generally
deﬁned as having a minor allele frequency (MAF) of 5%.
Low-frequency variants (LFVs) have an MAF ranging from
0.5% to 5% (Goldilocks variants). Rare variants (RV) are
below 0.5% (Mersha and Abebe, 2015; Nelson et al., 2012).
We speak here about sequence variants. SV will be discussed
later. The contribution of RVs and LFVs to relevant traits
remains largely unexplored (The UK10K Consortium,
2015).

Crucial features of LFVs and RVs are that they tend to
(1) have originated recently, and (2) be localized, and
hence population-speciﬁc, proportionally to their rarity
(Bustamante et al., 2011). Even if the Fst calculated
from CVs is low, LFVs and RVs are able to reliably
separate major
including
AFAs, East Asia, Europe, the Americas, including admixed
populations). Seventeen percent of LFVs are speciﬁc of
only one ancestral group. For RVs,
the ﬁgure is 53%
(The 1000 Genomes Project Consortium, 2012). In a
survey dealing with 2054 individuals from 26 geographical

continental groups

(Africa

Human Population Variability and Its Adaptive Signiﬁcance Chapter | 6 97

populations
from Africa, Southeast and South Asia,
Europe, and the Americas, analyzed by microarrays and
deep sequencing, 88 million variants were evidenced. Most
of the variants were rare: 64 million autosomal SNPs were
RVs. Only 8 million were CVs. Eighty-six percent of the
variants were speciﬁc of only one continental group (The
1000 Genomes Project Consortium, 2015).

Another

speciﬁcity of RVs and LFVs, precisely
because they are rare, is that they are most often missed by
microarrays
and Genome-Wide Association Studies
(GWAS). Whole genome sequencing is the best approach
to detect RVs and LFVs (Novembre et al., 2008; Rowell
et al., 2012).

Lastly, the proportion of deleterious alleles is higher in

RVs than in CVs (Henn et al., 2015).

When protein-coding variants are considered, the vast
them are rare, and indeed enriched with
majority of
deleterious alleles. These rare protein-coding variants are
probably highly relevant for the study of phenotypes and
diseases
(Belizário, 2013). According to Casals and
Bertranpetit (2012), the demographic explosion linked to
the advent of agriculture 10,000 years ago, has yielded a
vast excess of RVs compared to the expectations of
classical population genetics, many of them being possibly
deleterious. This would be due to the impossibility of
natural selection to eliminate the deleterious mutations in
too short a time, and could affect the ﬁtness of future
generations. The authors have estimated that 70e90% of
RVs were continent-speciﬁc, while 20e30% were speciﬁc
of populations within continents.

Fu et al. (2013) studied 4298 EURAs and 2217 AFAs
by resequencing 15,336 genes. In agreement with the
hypothesis postulated by Casals and Bertranpetit (2012),
they have inferred a huge excess of rare variants. By
coalescence simulations, the authors have estimated that
86.4% of the single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) had arisen
in the past 5000 years (91.2% and 77.0% for EURAs and
AFAs, respectively). This recent demographic explosion
would have resulted in a deluge of
rare functionally
important variation, with a larger burden of Mendelian
disorders, but also a new reservoir of advantageous alleles
(Hawks et al., 2007).

Tennessen et al. (2012) performed exome sequencing
on 1351 EURAs and 1088 AFAs identiﬁed by AIMs. They
have found 86% of RVs, of which 82% were unknown, and
52% were restricted to either EURAs or AFAs. According
to the authors, RVs and LFVs would explain the heritability
of common complex diseases (see Chapter 10), while CVs
would be responsible for only a modest fraction of the
heritability of most phenotypic traits. In agreement with the
results by Casals and Bertranpetit (2012) and Fu et al.
(2013), the authors have found a great excess of RVs,
suggesting
about
5000 years ago. The vast majority of the coding variation

demographic

explosion

a

recent

appears to be recent, rare, and enriched with deleterious
alleles. These features are most relevant for phenotypic
variation and disease susceptibility. Since most RVs are
population-speciﬁc, association studies among different
populations are challenging.

In summary, LFVs, and even more, RVs, tend to be
population-speciﬁc and of recent origin, as a result of a
recent demographic explosion. They seem to play a much
greater role than CVs in phenotypic and disease suscepti-
bility diversity.

COPY NUMBER MATTERS: STRUCTURAL
VARIATION
One major discovery of modern genomics has been to
show that human populations exhibit a high variability of
structural variantsdthat is to say, segments of the genome
that have one,
two, or more copies, or have different
orientations among individuals and populations. Accord-
ing to Conrad and Hurles (2007), all of population ge-
netics science should be revisited in light of SV. The
database of genomic variants (http://dgv.tcag.ca/dgv/app/
hom) has cataloged more than 100,000 CNVs (Belizário,
2013).

(2)

SV is observed in healthy individuals (Conrad and
Hurles, 2007; Lander, 2011). It comprises: (1) CNVs,
which can be diallelic or multiallelic, and involve deletions
and duplications;
inversions and balanced trans-
locations. The former changes the DNA dosage, the latter
do not. SV ranges from 1 kilobase (kb) to more than
3 megabases (Mb) (Conrad and Hurles, 2007). CNVs are
considered to play a more important role in phenotypic
variation and human adaptation than SNVs (Belizário,
2013; Fu and Akey, 2013; Gonzaga-Jauregui et al., 2012;
Vasseur and Quintana-Murci, 2013), and “SVs seem to
have a disproportionate impact on gene expression relative
to their number” (Sudmant et al., 2015b). SV affects more
base pair (bp) polymorphisms than do SNPs outside SV
(Sudmant et al., 2015b). According to Sudmant et al.
(2015a), 7.01% of the human genome is variable because
of CNVs, while SNVs are the cause of 1.1% of this vari-
ability only. About 2100e2500 SVs affect 20 million
nucleotide bp (The 1000 Genomes Project Consortium,
2015).

SVs are observed in healthy subjects. However, they are

involved in various pathologies (see Chapter 10).

Lastly, as we have already shown (see “A Mankind
Population Genetics Framework for Applied Research”),
SV varies among populations and corroborates continen-
tal groupings evidenced by microsatellites, SNPs, and
other genetic markers (Jakobsson et al., 2008; Sudmant
et al., 2010). As is the case for genic RVs, rare SVs tend
to be speciﬁc of continental groupings (Sudmant et al.,
2015b)

98 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

NOT ONLY GENES: REGULATION IS A
MAJOR ACTOR
Gene regulation is considered to have a major role in
evolution. King and Wilson (1975) have hypothesized that
biological differences between humans and chimpanzees
were better explained by regulatory mutations than by
sequence differences. Indeed, the sequences of the two
species present a high similarity (98.77%; Chimpanzee
Sequencing and Analysis Consortium, 2005). This
hypothesis has been recently supported by Fu and Akey
(2013), who have stated that differences in gene expression
between humans and chimpanzees were considerable,
particularly at the level of the brain.

(2007),

(2013), Lander

Belizário (2013) has underlined the relevance of
studies dealing with delineation of genome-wide DNA
methylation patterns (epigenome) and full characterization
of coding and noncoding RNAs (transcriptome), together
with classical genome sequencing approaches, to better
elucidate the mechanisms of phenotype and disease risk
diversity. The author has noted that 90% of the SNPs
associated with human phenotypes are not
in protein-
coding regions. According to Enard et al. (2015), Fraser
(2013), Grossman et al.
(2011), and
Stranger et al.
regulatory changes and gene
expression have been more important than amino acid
substitutions in the evolution and local adaptation of hu-
man populations. Fu and Akey (2013) have proposed that
regulatory, soft, polygenic, epistatic adaptation was more
important than hard adaptive events (“hard sweeps”: see
“Abundant Indications for Recent and Geographically
Differentiated Evolution”), in human evolution, a view
shared by Karlsson et al. (2014). Spielman et al. (2007)
compared gene expression of transformed lymphoblastic
cells in three populations of the HapMap project: 60 CEU
(EURAs), 41 Han Chinese (CHB), 41 Japanese (JPT), and
24 Han Chinese from Los Angeles (CHLA). Differences
 5
were highly signiﬁcant at a statistical level of p < 10
between groups of European versus Asian ancestry. Dif-
ferences involved 1097 out of 4197 genes. The highest
difference was for the UGT2B17 gene (which codes for an
enzyme), ie, expression in the CEU group was 22 times
higher than in the CHB þ JPT samples. Heyn et al. (2013)
have analyzed whole genome DNA methylation proﬁles
of b-lymphocyte cells in 96 AFAs, 96 EURAs, and 96
Asian Americans (ASAs; Han Chinese). They found that
DNA methylation proﬁles clearly separated the three
populations (Fig. 6.5).

One-third of the DNA methylation variation was not
related to any genetic modiﬁcations: variation in
population-speciﬁc sites would be explained by both the
genetic and epigenetic modiﬁcations, underlining the
relevance of epigenetic activity in human variation. The

results suggested a regulatory network that contributes to
the variance observed between populations. Martin
et al. (2014) have sequenced the genomes, exomes, and
transcriptomes of EpsteineBarr virus transformed lym-
phoblastoid cell
lines derived from 45 individuals of
diversiﬁed geographical origins (HGDP; Namibian San,
Mbuti Pygmies of Congo, Mozabites, Pathan of Pakistan,
Cambodians, Yakut, and Mayans of Mexico). They found
that about 25% of the variation in gene expression could
be attributed to population differences. However, few
genes were systematically differentially expressed among
populations. Lastly, Sudmant et al. (2015b) have noted
that SV seemed to have “a disproportionate impact on
gene expression relative to their number.”

The data above show that (1) gene regulation is probably
more important than amino acid changes in human evolution
and adaptation. Consequently, whole exome sequencing,
which concerns only the coding part of the genome, is not
relevant to capture this key feature of human adaptation
(Manry and Quintana-Murci, 2013). (2) Populations of
different geographical origins exhibit different patterns of
gene regulation, probably related to local adaptation and
different selective pressures.

WHAT ABOUT PHENOTYPIC
GEOGRAPHICAL VARIATION?
We have shown in this chapter that
there is a clear
association between: (1) diversity of genes, gene regula-
tion, and SV on one hand and (2) geographic origin on the
other hand. What about phenotypic variation? Everyday
experience suggests that to a large extent it is possible to
guess the geographic origin of individuals according to
their external aspect. This is largely due to the fact that
phenotypic traits are not independent of each other, but
show clear correlations. People of African ancestry not
only have darker skin than Europeans but they also never
have blue eyes. Blue eyes are more frequent in blond
individuals. Slanting (never blue) eyes in people of Asian
ancestry are generally associated with dark, thick, coarse
hair. But everyday experience is not enough for scientiﬁc
conclusions. What about data?

According to Relethford (2009), the heritability of skin
color is 0.66. Harpending (2002) noted that the Fst (which
shows the differences between populations) applied to skin
color ranged from 0.60 to 0.90, a far higher ﬁgure than the
Fst inferred from common genetic variation (0.05e0.15).
Relethford (2009) found Fst ¼ 0.88 for skin color between
the ﬁve main geographical regions and noted that there
were no major discontinuities in skin darkness among
human populations. Both strong Fst and progressive vari-
ations are hardly astonishing: color reﬂects climatic adap-
tation (Relethford, 2009) and is correlated with UV

Human Population Variability and Its Adaptive Signiﬁcance Chapter | 6 99

FIGURE 6.5 DNA methylation (involved in gene regulation) separates African-American (AF, brown), Caucasian-American (CA, pink), and Han
Chinese-American (AS, yellow) individuals. (A) Hierarchical clustering of 439 differentially methylated DNA sites separating the three populations using
absolute DNA methylation levels (low: green; high: red). (B) Multiscale bootstrap resampling (n ¼ 10,000) of the 439 DNA sites signiﬁcantly differ-
entially methylated between African, Asian, and Caucasian individuals. The three populations cluster separately and consistently with prior genetically
deﬁned proximities. (C) Principal component analysis (PCA) of the differentially methylated DNA sites. (D) ADMIXTURE analysis of these patterns of
differential methylation. Each individual is represented by a vertical line, with the lengths corresponding to the ancestry coefﬁcients in up to three inferred
ancestral groups (Heyn et al., 2013).

radiation (although Harpending (2002) proposed that
sexual selection plays a role as well). Let us recall here that
Parra et al. (2004) have found a signiﬁcant correlation
between skin color and admixture level evaluated by AIMs,
which shows that
this phenotype is related to general
genetic polymorphism, since AIMs have no role in skin
color.

ie, “races”) was 10 times stronger

Sarich and Miele (2004; the race affair) emphasized that
morphological variation (skull and face among continental
populations,
than
between genders in the same continental group, and higher
than the morphological differences between chimpanzees
and bonobos, two different species of apes. Unfortunately,
their book lacks precise scientiﬁc references.

More reliable data come from tooth and skull studies.
Edgar (2009) has compared dental morphology (assumed to

that biological distances

and Eastern Europeans were

be neutral and heritable) in 1445 subjects (EURAs and
AFAs) and their ancestors
since the 17th century.
According to the author, Europeans of different origins
(west, south, east) were fairly admixed (in spite of the fact
that Southern
long
discriminated against in the United States), while admixture
obtained much less between EURAs and AFAs. This study
shows
inferred from dental
morphology can distinguish Europeans from different
origins, and EURAs from AFAs. Moreover, it suggests that
cultural obstacles still limit interbreeding between EURAs
and AFAs today, although biological homogamy could
play a role too (see “Toward Homogenization?”). Studying
4666 male skulls from various populations, plus a more
limited sample of female skulls, Manica et al. (2007) found
that the loss of genetic diversity having followed the OOA

100 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

was correlated with a loss of phenotypic diversity (after
correction for the climatic impact).

Ousley et al. (2009) noted that craniometric variation
worldwide showed strong geographic patterning, but also
differences among populations from the same continent.
Their results show that
individuals can be accurately
classiﬁed into geographic origin using skull measurements,
although different groups overlap. When the number of
measurements increased, the discrimination was clariﬁed,
which shows that different traits are correlated: this calls
for multivariate methods. Multivariate analysis conﬁrmed
that AFAs and EURAs could be distinguished by
craniometrics.

Relethfod (2009) conﬁrmed that craniometric data
were able to assign individuals to their geographic origin.
A cluster analysis built from the craniometric distance
matrix showed a clear
separation between the six
geographic regions covered by the sample (Polynesia,
Australasia, East Asia,
and
sub-Saharan Africa). This pattern is similar to the one
observed with genetic markers (see Figs 6.1e6.4) and with
gene regulation diversity (Fig. 6.5). However, the author
observed that this collection was not randomly sampled and
was based on regions far away from each other. Moreover,
like Ousley et al. (2009), Relethford (2009) has found that
craniometric measures exhibited an overlap between
different geographical populations.

the Americas, Europe,

a

role

than

stronger

environment

Two classical morphometric studies have been revisited
using modern statistical
tools. Sparks and Jantz (2002)
reexamined an important part of the skulls studied by Boas
(1912) with modern statistics. They claimed that the main
hypothesis by Boas (that cranial morphology variation is
weakly heritable and mostly explainable by environmental
parameters) was wrong. According to the authors, genetics
plays
in skull
morphology. Moreover, they have observed that cranial
morphology of AFAs and EURAs evolved, but did not
converge, which would be expected if environment had a
major impact. Another revisited classical study dealt with
the results produced by Morton (1849) on cranial com-
parisons between AFAs and EURAs. These results had
been severely criticized by Gould (1981). However, Lewis
et al. (2011) have reexamined both studies and have
directly remeasured almost 50% of the approximately 1000
skulls studied by Morton (while Gould had only checked
Morton’s measurements). Lewis et al.’s conclusion was that
only 2% of the results by Morton were wrong, and there-
fore, that Gould’s criticism was not justiﬁed. AFAs and
EURAs did show signiﬁcant differences in cranial mea-
surements, which conﬁrm the results by Sparks and Jantz
(2002).

In summary, skin color as well as dental and cranial
morphology are heritable and exhibit strong geographical
diversity. Skin color and cranial morphology do not show

discrete variation, but rather change progressively among
populations. Both dental and cranial morphology can be
used to reliably identify the geographical origin of the in-
dividuals under study, as do genetic markers.

ABUNDANT INDICATIONS FOR RECENT
AND GEOGRAPHICALLY
DIFFERENTIATED EVOLUTION
Two recent books of scientiﬁc popularization (Cochran
and Harpending, 2009; Wade, 2014) have supported
roughly the same hypothesis: that evolution has not stopped
with the advent of modern humans 40,000e50,000 years
ago, as was widely believed (Mayr, 1963; Lawler, 1978;
Gould, 2000), but on the contrary,
it (1) sped up in
non-African populations through admixture with archaic
humans; (2) exploded with the Neolithic revolution and the
advent of agriculture; and (3) was abundant, local, and
geographically diversiﬁed (Hawk et al., 2007). Cochran
and Harpending (2009), Chapter 1 hypothesized that
present-day humans have very different minds and bodies
from those of people only a few 1000 years ago. Differently
from Sarich and Miele (2004), the books by Cochran and
Harpending and by Wade cite abundant sources of refer-
ences. Some of the hypotheses proposed by these authors,
in particular those dealing with cognitive evolution, and
correlations between genetically driven cognition and the
economic
remain speculative.
However, many of the data they present are corroborated by
recent scientiﬁc studies. Lahn and Ebenstein (2009) and
Stearns et al. (2010) share the view that human evolution
has not stopped and still is going on.

success of

societies,

As a start, it should be noted that evolution and natural
selection are obviously operating in the present before our
very eyes if we consider transmissible diseases (Tibayrenc,
2004, 2007a,b). One example among many others, Malaria,
kills an incredible number of infants every year, especially
in sub-Saharan Africa. It would be unexpected that natural
selection did not favor the genetic background of the
survivors. This point will be developed in Chapter 10.

A few reminders will help understand this part on
selection/adaptation. Evolutionists distinguish several types
of selection. (1) Purging selection is the most common
mode of selection, and concerns the elimination of delete-
rious alleles. If alleles are only mildly deleterious, their
elimination can take a long time. In this case, many alleles
will exhibit intermediary frequencies, because they are on
the way to being eliminated and the process continues.
(2) Darwinian ¼ directional ¼ positive selection deals with
the selection of favorable alleles that augment the ﬁtness of
the organism. Again, if the allele is only slightly favorable,
its ﬁxation (frequency ¼ 1) will be slow, and mildly
favorable
intermediary
(3) Balanced selection occurs when the
frequencies.

alleles will

exhibit

often

Human Population Variability and Its Adaptive Signiﬁcance Chapter | 6 101

advantage of the allele is frequency-dependent, or when the
heterozygous state is favored, while the homozygous states
are not. Sickle cell anemia is a classical case of balanced
selection. Heterozygous individuals are protected against
malaria, while subjects who are homozygous for the sickle
cell anemia trait undergo a high mortality rate (see Chapter
10). In principle, adequate statistics dealing with genomic
patterns can distinguish between the different kinds of
selection, and their respective strength (Cavalli-Sforza and
Feldman, 2003; Colonna et al., 2014; Enard et al., 2015; Fu
and Akey, 2013; Fumagalli et al., 2015; Lachance and
Tishkoff, 2013; Pritchard et al., 2009; Shriver et al., 2004;
Tennessen and Akey, 2011; Vasseur and Quintana-Murci,
2013). Lastly, it is important to emphasize the fact that
selection acts on global phenotypes rather than directly on
genotypes (Stearns et al., 2010).

“Selective sweeps” designate the changes of allele
frequencies due to selection events. The most classical kind
is the “hard sweep,” in which strong selection drives new
mutations quickly to ﬁxation in given populations. “Soft
sweeps” use existing (standing) variation and select alleles
that are moderately favorable, or alleles that are roughly
equally favorable at the same locus. The genomic signature
of hard sweeps is much stronger than that of soft sweeps
(Pritchard et al., 2009). Convergent evidence suggests that
recent human adaptation relies little on hard sweeps and
much more on soft sweeps of multiple genes, regulatory,
and epistatic phenomena (Alves et al., 2012; Daub et al.,
2013; Fu and Akey, 2013; Karlsson et al., 2014; Tennessen
and Akey, 2011; Wade, 2014, Chapter 1). Soft selection
operates on standing variation and is therefore comparable
to artiﬁcial selection on domesticated plants and animals.
Everything that has been said above on RVs/LFVs, rare
CNVs, and geographically localized genetic regulation is
highly relevant to human recent evolution. As stated above,
RVs/LFVs tend to be restricted to geographical groups,
including at a small scale. Moreover, they are considered to
play a major role (greater than that of CVs) in phenotypic
diversity, adaptation, and disease risk, as do CNVs and
regulatory mechanisms. Some remarkable examples of
recent adaptation will be exposed in the next sections.

Mountaineers
Some human groups live at high altitudes; this is the case
for Tibetans, Native Americans of the Altiplano in Andean
countries (Aymaras), and the Ethiopians of the Highlands.
The three groups show a remarkable adaptation to altitude,
although through different mechanisms. The oxygen satu-
ration proﬁle of Ethiopian highlanders is different from that
of Aymaras and Tibetans (Lachance and Tishkoff, 2013).
Tibetans exhibit speciﬁc mutations in the EPAS1 gene that
are associated with hypoxia, and are reported to come from
a Denisovan archaic introgression (Racimo et al., 2015).

According to Fu and Akey (2013), EPAS1 patterns in
Tibetans corresponds to a hard sweep. The frequency dif-
ference with Han Chinese is considerable. Aymaras do not
have EPAS1 mutations but they do have selection signals
related to altitude in the PRKAA1 and NOS2A genes, which
Tibetans do not have. Both Tibetans and Aymaras have
altitude-related selection signals in the EGLN1 gene (Vas-
seur and Quintana-Murci, 2013). Aymaras have a striking
morphological and physiological adaptation to altitude. I
know these people well, having spent more than 7 years in
Bolivia. They have a barrel-shaped chest allowing a greater
respiratory capacity, and show physiological polyglobulia
(see Fig. 6.6). Long-term studies of the Bolivian Institute of
Altitude Physiology (Instituto Boliviano de Biologica de
Altura, IBBA; http://saludpublica.bvsp.org.bo/ibba/), sup-
ported by French cooperation, have shown that the adap-
tation to altitude was optimal for Aymaras, who are the
most anciently established people on the Altiplano. Adap-
tation is less good for Quechuas, who are the descendants
of the Incas, and have been there for a few 100 years only.
(The few) Bolivians of European ancestry exhibit the worst
adaptation to altitude. Even individuals born in La Paz may
suffer from pathological polyglobulia and may have to live
in the lowlands. Admixed people (the case of many Boli-
vians) are halfway between people of European ancestry
and Native American Bolivians.

White-Skinned, Blue-Eyed
A classical explanation for light skin adaptive value is the
necessity to absorb more UV and synthesize more
pro-vitamin D in climates with low UV radiation (Cochran
and Harpending,
and
Quintana-Murci, 2013). According to Wilde et al. (2014),
Neolithic diet changes would have played an indirect

2009, Chapter

3; Vasseur

FIGURE 6.6 This Aymara woman and her child show typical “Altiplano
faces” with red cheeks, indicating a physiological polyglobulia. This is an
adaptation to the low oxygen level that exists at 4000 m.

102 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

4).

It

is

skin.

In Europe,

present

in particular

2009, Chapter

selective role. Preagricultural societies enjoyed a meat and
ﬁsh, vitamin Derich diet,
through the
consumption of ﬁsh livers. The agricultural diet was far less
vitamin D rich, and therefore led to a selective pressure for
light
the SLC24A5 and SLC45A2
variants are considered to be responsible for light skin
(Cochran and Harpending, 2009, Chapter 1; Colonna et al.,
2014; Lachance and Tishkoff, 2013). The SLC24A5 variant
has a strong selective advantage.
It seems to have
spread throughout Europe in 5800 years (Cochran and
Harpending,
in
approximately 100% of Europeans, and is nearly absent in
people of African and East Asian ancestry (Lahn and
Ebenstein, 2009). The SLC24A2 and SLC24A5 variants are
not the only ones involved in light skinning. Analyzing
ancient DNA from Ukrainian individuals of early Neolithic
and Bronze Age eras, and by comparing them with that of
modern Ukrainians, Wilde et al. (2014) have found direct
evidence for selection, not only for SLC24A2, but also for
two other genes involved in pigmentation pathways,
namely HERC2 and TYR. An SNP in the BNC2 gene is
associated with skin pigmentation and freckling in
Europeans, in whom a Neanderthal archaic variant of this
gene has a frequency of 0.70, while it is absent in Asia and
Africa (Racimo et al., 2015). According to Novembre and
Han (2012), comparable selective pressure (low UV
radiation) has led to different genetic responses leading to
light skin in different geographical areas, therefore consti-
tuting a case of convergent evolution (Cochran and
Harpending, 2009, Chapter 4; Jablonski and Chaplin, 2012;
Wade, 2014, Chapter 4). The MC1R variant responsible for
light skin is found in East Eurasia and the Americas
only, while the SLC24A5 variant is restricted to Western
Eurasia, namely Europe, the Middle East, and Central Asia
(Pickrell et al., 2009), and the KITLG variant is observed
throughout Eurasia and the Americas (Novembre and Han,
2012). An ABCA12 variant is reported to be involved in
adaptation to low UV radiation as well. Its derived allele
frequency is 0.96 in Asia, 0.91 in Europe, and 0.13 in
Africa (Colonna et al., 2014). OCA2, MYO5A, DTNBP1,
and TYRP1 are four genes involved in skin pigmentation.
They show clear evidence of selection in Europeans
(Voight et al., 2006). OCA2 and TYRP1 both show very
different frequencies between Europe and Central Asia
(Pickrell et al., 2009).

Some genetic backgrounds that could play a role in skin
color still have to be identiﬁed; Grossman et al. (2013) have
uncovered various genes involved in biological pathways,
including skin pigmentation, thought to have undergone
recent selection. Quantitative trait
loci (QTLs) are loci
harboring genes that command quantitative traits such as
skin color. Quantitative phenotypes have a polygenic
command. The role of these QTLs in skin-color variance
remains poorly known (Gonzaga-Jauregui et al., 2012).

Lastly, gene regulation appears to play a role in skin
pigmentation; Fraser (2013) has inferred that regulatory
phenomena were involved in adaptation to UV radiation.
Vernot et al. (2012) have found enrichment in regulatory
noncoding
in
Europeans.

in melanogenesis

involved

regions

The OCA2 gene pertains to the melanin pathway
(melanin is the pigment that makes the skin more or less
dark). This gene is involved in skin pigmentation (Pickrell
et al., 2009; Voight et al., 2006), and is also responsible for
blue eyes, through a regulatory mechanism operated by the
neighbor gene HERC2 (Colonna et al., 2014). The variant
concerned is more frequent in Northern Europe and is
centered on the Baltic Sea (Cochran and Harpending, 2009,
Chapters 4 and 5).

responsible for

lactase persistence.

Milk Drinkers
In most populations of the world, only babies are able to
drink and properly digest milk,
thanks to an enzyme
called lactase, allowing them to digest the lactose (the sugar
found in the milk). After babyhood, the lactase gene is
repressed, except
in a few human groups. Lactase
persistence is a now-classical example of recent human
adaptation due to a speciﬁc diet. It is observed in human
groups who rely on milk feeding: Europeans (more in the
north), some East Africans, and the Fulani in West Africa.
In Europe, a mutation in the promoter (the DNA region
that initiates transcription of a given gene) of the lactase
gene is
In East
Africans, a different mutation is involved (Vasseur and
Quintana-Murci, 2013). This is a case of convergent
evolution.
the European polymorphism
responsible for lactase persistence has a frequency of 0.37.
It has been hypothesized (Arama et al., 2015) that lactase
persistence played a role in the speciﬁc malaria resistance
observed in the Fulani (see Chapter 10). Mathieson et al.
(2015) analyzed 230 ancient West Eurasians DNAs ( 6500
to  1000 years) and found that the earliest appearance of
the variant responsible for lactase persistence was  2200
or  2300 years old. According to Cochran and Harpending
(2009), Chapter 3, this variant was absent 7000 years ago.
These authors (Chapter 6) have hypothesized that lactase
persistence had given a strong selective advantage to the
Indo-Europeans, since dairy farming produces ﬁve times
more calories per hectare than ﬂeshing.

In the Fulani,

Other Examples of Recent Evolution
Since the advent of agriculture, bones have become
slighter. Brow ridges have disappeared,
in
Australian natives. UK skull morphology has changed a
great deal over the past few 100 years (Cochran and
Harpending, 2009, Chapter 4). A decrease in long bone

except

Human Population Variability and Its Adaptive Signiﬁcance Chapter | 6 103

loci dealing with diet, height,

strength since the upper Paleolithic has been conﬁrmed by
Ruff et al. (2015). Analyzing ancient DNA from West
Eurasians, Mathieson et al. (2015) found indications for
selection at
tooth
morphology, and hair thickness. For most of the selection
signals detected, allele frequencies of present Europeans
were outside the range of any ancient populations, sug-
gesting that phenotypically, Europeans of 4000 years ago
were different in important respects from Europeans today
despite having overall similar ancestry. This corroborates
Cochran & Harpending’s view (2009), Chapter 1. The
Inuits exhibit a remarkable adaptation to cold climates and
a marine diet (Tishkoff, 2015). Lastly, according to Wade
(2014), Chapter 1, the age of ﬁrst reproduction is tending to
decrease, while the contrary is true for
the age of
menopause.

Coevolution Between Culture and Genetics
Cochran and Harpending (2009; conclusion) emphasized
the importance of coevolution between culture and biology.
The “niche construction theory” states that organisms
modify their environment, which in turn has an impact on
their evolution (Laland et al., 2010). Richerson et al. (2010)
have proposed that cultural evolution was the leader rather
than the lagger of biological evolution. The “Baldwin
effect” states that learned behaviors have an impact on
evolution and selection. This could have been very
important in human evolution. Lactase persistence in dairy-
producer human groups is a remarkable example of this.

Brain Genes and Cognition
This is obviously a touchy subject. I will stick to a few
rough observations and examples. Ethical aspects on hu-
man population differences will be more developed in
Chapter 38. Richardson (2011) noted that before the pre-
sent postgenomic era, supporters of racial IQ differences
have never been able to prove that culture and education
did not have a major impact on intelligence/IQ (see Arvey
et al., 1994; Rushton and Jensen, 2006). Postgenomics
might change the game. Research on recent positive se-
lection on brain genes has “potentially explosive implica-
tions” (Richardson, 2011). Many scientists are of the
opinion that positive selection on cognitive genes has acted
differently on populations after OOA and that people of
different
intellectual
strengths
further
notice, no clear relation between brain genes and intelli-
gence has been established. Now some relevant observa-
tions on brain genes have been made. Ayub et al. (2013)
looked for positive selection in target genes of the tran-
scription factor FOXP2, involved in language and language
disorders. They have found clear evidence for positive

ancestries
(Richardson, 2011). However, until

could have different

selection in FOXP2 target genes in Europeans, not
in
Asians and Africans. FOXP2 is the result of a selective
sweep in modern humans. It is shared between them and
Neanderthals. It would come either from a Neanderthal
AAI, or from the common ancestor between Neanderthals
and modern humans (Cochran and Harpending, 2009,
Chapter 2; Krause et al., 2007). The brain growth and
development-related genes ASPM and microcephalin 1
(MCPH1) exhibit signs of natural selection and a clear
geographic structure, correlated to linguistic tone variation
(Laland et al., 2010). Mekel-Bobrov et al. (2005) observed
that a variant of the ASPM gene, having arisen about
5800 years ago, was clearly more frequent in Europe and
the Middle East than in other regions, due to recent positive
selection. The authors inferred that the human brain was
still undergoing adaptive evolution. The ASPM and
MCPH1 genes have been the theme of intense debates
some years ago. Evans et al. (2005, 2006) proposed that the
MCHP1 Haplogroup D, which is hypothesized to be the
outcome of an AAI (possibly from Neanderthal; Wolpoff,
2009), and arose approximately 37,000 years ago (at the
time of the advent of modern human behavior such as art
and the use of symbolism), had undergone strong natural
selection, possibly associated with brain phenotypes, and
had radically different frequencies among geographical
populations. These
challenged by
Richardson (2011), who observed that (1) these variants
show no correlation with either brain size or IQ; and
(2) they are expressed in various tissues, not the brain only.
However, the debate on ASPM, MCPH1, and cognition still
goes on. It has been proposed that microcephalin was not
associated with IQ at the individual level, but exhibited a
strong correlation with IQ at
the population level (59
populations compared; Woodley et al., 2014).

conclusions were

As a last example of recent evolution of cognition,
Cochran et al. (2006) presented an audacious and fasci-
nating hypothesis to explain the high level of intelligence in
AJs. As we have seen, this community is assumed to have a
recent origin (about 1000 years ago), and has maintained
strong endogamy for religious reasons and because of
persecutions.
In Medieval Europe, AJs specialized in
money trade jobs, which require high mental abilities. The
better they were at the job, the richer they became, and the
more children they had. This with endogamy gave the
classical conditions for accelerated natural selection. Ac-
cording to the authors, AJs have paid a heavy price for their
increased IQ. Selection would have acted on genes that
boosted IQ at a heterozygous state, but provoked severe
disorders (such as Tay-Sacks disease, very frequent in AJs)
at a homozygous state.

It is most probable that cognition and behavioral traits
have a polygenic basis and that environment and education
play a major role in their expression (Jordan, 2008, Chapter
4; Jorde and Wooding, 2004; Zietsch et al., 2015), which

104 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

makes the study of cognitive traits a challenge. However
the progress of genomics should make it possible to clarify
the genetic background of psychological traits and of their
possible variations among geographical populations.

recent

It can therefore be concluded that as a whole, Cochran
and Harpending’s (2009) and Wade’s (2014) hypothesis
(and possibly present) and
that clear signs of
geographically differentiated evolution exist,
for many
traits,
including diet adaptation, morphological features,
and brain adaptation. Evidence for recent selection on
pathological
traits will be presented in Chapter 10.
However, the data should be interpreted with caution, since
this ﬁeld is subject to much storytelling (the Panglossian
paradigm; Gould and Lewontin, 1979). It is safe to infer
that lactase persistence has been selected by the special diet
of diary-feeding populations. It is very tentative to infer that
isolated genetic data will make it possible to understand
macrohistorical features. For example, it has been proposed
that wealth differences among geographical populations
could be explainable by the level of genetic diversity (ex-
pected heterozygosity), which would be optimal in Euro-
peans and Asians, excessive in Africans, and insufﬁcient in
Native Americans (Ashraf and Galor, 2011; Conley et al.,
2014). In turn, there is no proof of a total lack of inﬂuence
of human biological diversity on history and civilizations,
as claimed by Levy-Strauss (1952).

CONCLUSION
We are only at the beginning of the wave. Exponential
technological progress in genomics, postgenomics, data
computation, and the concomitant drastic decrease of their
costs will soon make population genomics and personalized
medicine (see Chapter 10) a routine affair. Our knowledge
on the human population structure has already reached an
unbelievable level of reﬁnement. Many data have been
gathered on indications of
recent selection in human
populations. However, strong challenges remain. The fact
that rare and very rare variants seem to play a major role in
human evolution explains much of
the still ongoing
“missing heritability” (Lander, 2011; Nelson et al., 2012),
since by nature, these variants are extremely difﬁcult to
detect and make that GWAS requires huge sample sizes.
The role of regulation, epistasis, interaction between alleles
of the same gene and between different genes, and CNV
still
least,
exploring the interaction between biological evolution and
environmental/cultural factors is the new frontier of our
knowledge on human nature. Many authors have pleaded
for integrative and holistic strategies able to cross this
frontier (see, for example, Cochran and Harpending, 2009,
conclusion; Vasseur and Quintana-Murci, 2013). The very
design of the present book, with its balance between
various social and biological disciplines,
reﬂects the

sufﬁcient knowledge. Last but not

lacks

thought that human nature can be explored only by thor-
ough multidisciplinary approaches.

GLOSSARY OF SPECIALIZED TERMS
Allopatry Living in different geographic locations (see sympatry).
Alu insertion sequence Dispersed repeated DNA sequences in the
human genome, consisting of roughly 300 bp in approximately
3e5  105 copies, constituting roughly 5% of
the human
genome. These sequences are easily transposable. They are spe-
ciﬁcally cleaved by the restriction enzyme Alu I.

Ampliﬁcation fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) Selective
ampliﬁcation of genomic restriction fragments (obtained by
RFLP) by PCR.

Autosomal Designates all chromosomes, but sexual chromosomes.
Clade Evolutionary lineage deﬁned by cladistic analysis. A clade is
monophyletic (it has only one ancestor) and is genetically isolated
(it evolves independently) from other clades.

Cladistic analysis A speciﬁc method of phylogenetic analysis
designed by the German entomologist Willy Hennig (1966). It is
based on the polarization of characters that are separated into
ancestral (plesiomorphic) and derived (apomorphic) characters.
Only those apomorphic characters that are shared by all members
of a given clade (synapomorphic character) are considered to be
phylogenetically informative. For example, feathers are speciﬁc of
the clade “birds” (which is a class) and are featured by all birds.
They are synapomorphic characteristics of that clade.

Coalescence time Time elapsed between the common ancestral copy
(one gene in one individual) and two or more copies of a given
gene at the present time.
Copy-number variant (CNV) DNA sequence 1 kb, present with a
variable copy number by comparison with a reference genome.
Includes insertions, deletions, and duplications.

DNA microarray ([DNA chip) A set of microscopic DNA spots
attached on a solid surface. DNA microarrays are used to measure
the expression levels of large numbers of genes simultaneously or
to genotype various genomic regions. Each DNA spot (¼probe)
contains picomoles (¼10
 12 mol) of a speciﬁc DNA sequence.
Epigenetics Deals with the activation and deactivation of genes
without any change in the corresponding DNA sequence of the
organism.

Epistasis Occurs when the expression of one gene is affected by the

expression of one or more independently inherited genes.

Exome The coding part of the genome (no more than 1e2% of the

total human genome).

Fitness The relative ability of an organism to survive and to transmit

its genes to the next generation.

Genome-wide Association study (GWAS) Compares the repartition
of DNA markers across the genome (either microsatellites or
SNPs) in people with a disease or other phenotypic traits to people
without the disease or traits. The goal is to identify the genomic
region where the genes responsible for the traits under study is
localized.

Heritability Proportion of variation in a trait among individuals in a

population that can be attributed to genetic effects.

Heterozygote, heterozygous In a diploid organism (each chromo-
some has two copies, one comes from the male, one comes from
the female), the two copies of a given gene in one individual have

Human Population Variability and Its Adaptive Signiﬁcance Chapter | 6 105

a different molecular structure:
different alleles of the same gene.

this individual harbors two

Homozygote, homozygous In a diploid organism, the two copies of a
given gene in one individual have identical molecular structures.
Homoplasy Possession in common by distinct phylogenetic lineages
of
identical characters that do not originate from common
ancestry. The origin of homoplastic characters include the
following: (1) convergence (possession of identical characters
derived from different ancestral characters, due to convergent
evolutionary pressure, for example, the wings of birds on one
hand and of bats on the other hand); (2) parallelism (possession of
identical characters derived from a single ancestral character, and
generated independently in different phylogenetic lineages); and
(3) reversion (restoration of an ancestral character from a derived
character).

Isoenzymes Protein extracts of

the biological

samples under
analysis are separated by electrophoresis. The gel
is then
processed with a histochemical reaction involving the speciﬁc
substrate of a given enzyme. This enzyme’s zone of activity is
then speciﬁcally stained on the gel. From one sample to another,
migration differences can be visible for this same enzyme. These
different electrophoretic forms of a given enzyme are referred to
as isoenzymes or isozymes. When given isoenzymes are driven by
different alleles of a single gene,
they are more speciﬁcally
referred to as alloenzymes or allozymes. Differences in migration
result
from different overall electrical charges between iso-
enzymes. Overall electric charges are a resultant of the individual
electric charges of each amino acid (AA) of a given enzyme. The
AA sequence is the direct result of the DNA sequence of the gene
that codes for this enzyme. It is therefore considered (and veriﬁed)
that isoenzyme polymorphism is a faithful reﬂection of the genetic
polymorphism of the organism under study.

Microsatellite A short DNA sequence, usually 1e4 bp long, which is
repeated together in a row along the DNA molecule. In humans,
as in many other species, there is great variation from one person
to another (widely used in forensic applications for individual
identiﬁcation) and among different populations in the number of
repeats. Numbers of repeats for a given locus deﬁne microsatellite
alleles. There are hundreds of places in human DNA and in most
other species that contain microsatellites.

Penetrance The extent to which a given gene is expressed in the

phenotype of the individuals who carry it.

Phenotype All observable characteristics of a given individual or a
given population distinct from the genome. The phenotype is not
limited to morphological characteristics and includes,
for
example, physiological parameters (blood pressure, muscular
strength, etc.) biochemical parameters (level of cholesterol, etc.),
or cognitive properties. The phenotype is produced by the
interaction between genotype and the environment. The variable
part that is driven by the action of the genotype constitutes the
heritability of the character under study.

Random primer ampliﬁed polymorphic DNA (RAPD) In the
classical polymerase chain reaction method, the primers used are
known DNA sequences, whereas the RAPD technique relies on
primers whose sequence is arbitrarily determined. RAPD primers
are generally 10 bp long. The possible combinations are virtually
unlimited. For a given genotype of a given individual or strain,
different primers will reveal different polymorphisms. RAPDs are

an extremely powerful method of exploring the genetic variability
of organisms. However,
their use in routine identiﬁcation is
limited by their lack of reproducibility.

Restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) Variability in
the DNA of a given organism evidenced by the use of bacterial
restriction endonucleases. The endonuclease cuts the DNA at
speciﬁc restriction sites characterized by given sequences, and the
polymorphism of the DNA fragments thus obtained can be
visualized on gels, either directly by ethidium bromide staining, or
by Southern blot hybridization with speciﬁc probes.

Short tandem repeat polymorphism (STRP) Synonymous with

microsatellites.

Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), Single-nucleotide Variant
(SNV) Polymorphisms of one-letter variations in the DNA
sequence. SNPs contribute to differences among individuals and
populations. Most of them have no effect; others cause subtle
differences in countless features, such as appearance, while
some affect the risk for certain diseases. SNPs are widely used as
high-resolution population markers and are the basic tool used in
the so-called HapMap project. SNPs can be detected by: (1)
restriction fragment
(2) sequencing,
(3) denaturating high-performance liquid chromatography, (4)
mass spectrometry, and (5) array-based resequencing/micro-
arrays. SNPs constitute approximately 90% of all human genetic
variations, and SNPs with a minor allele frequency of 1%
occur every 100e300 bases throughout the human genome, on
average. It is important to note that there are allelic frequency
variations among different human populations, with the result
that an SNP that is common in one geographical or ethnic group
may be much rarer
(see ancestry informative
markers).

length polymorphism,

in another

Sympatry Living in the same geographic location (see allopatry).
Transcription factor Protein that binds to speciﬁc genes, and
modulates the rate of transcription of genetic information from
DNA to messenger RNA.

REFERENCES

Alexander, D.H., Novembre, J., Lange, K., 2009. Fast model-based esti-
mation of ancestry in unrelated individuals. Genome Research 19,
1655e1664.

Alves, I., Srámkovaá Hanulová, A., Foll, M., Excofﬁer, E., 2012. Genomic
data reveal a complex making of humans. PLoS Genetics 8 (7),
e1002837. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1002837.

Arama, C., Maiga, B., Dolo, A., et al., 2015. Ethnic differences in
susceptibility to malaria: what have we learned from immuno-
epidemiological
in West Africa? Acta Tropica 146,
152e156.

studies

Armengol, L., Villatoro, S., González, J.R., et al., 2009. Identiﬁcation of
copy number variants deﬁning genomic differences among major
human groups. PLoS One e7230. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0007230.

Arvey, R.D., Bouchard Jr., T.J., Kaufman, N.L., et al., 1994. Mainstream

science on intelligence. The Wall Street Journal. December 13.

Ashraf, Q., Galor, O., 2011. The “Out of Africa” Hypothesis, Human
Genetic Diversity, and Comparative Economic Development. NBER
Working
No.
N10,N30,N50,O11,O50,Z10. http://www.nber.org/papers/w17216.

17216,

Paper

No.

July

2011;

JEL

106 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

Auton, A., Bryc, K., Boyko, A.R., et al., 2009. Global distribution of
genomic diversity underscores rich complex history of continental
human populations. Genome Research 19, 795e803.

Daub, J.T., Hofer, T., Cutivet, E., Dupanloup, I., et al., 2013. Evidence for
polygenic adaptation to pathogens in the human genome. Molecular
Biology and Evolution 30, 1544e1558.

Avise, J.C., 2004. Molecular Markers, Natural History and Evolution,

second ed. Chapman & Hall, New York, London.

Ayub, Q., Yngvadottir, B., Chen, Y., et al., 2013. FOXP2 targets show
evidence of positive selection in European populations. The American
Journal of Human Genetics 92, 696e706.

Edgar, H.J.H., 2009. Biohistorical approaches to ‘‘Race’’ in the United
States: biological distances among African Americans, European
Americans, and their ancestors. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology 139, 58e67.

Edwards, A.W.F., 2003. Human genetic diversity: Lewontin’s fallacy.

Barbujani, G., Colonna, V., 2010. Human genome diversity: frequently

BioEssays 25, 798e801.

asked question. Trends in Genetics 26, 285e295.

Barbujani, G., Magagni, A., Minch, E., Cavalli-Sforza, L., 1997. An
apportionment of human DNA diversity. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 94,
4516e4519.

Belizário, J.E., 2013. The humankind genome: from genetic diversity to

the origin of human diseases. Genome 56, 705e716.

Boas, F., 1912. Changes in the bodily form of descendants of immigrants.

American Anthropologist 14, 530e562.

Bustamante, C.D., González Burchard, E., De La Vega, F.M., 2011.

Genomics for the world. Nature 475, 163e165.

Cardona-Castro, N., Cortés, E., Beltrán, C., Romero, M., Badel-
Mogollón, J.E., Bedoya, G., 2015. Human genetic ancestral compo-
sition correlates with the origin of Mycobacterium leprae strains in a
leprosy endemic population. PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases 9 (9),
e0004045. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0004045.

Casals, F., Bertranpetit, J., 2012. Human genetic variation, shared and

private. Science 337, 39e40.

Elhaik, E., Tatarinova, T., Chebotarev, D., et al., April 29, 2014. Nature

Communications 5, 3513. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ncomms4513.

Enard, D., Messer, P.W., Petrov, D.A., 2015. Genome-wide signals of
positive selection in human evolution. Genome Research 24,
885e895.

Evans, P.D., Gilbert, S.L., Mekel-Bobrov, N., et al., 2005. Microcephalin,
a gene regulating brain size, continues to evolve adaptively in humans.
Science 309, 1717e1720.

Evans, P.D., Mekel-Bobrov, N., Vallender, E.J., Hudson, R.R.,
Lahn, B.T., 2006. Evidence that the adaptive allele of the brain size
gene microcephalin introgressed into Homo sapiens from an archaic
Homo lineage. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 103, 18178e18183.

Fraser, H.B., 2013. Gene expression drives local adaptation in humans.

Genome Research 23, 1089e1096.

Fu, W., Akey, J.M., 2013. Selection and adaptation in the human
genome. Annual Review of Genomics and Human Genetics 14,
467e489.

Cavalli-Sforza, L., 2007. Human evolution and its relevance for scientiﬁc
epidemiology. Annual Review of Genomics and Human Genetics 8,
1e15.

Fu, W., O’Connor, T.D., Jun, G., et al., 2013. Analysis of 6,515 exomes
reveals the recent origin of most human protein-coding variants. Na-
ture 493, 216e220.

Cavalli-Sforza, L.L., Feldman, M.W., 2003. The application of molecular
genetic approaches to the study of human evolution. Nature Genetics
(Suppl. 33), 266e275.

Fumagalli, M., Moltke, I., Grarup, N., et al., 2015. Greenlandic Inuit show
genetic signatures of diet and climate adaptation. Science 349,
1343e1346.

Cavalli-Sforza, L.L., Minch, E., Mountain, J.L., 1992. Coevolution of
genes and languages revisited. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America 89, 5620e5624.

Chimpanzee Sequencing and Analysis Consortium, 2005. Initial sequence
of the chimpanzee genome and comparison with the human genome.
Nature 437, 69e87.

Cochran, G., Hardy, J., Harpending, H., 2006. Natural history of Ashke-

nazi intelligence. Journal of Biosocial Science 38, 659e693.

Cochran, G., Harpending, H., 2009. The 10,000 Year Explosion e How
Civilization Accelerated Human Evolution. Basic Books. A member
of the Perseus Books Group, New York.

Colonna, V., Ayub, Q., Chen, Y., et al., 2014. Human genomic regions
with exceptionally high levels of population differentiation identiﬁed
from 911 whole-genome sequences. Genome Biology 15, R88.

Conley, D., Fletcher, J., Dawes, C., 2014. The Emergence of Socio-

Genomics. Contemporary Sociol 43, 458e467.

Galanter, J.M., Fernandez-Lopez, J.C., Gignoux, C.R., et al., 2012.
Development of a panel of genome-wide ancestry informative
markers
the Americas. PLoS
Genetics 8 (3), e1002554. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.
1002554.

to study admixture throughout

Gallego Llorente, M., Jones, E.R., Eriksson, A., et al., 2015. Ancient
Ethiopian genome reveals extensive Eurasian admixture throughout
the African continent. Science (online). http://www.sciencemag.org/
content/early/2015/10/07/science.aad2879.

Gibbons, A., 2015. Humanity’s long, lonely road. Science 349, 1270.
Gonzaga-Jauregui, C., Lupski, J.R., Gibbs, R.A., 2012. Human genome
sequencing in health and disease. Annual Review of Medicine 63,
35e61.

González Burchard, E., Ziv, E., Coyle, N., et al., 2003. The importance of race
and ethnic background in biomedical research and clinical practice. The
New England Journal of Medicine 348, 1170e1175.

Conrad, D.F., Hurles, M.E., 2007. The population genetics of structural

Gould, S.J., 1981. The Mismeasure of Man. W. W. Norton and Company,

variation. Nature Genetics 39 (Suppl. 7), S30eS36.

New York.

Coon, C.S., 1962. The Origin of Races. Alfred A. Knopf, New York.
Currat, M., Excofﬁer, L., 2004. Modern humans did not admix with
Neanderthals during their range expansion into Europe. PLoS Biology
2 (12), e421.

Demoule, J.P., 2014. Mais où sont passés les Indo-Européens? La librairie

du XXIe siècle. Editions du Seuil, Paris.

Dobzhansky, T., 1966. L’Homme en évolution. Flammarion ed., Paris.

Gould, S., 2000. “The spice of life”. Leader to Leader 15, 19e28.
Gould, S.J., Lewontin, R.C., 1979. The spandrels of San Marco and the
Panglossian paradigm: a critique of the adaptationist programme.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B 205, 581e598.

Grossman, S.R., Andersen, K.G., Shlyakhter,

al., 2013.
Identifying recent adaptations in large-scale genomic data. Cell 152,
703e713.

I.,

et

Human Population Variability and Its Adaptive Signiﬁcance Chapter | 6 107

Guha, S., Rosenfeld, J.A., Malhotra, A.K., et al., 2012. Implications for
health and disease in the genetic signature of the Ashkenazi Jewish
population. Genome Biology 13, R2.

Laland, K.N., Odling-Smee, J., Myles, S., 2010. How culture shaped the
human genome: bringing genetics and the human sciences together.
Nature Reviews Genetics 11, 137e148.

Günther, T., Valdiosera, C., Malmström, H., et al., 2015. Ancient genomes
link early farmers from Atapuerca in Spain to modern-day Basques.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 112, 11917e11922.

Gurdasani, D., Carstensen, T., Tekola-Ayele, F., et al., 2015. The African
Genome Variation Project shapes medical genetics in Africa. Nature
517, 327e332.

Haak, W., Lazaridis, L., Patterson, N., et al., 2015. Massive migration
from the steppe was a source for Indo-European languages in Europe.
Nature 522, 207e211.

Lander, E.S., 2011. Initial impact of the sequencing of the human genome.

Nature 470, 187e197.

Lawler, J.M., 1978. IQ, Heritability, and Racism. International Publishers,

New York.

Lazaridis, I., Patterson, N., Mittnik, A., et al., 2014. Ancient human
for present-day

ancestral populations

three

genomes
Europeans. Nature 513, 409e413.

suggest

Leroi, A.M., March 14, 2005. A Family Tree in Every Gene. The New

York Times.

Leslie, S., Winney, B., Hellenthal, G., et al., 2015. The ﬁne-scale genetic

Harpending, H., 2002. Race. Population genetics perspective. In: Pagel, M.

structure of the British population. Nature 519, 309e314.

(Ed.), Encyclopedia of Evolution, pp. 979e981.

Hawks, J., Wang, E.T., Cochran, G.M., Harpending, H.C., Moyzis, R.K.,
2007. Recent acceleration of human adaptive evolution. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
104, 20753e20758.

Levy-Strauss, C., 1952. Race et histoire. Editions Denoël, Paris.
Lewis, J.E., DeGusta, D., Meyer, M.R., et al., 2011. The mismeasure of
science: Stephen Jay Gould versus Samuel George Morton on skulls
and bias. PLoS Biology 9 (6), e1001071. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pbio.1001071.

Hellenthal, G., Busby, G.B.J., Band, G., et al., 2014. A genetic atlas of

Lewontin, R.C., 1972. The apportionment of human diversity. Evolu-

human admixture history. Science 343, 747e751.

tionary Biology 6, 381e398.

Henn, B.M., Botigué, L.R., Bustamante, C.D., Clark, A.G., Gravel, S.,

Lewontin, R.C., Hartl, D.L., 1991. Population genetics in forensic DNA

2015. Nature Reviews Genetics 16, 333e343.

typing. Science 254, 1745e1750.

Hennig, W., 1966. Phylogenetic Systematics. University of Illinois Press,

Urbana, Illinois.

Heyn, H., Moran, S., Hernando-Herraez, I., et al., 2013. DNA methylation
contributes to natural human variation. Genome Research 23,
1363e1372.

Hooton, E.A., 1926. Methods of racial analysis. Science 63, 75e81.
Hunley, K.L., Healy, M.E., Long, J.C., 2009. The global pattern of
gene identity variation reveals a history of long-range migrations,
bottlenecks, and local mate exchange: implications for biological race.
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 139, 35e46.

Jablonski, N.G., Chaplin, G., 2012. Human skin pigmentation, migration
and disease susceptibility. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society B 367, 785e792.

Jakobsson, M., Scholz, S.W., Scheet, P., et al., 2008. Genotype, haplotype
and copy-number variation in worldwide human populations. Nature
451, 998e1003.

Jordan, B., 2008. L’humanité au pluriel. La génétique et la question des

races. Editions du Seuil, Paris.

Jorde, L.B., Wooding, S.P., 2004. Genetic variation, classiﬁcation and

“race”. Nature Genetics 36 (Suppl. 11), S28eS32.

Karlsson, E.K., Kwiatkowski, D.P., Sabeti, P.C., 2014. Natural selection
and infectious disease in human populations. Nature Reviews Ge-
netics 15, 379e383.

Keita, S.O.Y., Kittles, R.A., Royal, C.D.M., et al., 2004. Conceptualizing

human variation. Nature Genetics 36 (Suppl. 11), S17eS20.

King, M.C., Wilson, A.C., 1975. Evolution at two levels in humans and

chimpanzees. Science 188, 107e116.

Li, J.Z., Absher, D.M., Tang, H., et al., 2008. Worldwide human
relationships inferred from genome-wide patterns of variation. Science
319, 1100e1104.

Long, J.C., Li, J., Healy, M.E., 2009. Human DNA sequences: more
variation and less race. American Journal of Physical Anthropology
139, 23e34.

Longobardi, G., Ghirotto, S., Guardiano, C., et al., 2015. Across
language families: genome diversity mirrors linguistic variation
within Europe. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 157,
630e640.

López Herráez, D., Bauchet, M., Tang, K., et al., 2009. Genetic variation
and recent positive selection in worldwide human populations:
evidence from nearly 1 million SNPs. PLoS One 4 (11), e7888. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0007888.

Manica, A., Amos, W., Balloux, F., Hnihara, T., 2007. The effect of
ancient population bottlenecks on human phenotypic variation. Nature
448, 346e349.

Manry, J., Quintana-Murci, L., 2013. A genome-wide perspective of hu-
man diversity and its implications in infectious disease. Cold Spring
Harbor Perspectives in Medicine 3, a012450.

Martin, A.R., Costa, H.A., Lappalainen, T., et al., 2014. Transcriptome
sequencing from diverse human populations reveals differentiated
regulatory architecture. PLoS Genetics 10 (8), e1004549. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1004549.

Mathieson, I., Lazaridis, I., Rohland, N., et al., 2015. Eight Thousand
Years of Natural Selection in Europe. Preprint at bioRxiv at. http://doi.
org/4wt.

Krause, J., Lalueza-Fox, C., Orlando, L., et al., 2007. The derived FOXP2
variant of modern humans was shared with Neandertals. Current
Biology 17, 1908e1912.

Mathieson, I., McVean, G., 2012. Differential confounding of rare and
common variants in spatially structured populations. Nature Genetics
44, 243e246.

Lachance, J., Tishkoff, S.A., 2013. Population genomics of human
adaptation. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics
44, 123e143.

Lahn, B.T., Ebenstein, L., 2009. Let’s celebrate human genetic diversity.

Nature 461, 726e728.

Mayr, E., 1963. Animal Species and Evolution. Belknap Press of Harvard

University Press, Cambridge.

Mekel-Bobrov, N., Gilbert, S.L., Evans, P.D., et al., 2005. Ongoing
adaptive evolution of ASPM, a brain size determinant in Homo sa-
piens. Science 309, 1720e1722.

108 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

Mersha, T.B., Abebe, T., 2015. Self-reported race/ethnicity in the age of
genomic research: its potential impact on understanding health dis-
parities. Human Genomics. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s40246-014-
0023-x.

Mitton, J.B., 1977. Genetic differentiation of races of man as judged by
single-locus and multilocus analyses. The American Naturalist 111,
203e212.

Pigliucci, M., 2013. What are we to make of the concept of race? Thoughts
of a philosopherescientist. Studies in History and Philosophy of
Biological and Biomedical Science 44, 272e277.

Pritchard, J.K., Pickrell, J.K., Coop, G., 2009. The genetics of human
adaptation: hard sweeps, soft sweeps, and polygenic adaptation.
Current Biology 20, R208eR213.

Pritchard, J.K., Stephens, M., Donnelly, P., 2000. Inference of population

Mitton, J.B., 1978. Measurement of differentiation: reply to Lewontin,

structure using multilocus genotype data. Genetics 155, 945e959.

Powell, and Taylor. The American Naturalist 112, 1142e1144.

Moreno-Estrada, A., Gignoux, C.R., Fernández-López, J.C., et al., 2014.
The genetics of Mexico recapitulates Native American substructure
and affects biomedical traits. Science 344, 1280e1285.

Morning, A., 2014. Does genomics challenge the social construction of

race? Sociological Theory 32, 189e207.

Prugnolle, F., Manica, A., Balloux, F., 2005. Geography predicts neutral
genetic diversity of human populations. Current Biology 15,
R159eR160.

Racimo, F., Sankararaman, S., Nielsen, R., Huerta-Sánchez, E., 2015.
Evidence for archaic adaptive introgression in humans. Nature Re-
views Genetics 16, 359e371.

Morton, S.G., 1849. Catalogue of Skulls of Man and the Inferior Animals,

Relethford, J.H., 2009. Race and global patterns of phenotypic variation.

third ed. Merrihew and Thomson Printers, Philadelphia.

American Journal of Physical Anthropology 139, 16e22.

Morwood, M.J., van Oosterzee, P., 2007. The Discovery of the Hobbit:
The Scientiﬁc Breakthrough that Changed the Face of Human History.
Random House, Sydney.

Mountain, J.L., Risch, N., 2004. Assessing genetic contribution to
phenotypic differences among “racial” and “ethnic” groups. Nature
Genetics 36 (Suppl. 11), S48eS53.

Need, A.C., Kasperaviciut_e, D., Cirulli, E.T., Goldstein, D.B., 2009.
A genome-wide genetic signature of Jewish ancestry perfectly
separates individuals with and without full Jewish ancestry in a large
random sample of European Americans. Genome Biology 10, R7.

Nei, M., 1978. The theory of genetic distance and evolution of human

races. Japanese Journal of Human Genetics 23, 341e369.

Nei, M., Roychoudhury, A.K., 1993. Evolutionary relationships in human
populations on a global scale. Molecular Biology and Evolution 10,
927e943.

Richardson, S.S., 2011. Race and IQ in the postgenomic age: the micro-

cephaly case. BioSocieties 6, 420e446.

Richerson, P.J., Boyd, R., Henrich, J., 2010. Gene-culture coevolution in
the age of genomics. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences of the United States of America 107 (Suppl. 2), 8985e8992.

Risch, N., Burchard, E., Ziv, E., Tang, H., 2002. Categorization of humans
in biomedical research: genes, race and disease. Genome Biology 3 (7)
comment2007.1ecomment2007.12.

Risch, N., Choudhry, S., Via, M., et al., 2009. Ancestryrelated assortative

mating in Latino populations. Genome Biol 10, R132.

Romualdi, C., Balding, D., Naside, I.S., et al., 2002. Patterns of human
diversity, within and among continents, inferred from biallelic DNA
polymorphisms. Genome Research 12, 602e612.

Rosenberg, N.A., Pritchard, J.K., Weber, J.L., et al., 2002. Genetic

structure of human populations. Science 298, 2381e2385.

Nelson, M.R., Wegmann, D., Ehm, M.G., et al., 2012. An abundance of
rare functional variants in 202 drug target genes sequenced in 14,002
people. Science 337, 100e104.

Rosenberg, N.A., Mahajan, S., Ramachandran, S., et al., 2005. Clines,
clusters, and the effect of study design on the inference of human
population structure. PLoS Genetics 1 (6), e70.

Novembre, J., Han, E., 2012. Human population structure and the adaptive
response to pathogen-induced selection pressures. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B 367, 878e886.

Rowell, J.L., Dowling, N.F., Yu, W., et al., 2012. Trends in population-
based studies of human genetics in infectious diseases. PLoS One 7
(2), e25431. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0025431.

Novembre, J., Johnson, T., Bryc, K., et al., 2008. Genes mirror geography

within Europe. Nature 456, 98e101.

Novembre, J., Ramachandran, S., 2011. Perspectives on human population
structure at the cusp of the sequencing era. Annual Review of Ge-
nomics and Human Genetics 12, 245e274.

Ruff, C.B., Holt, B., Niskanen, M., et al., 2015. Gradual decline in
mobility with the adoption of food production in Europe. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
112, 7147e7152.

Rushton, J.P., Jensen, A.R., 2006. The totality of available evidence shows

Ostrer, H., Skorecki, K., 2013. The population genetics of the Jewish

the race IQ gap still remains. Psychological Science 17, 921e922.

people. Human Genetics 132, 119e127.

Sarich, V., Miele, F., 2004. Race: The Reality of Human Differences.

Ousley, S., Jantz, R., Freid, D., 2009. Understanding race and human
variation: why forensic anthropologists are good at identifying race.
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 139, 68e76.

Parra, E.J., Kittles, R.A., Shriver, M.D., 2004. Implications of correlation
between skin color and genetic ancestry for biomedical research.
Nature Genetics 36 (Suppl. 11), S54eS60.

Pfaff, C.L., Parra, E.J., Bonilla, C., et al., 2001. Population structure in
admixed populations: effect of admixture dynamics on the pattern of
linkage disequilibrium. The American Journal of Human Genetics 6,
198e207.

Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado, USA.

Serre, D., Pääbo, S., 2004. Evidence for gradients of human genetic di-
versity within and among continents. Genome Research 14,
1679e1685.

Shiao, J.L., 2014. Response to HoSang; Fujimura, Bolnick, Rajagopalan,
Kaufman, Lewontin, Duster, Ossorio, and Marks; and Morning. So-
ciological Theory 32, 244e258.

Shiao, J.L., Bode, T., Beyer, A., Selvig, D., 2012. The genomic chal-
lenge to the social construction of race. Sociological Theory 30,
67e88.

Pickrell, J.K., Coop, G., Novembre, J., et al., 2009. Signals of recent
positive selection in a worldwide sample of human populations.
Genome Research 19, 826e837.

Shriver, M.D., Kennedy, G.C., Parra, E.J., et al., 2004. The genomic
distribution of population substructure in four populations using 8,525
autosomal SNPs. Human Genomics 1, 274e286.

Pickrell, J.K., Reich, D., 2014. Toward a new history and geography of
human genes informed by ancient DNA. Trends in Genetics 30,
377e389.

Sparks, C.S., Jantz, R.L., 2002. A reassessment of human cranial
plasticity: Boas revisited. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 99, 14636e14639.

Human Population Variability and Its Adaptive Signiﬁcance Chapter | 6 109

Spielman, R.S., Bastone, L.A., Burdick, J.T., et al., 2007. Common genetic
variants account for differences in gene expression among ethnic
groups. Nature Genetics 39, 226e231.

Stearns, S.C., Byars, S.G., Diddahally, R., Govindaraju, D.R., Ewbank, D.,
2010. Measuring selection in contemporary human populations.
Nature Reviews Genetics 11, 611e622.

Stoneking, M., Krause, J., 2011. Learning about human population history
from ancient and modern genomes. Nature Reviews Genetics 12,
603e614.

Tibayrenc, M., 2007b. Human genetic diversity and the spread of
infectious diseases.
(Ed.), Encyclopedia of
Infectious Diseases: Modern Methodologies. Wiley & Sons,
pp. 321e335.

In: Tibayrenc, M.

Tibayrenc, M., Ayala, F.J., 2012. Reproductive clonality of pathogens: a
perspective on pathogenic viruses, bacteria, fungi, and parasitic pro-
tozoa. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 109 (48), E3305eE3313.

Tibayrenc, M., Ayala, F.J., 2013. How clonal are Trypanosoma and

Stranger, B.E., Nica, A.C., Forrest, M.S., et al., 2007. Population genomics

Leishmania? Trends in Parasitology 29, 264e269.

of human gene expression. Nature Genetics 39, 1217e1224.

Stringer, C.B., Andrews, P., 1988. The origin of modern humans. Science

239, 1263e1268.

Sudmant, P., Kitzmann, J.O., Antonacci, F., et al., 2010. Diversity of
human copy number variation and multicopy genes. Science 330,
641e646.

Tishkoff, S., 2015. Strength in small numbers. Science 349, 1282e1283.
Tishkoff, S.A., Kidd, K.K., 2004. Implications of biogeography of human
populations for “race” and medicine. Nature Genetics 36 (Suppl. 11),
S21eS27.

Vallois, H.V., 1976. Les Races Humaines. Presses Universitaires de

France, Paris.

Sudmant, P.H., Mallick, S., Nelson, B.J., et al., 2015a. Global diversity,
population stratiﬁcation, and selection of human copy-number
variation. Science. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.aab3761.

Vasseur, E., Quintana-Murci, L., 2013. The impact of natural selection on
health and disease: uses of the population genetics approach in
humans. Evolutionary Applications 6, 596e607.

Sudmant, P.H., Rausch, T., Gardner, E.J., et al., 2015b. An integrated
map of structural variation in 2,504 human genomes. Nature 526,
75e81.

Vernot, B., Stergachis, A.B., Maurano, M.T., et al., 2012. Personal and
population genomics of human regulatory variation. Genome
Research 22, 1689e1697.

Tang, H., Quertermous, T., Rodriguez, B., et al., 2005. Genetic structure,
self-identiﬁed race/ethnicity,
and confounding in case-control
association studies. The American Journal of Human Genetics 76,
268e275.

Templeton, A.R., 2012. Gene ﬂow, haplotype patterns and modern human
In: eLS. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester. http://

origins.
dx.doi.org/10.1002/9780470015902.a0020795.pub2.

Templeton, A.R., 2013. Biological races in humans. Studies in History and

Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Science 44, 262e271.

Tennessen, J.A., Akey, J.M., 2011. Parallel adaptive divergence among
geographically diverse human populations. PLoS Genetics 7 (6),
e1002127. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1002127.

Tennessen, J.A., Bigham, A.W., O’Connor, T.D., et al., 2012. Evolution
and functional impact of rare coding variation from deep sequencing
of human exomes. Science 337, 64e69.

Voight, B.F., Kudaravalli, S., Wen, X., Pritchard, J.K., 2006. A map of
recent positive selection in the human genome. PLoS Biology 4 (3),
e72.

Wade, N., 2014. A Troublesome Inheritance. Genes, Race and Human

History. Penguin Books, New York.

Wang, C., Zöllner, S., Rosenberg, N.A., 2012. A quantitative comparison
of the similarity between genes and geography in worldwide human
populations. PLoS Genetics 8 (8), e1002886. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pgen.1002886.

Weidenreich, F., 1946. Apes, Giants, and Man. University of Chicago

Press, Chicago, IL.

Wilde, S., Timpson, A., Kirsanow, K., et al., 2014. Direct evidence for
positive selection of skin, hair, and eye pigmentation in Europeans
during the last 5,000 y. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 111, 4832e4837.

The 1000 Genomes Project Consortium, 2012. An integrated map of

Wolpoff, M.H., 2009. How Neandertals

inform human variation.

genetic ariation from 1,092 human genomes. Nature 491, 56e65.

American Journal of Physical Anthropology 139, 91e102.

The 1000 Genomes Project Consortium, 2015. A global reference for

human genetic variation. Nature 526, 68e74.

The UK10K Consortium, 2015. The UK10K project identiﬁes rare variants

in health and disease. Nature 526, 82e89.

Tibayrenc, M., 2004. The impact of human genetic diversity in the
transmission and severity of infectious diseases. In: Dronamraju, K.
(Ed.),
Infectious Disease: Host-Pathogen Evolution. Cambridge
University Press, pp. 315e324.

Tibayrenc, M., 2007a. Human genetic diversity and epidemiology of
parasitic and other transmissible diseases. Advances in Parasitology
64, 378e428.

Woodley, M.A., Rindermann, H., Bell, E., Stratford, J., Piffer, D., 2014.
The relationship between Microcephalin, ASPM and intelligence: a
reconsideration. Intelligence 44, 51e63.

Wright, S., 1978. Evolution and the Genetics of Populations, Vol. 4,
Variability Within and Among Natural Populations. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.

Zietsch, B.P., de Candia, T.R., Keller, M.C., 2015. Evolutionary
behavioral genetics. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences 2,
73e80.

Chapter 7

Evolution and Implications of Genomic
Diversity on “Human Kind” in India

R.M. Pitchappan1 and G. Arunkumar2
1Chettinad Academy of Research & Education, Chennai, India; 2SASTRA University, Thanjavur, India

the world’s

India has become

INTRODUCTION
India is the greatest story of humankind told until now, as a
six-part BBC historical documentary series reveals (Wood,
2007; “The story of India,” Youtube.com). As an ancient
civilization,
largest
democracy; one can reﬂect on and admire the determining
factors in India’s success. The Indian subcontinent and its
people are more diverse than anywhere else in the world in
terms of its gene pool, culture, and landscape (Shastri,
1976). This was the result of the ﬁrst coastal Southern route
migration w60,000 ybp, and the subsequent migrations,
which led to many autochthonous evolution of its lineages
(Mellars et al., 2013; Underhill et al., 2001; Wells et al.,
2001). The early settlers were isolated in various niches of
India, particularly in hilly tracts, while later migrants
occupied the plains and river beds (Sahoo et al., 2006;
Sanghvi et al., 1981). The later migrants formed self-
sustainable demes in various niches, resulting in enor-
mous diversity and absorption of the ﬁrst coastal migrants
into their fold (ArunKumar et al., 2012b). The degree of
natural selection that operated on these demes through in-
fectious diseases and bottlenecks, in addition to population
level forces like migration and miscegenation, is still an
enigma (Norman et al., 2007; Rajalingam et al., 2008).
Nevertheless, we can obtain evidence for many of these
factors that operated on the Indian gene pool to make it a
diverse region (Pitchappan, 1988, 2002; Shanmugalakshmi
et al., 2003).

The Indian population has been broadly classiﬁed
into tribes and castes. The primitiveness of their traits,
distinctive culture, geographical isolation, shyness of con-
tact, and backwardness are all characterized as scheduled
tribes (STs) deserving constitutional preferences (Ministry

the Southern part of

of Tribal Affairs, 2015). The STs forming 8.6% of
Indian populations in 2011 are concentrated in Central
India (20%e40% of total population) and the Northeast,
particularly Arunachal Pradesh and areas surrounding
Assam (>40%) (Ministry of Tribal Affairs, 2015), while
castes live mostly in plains and river-bed civilizations, with
the highest proportion of castes in Indo-Gangetic doab and
Tamil Nadu/Kerala,
the Deccan
Plateau, with <5% STs. It is interesting to note that after
independence, Indian states (from now, referred to as
States) were reorganized as linguistic states based on the
premise that people speaking a given language share
similar cultures within a restricted geographical region
(Ambedkar, 1956). Though this may be true at times, it
has never been true all of
the time. The genetic
polymorphisms of Indian populations have thrown light on
their diversity and afﬁnity to the world populations
(Arunkumar et al., 2012a; Balakrishnan et al., 1996;
Pitchappan, 2002; Pitchappan et al., 1984, 1997). These
studies have revealed the regional differences and social
structure that correlated to many genetic, physical, and
cultural-anthropological characteristics (ArunKumar et al.,
2012b, 2015a,b; Sanghvi et al., 1981; Shanmugalakshmi
et al., 2003; Underhill et al., 2010). Contrary to the
common notion, tribes were not always drawn from the
early settlers of the region as some of them were drawn
from later migrations. A classical example in the state of
Tamil Nadu are the ancient tribes Paliyar, Pulayar, Paniyar,
Kadar, and Irula with ancient NRY clade F* while the Toda
and Kota are the later migrants with their animal husbandry
and metallurgy;
the later cluster with Brahmin-related
populations in their NRY Rs and Js of the Neolithic
people and Central Asian populations (ArunKumar et al.,
2012b). The gene pool of each state is thus never panmictic,

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00007-7
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

111

112 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

and the “intrastate” diversity of various demes is greater
than the interstate diversity (Majumder, 1998). Under-
standing the causes of this diversity will help in under-
standing better the role of the immunogenome in health and
diseases.

a

result of

sympatric

A major genome block involved in immune and
inﬂammatory responses are strewn in the major histocom-
patibility complex (MHC) region located in the short
arm of chromosome 6 (Trowsdale and Knight, 2013). The
investigations on MHC and non-MHC gene proﬁles in
various populations of peninsular India and the Deccan,
and their correlates to health and disease, have revealed
enormous diversity,
isolation
(Jayalakshmi et al., 2012; Pitchappan, 2002). Various
demes and population groups show diverse genetic proﬁles,
suggesting a differential susceptibility to infectious diseases
such as leprosy, tuberculosis (TB), and HIV (Brahmajothi
et al., 1991; Jagannathan et al., 2011; Ravikumar et al.,
1999; Siddiqui et al., 2001). Many of these diseases do
have unique epidemiological proﬁles in their distribution
and manifestations; not all these demes and population
groups may be equally susceptible to a given epidemic
(Pitchappan, 2002). There are three partners in determining
the outcome of an infectious disease, viz., pathogen, host,
and environment. As we know, most diseases have a
natureenurture relationship, and we need to study all three
partners and their diversity on the same cohort to under-
stand a disease. The existence of varied gene poolsd
populations and demesdin different States make each State
unique and adds a new dimension to the disease studies.

With the advent of DNA technology, biology has
become a more exact science and it is now possible to draft
a well-designed study inclusive of all
the confounding
factors mentioned above. This essentially needs to cover
the local epidemiological scenario, genetic landscape of the
population, country investigated, and the nature of the
disease. Here we review our understanding of the peopling
of India, how the early settlers contributed to the diversity
of the gene pool of India, and how later migration and
cultural evolution shaped this diversity and the resultant
immunogenome diversity, and we argue how one can make
use of these variables to study disease processes.

PEOPLING OF INDIA

Early Settlers
Homo sapiens sapiens arrived in India some 60,000 ybp
(Wells et al., 2001), which was the Southern route and the
coastal highway to reach Australia (Cavalli-Sforza et al.,
1994). The sea was low at that time, making Indonesia one
land mass, which allowed them to walk through the coastal
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v¼-dDXIX-y6aY).
belt
As a result of this early migration, some people stayed

enroute giving rise to some isolated groups, the signature
of which we see even today in both the tribal and caste
populations of India (Arunkumar et al., 2012a,b; Zhong
et al., 2010). We hasten to add that the tribe and caste
designations were originally described by the anthropolo-
gists of the past, and the classiﬁcations could change. As
per the constitution of India these tribes have been provided
with special
their
standard of living. All these tribes have not been derived
from the earlier settlers alone. Most of them live in difﬁcult
niches in hilly tracts and dense forest covers, isolated from
the rest of the plains populations; but early Neolithic people
who settled in these regions also took up isolated lifestyle
to be called as tribes, as in the case of Toda and Kota tribes
of Tamil Nadu (ArunKumar et al., 2012b).

incentives and privileges to uplift

In 2001 we identiﬁed the descendants of the ﬁrst coastal
migration to India, carrying the marker NRY HG C-M130
in Tamil Nadu (Arunkumar et al., 2012a; Wells et al.,
2001). This ﬁrst coastal migration left the sporadic NRY
HG C-M130 marker, the marker for out-of-Africa (OOA)
migration, estimated w60,000 years old, mostly in the
Western Ghats, Eastern plains, and sporadically across
Northeast and Central
India. The NRY HG F*-M89
representing the second wave, with an estimated age of
w55,000 years, has been very successful, and as of today,
90% of the world population is the descendant of these
ancestors. A serial founder effect with successive bottle-
necks during range expansion progressively reduced the
genetic and phenotypic diversity with distance from Africa,
and a similar founder effect seems to have operated on
human culture and languages as well (Atkinson, 2011;
Ramachandran et al., 2005). In India the NRY clade
F*-M89 is seen in many populations of the Deccan and
Southern India and sporadically in Gujarat and Northeast,
interestingly without any distinction of castes and tribes
(ArunKumar et al., 2012b). Many lineages of this clade
have expanded and have been very successful in India,
characterizing various demes.

Autochthonous Expansions
Under the aegis of the Genographic, a global collaborative
study (www.genographic.com), we have now studied
w11,527 male samples from 91 tribes and 129 castes, for
their NRY and mtDNA polymorphisms. The study has
revealed a nonuniform pattern of distribution of NRY and
mtDNA clades in different states and regions of India
(Watkins et al., 2008). NRY HG H-M69 and its clades are
India except
unique and ubiquitous in most parts of
(The Genographicd
Arunachal Pradesh and Nepal
Madurai, unpublished, Fig. 7.1; Underhill et al., 2001). On
the other hand, NRY HG L1-M27, considered as a marker
for Dravidian (Sengupta et al., 2006),
in
most parts of India with the highest frequency and diversity

is present

Genomic Diversity & “Human Kind” in India Chapter | 7 113

FIGURE 7.1 Distribution of major Non recombinant Y Haplo group (NRY HG) in various states of India. Major alleles are distributed in most of
the states though in varied proportions. Thus the Indo-Gangetic doab and Western Frontier are characterized by R1a1, East by O2a, O3a3, and K, and
Southern India by L1a. Nonetheless at the exact population/deme level (caste/tribe) there is enormous variation as shown in our Tamil Nadu paper
(ArunKumar et al., 2012b). A similar trend prevails in various States of India. Compiled based on “The Genographic India” data set of 11,420 samples.

in highest

in Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, and Andhra (Fig. 7.1), and it is
absent in Assam, Bengal, Northeast, and Himalayas. On the
contrary, the marker for Austroasiatic speakers NRY HG
O2a-M95 is restricted to the East and parts of Central and
Northeast India (Arunkumar et al., 2015b; Kumar et al.,
2007). The NRY R clades, R1a1-M17 and R2-M124, are
present
frequencies in Indo-Gangetic doab
region, particularly Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, and Western India
(Fig. 7.1). The literature and our study have thus shown
evolution and autochthonous expansion of many new NRY
clades in India: a small founder settling in a niche, bottle-
neck, and a huge uninterrupted expansion might have lead
to the current scenario. Since it has now been conﬁrmed
that the genetics correlate with the linguistics, particularly
various NRY clades, it suggests that this was the trend from
the very beginning of OOA exodus, and it makes one
wonder whether language was instrumental
to various
communication tools
cultural
(Arunkumar et al., 2012a, 2015b; Atkinson, 2011; Bal-
anovsky et al., 2011; Quintana-Murci and Fellous, 2001;
Semino et al., 2004).

evolutions with better

Arrival of Neolithic Farmers
The origin and expansion of various populations in
different niches of India have been well documented. These

early settlers further
received many gene pools and
migrations from both East and the West of India during the
Neolithic period (Kivisild et al., 1999; Renfrew, 1996).
Males with NRY HG O2a-M95 arrived at the Northeastern
frontiers 10,000e5000 ybp, from Laos with their Austro-
asiatic tongue to expand and give rise to the Munda lan-
guage (Arunkumar et al., 2015b; Chaubey et al., 2011).
Similarly from the West, many streams of Neolithic people
came in from Central Asia with their technology and cattle
rearing. These include people with NRY HGs J-M304 and
R-M207 male chromosomes (Basu et al., 2003; McElrea-
vey and Quintana-Murci, 2005). The most successful
expansion within the NRY HG R-M207 clade was R1a1-
M17 and R2-M124 people with Indo-European tongue
spreading into the whole of Indo-Gangetic doab, and North
of Vindhyas. Paradoxically the rice cultivation thought to
be a technology of the eastern world was well adopted by
these people, and wetland agriculture was successfully
implemented in both Northern and Southern India (Bell-
wood et al., 2002; Fuller, 2006; Higham, 2002; Trivedi
et al., 2008). Rice was not common in the early Harappan
phase (Kochhar, 2000) and it was brought
from the
northeast
to India (Higham, 2002). While the demic
expansion may explain the various language speakers and
their cultures, the rice cultivar adoption implies a quick
technology change.

114 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

of

regions

Indiadthe

Population Stratiﬁcation
At the dawn of independence, scholars of India debated and
carved out various administrative provinces as linguistic
states, since the people speaking a given language shared
similar cultures (Ambedkar, 1956). Many studies have also
proved that these might be true at the gene pool level as
for various languages are restricted to different
well,
geographical
Indo-European
speakers in the North; Austroasiatic and Tibeto-Burmese
speakers to the East and Northeast,
respectively; and
Dravidian in the Deccan/South (ArunKumar et al., 2012b,
2015b; Sanghvi et al., 1981; Thapar, 1995). In most of the
states the intrastate diversity is greater than the interstate
diversity, though very deﬁnite Y chromosome signatures
reﬂect on the whole genome,
their
present-day distribution in India (ArunKumar et al., 2015a;
Majumder, 2008). As mentioned earlier,
the enormous
degree of regional differences in gene pool and population
stratiﬁcation of various kinds is attributed to their history
of migration, settlement, and expansion, and serial founder
effect (Ramachandran et al., 2005). Nonetheless, it was
observed that the mode of subsistence is the most powerful
tool of this isolation and stratiﬁcation in the early migrants
(ArunKumar et al., 2012b).

irrespective of

region of

though the continuum of

Enigma of Dravidian Land
Among various states of India, Tamil Nadu is the South-
ernmost
the Deccan and the heartland of
Dravidian cultural evolution. Dravidian also includes a
group of people who share cultural practices and values.
Their characteristic cross-cousin marriages and place names
are shared with Gujarat and Maharashtra states as well
(Fuller, 2007; Southworth, 2005a,b; Trautmann, 1981),
proposing a relationship between the people of these two
regions,
this culture and
place names are absent in the intervening regions. The
Dravidian language Tamil has a very ancient
literary
tradition dating back to second millennium BC and many
ancient literary works describe a well stratiﬁed, occupa-
tionally specialized society; the earliest literary work itself,
a grammar by Tholkappiar, a Brahman, implies that the
spoken language must have been in vogue at least a few
millennia earlier to that period. The great epics of Sangam
literature, such as Agananuru and Purnananuru, depict early
life style of eloping and marriages, and a hunter-gatherer
mode of subsistence. The Sangam literature Silappathi-
karam depicts the lifestyle of a well-organized society and
various
study has
revealed that
the identiﬁed population stratiﬁcation of
Tamil Nadu crystallized 7000 ybp and no admixture be-
tween the identiﬁed subsistence-based demes took place
during the past 3000 years (ArunKumar et al., 2012b).

thoughts 2000 ybp. Our

religious

ethos

religious

(Champaklakshmi,

Thus the mode of subsistence, such as ﬁshery in the coast,
dry land farming in the interior rain shadow regions, and
foraging, hunting, and gathering in the hilly tracts played a
dominant role in determining the lifestyle and technology
of these demes, giving rise to the stratiﬁed society of Tamil
Nadu. This is indeed much earlier to the formation of castes
that was ushered in with the arrival of wet land irrigation,
settled agriculture, private land holdings, and crystallization
of
2001). Both
geographical and cultural isolation sufﬁciently lead them to
inbreed amongst themselves resulting in unique genetic
signatures in each one of them. Thus the present day hill
tribes of Western Ghats are characterized by NRY HG F*-
M89, an ancient marker (w55,000 ybp),
the dry land
farmers (DLF) of the Western Ghat rain shadow regions
and plains accounting for about 50% of Tamil Nadu (TN)
population by NRY HG L1-M20, a characteristic of
Dravidian (Sengupta et al., 2006) and Vellala and
Brahminerelated populations by NRY HG R1a1-M17 and
R2-M205 (Bamshad et al., 2001; Sharma et al., 2009).

Deccan, Dry Land Farmers, and NRY
HG L1
the early successful settlers of the
If we presume that
Deccan were the DLF, who survived on abundant palm
trees in most of the scrub jungle fauna and ﬂora, and
subsequently on seasonal monsoon-driven wild crops such
as pulses (Misra, 2001), rice in Tamil Nadu appears only
during the megalithic period 300 BC. Southern India seems
to have thus developed a shared linguistic, literary, and
traditiondDravidian, predominantly non-Vedic
cultural
and non-Sanskrit in origin (Fuller, 2006). This ﬁts well
with the equation of NRY HG L1-M20 as Dravidian
marker with its autochthonous divergence and expansion.
This HG is present in high frequency and diversity in Tamil
Nadu (average 16%, DLF w50%) and most of the Deccan,
the Southern Dravidian territory, and is also present in low
frequencies in Western frontiers and Central India. Inter-
estingly,
this clade is not seen in Central Dravidian
speakers and its territory, such as Orissa. On the other hand
an ancient, NRY HG H1-M52 lineages are the commonest
in both Central and Southern India with highest frequency
(32%) in Madhya Pradesh (Central India) and Dravidian
land (Fig. 7.1). As it stands the Western Ghats and Central
Indian rain forests seem to be the earliest home of these
early migrants, giving rise to Dravidian cultural evolution.
Whether it is autochthonous or originated somewhere else
to blossom in Tamil Nadu is a question to be addressed.

Demic Expansion
The Dravidian is a language family and its origin is a highly
contentious
elements

though not

cultural

issue

the

Genomic Diversity & “Human Kind” in India Chapter | 7 115

(Krishnamurti, 2003; Trautmann, 2011). In the absence of
archaeological evidences on early humans in Southern
India, one may need to interpret it in the light of genetic
data taking cultural elements into consideration. A demic
expansion hypothesis of proto-Dravidian speakers who
came from the Fertile Crescent
to India was proposed
originally based on the Nostratic hypothesis, a commonly
held view that
the proto-Dravidian language originated
from the proto-Elamite language (McAlpin, 1981; Renfrew,
1996). As an evidence to this, the Neolithic archaeological
ﬁnds at Mehrgarh in Afghanistan identifying a sedentary
population in stratigraphy is quoted often (Kochhar, 2000).
Similar archaeological evidences are yet to be identiﬁed in
Southern India. Nonetheless, the absence of Vedic ﬁre al-
ters, rice, and horse relics in the excavations of early phases
Harappan sites are taken as evidence of Dravidian spoken
in the Indus valley civilization, though the writings of the
Indus are still debatable (Allchin and Allchin, 1997;
Kochhar, 2000; Mahadevan, 1977). The studies equating
NRY HG L1-M20 to Dravidian (Sengupta et al., 2006) and
the unique and high frequency and diversity of this clade in
Tamil Nadu makes this land as a cradle of Dravidian
civilization though not its origin. The absence of NRY HG
L1-M20 in Central Dravidian speakers of Orissa suggests
that the Dravidian linguistics or cultural elements were
much prior to their origin. Brahui, the Westernmost region
of Dravidian language-isolate speakers of Afghanistan/
Pakistan share local Y chromosome proﬁle with some
speciﬁc lineages (Qamar et al., 2002) and thus suggesting
this still is a relic of the early migration from the West that
has been absorbed by later arrivals in large scales:
presumably these migrants found the Brahui handy to
communicate. Thus L1-M20 may still be a marker of demic
expansion of this language for its people to blossom on the
canopy, the Tamil Nadu. Whole genome studies indeed
support a huge expansion of people in Southern India and
dispersal towards the North and the East (Javed et al., 2012;
Metspalu et al., 2011; Reich et al., 2009). The wetland
farming was introduced into Tamil Nadu only during Chola
period 300s BCE to 1279 CE, Southern Neolithic people in
Karnataka has been dated around 2nd Century BCE. This
period is the arrival of Indo-European-speaking people into
Tamil Nadu to document Tamil Sangam the ancient literary
period of Tamil language, 300 BCe200 AD, with a well-
developed society.

The demic expansion and the arrival of the Central
Asian gene pool need to be corroborated with the scenario
described earlier. It is interesting to note that two waves of
Pleistocene expansion took place in India between 50,000
and 37,000 ka (Shi et al., 2010; Underhill et al., 2001); a
coalescence of various South Asian populations dates back
to 36e46 ka (Wei et al., 2013). Worldwide human settle-
ment history and genome-wide patterns of variations have
supported this dispersal and serial founder effects from

Africa toward the East (Li et al., 2008; Liu et al., 2006).
These are in close agreement with archaeological and
anthropological evidence (Mellars et al., 2013). This
implies that an ancient Northern Indian expansion occurred
without
and the
7000 years of Mehrgarh and w5000 years of Harappan as a
well-organized stratiﬁed society with maritime trades with
Egyptians and Romans must have been the pinnacle of this
ancient civilization (Allchin and Allchin, 1997).

inﬂuencing the Southern Deccan,

Settled Agriculture
Settled agriculture is considered a primary cause of the
formation of
families and extended families, demes-
population groups, and the possession and inheritance of
properties (Chaix et al., 2004). The Harappan, a city-state
with well-established technology and maritime trade with
the West, and with its city planning and architecture,
disappeared without trace (Thapar, 1995). Nonetheless,
the very successful Swat Pirak culture, with painted grey
wares, is considered the origin of Vedic culture in India:
be it arrival from Central Asia via the Hindu Kush ranges
or autochthonous (Cavalli-Sforza, 1997; Kochhar, 2000;
Sharma et al., 2009; Wells et al., 2001). The origin of this
culture w2500 BC and the purported absence of Vedic
inﬂuence in this culture till
the late Harappan phase
(cf. Kochar, 2000) need to be looked at in the context of
the recent genetic evidences of Y chromosome/male
migrations that the marker for Indo-European language
speakers in India, NRY HG R1a1-M17, might have
arrived in India from North or West somewhere between
10 and 20,000 ybp. The wet land agricultural expansion in
Indo-Gangetic doab marks the evolution of deﬁnite demes
and stratiﬁed society with the torch bearers of Vedic rit-
uals with this NRY HG R1a1-M17 or its derivatives yet to
be identiﬁed. Studies on NRY HG R1a1-M17 in Euro-
peans and South Asians have shown a deep coancestry
predating mid-Holocene period (w10,000 ybp) (Underhill
et al., 2010). Our study on the geospatial pattern of skin
color allele SLC24A5 reﬂects a strong inﬂuence of lan-
guage, geography, and demographic history of the pop-
ulations,
sequencing 11.74 kb of 95
individuals worldwide has revealed the monophyletic
nature of rs1426654-A alleles in South Asian and West
Eurasian populations with a coalescence date at 22e28 ka
(Basu Mallick et al., 2013). The study further revealed
that this gene has also been a target for positive selection
in Europe, the Middle East, Central Asia, Pakistan, and
in South India. The claim that
North India but not
R1a1-M17 clade of
India is autochthonous in origin
(Sharma et al., 2009) can best be interpreted by an ancient
seeding of R1a1 ancestral allele through the mountainous
ranges of Swat Pirak culture, followed by new mutations
and expansion of its derivatives in Northwestern India,

and further,

116 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

starting from Gujarat

and crisscross population movements through Kyber and
Bolan passes, hence a high diversity identiﬁed in this
tiers of present-day Northern
study. The higher social
Indian populations
to Bengal
including the Brahmins, the torch bearers of Vedic culture
sans the tribal populations, might be the descendants of
this expansion. It is the demic expansion and the dispersal
of wetland irrigation and Paddy cultivation that trickled
down from the Indo-Gangetic doab, Orissa down through
coastal Andhra Pradesh to Tamil Nadu and Pallava-Chola
country, Cauvery, and other riverine belts during the post-
Sangam period, 600e1000 AD that brought down these
people to Tamil Nadu. The R1a1-M17 is a predominant
and ubiquitous clade seen in Brahmins, artisan, and
the whole of Northern and
warrior populations of
Northwest India and the Deccan, except
the dry land
farming Dravidian and tribal populations (ArunKumar
et al., 2012b; Kavitha, 2008), of Dravidian and Austro-
asiatic speaking belts. The arrival of this wetland farming
in Tamil Nadu ushered in “Mutt” (religious congregation
and community living) concepts, these religious centers
being the link between the Brahman and the locals in
cultivation and resource sharing (Champaklakshmi, 2001;
Shastri, 1976). The male hegemony and patrilineal
concept of family must have thus arrived from Central
Asia (Chaix et al., 2004), through Northern India, since
the early Chola society of Tamil Nadu was more female-
centric (Karashima et al., 1978). The private land holdings
appeared in Tamil Nadu only during the later and post-
Chola period, with the male hegemony and patriarchal
ethos as in the case of Kazakhstan (Chaix et al., 2007).
Thus the wetland farming communities, Vellala (artisans
and farmers), Kar Katha Vellala of Chola country, Saiva
Pillaimars of Pandiya country, and Kongu Vellala of
Chera country played crucial roles in the agricultural
development and local polity and power.

tell

The genomic identity of these people in the context of
the Central Asian, East European, and Northern Indian
populations will
the recent history of India better.
Nonetheless, this was the golden period of Tamil Nadu,
when Raja Raja Chola conquered the Himalayas and had
maritime trade not only with the Egyptians and Romans on
the West, but also with Indochina and Bali, Indonesia,
establishing the Hindu culture in these places. However,
has not impacted the whole of Tamil Nadu, except the
Cauvery and other river belts. The societal stratiﬁcation
identiﬁed by disparate gene pools that was laid down
7000 ybp itself has not become similar by these later mi-
grations and criss-cross population movements, until date
(ArunKumar et al., 2012b). The subsistence-based demes
living in various niches was further crystallized by cultural
evolution leading to the caste formation, the last in recent
times <2000 years further maintaining the distances of
these gene pools.

settled

amidst

technology

Culture, an Isolation Parameter
Culture as a factor of
isolation is supported by the
picture we get from epigraphic records of Tamil Nadu.
The societies in early Chola period (w800 AD) were more
female-centric as their names appear in inscriptions, and
male names appear only during the later Chola period
(w1200 AD)
(Karashima et al., 1978; Subbarayalu,
2012). It was during this period the Brahmadeya concept
was introduced. Under this model
the Brahmin settle-
ments, called Agraharam of various temple cities and Seri,
the earlier settlers living on the periphery of these settle-
ments appeared in Tamil Nadu (Champaklakshmi, 2001).
This temple-centric and ritual-driven society lead to the
state cultivation of crops, community kitchens, etc.
Various Mutts (religious sect heads and community
living) controlled the water-taming technology and the
resultant agriculture. The later migrant populations with
water-taming
preexisting
populations isolated or mingled to various degrees, rein-
forcing the societal
stratiﬁcation further by cultural
elements and value systems. The Varna system and a color
caste system were introduced, characterized by familial
occupation crystallized with codiﬁed conduct and func-
tions in the subdivided, hierarchical society. This, indeed,
was reﬂected in the NRY chromosome composition of
various stratiﬁed demes (castes and tribes) of Tamil Nadu.
The initial settlements in various niches far apart from
each other
and expansion lead to
geographical dispersal, and hence we could observe the
coancestry of many demes as we described in the Southern
Indian DLF populations such as Piramalai Kallar, Van-
niyar, Nadar, Ezhava, and Thiyya, all with similar family,
lifestyle, and subsistence (ArunKumar et al., 2012b;
Kavitha, 2008)dwhereas in the case of Brahmin- and
Vellala-related communities,
they were closer to each
other and stand isolated from the rest of the population
irrespective of
the state from where they live now
(ArunKumar 2012; ArunKumar et al., 2012b). The genetic
landscape thus ﬁts well with an ancient demic expansion
with dry land cultivation of this L1 gene pool, and a later
migration of R1a1 people, with wet
land agriculture
technology. Presumably the religion was incidental and
the Vedic culture made them stay isolated at the NRY
level
through the anuloma and prathiloma concepts,
resulting in many Brahmin populations of India absorbing
early settled female gene pools into their fold (Majumder,
2008; Shastri, 1976). The lifestyle of the Sangam period
explains the religious harmony of that period with Bud-
dhism, Jainism, and a more appealing HinduismdBakthi
movements, Vaishnava philosophy, and birth reincarna-
tion. The urban centers and sea ports such as Poompuhar,
Vanchi, and Korkai of the East and West coasts of the
lower Deccan traded pearls, peacocks, sandalwood, teak,

(100s of km)

Genomic Diversity & “Human Kind” in India Chapter | 7 117

ebony, and pepper with Romans, known as “Yavanars”
(Thapar, 1995). The afﬂuent, urban life style of this period
is described at length in great epics “Silappathikaram” and
“Manikegalai,” the Sangam literature (w2000 ybp). The
advent of land holdings presumably in combination with
these religious thoughts lead to further crystallization of
various demes. Family, the basic unit of a modern society
with patriarchy and monogamy, came into vogue in these
modern populations, though many tribal populations even
today show varied cultures, values, and belief systems in
marriage and lifestyle. As on date in a caste characterized
by endogamy and clan exogamy, many times the clans,
paternal lineages of a given caste have been drawn from
various directions. Higher the status in social hierarchy,
hegemony, and afﬂuence, was strong their belief system
(Pitchappan et al., unpublished). These pointers indicate
that the caste system in Tamil Nadu (Sanghvi et al., 1981)
is very young, only w2000 years, and it reinforced the
already structured Tamil society. A similar picture is
emerging in many parts of the country as well (the
Genographic India data). These divergent gene pools,
living sympatrically isolated in a given geography may not
be equally susceptible to a given epidemic as we discuss in
the next section.

IMPLICATIONS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE

Not All the Infected Develop the Disease
It is common knowledge that every body in the population
does not contract a ﬂu or cold, and this is by virtue of the
individual genetic composition: immunogenome. We have
shown enormous genetic distances between various caste
groups and populations of India (Pitchappan, 2002). Thus
not all the castes may be susceptible to a given epidemic to
the same degree. A classical example is the correlation
between HIV-infected “long term nonprogressors” and
HLA B57 allele that is present only in select populations/
castes of India and not in all (Rajasekar et al., 1987;
Jagannathan et al., 2011; Pitchappan, 2015). With the
advent of germ theory, all the infections are considered as
the product of an infectious agent, virus, or bacteria. We
now know that in many instances a disease is not directly
caused by the concerned bacteria/virus itself, rather it is
the host
(HIV),
imbalance (diabetes), or the germ-induced
biochemical
pathology (leprosy). Many times the immunopatholog-
ical
response to the antigenic constituents (proteins,
breakdown products) results in the disease state, such as
nephritis and multiple sclerosis (MS) (Cardona and Ivanyi,
2011). Major
these genes
involved in antigen presentation, immunological, and in-
ﬂammatory pathways are located in the MHC region in
c6p21.3: allelic polymorphism is the highest in some of

that harbor many of

response

loci

reaction, be

it

immune

these loci (Trowsdale and Knight, 2013) (Table 7.1). The
greater the diversity of a given locus, the greater it is
generally believed that it is involved in natural selection
processes (Cavalli-Sforza, 2007). In spite of these great
discoveries and better understanding of these diseases,
many of them defy solution and better understanding
(HIV, leprosy, MS, diabetes, etc.). Diseases other than the
monogenic, and many times complex and chronic disease
are polygenic and multifactorial. One will not thus get a
disease that easily. If we invoke six different loci involved
in a disease process, the probability of obtaining such
combination is one in milliondsimilar to winning the
lottery. But within a family among two given sibships, it is
of the order of one or two digits depending on the linkage
of these loci on the chromosome and among the parents.
These are exempliﬁed by the fact that not all the intimate
contacts of leprosy patients sharing the same domicile and
nutrition develop the disease during their lifetime but the
concordance rate of leprosy and TB manifestation is
w85% in identical twins (Chakravartti and Vogel, 1973;
van der Eijk et al., 2007). This is an indicator that host
genetics is more important in disease manifestation rather
than the infectious agent per se. This assumes greater
signiﬁcance at the “ethnic,” population, and continental
level. By virtue of the founder effect, inbreeding, and
endogamy, even many six loci MHC haplotypes are
unique to given populations (Balakrishnan et al., 1996)
and one may not expect all of them to behave in a similar
fashion to an infection.

Lotus and Cactus Model
We call this the “Lotus and Cactus model” (Pitchappan,
2015b): a lotus grows in a pond and a cactus in a desert:
but not the other way. Thus a TB patient’s lung is an ideal
“nutrient broth” for the TB bacilli to grow. Our whole
Genome Scan using microsatellite markers in 256 affected
sib pair from India has identiﬁed a handful of markers in
the genome predisposing for leprosy (Siddiqui et al.,
2001; Tosh et al., 2002). Our study has been replicated in
Vietnamese cohorts: a rare event that two genome scans
on entirely different cohorts are concordant (Mira et al.,
2003). Furthermore,
the utility of disparate demes in
disease studies have been demonstrated time and again in
leprosy. Genome scans that proved positive with c10p13
in our study did not hold for another marker in c20: while
c20 association is valid in Tamil Nadu samples, it did
not show any association in patients from Andhra Pradesh
(Tosh et al., 2002). Similar observations have been made
in psoriasis, TB (Pitchappan, 2002; Pitchappan et al.,
1989), and cardiovascular diseases (unpublished).
In
these cases the relative risks increased multifold on
stratiﬁcation of samples based on caste matched case
controls.

118 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

TABLE 7.1 Allelic (Sequence) Polymorphism of Select Major Histocompatibility Loci in c6-p21.3, as of July 2015:
The Phenotype (Protein Level) Polymorphisms are Also Listed (Ref: www.hla.alleles.org/nomenclature/stats.html)

Gene

Alleles

Proteins

Nulls

Gene

Alleles

Proteins

Nulls

Gene

Alleles

Proteins

Nulls

Gene

Alleles

Proteins

Nulls

A

3192

2245

150

B

3977

2938

128

HLA Class I

C

2740

1941

89

HLA Class II

E

17

6

1

F

22

4

0

G

50

16

2

DRA

7

2

0

DRB

1868

1364

45

DQA1

DQB1

DPA1

DPB1

DMA

DMB

DOA

DOB

54

32

1

807

539

20

40

20

0

550

447

15

7

4

0

13

7

0

12

3

1

13

5

0

DRB1

DRB2

DRB3

DRB4

DRB5

DRB6

DRB7

DRB8

DRB9

HLA Class II - DRB Alleles

1764

1290

39

1

0

0

59

47

1

16

9

3

21

18

2

3

0

0

MICA

102

80

2

Other Non-HLA Genes

MICB

41

27

2

1

0

0

2

0

0

TAP1

12

6

1

1

0

0

TAP2

12

5

0

Pharmacogenomics
There are many studies in recent
times showing an
unequivocal association of select genes with hypersensi-
tivity to select drugs. One such widely known is Abacavir,
an antiretroviral drug commonly used to treat AIDS pa-
tients, and patients with HLA-B*57:01 develop severe
adverse reactions. Another sister clade of this HLA, viz
B*58:01 has on the other hand been shown to cause severe
cutaneous adverse reactions with an allopurinol treatment
for gout patients. Hence the clinics have started testing
HLA B*57 and *58 status before prescribing these drugs.
Nonetheless, the major catch in this approach is the fre-
quency of these alleles in various populations. It is known
that HIV infected patients with HLA B*57 normally turn
into long-term nonprogressors (LTNP) and in India too
these patients show good CD4 count and may stay healthy
for a long time without progressing toward AIDS (Jagan-
nathan et al., 2011). HLA B17, particularly its split, B*57,

is one of the common alleles in India to be called a Telugu
haplotype in a Durban, South African study, as early as
1979 (Hammond et al., 1979). This allele and its haplotype
HLA A1-B17 is present only in certain populations of India
and, again, not all the castes of a state (Pitchappan, 2015a).
In order to put these tools to effective use one may need to
map the immunogenome of a country. The “ethnic” di-
versity, though, could pose a problem to clinicians and
epidemiologists; it is a boon to geneticists to unravel the
mysteries of disease susceptibility. Many times epidemi-
ologists look at the variables known to them only to forget
the host and pathogen genomic diversities.

Survival Dictum
The MHC haplotypes of various world populations are very
disparate, and this is true with Indian castes as well. When a
polygenic and multifactorial etiopathology is invoked for a
disease, the combination of genome and markers involved

Genomic Diversity & “Human Kind” in India Chapter | 7 119

need to be looked at as we know that these may be different
from one population to another. The genomic diversity at
the level of host and parasite poses a greater hurdle in
vaccine development
(Walker and McMichael, 2012).
In the process of coevolution of a host and parasite over a
period of time, this is not surprising. An elegant study on
the correlates of genomic deletions in the TB bacilli and the
extant of lung lesions in TB patinets revealed greater
the genomic deletions in the pathogen, was less extensive
the lung lesionsdthat means a less
severe disease
(Gagneux and Small, 2007). This has great relevance in
high endemic areas; it is important what bug (virulent vs
less virulent; more deleted vs less deleted) infects a child
when born in to this world. If less virulent TB bacilli infects
the baby ﬁrst, the chances of not developing a clinical
disease and becoming immune is greater. If a virulent,
“more infectious” bug infects,
the child might develop
clinical TB. This is the rationale of administering the TB
vaccine (BCG) soon after birth. This milieu of epidemi-
ology is ever changing and contemporary and this is all the
more important in deciphering the diseases; the epidemi-
ology of Chengleput now is not the same as that of 40 years
ago when BCG vaccine trial was conducted. This is true for
viral infections as well: in many HIV-infected individuals
the infections do not progress toward disease that easily.
Individuals with HLA B57 infected with HIV in general
become an long term non-progressor (LTNP), and their
CD4 counts are normal for a long time (Jagannathan et al.,
2011). These patients with HLA B57 are known to develop
escape mutants, thus evading attack by cytotoxic T cells of
the immune system and generated to kill the virus infected
CD4 cells (Leslie et al., 2004). In terms of epidemiology,
these apparently healthy “carriers” stay in the population
for a while,
thus infecting more partners (Pitchappan,
2015a).

Recent genomic studies also conform to the ﬁndings on
classical genetics. Modeling single nucleotide poly-
morphism (SNP) haplotype diversities obtained through
studying 600,000 SNPs suggests that both the Indian
ancestry components, one shared with West Asia and the
Caucasus and the other restricted to South Asia accounting
for more than 50% of the ancestry in Indian populations are
much older
than the purported Indo-Aryan invasion
3500 ybp. Many candidate genes of positive selection have
also been identiﬁed in India. Two of these, MSTN and
DOK5, both have potential implications in lipid metabolism
and the etiology of type 2 diabetes (Metspalu et al., 2011).
Positive selection operating on KIR polymorphisms have
selected natural killer cells expressing the dominant
KIR3DL1 at high frequency and high surface density,
respond strongly to cells perturbed in Bw4 expression.
Among the ﬁve binding-site motifs residues of KIR, D0 new
splits are more prevalent in Europeans and South Asians
markedly increasing their functional 3DL1 diversity, beyond

that deﬁned by D1eD2 motifs alone (Norman et al., 2007).
A recent collaborative genome-wide association study of
large international HIV cohorts, using 1.3 million SNPs
strewn over all the chromosomes, has demonstrated the
utility of such stratiﬁcation and clustering of samples into
ethnic groups, as of European, Hispanic, and African-
American ancestry based on PCA, to ﬁnd the real meaning
of identiﬁed associations and point out
the purpose of
rigorously controlling for ethnicity (Carrington and Walker,
2012). We have shown the importance of such stratiﬁcation
and matching the case control for castes in ancient gene
pools like India (Pitchappan et al., 2008; Ravikumar et al.,
1999), wherein geography and languages correlate to the
whole genome and also Y chromosomes (ArunKumar et al.,
2015a; Pitchappan, 2008). Studies that do not match case
controls for ethnicity and other demographic variables may
not identify the real association with the genes.

INDIA: GRANDEST EXPERIMENT OF
NATURE
Dobzhansky, who visited India during the 1960s (Prof.
Krishnaswamy (late) personal
communication) was
curious to understand the caste system in Southern India,
known for its inbreeding and endogamy. In many of his
writings Dobzhansky (1973) argues about the develop-
ment of excellence and puriﬁcation,
if any, by such
methods. He commented “Caste system in India is the
greatest biological experiment ever done on Homo sapi-
ens” (Sanghvi et al., 1981). India is no less true to the
words of Dobzhansky or Lalit Sanghvi, author of the B
squared method of genetic distance, a mathematician
turned genetic epidemiologist and a postdoctoral student
of Dobzhansky’s and Iravathi Karve’sdone of the doyen
in social anthropology from India, Deccan College,
Punedwho were the ﬁrst to appreciate the evolutionary
implications of such diverse gene pool. The enormous
diversity and distances identiﬁed between the various
social groups of India serve as ideal models to study the
role of these disparate gene pools in health and disease
status. The Genographic study and the genome scan studies
on India that have been carried out open up new avenues of
research in genetic epidemiology and community genetics.
The evolution and implications of genomic diversity of
humankind in India is thus indeed Nature’s grandest bio-
logical experimentation.

CONCLUSION
The enormous genetic diversity observed in India is a
sequela of ancient migrations and settlements in various
niches, and autochthonous expansion with incidental
language developments, all determined primarily by the
mode of subsistence. This initial stratiﬁcation crystallized

120 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

into caste system with the advent of settled agriculture and
the resultant patriarchal society. By virtue of their origin,
migration, divergence and settlements, and the resultant
genetic composition, all of these demes living sympatri-
cally isolated in a given niche/State may not be equally
susceptible to a given epidemic or disease. The host
genome and MHC determines whether all
the infected
develop the disease or notdan evolutionary way of
thinking. One has to explore this experimentation to un-
ravel the mysteries of the challenging diseases. This is very
much applicable in this genomic era as well.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Pitchappan thanks various funding agencies through the past four
decades that helped with this conceptual framework. These include
European Commission, Wellcome Trust-UK,
INSERM-France,
Government of India funding agencies viz. DST, DBT, ICMR and
The Genographic Project funded by The National Geographic Society,
IBM & Tedd Wait Family FoundationdThe United States. Pitch-
appan also acknowledges the contributions of all his students in
synthesizing this hypothesis by their contribution at various levels; the
notable few testing these hypotheses at various levels were Drs.
Brahmajothi, Balakrishnan, Shanmugalakshmi, Dheenadhayalan,
Vani, Kavitha, and Arunkumar. We acknowledge Chettinad Academy
of Research and Education, Kelampakkam and Sastra University,
Thirumalaisamudram for their support and vision.

REFERENCES

Allchin, B., Allchin, F.R., 1997. Origins of a Civilization: The Prehistory

and Early Archaeology of South Asia. Viking, New Delhi.

Ambedkar, B.R., 1956. States Reorganisation Act 1956 (New Delhi).
Arunkumar, G., Arun, V., Syama, A., Kavitha, V., Pitchappan, R., 2012a.
Genomic perspective of peopling and languages of the Indian Sub-
continent. In: Kumar, D. (Ed.), Genomics and Health in the Devel-
oping World. Oxford University Press, Oxford, p. xxxiii, 1501 p.

ArunKumar, G., Soria-Hernanz, D.F., Kavitha, V.J., Arun, V.S.,
Syama, A., Ashokan, K.S., Gandhirajan, K.T., Vijayakumar, K.,
Narayanan, M., Jayalakshmi, M., Ziegle, J.S., Royyuru, A.K.,
Parida, L., Wells, R.S., Renfrew, C., Schurr, T.G., Smith, C.T.,
Platt, D.E., Pitchappan, R., Consortium, T.G., 2012b. Population
differentiation of southern Indian male lineages correlates with agri-
cultural expansions predating the caste system. PLoS One 7 (11),
e50269. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0050269.

ArunKumar, G., Tatarinova, T.V., Duty, J., Rollo, D., Syama, A.,
Arun, V.S., Kavitha, V.J., Triska, P., Greenspan, B., Wells, R.S.,
Pitchappan, R., 2015a. Genome-wide signatures of male-mediated
migration shaping the Indian gene pool. Journal of Human Genetics.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/jhg.2015.51, jhg201551 [pii].

Arunkumar, G., Wei, L.-H., Kavitha, V.J., Syama, A., Arun, V.S.,
Sathua, S., Sahoo, R., Balakrishnan, R., Riba, T., Chakravarthy, J.,
Chaudhury, B., Panda, P.K., Das, P., Nayak, P.K., Li, H.,
Pitchappan, R., The Genographic Consortium, 2015b. A late Neolithic
expansion of Y chromosomal haplogroup O2a1-M95 from east to
west. Journal of Systematics and Evolution. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/
jse.12147, n/a-n/a.

ArunKumar, G., 2012. Studies on the NRY and mtDNA Genomic Di-
versity of Selected Indian Populations Carrying the NRY Haplogroups
R and O: Deciphering the Early Settlement of Austro-Asiatic and
Indo-European Speakers of India. Madurai Kamaraj University.

Atkinson, Q.D., 2011. Phonemic diversity supports a serial founder effect
model of language expansion from Africa. Science 332, 346e349.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1199295, 332/6027/346 [pii].

Balakrishnan, K., Pitchappan, R.M., Suzuki, K., Kumar, U.S.,
Santhakumari, R., Tokunaga, K., 1996. HLA afﬁnities of Iyers, a
Brahmin population of Tamil Nadu, South India. Human Biology 68,
523e537.

Balanovsky, O., Dibirova, K., Dybo, A., Mudrak, O., Frolova, S.,
Pocheshkhova, E., Haber, M., Platt, D., Schurr, T., Haak, W.,
Kuznetsova, M., Radzhabov, M., Balaganskaya, O., Romanov, A.,
Zakharova, T., Soria Hernanz, D.F., Zalloua, P., Koshel, S.,
Ruhlen, M., Renfrew, C., Wells, R.S., Tyler-Smith, C.,
Balanovska, E., 2011. Parallel evolution of genes and languages in the
Caucasus region. Molecular Biology and Evolution 28, 2905e2920.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msr126.

Bamshad, M., Kivisild, T., Watkins, W.S., Dixon, M.E., Ricker, C.E.,
Rao, B.B., Naidu, J.M., Prasad, B.V., Reddy, P.G., Rasanayagam, A.,
Papiha, S.S., Villems, R., Redd, A.J., Hammer, M.F., Nguyen, S.V.,
Carroll, M.L., Batzer, M.A., Jorde, L.B., 2001. Genetic evidence on
the origins of
Indian caste populations. Genome Research 11,
994e1004. http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/gr.173301.

Basu, A., Mukherjee, N., Roy, S., Sengupta, S., Banerjee, S.,
Chakraborty, M., Dey, B., Roy, M., Roy, B., Bhattacharyya, N.P.,
Roychoudhury, S., Majumder, P.P., 2003. Ethnic India: a genomic
view, with special reference to peopling and structure. Genome
Research 13, 2277e2290. http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/gr.1413403.

Basu Mallick, C.,

Iliescu, F.M., Mols, M., Hill, S., Tamang, R.,
Chaubey, G., Goto, R., Ho, S.Y., Gallego Romero, I., Crivellaro, F.,
Hudjashov, G., Rai, N., Metspalu, M., Mascie-Taylor, C.G.,
Pitchappan, R., Singh, L., Mirazon-Lahr, M., Thangaraj, K.,
Villems, R., Kivisild, T., 2013. The light skin allele of SLC24A5 in
South Asians and Europeans shares identity by descent. PLoS Ge-
netics 9, e1003912. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1003912,
PGENETICS-D-13-01047 [pii].

Bellwood, P.S., Renfrew, C., McDonald Institute for Archaeological
Research, 2002. Examining the Farming/Language Dispersal Hypothesis.
McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research. Distributed by Oxbow
Books, Cambridge, UK Oxford.

Brahmajothi, V., Pitchappan, R.M., Kakkanaiah, V.N., Sashidhar, M.,
Rajaram, K., Ramu, S., Palanimurugan, K., Paramasivan, C.N.,
Prabhakar, R., 1991. Association of pulmonary tuberculosis and HLA
in south India. Tubercle 72, 123e132.

Cardona, P.J., Ivanyi, J., 2011. The secret trumps, impelling the patho-
genicity of tubercle bacilli. Enfermedades Infecciosas y Microbiología
Clínica 29 (Suppl. 1), 14e19. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0213-
005X(11)70013-1, S0213-005X(11)70013-1 [pii].

Carrington, M., Walker, B.D., 2012. Immunogenetics of spontaneous
control of HIV. Annual Review of Medicine 63, 131e145. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev-med-062909-130018.

Cavalli-Sforza, L.L., Menozzi, P., Piazza, A., 1994. The History and
Geography of Human Genes. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Cavalli-Sforza, L.L., 1997. Genes, peoples, and languages. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 94,
7719e7724.

Genomic Diversity & “Human Kind” in India Chapter | 7 121

Cavalli-Sforza, L.L., 2007. Human evolution and its relevance for genetic
epidemiology. Annual Review of Genomics and Human Genetics 8,
1e15. http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.genom.8.080706.092403.

Chaix, R., Austerlitz, F., Khegay, T., Jacquesson, S., Hammer, M.F.,
Heyer, E., Quintana-Murci, L., 2004. The genetic or mythical ancestry
of descent groups: lessons from the Y chromosome. The American
Journal of Human Genetics 75, 1113e1116. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1086/425938, S0002-9297(07)60078-0 [pii].

Chaix, R., Quintana-Murci, L., Hegay, T., Hammer, M.F., Mobasher, Z.,
Austerlitz, F., Heyer, E., 2007. From social to genetic structures in
central Asia. Current Biology 17, 43e48. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.cub.2006.10.058, S0960-9822(06)02433-X [pii].

Jayalakshmi, M., Kalyanaraman, N., Pitchappan, R., 2012. The genetics of
leprosy in India. In: Kumar, D. (Ed.), Genomics and Health in the
Developing World. Oxford University Press, Oxford, p. xxxiii, 1501 p.
Karashima, N., Subbarayalu, Y., Matsui, T., 1978. A Concordance of the

Names in Cola Inscriptions. Sarvodaya Ilakkiya Pannai, Madurai.

Kavitha, V.J., 2008. Studies on the Genomic Diversity of Southern Indian

Breeding Isolates. Madurai Kamaraj University.

Kivisild, T., Bamshad, M.J., Kaldma, K., Metspalu, M., Metspalu, E.,
Reidla, M., Laos, S., Parik, J., Watkins, W.S., Dixon, M.E.,
Papiha, S.S., Mastana, S.S., Mir, M.R., Ferak, V., Villems, R., 1999.
Deep common ancestry of Indian and Western-Eurasian mitochondrial
DNA lineages. Current Biology 9, 1331e1334, bb9v50 [pii].

Chakravartti, M.R., Vogel, F., 1973. A Twin Study on Leprosy. G.

Kochhar, R., 2000. The Vedic People: Their History and Geography.

Thieme.

Champaklakshmi, R., 2001. Reappraisal of a Brahmanical Institution: the
Brahmadeya and its ramiﬁcations in early midieval South India. In:
Hall, K.R. (Ed.), Structure and Society in Early South India: Essays in
Honour of Noboru Karashima. Oxford University Press, Delhi,
pp. 59e84.

Chaubey, G., Metspalu, M., Choi, Y., Magi, R., Romero, I.G., Soares, P.,
van Oven, M., Behar, D.M., Rootsi, S., Hudjashov, G., Mallick, C.B.,
Karmin, M., Nelis, M., Parik, J., Reddy, A.G., Metspalu, E., van
Driem, G., Xue, Y., Tyler-Smith, C., Thangaraj, K., Singh, L.,
Remm, M., Richards, M.B., Lahr, M.M., Kayser, M., Villems, R.,
Kivisild, T., 2011. Population genetic structure in Indian Austroasiatic
speakers: the role of landscape barriers and sex-speciﬁc admixture.
Molecular Biology and Evolution 28, 1013e1024. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1093/molbev/msq288, msq288 [pii]

Dobzhansky, T., 1973. Genetic Diversity and Human Equality. Basic

Books, New York.

Fuller, D.Q., 2006. Agricultural origins and frontiers in South Asia: a

working synthesis. Journal of World Prehistory 20, 1e86.

Fuller, D.Q., 2007. Non-human genetics, agricultural origins and historical
linguistics in South Asia. In: Petraglia, M.D., Allchin, B. (Eds.), The
Evolution and History of Human Populations in South Asia. Springer,
Dordrecht, The Netherlands, pp. 393e443.

Gagneux, S., Small, P.M., 2007. Global phylogeography of Mycobacte-
rium tuberculosis and implications for tuberculosis product develop-
ment. The Lancet Infectious Diseases 7, 328e337. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/S1473-3099(07)70108-1, S1473-3099(07)70108-1 [pii].

Orient Longman, New Delhi.

Krishnamurti, B., 2003. The Dravidian Languages. Cambridge University

Press, Cambridge.

Kumar, V., Reddy, A.N., Babu, J.P., Rao, T.N., Langstieh, B.T.,
Thangaraj, K., Reddy, A.G., Singh, L., Reddy, B.M., 2007. Y-
chromosome evidence suggests a common paternal heritage of
Austro-Asiatic populations. BMC Evolutionary Biology 7, 47. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1186/1471-2148-7-47, 1471-2148-7-47 [pii].

Leslie, A.J., Pfafferott, K.J., Chetty, P., Draenert, R., Addo, M.M.,
Feeney, M., Tang, Y., Holmes, E.C., Allen, T., Prado, J.G., Altfeld, M.,
Brander, C., Dixon, C., Ramduth, D., Jeena, P., Thomas, S.A., St
John, A., Roach, T.A., Kupfer, B., Luzzi, G., Edwards, A., Taylor, G.,
Lyall, H., Tudor-Williams, G., Novelli, V., Martinez-Picado, J.,
Kiepiela, P., Walker, B.D., Goulder, P.J., March 2004. HIV evolution:
CTL escape mutation and reversion after transmission. Nature Medicine
10 (3), 282e289. Epub 2004 Feb 8. pmid:14770175.

Li, J.Z., Absher, D.M., Tang, H., Southwick, A.M., Casto, A.M.,
Ramachandran, S., Cann, H.M., Barsh, G.S., Feldman, M., Cavalli-
Sforza, L.L., Myers, R.M., 2008. Worldwide human relationships
inferred from genome-wide patterns of variation. Science 319,
1100e1104. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1153717, 319/5866/
1100 [pii].

Liu, H., Prugnolle, F., Manica, A., Balloux, F., 2006. A geographically
explicit genetic model of worldwide human-settlement history. The
American Journal of Human Genetics 79, 230e237. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1086/505436, S0002-9297(07)63131-0 [pii].

Mahadevan, I., 1977. The Indus Script: Texts, Concordance, and Tables.

Hammond, M.G., Appadoo, B., Brain, P., 1979. HLA and cancer in South

Archaeological Survey of India, New Delhi.

African Indians. Tissue Antigens 14, 296e302.

Majumder, P.P., 1998. People of India: biological diversity and afﬁnities.

Higham, C.F.W., 2002. Languages and farming dispersals: Austroasiatic
languages and rice cultivation. In: Bellwood, P., Renfrew, A.C. (Eds.),
Examining the Farming/Language Dispersal Hypothesis. McDonald
Institute, Cambridge, pp. 223e232.

Jagannathan, L., Chaturvedi, M., Satish, B., Satish, K.S., Desai, A.,
Subbakrishna, D.K., Satishchandra, P., Pitchappan, R., Balakrishnan, K.,
Kondaiah, P., Ravi, V., 2011. HLA-B57 and gender inﬂuence the
occurrence of tuberculosis in HIV infected people of south India. Clinical
and Developmental
Immunology 2011, 549023. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1155/2011/549023.

Javed, A., Mele, M., Pybus, M., Zalloua, P., Haber, M., Comas, D.,
Netea, M.G., Balanovsky, O., Balanovska, E., Jin, L., Yang, Y.,
Arunkumar, G., Pitchappan, R., Bertranpetit,
J., Calafell, F.,
Parida, L., 2012. Recombination networks as genetic markers in a
human variation study of the Old World. Human Genetics 131,
601e613. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00439-011-1104-8.

Evolutionary Anthropology 6, 100e110.

Majumder, P.P., 2008. Genomic inferences on peopling of south Asia.
Current Opinion in Genetics & Development 18, 280e284. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gde.2008.07.003.

McAlpin, D.W., 1981. Proto-Elamo-Dravidian: the evidence and its im-
plications. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society 71,
3e155.

McElreavey, K., Quintana-Murci, L., 2005. A population genetics
perspective of
the Indus Valley through uniparentally-inherited
markers. Annals of Human Biology 32, 154e162. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1080/03014460500076223, K74332955H187555 [pii].

Mellars, P., Gori, K.C., Carr, M., Soares, P.A., Richards, M.B., 2013.
Genetic and archaeological perspectives on the initial modern human
colonization of southern Asia. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America 110, 10699e10704.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1306043110, 1306043110 [pii].

122 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

Metspalu, M., Romero, I.G., Yunusbayev, B., Chaubey, G., Mallick, C.B.,
Hudjashov, G., Nelis, M., Magi, R., Metspalu, E., Remm, M.,
Pitchappan, R., Singh, L., Thangaraj, K., Villems, R., Kivisild, T.,
2011. Shared and unique components of human population structure
and genome-wide signals of positive selection in South Asia. The
American Journal of Human Genetics 89, 731e744. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.010, S0002-9297(11)00488-5 [pii].

Minstry of Tribal Affairs: GOI, 2015. Scheduled Tribes Data. http://tribal.

nic.in/Content/STATISTICSDivision.aspx (accessed 09.08.15.).

Mira, M.T., Alcais, A., Van Thuc, N., Thai, V.H., Huong, N.T., Ba, N.N.,
Verner, A., Hudson, T.J., Abel, L., Schurr, E., 2003. Chromosome
6q25 is linked to susceptibility to leprosy in a Vietnamese population.
Nature Genetics 33, 412e415. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ng1096,
ng1096 [pii]

Misra, V.N., 2001. Prehistoric human colonization of India. Journal of

Biosciences 26, 491e531.

Norman, P.J., Abi-Rached, L., Gendzekhadze, K., Korbel, D.,
Gleimer, M., Rowley, D., Bruno, D., Carrington, C.V.,
Chandanayingyong, D., Chang, Y.H., Crespi, C., Saruhan-
Direskeneli, G., Fraser, P.A., Hameed, K., Kamkamidze, G.,
Koram, K.A., Layrisse, Z., Matamoros, N., Mila, J., Park, M.H.,
Pitchappan, R.M., Ramdath, D.D., Shiau, M.Y., Stephens, H.A.,
Struik, S., Verity, D.H., Vaughan, R.W., Tyan, D., Davis, R.W.,
Riley, E.M., Ronaghi, M., Parham, P., 2007. Unusual selection on
the KIR3DL1/S1 natural killer cell receptor in Africans. Nature
Genetics 39, 1092e1099. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ng2111, ng2111
[pii]

Pitchappan, R.M., Kakkanaiah, V.N., Rajashekar, R., Arulraj, N.,
Muthukkaruppan, V.R., 1984. HLA antigens in South India: I. Major
groups of Tamil Nadu. Tissue Antigens 24, 190e196.

Pitchappan, R.M., Koteeswaran, A., Kakkaniah, V.N., Manickasundari, M.,
V.,
Rajaram,
Brahmajothibai, V., 1989. HLA Bw57 and DR7 association with pso-
riasis vulgaris in south India. Tissue Antigens 34, 133e137.

V., Muthuveeralakshmi,

P., Mahendran,

Pitchappan, R.M., Balakrishnan, K., Sudarsen, V., Brahmajothi, V.,
Mahendran, V., Amalraj, S., Santhakumari, R., Vijayakumar, K.,
Sivalingam, P., Ramasamy, S., 1997. Sociobiology and HLA genetic
polymorphism in hill tribes, the Irula of the Nilgiri hills and the
Malayali of the Shevroy hills, south India. Human Biology 69,
59e74.

Pitchappan, R., Kavitha, V., Jayalakshmi, M., 2008. HLA genomic di-
versity of India and its implications in HIV pandemic. International
Journal of Human Genetics 8, 143e153.

Pitchappan, R., 1988. Founder effects explain the distri- bution of the HLA
A1-B17 but not the absence of the A1-B8 haplotypes in India. Journal
of Genetics 67, 101e111.

Pitchappan, R.M., 2002. Castes, migrations, immunogenetics and infec-

tious diseases in south India. Community Genetics 5, 157e161.

Pitchappan, R.M., 2008. Genomic implications of Dravidian cultural
evolution. In: First Great Migrations of Peoples. UNESCO, Paris,
pp. 60e67, 169-170,446.

Pitchappan, R., 2015a. Personalized medicine. Chettinad Health City

Medical Journal 4, 2.

Pitchappan, R.M, 2015b. Not all the infected develop the disease e a
“Lotus and Cactus” model. Infection, Genetics and Evolution. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.meegid.2015.11.007.

Qamar, R., Ayub, Q., Mohyuddin, A., Helgason, A., Mazhar, K.,
Mansoor, A., Zerjal, T., Tyler-Smith, C., Mehdi, S.Q., 2002.

Y-chromosomal DNA variation in Pakistan. The American Journal of
Human Genetics 70, 1107e1124. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/339929,
S0002-9297(07)62507-5 [pii].

Quintana-Murci, L., Fellous, M., 2001. The human Y chromosome:
the biological role of a “functional wasteland”. Journal of Biomed-
icine and Biotechnology 1, 18e24. http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/
S1110724301000080, S1110724301000080 [pii].

Rajalingam, R., Du, Z., Meenagh, A., Luo, L., Kavitha, V.J., Pavithra-
Arulvani, R., Vidhyalakshmi, A., Sharma, S.K., Balazs,
I.,
Reed, E.F., Pitchappan, R.M., Middleton, D., May 2008. Distinct
diversity of KIR genes in three southern Indian populations: com-
parison with world populations revealed a link between KIR gene
content and pre-historic human migrations. Immunogenetics 60 (5),
207e217. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00251-008-0286-2, Epub 2008
Mar 28, pmid:18369612.

Rajasekar, R., Kakkanaiah, V.N., Pitchappan, R.M., 1987. HLA antigens
in South India: II. Selected caste groups of Tamil Nadu. Tissue An-
tigens 30, 113e118.

Ramachandran, S., Deshpande, O., Roseman, C.C., Rosenberg, N.A.,
Feldman, M.W., Cavalli-Sforza, L.L., 2005. Support from the relationship
of genetic and geographic distance in human populations for a serial
founder effect originating in Africa. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America 102, 15942e15947. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0507611102, 0507611102 [pii].

Ravikumar, M., Dheenadhayalan, V., Rajaram, K., Lakshmi, S.S.,
Kumaran, P.P., Paramasivan, C.N., Balakrishnan, K., Pitchappan, R.M.,
1999. Associations of HLA-DRB1, DQB1 and DPB1 alleles with
pulmonary tuberculosis in south India. Tubercle and Lung Disease 79,
309e317, S0962847999902137 [pii].

Reich, D., Thangaraj, K., Patterson, N., Price, A.L., Singh, L., 2009.
Reconstructing Indian population history. Nature 461, 489e494.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature08365.

Renfrew, C., 1996. Language families and the spread of farming. In:
Harris, D.R. (Ed.), The Origins and Spread of Agriculture and
Pastoralism in Eurasia. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington,
DC, pp. 70e92.

Sahoo, S., Singh, A., Himabindu, G., Banerjee, J., Sitalaximi, T., Gaikwad, S.,
Trivedi, R., Endicott, P., Kivisild, T., Metspalu, M., Villems, R.,
Kashyap, V.K., 2006. A prehistory of Indian Y chromosomes: evaluating
demic diffusion scenarios. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 103, 843e848. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1073/pnas.0507714103, 0507714103 [pii].

Sanghvi, L.D., Balakrishnan, V., Karve, I., 1981. Biology of the People of
Tamil Nadu. Indian Society of Human Genetics and Indian Anthro-
pological Society, Calcutta.

Semino, O., Magri, C., Benuzzi, G., Lin, A.A., Al-Zahery, N., Battaglia, V.,
Maccioni, L., Triantaphyllidis, C., Shen, P., Oefner, P.J.,
Zhivotovsky, L.A., King, R., Torroni, A., Cavalli-Sforza, L.L.,
Underhill, P.A., Santachiara-Benerecetti, A.S., 2004. Origin, diffusion,
and differentiation of Y-chromosome haplogroups E and J: inferences on
the neolithization of Europe and later migratory events in the Mediterra-
nean area. The American Journal of Human Genetics 74, 1023e1034.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/386295, S0002-9297(07)64366-3 [pii].

Sengupta, S., Zhivotovsky, L.A., King, R., Mehdi, S.Q., Edmonds, C.A.,
Chow, C.E., Lin, A.A., Mitra, M., Sil, S.K., Ramesh, A., Usha
Rani, M.V., Thakur, C.M., Cavalli-Sforza, L.L., Majumder, P.P.,
Underhill, P.A., 2006. Polarity and temporality of high-resolution
y-chromosome distributions in India identify both indigenous and

Genomic Diversity & “Human Kind” in India Chapter | 7 123

exogenous expansions and reveal minor genetic inﬂuence of Central
Asian pastoralists. The American Journal of Human Genetics 78,
202e221. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/499411, S0002-9297(07)62353-2
[pii].

Shanmugalakshmi, S., Balakrishnan, K., Manoharan, K., Pitchappan, R.M.,
2003. HLA-DRB1*, -DQB1* in Piramalai Kallars and Yadhavas, two
Dravidian-speaking castes of Tamil Nadu, South India. Tissue Antigens
61, 451e464, 061 [pii].

Sharma, S., Rai, E., Sharma, P., Jena, M., Singh, S., Darvishi, K.,
Bhat, A.K., Bhanwer, A.J., Tiwari, P.K., Bamezai, R.N., 2009. The
Indian origin of paternal haplogroup R1a1(*) substantiates the
autochthonous origin of Brahmins and the caste system. Journal of
Human Genetics 54, 47e55. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/jhg.2008.2,
jhg20082 [pii]

Shastri, K.A.N., 1976. A History of South India: From Prehistoric Times
to the Fall of Vijayanagar, fourth ed. Oxford University Press, Madras.
Shi, W., Ayub, Q., Vermeulen, M., Shao, R.G., Zuniga, S., van der
Gaag, K., de Knijff, P., Kayser, M., Xue, Y., Tyler-Smith, C., 2010.
A worldwide survey of human male demographic history based on Y-
SNP and Y-STR data from the HGDP-CEPH populations. Molecular
Biology and Evolution 27, 385e393. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/mol-
bev/msp243, msp243 [pii]

Siddiqui, M.R., Meisner, S., Tosh, K., Balakrishnan, K., Ghei, S.,
Fisher, S.E., Golding, M., Shanker Narayan, N.P., Sitaraman, T.,
Sengupta, U., Pitchappan, R., Hill, A.V., 2001. A major susceptibility
locus for leprosy in India maps to chromosome 10p13. Nature Ge-
netics 27, 439e441. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/8695886958.

Southworth, F.C., 2005a. Linguistic Archaeology of South Asia.

Routledge.

Southworth, F.C., 2005b. Prehistoric implications of

the Dravidian
element in the NIA lexicon with special reference to Marathi. Inter-
national Journal of Dravidian Linguistics 34, 17e28.

Subbarayalu, Y., 2012. South India Under the Cholas. Oxford University

Press, New Delhi, Oxford.

Thapar, R., 1995. The First Millennium B.C.

in the Northern India

(Bombay).

Tosh, K., Meisner, S., Siddiqui, M.R., Balakrishnan, K., Ghei, S.,
Golding, M., Sengupta, U., Pitchappan, R.M., Hill, A.V., 2002.
A region of chromosome 20 is linked to leprosy susceptibility in a
South Indian population. The Journal of Infectious Diseases 186,
1190e1193. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/343806, JID020472 [pii].

Trautmann, T.R., 1981. Dravidian Kinship. Sage Publications Pvt Limited.
Trautmann, T.R., 2011. India: Brief History of a Civilization. Oxford

University Press, New York.

Trivedi, R., Sahoo, S., Singh, A., Bindu, G.H., Banerjee, J., Tandon, M.,
Gaikwad, S., Rajkumar, R., Sitalaximi, T., Ashma, R., Chainy, G.B.N.,
Kashyap, V.K., 2008. Genetic imprints of pleistocene origin of Indian
populations: a comprehensive phylogeographic sketch of
Indian
Y-chromosomes. Search Results International Journal of Human
Genetics 8 (1e2), 97e118.

Trowsdale, J., Knight, J.C., 2013. Major histocompatibility complex ge-
nomics and human disease. Annual Review of Genomics and Human

Genetics 14, 301e323. http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev-genom-
091212-153455.

Underhill, P.A., Passarino, G., Lin, A.A., Shen, P., Mirazon Lahr, M.,
Foley, R.A., Oefner, P.J., Cavalli-Sforza, L.L., 2001. The phylo-
geography of Y chromosome binary haplotypes and the origins of
modern human populations. Annals of Human Genetics 65, 43e62,
S0003480001008582 [pii].

Underhill,

P.A., Myres, N.M., Rootsi,

S., Metspalu, M.,
Zhivotovsky, L.A., King, R.J., Lin, A.A., Chow, C.E., Semino, O.,
Battaglia, V., Kutuev,
I., Jarve, M., Chaubey, G., Ayub, Q.,
Mohyuddin, A., Mehdi, S.Q., Sengupta, S., Rogaev, E.I.,
E.K.,
Khusnutdinova,
Balanovsky, O.,
Balanovska, E.,
Jeran, N., Augustin, D.H., Baldovic, M.,
Herrera, R.J., Thangaraj, K., Singh, V., Singh, L., Majumder, P.,
Rudan, P., Primorac, D., Villems, R., Kivisild, T., 2010. Separating
the post-Glacial coancestry of European and Asian Y chromosomes
within haplogroup R1a. European Journal of Human Genetics: EJHG
18, 479e484. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2009.194.

Pshenichnov, A.,

van der Eijk, E.A., van de Vosse, E., Vandenbroucke, J.P., van
Dissel, J.T., 2007. Heredity versus environment in tuberculosis in
twins:
the 1950s United Kingdom Prophit Survey Simonds and
Comstock revisited. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical
Care Medicine
http://dx.doi.org/10.1164/
rccm.200703-435OC, 200703-435OC [pii].

1281e1288.

176,

Walker, B., McMichael, A., 2012. The T-cell response to HIV. Cold
Spring Harbor Perspectives in Medicine 2. http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/
cshperspect.a007054, cshperspecta007054 [pii].

Watkins, W.S., Thara, R., Mowry, B.J., Zhang, Y., Witherspoon, D.J.,
Tolpinrud, W., Bamshad, M.J., Tirupati, S., Padmavati, R., Smith, H.,
Nancarrow, D., Filippich, C., Jorde, L.B., 2008. Genetic variation in
South Indian castes: evidence from Y-chromosome, mitochondrial,
and autosomal polymorphisms. BMC Genetics 9, 86. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1186/1471-2156-9-86.

Wei, W., Ayub, Q., Chen, Y., McCarthy, S., Hou, Y., Carbone, I., Xue, Y.,
Tyler-Smith, C., 2013. A calibrated human Y-chromosomal phylog-
eny based on resequencing. Genome Research 23, 388e395. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1101/gr.143198.112, gr143198.112 [pii].

I.,

Wells, R.S., Yuldasheva, N., Ruzibakiev, R., Underhill, P.A., Evseeva, I.,
Blue-Smith, J., Jin, L., Su, B., Pitchappan, R., Shanmugalakshmi, S.,
Balakrishnan, K., Read, M., Pearson, N.M., Zerjal, T., Webster, M.T.,
Zholoshvili,
Jamarjashvili, E., Gambarov, S., Nikbin, B.,
Dostiev, A., Aknazarov, O., Zalloua, P., Tsoy,
I., Kitaev, M.,
Mirrakhimov, M., Chariev, A., Bodmer, W.F., 2001. The Eurasian
heartland: a continental perspective on Y-chromosome diversity.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 98, 10244e10249.

Wood, M., 2007. The Story of India. BBC Books.
Zhong, H., Shi, H., Qi, X.B., Xiao, C.J., Jin, L., Ma, R.Z., Su, B., 2010.
Global distribution of Y-chromosome haplogroup C reveals the pre-
historic migration routes of African exodus and early settlement in
East Asia. Journal of Human Genetics 55, 428e435. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1038/jhg.2010.40, jhg201040 [pii]

Chapter 8

The Human Brain: Evolution and
Distinctive Features

T.M. Preuss
Emory University, Atlanta, GA, United States

human,

and

that

understanding

INTRODUCTION
If we accept that cognition and behavior are functions of
the brain, and if we accept
that humans have evolved
specialized cognitive and behavioral abilities, it follows that
there are properties of the human brain that are uniquely or
distinctively
those
distinctive features is the proper goal of the scientiﬁc study
of human brain evolution. For biologists of many stripes,
this has been difﬁcult to accept. Claims of human special-
ization smack of special pleading, amounting to denial of
the continuity of species, an attempt to create a false barrier
between humans and our closest relatives, the African great
apes. The propinquity of humans to chimpanzees and
bonobos has encouraged some to place them all in the
human genus, Homo (Goodman et al., 1998), or, with
similar logic, to regard humans as the “third chimpanzee”
(Diamond, 1992). This attitude seems consistent with
Darwin’s view that the differences between humans and
our closest relatives are matters of degree rather than kind
(Darwin, 1871), a view echoed by Huxley in his treatment
of human brain evolution (Huxley, 1863). For experimental
neuroscientists, whose evolutionary commitments may not
run very deep, human specializations can seem challenging
as well, potentially calling into question the value of results
obtained in model animals, be they monkeys, rodents, or
fruit ﬂies (Preuss and Robert, 2014).

Yet much of evolutionary biology is about barriers and
differences, speciﬁcally, the reproductive barriers created
by speciation and the differences that emerge between
species after the establishment of reproductive isolation.
Evolution is, after all, a theory of change, and species are,
after all, deﬁned by the features that make them different

from each other. Claims about human specializations must
ultimately stand or fall on the weight of evidence: One
can always be mistaken about matters of fact, and one can
make the more general error of failing to acknowledge
that species other than humans have evolved their own
special characteristics. But there is nothing necessarily
in proposing species-speciﬁc
unnatural or unbiological
characteristics of the human braindthat
is just what
evolutionary biologists do for other species and other
organ systems (Preuss, 2012a).

fossil brains, or more accurately,

Of course, the validity of empirical claims about human
brain evolution ultimately rests on the power of
the
investigative methods deployed and the quality of data
obtained. For much of its history, the ﬁeld has focused on
the analysis of
the
impressions of brains left on the inner surface of the skull
(endocasts). This paleoneurological approach provides
information about when in evolutionary history changes
took place in the size and shape of the brain, and sometimes
about changes in cortical folding, although impressions of
folds (gyri) and grooves (sulci) are rarely well preserved in
large-brained animals. Unfortunately, endocasts provide us
with no direct information about the neural structures and
circuits that carry out brain functions.
Inferring brain
function from endocasts is like trying to understand how a
computer works by studying the box it came indnot
pointless, especially if that is all you have to work with (or
if you think size is really all that matters, as some have), but
less than ideal. Clearly, we would be greatly aided by
having information about how the brains of humans
resemble and differ from those of other living speciesdthat
is, comparative experimental studies of actual brains. Until
recently, however, most of the experimental techniques

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00008-9
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

125

126 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

available to neuroscientists were suited for use almost
exclusively in experimental animal species, such as mon-
keys and rodents, because they require invasive and
terminal procedures. These techniques include injecting
chemicals into the brain to trace neuronal connections and
inserting electrodes to record from or electrically stimulate
neurons, and they usually end with the death of the subject,
in order to determine where the tracers went or to conﬁrm
where the electrode was placed. While these provide very
detailed information about model species, they cannot be
used in species off-limits for invasive research, which
include not only humans but, signiﬁcantly, great apes as
well.

Fortunately, we now have noninvasive neuroscientiﬁc
methods
that can provide data of a quality often
approaching, and for some purposes exceeding, that of
traditional invasive methods (Preuss, 2010; Rilling, 2008).
Prominent among these are the different neuroimaging
modalities, mainly different varieties of magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI). There are MRI-based methods
for
documenting brain morphology, for mapping myelin den-
sity (which is useful for making cortical maps), and for
tracking connectional pathways through white matter.
Connectivity studies, employing diffusion-weighted or
diffusion-tensor
imaging (DWI, DTI), are especially
important, given that the functions of brain regions depend
on their connections. There are also functional MRI
techniques, which measure regional brain activity levels.
These include task-based paradigms, where one compares
activity in different behavioral conditions, and “resting-
state” paradigms, used to identify brain regions that show
correlated patterns of activity or “functional connectivity”
(in contrast to the structural connectivity evaluated with
DWI). Not surprisingly, structures that are functionally
connected tend to be structurally connected, although the
relationship is not perfect. The virtue of these techniques,
from the standpoint of studying human evolution, is that
they can be used to directly study and compare humans,
great apes, and other nonhuman primates. The structural
techniques can even be used with brains acquired post-
mortem. An additional set of methods that has been brought
to bear on questions of brain evolution comes from
comparative molecular biology, including techniques from
genomics, proteomics, and related ﬁelds. As with the
neuroimaging techniques,
these do not require invasive
techniques, and so are ideal for comparative studies.
these techniques

for
studying human brain evolution, beginning in earnest in the
1990s, has greatly improved the research situation, there are
still serious obstacles. By deﬁnition, human specializations
are features of organization that evolved in our lineage after
it separated from the lineages leading to our closest
relatives, now generally considered to be the chimpanzee-
bonobo lineage (Figs. 8.1 and 8.2). Logically, therefore, a

Although the application of

candidate human specialization must be present in the hu-
man lineage, but absent in the chimpanzee-bonobo lineage.
Of course, a mere difference between humans and chim-
panzees could have resulted from a change in the
chimpanzee-bonobo lineage, rather than the human lineage.
For this reason, we need “outgroup” informationddata
from other closely related groups to estimate what
the
human-chimp ancestor was like. Ideally, we would also
have information from gorillas, orangutans, gibbons, and
Old World monkeys (such as macaques)din that order of
importance (Fig. 8.1).

In practice, we are far from the ideal. Currently, the
nonhuman primates for which we have the most informa-
tion are macaque monkeys, and thanks to the imaging
revolution, our knowledge of human brain organization is
rapidly growing. But access to a critical resourcedthe apes
themselvesdhas been sharply reduced in recent years. We
have some information about chimpanzees, but very little
about the other apes. This places serious limitations on the
quality of inferences we can make about human brain
specializations. Certainly, we can say quite a bit about the
similarities and differences between humans and macaques,
and while these are useful and suggestive, they do not paint
a very accurate or complete picture of human brain evo-
lution. Suppose, for example, that one were to identify
corresponding (homologous) brain areas in humans and
macaques that differ to some degree in their functional
properties (a number of such instances will be discussed
later in this chapter). With information only from humans
and macaques, we could not say whether the difference
arose in the human lineage or the macaque lineage. And if
it arose in the human lineage, it might have occurred after
the human-chimpanzee split, in which case it would be a
human specialization, or prior to it, in which case it would
be an ape-human (hominoid) specialization. In some cases,
one can plausibly (if not deﬁnitively) attribute changes to
the human side of the macaque-human split, such as the
tool-selective properties of the anterior inferior parietal
lobule of humans compared to its macaque homologue
(Peeters et al., 2009), but can we be sure chimpanzees do
not share that specialization? In general, the safest attri-
butions are probably those that involve major changes in
the size of a structure, given the enormous overall size of
the human brain. Yet even those inferences must be
considered highly provisional
in lieu of appropriate
comparative evidence.

The following review of human brain evolution is
necessarily selective, given space constraints. I focus on the
cortex, which is the part of the brain about which the most
data are available, reﬂecting the generally held view that
the cortex is where most of
the action occurred in
human brain evolution, although it
the
only brain region modiﬁed in human evolution. In addition,
I emphasize comparative studies over paleoneurology, not

is certainly not

Human Brain Evolution Chapter | 8 127

FIGURE 8.1 Phylogeny and taxonomy of the anthropoid primates. Branching orders and times are from Perelman et al. (2011). Branching time
estimates vary between studies; most current estimates of the human-chimpanzee divergence fall between 5 and 8 Ma. The hominoid taxonomy is from
de Sousa and Wood (2007).

only because I am more familiar with comparative research
but also because it speaks more directly to changes in the
internal organization of the brain and thus bears more
directly on functional changes. I also brieﬂy review some
results from comparative genomic and molecular biological
studies that are especially relevant to human brain evolu-
tion. In all these ﬁelds, I prioritize studies that include
chimpanzees, as well as humans, for reasons outlined
above. Finally, I emphasize results that speak to general
principles,
rather
the literature
comprehensively.

than trying to cover

This is very much my own view of human brain
evolution, and there are certainly others. In fact, a number
of books and reviews on this subject have been published in
recent years, in which you will ﬁnd coverage of issues not
dealt with here, as well as points of view that are sometimes
in accord with my own, and sometimes at variance with
them (eg, Allen, 2009; Cohen, 2010; de Sousa and Cunha,
2012; Falk, 2015; Gazzaniga, 2008; Holloway, 2008; Kaas
and Preuss, 2013; Passingham, 2008; Premack, 2010;
Rilling and Stout, 2014; Schoenemann, 2006; Sherwood
et al., 2008).

128 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

FIGURE 8.2 The fossil record of hominin phylogeny and brain size evolution. Date ranges for fossils are from Wood and Baker (2011). Brain sizes (in
cubic centimeters) are from de Sousa and Cunha (2012) and, for Pan paniscus only, from Hopkins et al. (2009). Sample sizes are indicated in parentheses.
Wood and Baker are not explicit about the details of relationships among each of the species, but there is general agreement that the genus Homo evolved
from an australopithecine ancestor.

SOME BASIC NEUROANATOMY
It is not possible to give anything like a detailed account of
human brain structure here; instead, I will introduce the
structures most germane to the remainder of the chapter,
mainly the cortex and related structures.

It

is

to divide

convenient

the brain into the
cerebrum and the brainstem (Fig. 8.3). The paired cerebral
hemispheres are covered by the gray matter of the cerebral
cortex, a thin band composed of cell bodies (neurons and
glia), nerve ﬁbers, and blood vessels beneath which lies
the white matter, composed mainly of
the axons of
nerve cells traveling between different cortical regions
and between the cortex and structures deep in the hemi-
spheres and in the brainstem. The cells of the cortex are
stratiﬁed into six layers (Fig. 8.4AeC), each of which
receives a speciﬁc set of incoming ﬁbers and gives rise to
a speciﬁc set of outgoing ﬁbers. The cells of different
layers are also interconnected, with the strongest local
(intrinsic) connections being organized so as to link cells
into vertical arrays, often termed “mini-columns.” Mini-
columns are considered to be fundamental units of the

information-processing architecture of the cortex. Groups
of adjacent cell arrays form larger units, termed “areas,”
which share common inputs, outputs, and intrinsic con-
nections. Sometimes these areas can be distinguished by
microscopic examination, because when stained for cells
they have distinctively layering of cells or cells of unusual
size or density or because of some other distinctive his-
tological feature, such as horizontal and vertical distri-
bution of myelinated ﬁbers (Fig. 8.4D and E). These
microscopic approaches are called “cytoarchitecture” (or
cytoarchitectonics) and “myeloarchitecture,” respectively.
Even larger divisions are the lobes of the cerebral cortex,
including the frontal, parietal,
temporal, and occipital
lobes, which are named for the skull bones that overlie
them (Fig. 8.3).

Each lobe contains numerous areas, which fall

into
several
types. There are the primary sensory areas,
including the primary visual, auditory, and somatosensory
areas (Fig. 8.5). They are termed “primary” because they
receive strong and direct projections from divisions of the
thalamus, a structure at
the top of the brainstem that
themselves receive strong inputs from the sensory systems,

Human Brain Evolution Chapter | 8 129

FIGURE 8.3 Human brain morphology. (A, B) The location of the major lobes are shown in lateral (A) and medial (B) views of the left cerebral
hemisphere. The central sulcus (CS) separates the frontal and parietal lobes; the Sylvian ﬁssure (SF) separates the temporal lobe from the frontal and
parietal lobes. The insula is a region of limbic cortex buried within the SF. The cingulate sulcus (CgS) separates the cingulate cortex from the frontal and
parietal cortex. (CeE) T2-weighted MRI images showing the relationship of the cerebral hemispheres to deep structures, including the thalamus (th),
cerebellum (cb), and brainstem (bs). The section in C is in a parasagittal plane, with anterior (A) to the left. D and E are coronal sections; their locations are
marked in C. In T2-weighted images, the cortical gray matter appears as a light rim surrounding the darker white matter (wm). Images were captured from
the Human Connectome Project (HCP) datasets using HCP Workbench software (Van Essen et al., 2013). Additional abbreviations: I, inferior; L, left;
P, posterior; R, right.

with the result that neurons in the primary areas respond
rapidly to stimulation of their corresponding sense organs.
There is also a primary motor area, which sends strong
projections to the motor neurons of the spinal cord, and so
gives rise to brisk movements when stimulated electrically.
Whereas in most mammals, the primary areas occupy a
large fraction of the total cortex, the cortical mantle of
anthropoid primates is dominated by nonprimary cortex,
which consists of secondary sensory areas and higher-order
association cortex. In primates, each primary sensory area
is connected with a set of secondary areas; these connec-
tions are organized partly in sequence (hierarchically) and
partly in parallel,
that process
different aspects of visual, auditory, and somatosensory
information. Areas higher in the chain represent more
complex features of stimuli. There is a similar arrangement
for the motor system, with more complex or abstract facets
of movement being represented in secondary areas, termed
“premotor” areas in this system. For New World and Old
World monkeys, these systems of areas and connections
have been extensively studied over the past four decades

forming subnetworks

(see, for example, the contributions in Kaas and Preuss,
2007).

The sensory and motor systems each occupy substantial
portions of the lobes in which they residedvisual in the
occipital lobe, auditory in the superior gyrus of the tem-
poral lobe, somatosensory in the anterior parietal lobe, and
motor in the posterior part of the frontal lobe. The rest of
the cortex is conventionally referred to as the association
cortex. We have known for over a century, based on
observation of individuals with brain injuries,
the
association cortex is critically involved in higher-order
cognitive functions: Damage to temporal and parietal
association cortices disrupts speciﬁc perceptual functions,
while damage to the frontal association cortex (the
so-called prefrontal cortex) and to portions of the parietal
association cortex disrupts the organization of action and
cognition on both short and long time scales. Like the
sensory regions,
association cortex consists of
collections of functionally specialized areas, as indicated by
lesion studies and conﬁrmed by neuroimaging. The idea
that the association cortex functions as an undifferentiated

that

the

130 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

FIGURE 8.4 Laminar, columnar, and areal organization of cerebral cortex. (A) An unstained section through the posterior right cerebral hemisphere of a
human; the inset shows the small region of gray matter illustrated at higher magniﬁcation in B. (B) A section of cortical gray matter stained for Nissl
substance to illustrate the six tangential layers and the vertically oriented mini-columns. In this section, the columnar appearance of the cortex is most
obvious in layers 4 and 5. (C) A schematic representation of cortical microstructure, showing the vertical clustering of neurons and the predominantly
vertical, intracolumnar organization of intrinsic (local) connections, although some layers also have prominent horizontal, intralaminar connections as
well. Most long connections travel in the white matter (wm). Collections of continuous minicolumns, with similar connections and cellular organization,
make up the areas, the next higher-order unit. (D, E) Low-magniﬁcation view of a horizontal section through the posterior right hemisphere of an
orangutan, stained for Nissl (D) and myelin (E) to illustrate cyto- and myeloarchitectonic differences between cortical areas. Posterior is to the left, lateral
to the bottom. In both stains, the distinctive, highly laminated character of the primary visual area (V1) is apparent, and the border between V1 and the
second visual area (V2), marked with arrowheads, is easily identiﬁed. Laterally, the border is close to the lip of the lunate sulcus (LuS, a deep ﬁssure in
apes and macaques, but absent in monkeys). While the other cortex in these sections is not homogeneous in Nissl or myelin, distinct borders, such as that
between V2 and V3, which presumably occupies the anterior bank of the LuS, are often difﬁcult to distinguish.

whole, as famously claimed by the inﬂuential neuropsy-
chologist Karl Lashley (1949), cannot be sustained. That
said, the association areas do not function in isolation, but
rather participate in transcortical networks of
inter-
connected areas that span multiple lobes and instantiate
speciﬁc functions. These networks were ﬁrst identiﬁed in
macaque monkeys (see especially Goldman-Rakic, 1988),
using chemical tracer techniques, and later in humans and
nonhuman primates, using neuroimaging methods (eg, Li
et al., 2013; van den Heuvel and Sporns, 2013; Yeo et al.,
2011). It is important to note that the distinction between
secondary sensory areas and the association cortex is

somewhat arbitrary, especially in the parietal and temporal
lobes, where areas involved in the identiﬁcation of objects
and actions are typically dominated by the analysis of
visual features.

In addition to the sensory, motor, and association areas,
the cortical mantle includes a number of “limbic” regions,
located along the margins of the cortical mantle in the
cingulate gyrus and the insular island, the latter buried deep
in the lateral ﬁssure. These regions link cortex (mainly the
association cortex) with outposts of the autonomic nervous
system in the brainstem that regulate emotion and moti-
vation, and with the hippocampus, a specialized region at

Human Brain Evolution Chapter | 8 131

FIGURE 8.5 The major sulci, gyri, and functional divisions of the cortex in humans, chimpanzees, and macaques. These are lateral views of the left
cerebral hemisphere drawn to scale. Figurines in the left panel illustrate similarities and differences in the folding patterns of the three species. Both
chimpanzees and macaques possess a deep lunate sulcus (LuS), which separates primary visual cortex (V1) from secondary visual areas; humans lack an LuS.
Also, macaque frontal lobes have a single longitudinal ﬁssure, the principal sulcus (PS) rather than the two longitudinal ﬁssures present in chimpanzees and
humans, the inferior and superior frontal sulci (IFS, SFS). Figurines in the right panel display color maps of the myelin density across the cortex. The densely
myelinated primary sensory areasdvisual (V1), somatosensory (S1), and auditory (A1) are red, as is the primary motor area (M1). The densely myelinated
middle temporal visual region (MTþ) is largely exposed on the surface in humans, but buried within the posterior part of STS in chimpanzees and macaques.
The secondary sensory and premotor areas, somewhat less heavily myelinated, shade from red to green. The higher-order association regions are mainly blue.
Association cortex makes up a much greater fraction of the cortical mantle in humans than in chimpanzees or macaques. Additional abbreviations: B, Broca’s
area; CS, central sulcus; IFG, inferior frontal gyrus; IP, inferior parietal lobule; IPS, intraparietal sulcus; ITG, inferior temporal gyrus; ITS, inferior temporal
sulcus; MFG, middle frontal gyrus; MTG, middle temporal gyrus; MTþ, the middle temporal visual complex; PT, planum temporale; SF, Sylvian ﬁssure;
SFG, superior frontal gyrus; SPL, superior parietal lobule; STG, superior temporal gyrus; STS, superior temporal sulcus; W, Wernicke’s area. Images were
captured from the Human Connectome Project (HCP) datasets using HCP Workbench software; the chimpanzee and macaque data are from scans collected
at the Yerkes National Primate Research Center, processed through HCP pipelines. Scale bar is 1 cm.

the extreme margin of the cortical mantle involved in
memory.

The left and right hemispheres of the human brain are
notably asymmetric in several features. For example, the
human brain exhibits torque, the right frontal lobe extended
further anteriorly than the left, and the left occipital lobe
further posteriorly than the right. Also, the folding patterns
in Broca’s region differ on the left and right, as do the
patterns in the posterior language region, where the Sylvian
ﬁssure extends into the parietotemporal junction region.
The differences in the latter region are attributable at least
in part to the larger size, on average, of the planum tem-
porale in the left hemisphere, that is, the cortical territory
immediately posterior to primary auditory cortex that is
usually identiﬁed with Wernicke’s area proper (Geschwind
and Levitsky, 1968).

THEMES AND THEORIES IN HUMAN
BRAIN EVOLUTION
Before considering current evidence about human brain
evolution, it is useful to review some of the ideas that
emerged prior to the advent of techniques that allow us to
directly compare the internal organization of human and
nonhuman primate brains, as these ideas remain inﬂuential.

Association Cortex Enlargement by the
Addition of Areas
It is commonly thought that the evolutionary enlargement
of the human brain resulted from expansion of the associ-
ation cortex. An important proponent of this view was
Korbinian Brodmann (1909), whose comparative cortical

132 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

maps remain staples of neuroscience textbooks today.
Brodmann charted cortical areas in humans based on dif-
ferences in cytoarchitecture; in the same era, others pro-
duced maps based on myeloarchitecture. Brodmann’s
results seemed to indicate that species with larger cortices
have more discrete cortical areas. In humans, for example,
Brodmann recognized divisions within Broca’s area (areas
44 and 45) and in the association cortex of the inferior
parietal
lobule (IPL; areas 40 and 39) that he did not
recognize in other primates. He also argued for
the
expansion of the prefrontal cortex in human evolution
(Brodmann, 1912). Much later, using more reliable
anatomic and physiological mapping techniques than those
available to Brodmann, John Allman and Jon Kaas sum-
marized evidence indicating that larger-brained mammals
generally have more cortical areas than smaller-brained
species (Allman, 1982; Kaas, 1987), although they did
not have data for apes or humans. The idea that enlarge-
ment of the human brain proceeded by the addition of new
areas is thus reasonable, and its appeal
is probably
enhanced by the intuition that human-speciﬁc cognitive
functions, such as language, are likely to be instantiated by
human-unique brain areas (eg, Crick and Jones, 1993;
Geschwind, 1970).

Association Cortex Expansion, Without
Internal Compartmentation
While enlargement of the association cortex was widely
accepted throughout the 20th century, its organization was
hotly disputed. Most scientists accepted that the association
cortex contained multiple subdivisions, with different
functions, but there was little agreement about the exact
number of
the borders
between them. Lashley (1949) concluded there really
were no divisions, that the association cortex operated as
an undifferentiated whole, and that what mattered func-
tionally was the amount of cortex possessed by different
species.

location of

areas or

the

If this is the case, then brain size is a highly meaningful
variable. There is a complication, however, brain size
varies with body size, but they do not vary proportionally
(isometrically): as body size increases, so does brain size,
but not to the same extent. In order to compare the relative
brain sizes of species that differ in body size, one must take
this allometric relationship into account. The classical
approach to this is to take brain and body sizes for a large
sample of mammals, log transform the data (which turns
the plot into something more nearly linear), and then ﬁt a
line using regression. The result is a baseline for assessing
relative brain size, an equation for generating the expected
value of brain size for a mammal of a given body size. This
was the approach taken by Harry Jerison (1973) in his
classic work. Although Jerison was not the ﬁrst to do this,

his underlying theoretical approach was an expression of
Lashley’s ideas, in which the brain is composed of two
compartments, one that
scales with brain size, and
anotherdthe association cortex, essentiallydthat does not.
In addition, he provided a way to express relative brain size
with his encephalization quotient (EQ), which is simply the
ratio of the observed brain size for a species divided by the
brain size expected for a mammal of that brain size.
Signiﬁcantly, Jerison believed EQ could be understood as
an index of behavioral or cognitive capacity: “biological
intelligence,” in his argot. In his original formulation, he
took no account of possible species differences in the or-
ganization of the cortex, apart from size, and he followed
Lashley in assuming association cortex is internally un-
differentiated (although he subsequently acknowledged
such differentiation; Jerison, 1977). According to Jerison,
human brains are about 7e8 times the size of an average
mammal.

Association Cortex Enlargement With the
Same Areas, but Reorganized
Despite the inﬂuence of Lashley on brain-evolutionary
studiesdmainly through Jerison’s workdhis core idea
that the association cortex is structurally and functionally
undifferentiated did not win wide favor. Nevertheless, by
the mid-20th century, the large number of areas proposed
by Brodmann was seen as excessive. The view emerged
that although the association cortex was not homogeneous,
the number of constituent areas was relatively small and did
not increase in human evolution (Bailey and Bonin, 1951;
Bailey et al., 1950; Bonin and Bailey, 1947, 1961). More
recently, Petriﬁes
remapped the
cytoarchitecture of frontal cortex in humans and macaques,
and concluded that both species possess the same com-
plement of areas.

and Panda

(1994)

If there are, in fact, no new areas in human cortex, what
changes took place that could account for the evolution of
human cognitive specializations? In a seminal paper, Hol-
loway (Holloway, 1966; see also Holloway, 2008), under
the general rubric of “reorganization,” considered a variety
of other types of change, including a general expansion of
existing areas, changes in the relative sizes of different
structures, changes in the way structures are interconnected,
hemispheric differences, and changes in brain microstruc-
ture, such as in the density and distribution of speciﬁc re-
ceptor molecules across cortical areas. Although Holloway
is best known for his later research on brain endocasts of
extinct and extant species, his conceptualization of possible
changes in brain internal organization, articulated in the
1960s when little was known in detail about cortical or-
ganization, was remarkable. It served as an inspiration to
new generations of scientists (including this author), when
techniques became available for comparing the internal

brain organization of living species (Broadﬁeld and Hol-
loway, 2010).

Humans as Scaled-Up Apes
The modern appreciation of just how closely humans are
related to the African great apes has exerted a signiﬁcant
inﬂuence on how scientists have viewed human brain
evolution and the molecular mechanisms involved. In their
classic paper, King and Wilson (1975) noted that, for the
proteins and protein-coding genes studied up to that time,
humans and chimpanzees were identical on average at
98e99% of nucleotide or amino-acid positions: remarkably
similar, given the apparent behavioral and other phenotypic
differences between humans and apes. To explain the
disparity, they proposed that the phenotypic differences
resulted from changes in genes that regulate the expression
of other genes, which could result in a common set of genes
and proteins being expressed in different quantities and at
different points in development in different species. Picking
up on this idea, Gould (1977) argued that changes in reg-
ulatory genes would have especially profound phenotypic
effects if they acted early in development, and a human-like
phenotype, with a large brain and small face, could be
produced from a chimpanzee-like ancestor by extending
early developmental programs and truncating later ones, a
phenomenon known as neoteny.

This kind of thinking invites consideration of how
species differences might be understood as predictable
outcomes of general rules of development. Finlay and
Darlington (1995) noted that
the sequence in which
different parts of the brain region emerge in development is
widely conserved across mammals, with cells in brainstem
structures generated early and cells in the forebrain gener-
ated later, with cortical cells latest of all. Large-brained
mammals, however, develop over a longer timespan than
small-brained mammals, and the effect of extending
lineardlater developing structures
development
show disproportionately protracted periods of cell genera-
tion, and thus are disproportionately enlarged in adults.
Because of the evident tight coupling of brain structures in
development, one can predict the sizes of brain structures
from total brain size (except for olfactory structures, which
play by a different set of rules).

is not

From this perspective, it is a small step to viewing the
human brain as a scaled-up version of an ape brainda
simple extension of the ape plandat least with respect to
size. Semendeferi and colleagues examined the proportions
of the frontal, parietal, and temporal lobes in humans and
apes, and found that although these lobes are larger in
humans, they occupy about the same fraction of total cortex
in all
these species (Semendeferi and Damasio, 2000;
Semendeferi et al., 2002). On this basis, they disputed the
claim that
cortex was

association

the

prefrontal

Human Brain Evolution Chapter | 8 133

differentially expanded in human evolution, although they
did not measure prefrontal cortex directly (which is difﬁcult
to do without histological examination of tissue). The same
inference would follow for the parietal and temporal as-
sociation regions. Others have made the same point, noting
that in regression analyses, the amount of frontal cortex (or
temporal cortex, or cortex generally) in humans is about
what would be expected for a great ape of our brain
sizedlarger, absolutely, but not disproportionately large
(Barton and Venditti, 2013; Bush and Allman, 2004; Hol-
loway, 2002; Passingham, 1973; Rilling and Insel, 1999).
These ﬁndings have prompted the suggestion that any
cognitive differences in humans involving the frontal lobe
are not related to its overall relative size, but rather to
changes in the proportions of different areas, and in their
microstructure and connectivity (Semendeferi et al., 2002;
Teffer and Semendeferi, 2012).

EVOLUTION OF BRAIN SIZE AND
EXTERNAL MORPHOLOGY
Brain size is an attractive variable for scientists, having the
virtue of being measurable in both living and extinct spe-
cies. For this reason, and because cortical organization and
its variations across mammalian groups were very poorly
understood for much of the 20th century, studies of brain
evolution during that period strongly emphasized the evo-
lution of relative brain size (encephalization). Jerison’s
(1973) methodology was highly inﬂuential, although not
without challenge. The correct assessment of relative brain
size (EQ) depends on the slope of the regression line used
to generate expected brain size for a given body weight:
higher slopes will yield smaller EQs for larger-bodied
species and higher EQs for smaller-bodied species. Jer-
ison favored a slope of 2/3, whereas Martin (1981) argued
for 3/4, based on a larger sample of species. Today, how-
ever, perhaps because of growing appreciation of the di-
versity of brain structure among mammals as well as of the
variations in body proportions and composition, it is not
obvious that there is or should be a single baseline for all
mammals.

One consequence of the diversity of brain organization
is that it compromises the utility of EQ as an index of
cognitive capacity: species with similar EQs can have brains
organized quite differently (Holloway, 1966). Nevertheless,
comparisons of relative brain size among closely related
species remain useful, because marked changes in size
suggest the action of selection to modify cortical functions
and cognitive capacities. The matter is rendered simpler if
the species in question are similar in body size, in which
case the distinction between absolute and relative brain size
dissolves. To a ﬁrst approximation, this is the case with
humans and the other members of the great ape clade.
Average adult human body size falls between that of

134 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

chimpanzees and gorillas (de Sousa and Wood, 2007;
Leigh and Shea, 1996). Human brains average about
1450 cm3 in volume, however, whereas chimpanzee and
gorilla brains average about 380e400 cm3 (Barks et al.,
2015a; de Sousa and Wood, 2007; Schoenemann, 2006), so
humans are about 3e4 times as encephalized as our African
ape relatives. For comparison,
rhesus macaque brains
average about 90 cm3 (Herndon et al., 1998), so human
brains are about 14 times as large, but macaques also
have much smaller bodies than apes or humans. One recent
allometric analysis suggests there are three different levels
(or grades) of encephalization among Old World anthropoid
primates, with macaques and other Old World monkeys,
plus gibbons, constituting one level, the great apes a higher
level, and humans a higher level still (Passingham and
Smaers, 2014).

These comparisons suggest

that humans underwent
enormous brain enlargement since the divergence of the
human lineage from those leading to the other African
hominoids, w5e8 Ma (dates reviewed by Langergraber
et al., 2012), even allowing for the possibility that chim-
panzees and gorillas underwent some independent brain
enlargement (Fig. 8.2). Even early hominins, such as
Australopithecus and Paranthropus, appear to have been
modestly encephalized compared to the living African apes,
having smaller bodies but slightly larger brains (de Sousa
and Wood, 2007), with a trend toward increasing enceph-
alization through time. One long-running controversy
concerns the location in australopithecines of the lunate
sulcus, which in apes and most monkeys separates the
primary visual cortex, located at the posterior pole of the
hemisphere, from the remainder of the cortex (Figs. 8.4 and
8.5) (for reviews, see Falk, 2014; Holloway, 2008). Early
accounts of the ﬁrst australopithecine fossil discovered in
1924 at Taung in South Africa, which includes a partial
natural brain endocast, argued that the lunate was displaced
posteriorly compared to apes, suggesting an expansion of
the association cortex. Falk (1980) later argued that the
Taung lunate is actually located in a more anterior, ape-like
location. Holloway (1981) responded that the lunate was
not preserved on the Taung endocast, but other features
suggested association cortex enlargement. My view is that
the sulcal patterns of Taung and other australopithecines are
quite chimpanzee-like; at the same time, the likelihood that
australopithecines are slightly encephalized compared to
living apes makes some degree of association cortex
expansion plausible as well.

A dramatic acceleration of brain volume began with the
appearance of the genus Homo, however, by about 2.5 Ma,
close in time to the appearance of the oldest stone tools,
assigned to the Oldowan tradition, followed several hun-
dred thousand years later by the more complex tools of the
Acheulean tradition (Stout, 2011). Nearly modern brain
size was achieved perhaps as early as 500,000 years ago,

with Homo heidelbergensis; a later hominin, Homo nean-
derthalensis, which evolved largely independently of our
own species, had a brain of nearly equivalent average size
(reviewed in de Sousa and Wood, 2007; Holloway et al.,
2009). However, Homo sapiens has a distinctive brain
shape, sometimes characterized as globular, contrasting
with the more elongated form of other members of the
genus Homo (Bruner, 2004). This may be related to an
expansion of the medial part of posterior parietal cortex, the
precuneus (Bruner et al., 2016). This shape change
occurred at a time when indicators of modern human
behavior, such as decorative objects,
items of personal
adornment, ﬁne blades,
increasingly standardized tool
types, and long-distance material exchange, ﬁrst appeared
record, beginning by around
in the
200,000 years ago,
in Africa (Mcbrearty and Brooks,
2000).

archeological

Evolutionary increases in total brain size reﬂect mainly
changes in the cortical gray matter and associated white
matter, which make up the largest fraction of brain volume.
There likely were size changes in other structures as well,
but because the cortex is connected with many other
structuresdboth physically, in adults, by means of axonal
connections, but also in development, as described
abovedit
to identify changes that occurred
independently. For example, humans have larger cerebella
than do chimpanzees or monkeys, and the prefrontal cortex
projection to the cerebellum is much larger in humans than
in other primates (Balsters et al., 2010). Did the cerebellum
enlarge as a consequence of prefrontal expansion, or vice
versa?

is difﬁcult

The prominent left-right asymmetries of the cerebral
hemispheres are commonly viewed as the basis of the
distinctive behavioral lateralities of humans, principally our
overwhelming right-handedness (at a population level) and
left-hemisphere dominance for
language. Nevertheless,
apes show many of the same asymmetries of gross brain
morphology as humans, at least qualitatively (Cantalupo
et al., 2009; Gannon et al., 1998; Gilissen and Hopkins,
2013; Holloway and de la Coste-Lareymondie, 1982;
Hopkins and Marino, 2000; Hopkins and Nir, 2010). For
this reason, it has been argued that the anatomical foun-
dations of human communication, gesture, and manipula-
tion were
inherited from our hominoid ancestors
(Cantalupo et al., 2009). So, it is currently unclear whether
there are human-unique asymmetries, at least at the level of
external morphology. This remains an area of active
investigation, however, and it has been claimed that
humans, but not chimpanzees, have a strong asymmetry
within a region of higher-order association cortex,
the
middle portion of the human superior temporal sulcus
(Leroy et al., 2015). Moreover, as discussed below, there is
evidence for human specializations of hemispheric asym-
metry at ﬁner levels of brain organization.

INTERNAL CHANGES

Enlargement of Higher-Order Cortex and
Thalamus
There are few conclusions one can state with great conﬁ-
dence about human brain evolution, but one can conﬁdently
assert that humans have a much larger proportion of the
cortical mantle devoted to the higher-order, nonprimary
cortex (the association cortex and secondary sensory re-
gions) than do apes or monkeys. Evidence from both
classical and modern work unambiguously supports the
idea that the primary cortical areas are about the same size
in human and apes and that nonprimary regions are much
larger. The quantitative work of Brodmann (1912), Blinkov
and Glezer (1968), Deacon (1997), and Passingham (1998),
reinforces the impression of differential enlargement ob-
tained from simple visual inspection of the architectonic
maps of humans and nonhuman primates. Cell counts in the
thalamic nuclei that project to the different parts of the
cortex tell much the same story, the primary sensory nuclei
having about the same numbers of neurons in humans and
great apes, while the association nuclei have several-fold
more in humans (Armstrong, 1982).

Recent analyses, using data from comparative MRI
research, also support this conclusion. Avants et al. (2006)
compared humans and chimpanzees, using an approach that
involves identifying homologous landmarks in the cortex
and then “deforming” one species to match the other,
concluded that frontal and temporal association cortex are
about twice as large in humans, relative to total cortical
volume. Another approach involves using MRI to measure
and map the myelin content of gray matter (Glasser and
Van Essen, 2011), which is useful because primary and
secondary areas tend to be heavily myelinated, while
association areas tend to be lightly myelinated. When
applied to humans, chimpanzees, and macaques with
comparable imaging protocols, the much greater extent of
association cortex in humans, in both relative and absolute
terms,
(Glasser et al., 2014)
(Fig. 8.5).

is dramatically apparent

How do we reconcile these results with the ﬁnding that
the major lobes of the brain are about the same proportions
in humans and apes? The major lobes contain a mixture of
primary, secondary, and association cortex; if the primary
areas are relatively static in size in human evolution, we
need to only assume that the nonprimary cortex expanded
to similar extents in the different lobes. This is reasonable,
given the strong connections and functional dependencies
between association regions (eg, Goldman-Rakic, 1988;
Yeo et al., 2011). These dependencies are highlighted by
the discovery that the association cortex is the home of a
number of connectivity “hubs,” that is, key nodes in net-
works that link areas dispersed among the different lobes

Human Brain Evolution Chapter | 8 135

(eg, Buckner et al., 2009; Li et al., 2013; van den Heuvel
and Sporns, 2013). A similar argument has been advanced
by Barton and Venditii (2013).

cortex, or

cortexdor prefrontal

What about the claim that humans have about as much
frontal
association
cortexdas would be expected for a great ape of our brain
size? The validity of this claim, with respect to prefrontal
cortex speciﬁcally, has been disputed (Deacon, 1997;
Passingham and Smaers, 2014), but for the sake of argu-
ment, let us assume it is true. Does it matter? One would
never expect a nonhuman primate to have a brain of our
size: apes of our body size have brains of about 400 cm3 in
size, rather than 1400e1500 cm3, and the difference is
almost entirely due to the greater amount of secondary and
higher-order association cortex (and underlying white
matter) in humans. There is simply no getting around the
fact that humans have a lot more neural machinery devoted
to higher-order systems than do other primates, and while
this is not the only difference in brain organization between
humans and apes, it must be an important one. The question
of whether
the amount of association cortex humans
possess is similar to that predicted for a primate of our brain
size might bear on the question of how humans came to
have such capacious association regionsdperhaps it is the
case that humans follow a primate-general law of growth
(Finlay and Darlington, 1995)dbut
that doesn’t make
those regions any less enormous (Passingham, 2002;
Preuss, 2011).

Changes in Areal Organization, Function,
and Connectivity
Turning to matters of how evolution modiﬁed the internal
structure, connectivity, and function of cortex, it is useful to
start with a detailed analysis of language. This is because
we know a great deal about its neural substrates in humans,
because there are numerous studies bearing on whether
homologous structures and systems exist
in nonhuman
primates, and because language has been a central focus in
discussions of human brain evolution and human psycho-
logical uniqueness. As it happens, the language system
exempliﬁes the variety of modiﬁcations that occurred dur-
ing human brain evolution.

It is reasonable to suppose that the evolution of lan-
guage, as one of
the key specializations of humans
comprising a set of functions that engages a remarkably
large fraction of the cortex (Price, 2012), has had a huge
impact on human brain organization. Not surprisingly, the
classical frontal and temporoparietal language regionsd
Broca’s and Wernicke’s areasdhave sometimes been
treated, explicitly or implicitly, as uniquely human (eg,
Brodmann, 1909; Crick and Jones, 1993; Geschwind,
1970). Nevertheless, there is a clear consensus among those

136 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

who have studied the issue that there are homologues of
Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas in chimpanzees, macaques,
and other nonhuman primates, based on similarities in
cytoarchitecture, location relative to other cortical areas,
and nonlinguistic functional and physiological characteris-
tics, such as representation of species-speciﬁc calls (for
reviews, see Aboitiz, 2012; Arbib, 2012; Deacon, 2006;
Ghazanfar and Miller, 2006; Preuss, 2011; Rilling and
Stout, 2014; Schoenemann, 2012; Sherwood et al., 2008).
In fact, the idea that a homologue of Broca’s area, at least,
is present in nonhuman primates dates back at least as far as
Bonin (1944), who suggested that this area was “recruited”
to language in human evolution (as discussed in Preuss,
1995).

including its most posterior segment,

If evolution “recruited” Broca’s and Wernicke’s area to
support language, it must have modiﬁed them in some
ways. Currently, there is evidence for major changes in the
long-distance, extrinsic connections of language cortex. In
humans, ﬁbers connecting the frontal and posterior lan-
guage regions were classically thought to travel in a distinct
ﬁber bundle,
the arcuate fasciculus (Geschwind, 1970).
Because the trajectories of ﬁbers through the white matter
can be tracked with DWI, the organization and distribution
of arcuate ﬁbers was the ﬁrst connectivity system to be
studied using comparative DWI in humans, chimpanzees,
and macaques (Rilling et al., 2008, 2011). Rilling and
colleagues found two pathways interconnecting the inferior
frontal gyrus (Broca’s area) and posterior superior temporal
gyrus (STG),
the
planum temporale (Wernicke’s area, as often construed).
These include a dorsal pathway running deep to the lateral
parietal and frontal cortex, corresponding to the arcuate
fasciculus, and a ventral pathway, running deep to the
insula. Interestingly, the dorsal pathway is larger on the left
than the right in both humans and chimpanzees, as is the
size of the planum temporale (Gannon et al., 1998). The
arcuate pathway is enlarged relative to the ventral pathway
in humans compared to chimpanzees; moreover,
in
humans, but not in chimpanzees or macaques, the main
termini of arcuate ﬁbers in the temporal lobe is actually
inferior to the planum temporale, in the posterior STG and
middle temporal gyrus (MTG). In humans, this MTG re-
gion, which is located immediately anterior to a region of
higher-order visual representation (the area MT þ com-
plex), is known to be involved in representation of word
meanings, and in semantic representation more generally. It
is also connected with areas in posterior parietal cortex
involved in tool use (Ramayya et al., 2010).

These results raise the question whether changes in
human arcuate anatomy represent only changes in con-
nectivity, or whether the MTG semantic region is an area
lacking in nonhuman primates. Currently, there is no evi-
dence for an MTG semantic-area homologue in nonhuman
primates; if there is, it must have been highly modiﬁed in

hominoid or hominin evolution. Similar issues arise when
we consider the extended language system. For example, in
humans, cortex at the anterior pole of the temporal lobe is
also thought
to be involved in semantic representation
(Jefferies, 2013), and there is currently no plausible ho-
mologue known in macaques (much less in chimpanzees).
Presumably, changes in the functions of areas involved
in language were accompanied by changes in the internal,
microstructural organization of areas. In fact, the spatial
organization of neurons in Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas is
different in humans compared to chimpanzees and ma-
caques. Speciﬁcally,
the spacing between the vertical
neuronal arrays (minicolumns) of Broca’s and Wernicke’s
areas is greater in the left hemisphere than the right in
humans, but not in the nonhumans (Buxhoeveden et al.,
2001; Schenker et al., 2008). While these results have been
interpreted as indicating increased space for synaptic pro-
cessing in the left,
language-dominant hemisphere, we
currently know nothing about speciﬁc patterns of connec-
tions between neurons in these areas and how they differ
across species.

From the language system, then, we have evidence for
evolutionary modiﬁcations in the functions of preexisting
areas, changes in extrinsic cortico-cortical connectivity, and
changes in microstructure. While it is possible that the
complement of cortical areas is not identical in humans,
chimpanzees, and macaques, we lack clear evidence of
human-unique areas.

Next to language, probably the best studied system,
from a comparative perspective, is the distributed network
of frontal, posterior parietal, and temporal areas involved in
the visually guided control of object grasping and manip-
ulation. This is sometimes referred to as the mirror system,
because similar patterns of cortical activation result when
an experimental participant observes another individual
grasping an object with the hands or mouth, or when the
participant makes that movement
themselves (Buccino
et al., 2001). There is good reason to think this system was
modiﬁed in evolution. For one, the system includes areas
that are engaged when humans manipulate or make tools,
including stone tools, as demonstrated in experimental
studies of human subjects taught to make Oldowan and
Acheulean implements (Stout et al., 2011). For another,
there are important species differences in imitative pro-
clivities (Whiten et al., 2009): Humans are extreme imita-
tors, focusing on the forms and sequences of action, even
when some of the elements of the action are not necessary
to produce the intended outcome. Macaques, by contrast,
have very limited abilities to copy actions. Chimpanzees
can copy actions but are less inclined than humans to copy
actions that have no functional consequences. In humans,
furthermore, areas of the mirror system are activated when
actions are directed toward an object (transitive move-
ments) or when they are merely mimed (intransitive

movements); in macaques, they are activated only when
viewing transitive movements (Buccino et al., 2001).

imaging technique,

Hecht et al. (2013) carried out comparative neuroimaging
studies of the mirror system. Using positron-emission to-
mography (PET), a functional
they
compared cortical activity in humans and chimpanzees
while subjects grasped an object, or observed others
grasping the same object
(transitive condition), or
observed another miming the action (intransitive condi-
tion). In one respect, chimpanzees were similar to humans,
showing increased activation in the intransitive condition,
as well as in the transitive observation and grasping
conditions. Both species, furthermore, showed activation
in frontal and parietal cortex, although chimpanzees
showed relatively greater activation of frontal than parietal
cortex compared to humans. In addition, humans showed
considerable activation in the temporal lobe, including the
posterior MTG, whereas there was little temporal-lobe
activation in chimpanzees. The authors suggest that the
bias toward frontal activation in chimpanzees is consistent
with their greater propensity for copying outcomes than
the details of action, the latter involving representations in
posterior cortex. Interestingly, macaques are reported to
show greater activation of frontal cortex relative to sec-
ondary visual cortex than humans while viewing objects
(Denys et al., 2004).

al.,

2015a). Compared

to macaques,

Subsequent examination of the connections between
cortical elements of the mirror system in humans, chim-
panzees, and macaques, using DWI, found that all three
species have connections between the inferior
frontal
gyrus, the IPL, and portions of temporal cortex (Hecht
et
however,
chimpanzees and humans showed greater connectivity
between the temporal and parietal cortex, while humans
temporal
showed
connectivity with
including
connections with portions of the superior parietal cortex
related
stronger
than chimpanzees or
parietofrontal connections overall
macaques. Evidently,
the mirror
system were modiﬁed in hominoid and human evolution,
with the possible recruitment of additional cortical areas
into the network in humans. Whether those areas have
homologues
to be
determined.

enhancement
parietal

the connections of

in nonhuman primates

remains

of
cortex,

further
the

to

spatial

even

attention,

as well

as

Hecht and colleagues have also compared the sizes and
distributions of the major ﬁber bundles that interconnect the
frontal and parietal lobesdthat is, the different divisions of
the superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF)din humans and
chimpanzees (Hecht et al., 2015a). They report that the
inferior limb of SLF (SLFIII), which connects cortical
regions involved in the higher-order control of grasping and
manipulationdthe anterior
inferior parietal cortex and
ventral premotor and prefrontal cortexdmakes up a

Human Brain Evolution Chapter | 8 137

signiﬁcantly larger fraction of total SLF volume in humans
than in chimpanzees. In addition, SLFIII is right-lateralized
in humans, but not chimpanzees. In humans,
the right
inferior frontal gyrus is thought to be specialized for ﬁne
motor control (Liakakis et al., 2011), and in experimental
studies of stone-tool making, the right inferior parietal and
ventral frontal cortex are activated more when individuals
make Acheulean tools compared to the simpler Oldowan
tools (Stout et al., 2011). Moreover, training individuals to
make tools results in structural enhancement of the SLFIII
and increased volume of the frontal and parietal areas it
connects (Hecht et al., 2015b). These results suggest that
right
inferior parietofrontal networks were modiﬁed in
human evolution.

A third system that has been studied in humans, chim-
panzees, and macaques is the so-called default-mode
network (DMN). The DMN was discovered in human
neuroimaging experiments as a set of areas that are acti-
vated when subjects rest in the scanner, not engaged in any
externally driven task, but are deactivated when such tasks
are initiated: hence the characterization as “default”
(Buckner, 2012; Raichle et al., 2001). Subjects report that
while resting in the scanner, they daydream about past
events in their lives, or about future plans, or about possible
interactions with other persons (Buckner and Carroll,
2007). As it happens, there are experimental conditions that
can activate the DMN, speciﬁcally conditions that cause
subjects to think about social situations or to engage in self-
examination; thus, the DMN and its constituent areas are
now seen as components of the social brain and substrates
of self-representation (Mars et al., 2012). There is evidence
for important differences between humans and other pri-
mates in the realm of social cognition, including our un-
usual
imitative proclivities, our sensitivity to rank and
social status in evaluating truth claims and for modeling
behavior (Henrich, 2015), and our sophisticated abilities to
represent mental states and understand their operation
(Povinelli and Eddy, 1996). Given this, one might expect
there to be major human specializations of social cognitive
systems, including the DMN. Nevertheless, there is good
functional
the DMN exists in
chimpanzees (Barks et al., 2015b; Rilling et al., 2007) and
macaques (Mantini et al., 2011; Vincent et al., 2007), and
includes many of the same anatomical areas as in humans,
although it is not clear whether an identical set of areas and
connections is involved in all three species.

imaging evidence that

The discussion above prioritized studies that included
human-chimpanzee comparisons, these being necessary (if
not sufﬁcient) for identifying human specializations. It is
useful, however, to also consider some of the recent neu-
roimaging studies comparing humans and macaques,
because these make it clear that there was much evolu-
tionary change in the functions of homologous areas in
primate evolution, even if it is not always clear whether the

138 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

changes constitute human specializations, hominoid spe-
cializations, or macaque
(or Old World monkey)
specializations.

The posterior parietal cortex is of special

interest
because, in both humans and macaques, parietal-lobe le-
sions impair the ability to grasp and manipulate objects, and
in both species, multiple areas along the intraparietal sulcus
(IPS) and anterior IPL respond to the visual presentation of
objects. Human and macaque parietal areas are sensitive to
different qualities of motion, however. For example, Pee-
ters et al. (2009) found that humans displayed enhanced
responsiveness in the anterior IPL when shown video clips
of an object being grasped by a tool compared to by a hand;
macaques responded no differently to tools versus hands
(Peeters et al., 2009, 2013). While the original study sug-
gested the area in question might be uniquely human, the
later study concluded that it is probably homologous to a
division of macaque anterior IPL.

Vanduffel et al. (2002) showed subjects stick ﬁgures
moving in two dimensions (ie, in a plane) or appearing to
move in depth, including movement around an internal
axis, giving the impression of a three-dimensional object (a
structure-from-motion display). Both conditions activated
lower-order visual areas and IPS cortex in both species, but
humans showed greater activation of IPS cortex with the
3D structure-from-motion display than with the 2D display.
At least some of the areas that show differential activation
in humans probably have homologues in macaques, as the
anatomical organization of this region is generally similar
in humans and macaques (Mars et al., 2011).

Mantini and colleagues used functional MRI to extract
networks of physiologically coupled areas (resting-state
networks) in humans and macaques to identify potentially
homologous networks, and to detect differences (Mantini
et al., 2013). Most of the networks they identiﬁed have
plausible homologues in both species, although the set of
areas that make up a given network differs in some cases
between humans and macaques. They did identify separate
left and right frontoparietal networks in humans as being
without counterparts in macaques; however,
this might
reﬂect a species difference in cortical lateralization, as the
areas in question probably have homologues in both spe-
cies and could belong to the ventral parietofrontal networks
discussed above in relation to object manipulation.

Evidence for New Areas?
The evidence reviewed above strongly suggests that much
of the action in brain evolution involved the modiﬁcation of
the connections and functions of areas common to humans
and nonhuman primates. There is also some evidence that
new areas evolved in the lineages under consideration. A
survey of the functional connectivity of human and ma-
caque temporal cortex identiﬁed a territory at the anterior

end of the superior temporal sulcus (STS) lacking a deﬁnite
counterpart in macaques, and having properties suggesting
involvement in social cognition (Mars et al., 2013), which
is consistent with results from task-based functional neu-
roimaging studies of humans (Zahn et al., 2007). Func-
tional connectivity data also suggest that humans possess a
region of frontopolar cortex (the lateral part of Brodmann’s
area 10) that is not present in macaques (Sallet et al., 2013).
Area 10 is reportedly enlarged in humans compared to
other apes and to monkeys (Semendeferi et al., 2001),
raising the possibility that this is a human specialization.
Probably the clearest evidence for differences in areal or-
ganization comes from studies of face-sensitive areas in the
temporal lobe. Macaques have face-selective foci in the
STS, while humans possess STS foci as well as one or more
additional foci in the fusiform gyrus, comprising the so-
called fusiform face area (Pinsk et al., 2008). While this
likely represents a real difference in areal organization,
there is reason to think it is not a human specialization,
because a PET study in chimpanzees yielded face sensitive
foci in both STS and fusiform gyrus (Parr et al., 2009),
consistent with behavioral experiments indicating chim-
panzees process faces in ways more similar to humans than
to macaques (Parr, 2011).

To summarize, while there is evidence that new areas
evolved in Old World anthropoid primates, it is currently
unclear that there are new human, as opposed to homi-
noid, areas. Deﬁnitive resolution of this matter awaits the
construction of cortical maps for chimpanzees comparable
in resolution to those available for macaques and humans.
Yet for one region, the frontal cortex, which is the part of
the cortex that has been most carefully studied with
respect to areal compartmentation and homologies, it is
remarkable how little difference there is between humans
and macaques: if not quite identical in areal organization
(Petrides and Pandya, 1994), they nonetheless appear to
be extremely similar (Neubert et al., 2014; Sallet et al.,
2013).

Evolutionary Modiﬁcations of Sensory and
Limbic Cortex
Given the traditional emphasis on modiﬁcations of associ-
ation cortex in human evolution, one might suppose that
other regions of the brain, such as sensory and limbic
structures, were evolutionarily static. This is not the case.
Although there have been few comparative studies of most
of the sensory and motor regions, the visual cortex of
humans and macaques has been intensively studied, and
their organization compared (for a review, see Preuss,
2004). Both species possess, in addition to the primary
visual area (V1, also known as “striate” cortex, because it
has a prominent band of myelinated ﬁbers in its middle
layers; see Fig. 8.3), a large set of secondary, “extrastriate”

areas. Many of these are present
in both species, and
indeed, there are many areas common to both New World
and Old World anthropoids (Lyon, 2007; Rosa and
Tweedale, 2005). Collectively, the secondary visual areas
appear to be larger, relative to the size of area V1, in
humans (Van Essen et al., 2001; Vanduffel et al., 2014).
Also, in the lateral occipital cortex, which is dominated by
representation of central vision, recent human parcellations
posit several cortical divisions (designated with the preﬁx
LO) in addition to area V4 (Kolster et al., 2014), an area
present in all primates that have been studied. There are
also well-documented differences in the motion sensitivity
of homologous cortical areas in the dorsal extrastriate
cortex (Tootell et al., 1997; Vanduffel et al., 2001). Dif-
ferences in these areas could contribute to the differences in
parietal
cortex motion sensitivities discussed above,
although as with the parietal areas, without detailed studies
of great apes, we cannot reconstruct the history of evolu-
tionary change in extrastriate cortex.

In addition to sensory, motor, and association cor-
tex, there are large territories along the margins of the
cortical mantledin the orbitofrontal and insular regions,
laterally, and on the cingulate gyrus, mediallydthat are
considered to be cortical outposts of the limbic system,
by virtue of their connections with subcortical structures
that regulate emotion and motivation. In fact, they are
involved in sensory and cognitive, as well as affective,
functions. These regions include tissue lacking the six
cell layers characteristic of the “neocortex” that makes
up the largest part of the cortical mantle, and have thus
been designated as “paleocortex” or “archicortex,” and
as those terms suggest, homologues of some of their
divisions evolved before mammals separated from other
vertebrates. The fact
in that
sense, however, does not mean they were frozen in
In fact, major changes in limbic
evolutionary time.
cortex organization occurred in primate
evolution,
including changes in the hominoid and human lineages
(Barger et al., 2014; Preuss, 2007).

they are primitive,

that

The insula, an island of cortex buried within the lateral
sulcus of primates, includes multiple divisions and a di-
versity of functions, including interoceptive and extero-
ceptive sensory functions and cognition (reviewed by
Nieuwenhuys, 2012). The anterior portions have been
proposed to be crucial loci in the representation of the self,
social cognition, and conscious awareness (eg, Allman
et al., 2011; Craig, 2011; Seeley et al., 2012). The anterior
insula contains a distinctive histological division in apes
and humans,
region, marked by the
presence of a characteristic cell type, the large spindle cells,
or Von Economo (VE) neurons, and is reported to be
differentially enlarged in apes and humans (Bauernfeind
et al., 2013). The anterior insula is connected with other
limbic regions, including the anterior cingulate cortex, and

the frontoinsular

Human Brain Evolution Chapter | 8 139

Mantini et al. (2013) indicate these regions are more
strongly coupled functionally in humans than in macaques.
Like the insula, the cingulate cortex is composed of
multiple divisions, with diverse functions (eg, Torta and
Cauda, 2011; Vogt, 2005). As indicated in Brodmann’s
(1909) maps of humans and monkeys, humans have a
prominent superior limb of the prelimbic area (area 32), that
extends posteriorly over the anterior cingulate area (area
24). Based on differences in neurochemistry, Vogt et al.
(2013) indicate that this region contains two subdivisions in
humans, areas d32 and 32
, that are not present in macaque
monkeys, rats, or mice. This is extremely interesting, given
the participation of this region in representing mental states
and in other social-cognitive functions (eg, Abu-Akel and
Shamay-Tsoory, 2011; Gobbini et al., 2007; Masten et al.,
2011). The status of chimpanzees is, again, unknown.

0

and its

and laminar organization,

Microstructural Changes
Within the neuroscience community, there have long been
those who believe that the microstructure of the cortexdits
cellular
intrinsic
connectivitydare basically uniform across cortical areas
and across species (a landmark statement of this position
can be found in Rockel et al., 1980). Consistent with this,
Crick and Jones (1993), allowed that humans were likely to
possess cortical areas that other animals lack, and also
differences in extrinsic connectivity, but gave short shrift to
specializations of microstructure. Nevertheless, evidence
for such differences across mammalian species, and among
primates, has accumulated steadily (Charvet et al., 2015;
Collins, 2011; Herculano-Houzel et al., 2008; Hof and
Sherwood, 2005; Preuss, 1995, 2001). This, plus the evi-
dence that homologous areas differ in function between
humans and nonhuman primates, means there is a high
probability that humans evolved specializations of cortical
microstructure.

Nevertheless, given the prevailing Zeitgeist, and
because the tissue required for these studies can be difﬁcult
to obtain from humans and apes (even though useful tissue
can be obtained from human autopsies and from animals
that die of natural causes), dedicated studies of human
microstructural specializations are of fairly recent vintage.
One of the ﬁrst concerned the VE neurons (spindle cells)
introduced earlier in this chapter. These were described
initially as a unique population of large neurons in the
anterior cingulate cortex of great apes and humans (Nim-
chinsky et al., 1999), and later in the frontoinsular cortex
(for reviews, see Allman et al., 2005; Seeley et al., 2012).
VE cells were said to be especially large and numerous in
humans. Although it is difﬁcult to trace the connections of
individual neurons in humans, it was speculated (reason-
ably) that these cells have long connections, facilitating
rapid cortico-cortical communication of socially relevant

140 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

information (Allman et al., 2005). Subsequently,
the
comparative-anatomical claim has been qualiﬁed, as similar
neurons, in similar locations, have been described in a
wider variety of primate species, as well as in some non-
primate mammals,
including large-brained animals with
complex social systems, such as elephants and cetaceans
(Butti et al., 2013). It remains the case, however, that
humans have an unusually prominent VE cell population
compared to most other primates, and the areas where they
are found are important in social cognition and emotional
regulation.

There is additional indication of human or hominoid
specializations at
the level of cell phenotypes. Among
mammals, there is considerable diversity in the biochem-
istry and morphology of the major cortical neuron classes,
namely, pyramidal cells, which form long, excitatory con-
nections, and the predominantly short-axoned, inhibitory
interneurons (Hof and Sherwood, 2007). There is evidence
that humans or hominoids have specialized phenotypes of
both cell classes (del Río and DeFelipe, 1997; Hof et al.,
2001).
In addition, an important series of studies by
Raghanti, Sherwood, and their collaborators has high-
lighted variation among hominoid primates in the laminar
distribution of axon terminals and terminal morphology in
the cortex arising from deep structures that express major
neurotransmitters and neuromodulators such as acetylcho-
line, dopamine, and serotonin (Raghanti et al., 2007,
2008a,b). In addition, they have documented differences in
the distribution of interneuron classes and their intracortical
connections (Raghanti et al., 2014, 2009, 2010). These
workers also suggest that the greater width of neuronal
minicolumns in some cortical areas in humans compared to
chimpanzees and other primates, reﬂects species differ-
ences in innervation of
the cortex by acetylcholine-
containing neurons in the basal forebrain, and possibly of
a speciﬁc class of
(calbindin-expressing
double-bouquet cells) that may be important in organizing
minicolumn structure (Raghanti et al., 2010).

interneurons

Perhaps the most

thoroughly explored cortical area,
from a comparative microstructural standpoint, is the pri-
mary visual area, V1, which exhibits both hominoid and
human specializations of cellular morphology, biochem-
istry, and connectivity. In most New World and Old World
monkeys, visual inputs to V1 from the main visual nucleus
of the thalamus, the lateral geniculate nucleus, terminate in
two main bands in the middle layers of cortex, termed
layers 4A and 4C. Although it is difﬁcult to directly study
connections at
this level of organization in apes and
humans, there are reliable chemical markers for geniculate
synapses in the cortex, and studies with those markers
indicate that geniculate projections to layer 4A were lost in
hominoid evolution (Bryant et al., 2012; Preuss et al.,
1999). Also,
in great apes and humans, and unlike
monkeys, layer 4A is densely packed with small cells that

express calbindin. In humans, furthermore, the calbindin
cells are segregated into clusters separated by bands of cell
bodies and dendrites that
label with antibody Cat-301
(Preuss and Coleman, 2002). As Cat-301 is a marker for
the so-called “magnocellular” pathway, a visual subsystem
important in motion processing, Preuss and colleagues have
suggested that humans underwent changes in motion
sensitivity at early stages of visual processing, and that
these might contribute to the differences reported in
extrastriate cortex and the IPS.

Cellular specializations are not limited to neurons: there
is evidence for phyletic diversity in glial cells, once
considered to be merely structural and metabolic supporters
of neurons, but increasingly seen as active partners in the
information-processing business of the brain (Fields et al.,
2014). Differences have been described between mammals
orders in the morphology and physiology of astrocytes, a
major class of glia (Colombo et al., 2000). Also, humans
and chimpanzees, but not monkeys, reportedly possess a
class of astrocytes residing in the deepest cortical layers
that have
studded with
varicosities (Oberheim et al., 2009).

long, horizontal processes

MOLECULAR SPECIALIZATIONS
RELEVANT TO HUMAN BRAIN
EVOLUTION
In the years since King and Wilson (1975) published
their landmark review highlighting the similarities of hu-
man and chimpanzee gene and protein sequences, and the
likely evolutionary importance of changes in gene expres-
sion, our knowledge of the genome and mechanisms of
genetic regulation has grown immensely, and the methods
available for probing species differences in molecular
biology greatly improved. Sequencing genomes can now be
done rapidly and cheaply; we can survey the set of tran-
scribed genes (messenger RNAs) in tissue samples using
gene chips (microarrays) or by resequencing the transcripts;
and mass spectrometry is coming of age as a tool for
identifying and quantifying the molecular composition of
tissue samples.

The results have made it clear that the molecular dif-
ferences between humans and other primates are much
more extensive than the analysis of King and Wilson would
lead one to expect (for review, see Preuss, 2011). While it is
true that
the protein-coding sequences of humans and
chimpanzees are the same at about 98% of nucleotide
positions, when noncoding DNA is included, overall DNA
sequence similarity is much lower. In the human lineage,
thousands of genes underwent evolutionary changes in
expression level (ie, in the number of transcripts produced)
and hundreds of genes, at least, show evidence of having
that underwent
undergone positive
positive
that
for

selection. Genes
a number

selection include

code

transcription factors (TFs), proteins that bind to noncoding
DNA sequences that regulate gene expression. The DNA
regulation sites themselves underwent changes that affect
TF binding and methylation state, another regulator of gene
expression. There were changes in microRNAs, a class of
molecules (unknown in 1975) that regulate the translation
of RNA transcripts to proteins. Perhaps most surprisingly,
evolution has produced some species-speciﬁc genes,
including human-speciﬁc and chimpanzee-speciﬁc genes.
Bear in mind, too, that these differences in nucleic acids
may reﬂect only a relatively small fraction of the molecular
differences between humans and chimpanzees, as proteins,
lipids, and other classes of molecules have yet
to be
comprehensively surveyed (Bauernfeind et al., 2015a).

The tremendous number and diversity of human
molecular specializations presents a problem: How do we
relate changes in genes and other macromolecules to visible
phenotypic changes? If the genetic changes merely affected
a small number of regulatory genesdTFs, for exampled
one could imagine telling a reasonable story about
its
phenotypic consequences, based perhaps on correlations
between polymorphisms in the TF sequence and variations
in phenotypes. But the situation is not so simple: even when
we have genes that seem to have a strong relationship to a
particular phenotype,
is very difﬁcult, given our
current research methodologies, to nail down the causal
connection.

it

A case in point is FOXP2, a gene that codes for a TF
and that may be related to the evolution of language.
FOXP2 is regarded as a language gene because individuals
in a family in England who share a loss-of-function
mutation of the gene have marked language deﬁcits, as well
as some other, possibly less obvious cognitive and behav-
ioral deﬁcits (Vargha-Khadem et al., 1995). The FOXP2
gene and protein sequences are highly conserved among
primates, but two amino acid substitutions occurred in the
human lineage, an amount of change much greater than
expected based on chance (Enard et al., 2002a). This
prompted the suggestion that the amino acid changes in
the human lineage were the result of natural selection
related to the evolution of language (Enard, Przeworski,
et al., 2002). Although this is a plausible suggestion, a
direct demonstration of the connection has proven elusive.
What sort of ethical experimental manipulation of a gene
could demonstrate its role in language? One approach
adopted was to engineer a transgenic mouse that expresses
a humanized FOXP2 sequence (Enard et al., 2009;
Hammerschmidt et al., 2015; Reimers-Kipping et al.,
2011). As pups, these mice exhibit changes in their ultra-
sonic vocalizations and changes in the morphology and
physiology of neurons in the basal ganglia, a structure that,
in humans,
is not obvious,
however, that mouse vocalizations have a speciﬁc rela-
tionship to human language, and the basal ganglia is

is involved in language. It

Human Brain Evolution Chapter | 8 141

involved in many functions other than language. Another
approach has been to engineer humanized and “chimpan-
ized” FOXP2 genes and express them in cell culture to
determine the suite of genes regulated by the TF product of
FOXP2 (Konopka et al., 2009). This demonstrated that
FOXP2 protein regulates numerous genes involved in
neural development, and that the sets of genes regulated
by the human and chimpanzee versions of FOXP2 are not
identical. Furthermore, in humans, FOXP2 is a key gene
in a cluster of genes that covary in expression in a human-
speciﬁc mannerda gene-expression module, as these are
known (Konopka et al., 2012). Certainly, it is possible that
such differences are related to language, but again, there is
no smoking gun. It is, plainly, difﬁcult to relate changes in
human genetics to language or other human-speciﬁc
macrophenotypes using the standard tools of molecular
biology, such as transgenic mice and cell culture. New
methods are needed.

Stem-cell

technology offers intriguing possibilities.
Using embryonic stem cells, or stem cells de-differentiated
from mature cells (induced pluripotent stem cells, or
iPSCs), one can generate a variety of species-speciﬁc cell
types, including different types of neurons and glia from
speciﬁc brain regions. The cells are grown in a dish, and
under appropriate conditions, they exhibit patterns of gene
expression, growth, and mature morphology that resemble
their counterparts in natural tissue. Multiple cell types can
be cultured together, and can organize themselves spatially
in ways that reproduce some of the architectural features of
normal tissue: “cortex in a dish,” as it has been called
(Gaspard et al., 2009), or “cerebral organoids” (Lancaster
et al., 2013). The process of organization can even resemble
the sequence of events in normal neurodevelopment (Eir-
aku et al., 2008). Cultures could be experimentally
manipulated: for example, one might express humanized
transgenes in chimpanzee neurons. Just how far we can go
in building brain tissue in vitro is uncertain, but it might be
possible to reproduce many aspects of development, his-
tology, and physiology with these technologies. These
technologies have attracted great interest for their potential
tools for elucidating the mechanisms of neurological dis-
ease, but they could also be valuable for understanding
human brain evolution (Hrvoj-Mihic et al., 2014).

If comparative molecular studies have so far failed to
yield much insight into the evolution of language, or other
conspicuous phenotypes, they have nonetheless opened our
eyes to possible human specializations of cell biology,
physiology, and postnatal development (Preuss, 2012b;
Varki et al., 2008). Among the genes identiﬁed as
undergoing increased expression in human cortex in early
comparative studies of gene expression (Cáceres et al.,
2003; Enard et al., 2002a; Uddin et al., 2004) are several
involved in cerebral energy metabolism and synaptic
plasticity, suggesting that selection promoted increased

142 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

levels of brain physiological activity in humans (Cáceres
et al., 2003; Caceres et al., 2007; Preuss, 2004). Recent
studies, with better data, support this idea (Bauernfeind
et al., 2015a; Fu et al., 2011). Intriguingly, there was also a
high rate of evolutionary changes of brain-enriched lipid
elements in the human cerebral cortex (but not cerebellum),
with corresponding changes in the expression of genes for
lipid-related enzymes (Bozek et al., 2015). As brains are
largely lipid, these results suggest an extensive reorgani-
zation or remodeling of brain membrane structure in human
evolution.

Recent studies point

in postnatal development

There is evidence of important evolutionary changes in
other molecular systems. Konopka et al. (2012), using next-
generation sequencing to compare the transcriptomes of
humans, chimpanzees, and macaques, identiﬁed a number
of human-unique gene-expression modules in the prefrontal
cortex in addition to the one that includes FOXP2. This
suggests that systems of gene and protein interaction were
reorganized in the evolution of human association cortex.
to evolutionary changes in the
timing of gene and protein expression in the human brain.
Somel et al. (2009) identiﬁed a subset of gene and protein
products in the prefrontal cortex that are expressed
earlier
in humans than in
chimpanzees and macaques, a phenomenon they refer to as
“transcriptional neoteny.” Genes involved in growth and
development were
set.
Interestingly, there is also evidence from gene expression
studies (Arora et al., 2009; Bauernfeind et al., 2015b),
backed by experimental studies in cell culture (Arora et al.,
of
2012),
death
for
(apoptosis)
Inhibition of apoptosis could
conceivably play a role in increasing brain size in early
development, but it could also help preserve neurons over
the course of the long human lifespan. Like other primates,
all
the neocortical neurons we humans possess are
generated prenatally (Bhardwaj et al., 2006), but humans
have evolved an extended lifespan potentialddecades
longer than other primates (Blurton Jones et al., 2002)dso
we most likely have evolved enhanced mechanisms for
preserving our neurons.

inhibition
in humans.

especially abundant

programmed

in this

cell

CONCLUSIONS
In summary, the currently available evidence allows us to
conclude with some conﬁdence that human brain evolution
entailed the enlargement of association cortex, modiﬁca-
tions of the long-distance, cortico-cortical connectivity, and
modiﬁcation of the intrinsic, microstructural organization
of cortical areas. Change was not restricted to association
cortex, but also involved primary and secondary sensory
areas and limbic cortex. (Motor systems have not been
extensively investigated.) In addition,
there were major

modiﬁcations of molecular systems that imply important
changes not only in brain development, but also in
cellular physiology. There is currently no deﬁnitive
evidence for human-unique cortical areas, although the
possibility cannot be excluded, and there can be no
principled objection to this possibility, given some of the
human-macaque differences discussed above, as well as
the evidence that new areas evolved at other points in
primate history (Preuss, 2007). That said, current evidence
suggests that cortical expansion mainly involved enlarge-
ment of existing areas, along with modiﬁcations of their
extrinsic,
intrinsic
architecture.

connectivity,

network

their

and

of

capture

cognitive

functioning,

Classical accounts of human brain evolution that
emphasized the enlargement of prefrontal and other
the association cortex, with accompanying
regions of
modiﬁcation
an
important truth, but there was too much going on in other
systems to be dismissed as unimportant. Moreover, changes
in the intrinsic organization of brain structures, and in the
morphology, biochemistry,
and physiology of brain
cellsdchanges at levels of organization few would have
suspected are important in human brain evolutiondmust
have profound effects on function. Human brains are thus
not simply scaled-up ape or monkey brains: they are rife
with differences in virtually every system that has been
examined in detail to date, and at virtually every level of
organization, from the genome up. It seems unlikely that
most of these differences can be accounted for by a small
set of genetic changes, although of course some changes
must have had bigger effects than others. Rather, human
brain evolution probably involved many episodes of
selection, acting on many different systems. Even if
selection targeted a particular structure or system, the result
might have been general enlargement of the nonprimary
cortex, as suggested by Finlay and Darlington (1995), but it
is difﬁcult at present
to see how one can explain the
extensive changes in the network organization of areas and
changes at ﬁner
levels of organization without more
particularistic accounts.

What might

the future of human brain evolutionary
studies offer? Clearly, it is important to have more detailed
and comprehensive brain maps of chimpanzees and other
great apes, comparable to maps currently available for ma-
caques and currently in development for humans. These are
necessary to identify homologous areas across species, an
essential ﬁrst step for a variety of critical analyses. These
analyses include: determining the extent to which evolution
modiﬁed the sizes of individual areas; identifying networks
of cortical areas and assessing changes in their cortico-
cortical connectivity; and localizing targets for assessing
changes in intrinsic areal organization. Producing these maps
is within the capabilities of current imaging and histological

techniques, as are many of the analyses they would support.
More detailed investigations of cortical intrinsic organization
would, however, beneﬁt greatly from higher-resolution im-
aging than is commonly employed at present.

Another priority is improving our understanding of the
chronology of human brain evolution, that is, determining
when in human prehistory particular changes in the in-
ternal organization of the brain occurred, and relating
those to changes in behavior, as inferred from archeology.
Strengthening the
ties between paleoneurology and
neuroanatomy would help: if it were the case, for example,
that changes in internal skull morphology reﬂect changes
in brain shape, rather than vice versa, then it should be
possible to infer changes in the proportions of different
cortical regions from changes in brain shape (Bruner et al.,
2016). Genetic approaches might take us further, if we
could tie speciﬁc anatomical and physiological changes to
speciﬁc genetic changes, and if we could date those
genetic changes, which is possible in some cases based on
linkage disequilibrium. If this were to prove practical, it
could inform us about changes at multiple levels of or-
ganization. By combining this approach with stem-cell
(Hrvoj-Mihic et al., 2014) and embryonic tissue-culture
techniques (Letinic and Rakic, 2001), it might even be
possible to recreate features of ancestral brain organization
in a dish.

It is vital to appreciate that all these advancesdeven the
modest onesdrequire the continued study of chimpanzees
and other great apes. We are fortunate to now have a variety
of noninvasive methods for studying apes. Yet the animals
themselves are likely to be the critical limiting resources in
the future, given the decreasing numbers of great apes in
captivity and the likelihood they will become extinct in the
wild over the next several decades (Povinelli and Preuss,
2012). The future of human brain evolution studies, and
indeed of scientiﬁc approaches to human nature generally,
depends critically on the preservation of great apes.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported by National Institutes of Health Ofﬁce of
Research Infrastructure Programs/OD P51OD11132 to the Yerkes
National Primate Research Center and by the John Templeton
Foundation (award 40463). Human data used to generate some of the
ﬁgures were provided by the Human Connectome Project, WU-Minn
Consortium (principal
investigators: David Van Essen and Kamil
Ugurbil; 1U54MH091657) funded by the 16 NIH Institutes and
Centers that support the NIH Blueprint for Neuroscience Research;
and by the McDonnell Center for Systems Neuroscience at Wash-
ington University. The author is especially grateful
to Matthew
Glasser and Longchuan Li for processing chimpanzee and macaque
imaging data through the Human Connectome Project pipeline, and to
Katherine Bryant, Mary Ann Cree, and Christina Rogers for providing
comments on drafts of the manuscript.

Human Brain Evolution Chapter | 8 143

REFERENCES

Aboitiz, F., 2012. Gestures, vocalizations, and memory in language ori-

gins. Frontiers in Evolutionary Neuroscience 4, 2.

Abu-Akel, A., Shamay-Tsoory, S., 2011. Neuroanatomical and neuro-
chemical bases of theory of mind. Neuropsychologia 49, 2971e2984.
Allen, J.S., 2009. The Lives of the Brain: Human Evolution and the Organ
of Mind. Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
Mass.

Allman, J.M., Watson, K.K., Tetreault, N.A., Hakeem, A.Y., 2005. Intu-
ition and autism: a possible role for Von Economo neurons. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences 9, 367e373.

Allman,

J.M., Tetreault, N.A., Hakeem, A.Y., Manaye, K.F.,
Semendeferi, K., Erwin, J.M., Park, S., Goubert, V., Hof, P.R.,
2011. The von Economo neurons in the frontoinsular and anterior
cingulate cortex. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences
1225, 59e71.

Allman, J., 1982. Reconstructing the evolution of the brain in primates
through the use of comparative neurophysiological and anatomical
data. In: Armstrong, E., Falk, D. (Eds.), Primate Brain Evolution.
Methods and Concepts. Plenum, New York, pp. 13e28.

Arbib, M.A., 2012. How the Brain Got Language: The Mirror System

Hypothesis. Oxford University Press.

Armstrong, E., 1982. Mosaic Evolution in the Primate Brain: Differences
and Similarities in the Hominoid Thalamus. Primate Brain Evolution.
Springer, US, pp. 131e161.

Arora, G., Polavarapu, N., McDonald, J.F., 2009. Did natural selection for
increased cognitive ability in humans lead to an elevated risk of
cancer? Medical Hypotheses 73, 453e456.

Arora, G., Mezencev, R., McDonald, J.F., 2012. Human cells display
reduced apoptotic function relative to chimpanzee cells. PLoS One 7,
e46182.

Avants, B.B., Avants, B.B., Schoenemann, P.T., Schoenemann, P.T.,
Gee, J.C., Gee, J.C., 2006. Lagrangian frame diffeomorphic image
registration: morphometric comparison of human and chimpanzee
cortex. Medical Image Analysis 10, 397e412.

Bailey, P., von Bonin, G., 1951. The Isocortex of Man. Univ. of Illinois

Press, Urbana.

Bailey, P., von Bonin, G., McCulloch, W.S., 1950. The Isocortex of the

Chimpanzee. Univ. of Illinois Press, Urbana, IL.

Balsters, J.H., Cussans, E., Diedrichsen, J., Phillips, K.A., Preuss, T.M.,
Rilling, J.K., Ramnani, N., 2010. Evolution of the cerebellar cortex:
the selective expansion of prefrontal-projecting cerebellar lobules.
NeuroImage 49, 2045e2052.

Barger, N., Hanson, K.L., Teffer, K., Schenker-Ahmed, N.M.,
Semendeferi, K., 2014. Evidence for evolutionary specialization in
human limbic structures. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 277.

Barks, S.K., Calhoun, M.E., Hopkins, W.D., Cranﬁeld, M.R.,
Mudakikwa, A., Stoinski, T.S., Patterson, F.G., Erwin,
J.M.,
Hecht, E.E., Hof, P.R., Sherwood, C.C., 2015a. Brain organization of
gorillas reﬂects species differences in ecology. American Journal of
Physical Anthropology 156, 252e262.

Barks, S.K., Parr, L.A., Rilling, J.K., 2015b. The default mode network in
chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) is similar to that of humans. Cerebral
Cortex 25, 538e544.

Barton, R.A., Venditti, C., 2013. Human frontal lobes are not relatively
large. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 110, 9001e9006.

144 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

Bauernfeind, A.L., de Sousa, A.A., Avasthi, T., Dobson, S.D.,
Raghanti, M.A., Lewandowski, A.H., Zilles, K., Semendeferi, K.,
Allman, J.M., Craig, A.D.B., Hof, P.R., Sherwood, C.C., 2013.
A volumetric comparison of the insular cortex and its subregions in
primates. Journal of Human Evolution 64, 263e279.

Bauernfeind, A.L., Reyzer, M.L., Caprioli, R.M., Ely, J.J., Babbitt, C.C.,
Wray, G.A., Hof, P.R., Sherwood, C.C., 2015a. High spatial resolu-
tion proteomic comparison of the brain in humans and chimpanzees.
Journal of Comparative Neurology 523, 2043e2061.

Bauernfeind, A.L., Soderblom, E.J., Turner, M.E., Moseley, M.A.,
Ely, J.J., Hof, P.R., Sherwood, C.C., Wray, G.A., Babbitt, C.C.,
2015b. Evolutionary divergence of gene and potein expression in the
brains of humans and chimpanzees. Genome Biology and Evolution 7,
2276e2288.

Bhardwaj, R.D., Curtis, M.A., Spalding, K.L., Buchholz, B.A., Fink, D.,
Björk-Eriksson, T., Nordborg, C., Gage, F.H., Druid, H.,
Eriksson, P.S., Frisén, J., 2006. Neocortical neurogenesis in humans is
restricted to development. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 103, 12564e12568.

Blinkov, S., Glezer, I., 1968. The Human Brain in Figures and Tables.

Basic Books, New York.

Blurton Jones, N.G., Hawkes, K., O’Connell, J.F., 2002. Antiquity of
postreproductive life: are there modern impacts on hunter-gatherer
postreproductive life spans? American Journal of Human Biology
14, 184e205.

von Bonin, G., Bailey, P., 1947. The Neocortex of Macaca Mulatta.

University of Illinois Press, Urbana.

Buccino, G., Binkofski, F., Fink, G.R., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., Gallese, V.,
Seitz, R.J., Zilles, K., Rizzolatti, G., Freund, H.J., 2001. Action
observation activates premotor and parietal areas in a somatotopic
manner: an fMRI study. European Journal of Neuroscience 13,
400e404.

Buckner, R.L., Carroll, D.C., 2007. Self-projection and the brain. Trends

in Cognitive Sciences 11, 49e57.

Buckner, R.L., Sepulcre, J., Talukdar, T., Krienen, F.M., Liu, H.,
Hedden, T., Andrews-Hanna, J.R., Sperling, R.A., Johnson, K.A.,
2009. Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity:
mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer’s Disease.
The Journal of Neuroscience 29, 1860e1873.

Buckner, R.L., 2012. The serendipitous discovery of the brain’s default

network. NeuroImage 62, 1137e1145.

Bush, E.C., Allman, J.M., 2004. The scaling of frontal cortex in primates
and carnivores. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 101, 3962e3966.

Butti, C., Santos, M., Uppal, N., Hof, P.R., 2013. Von Economo neurons:

clinical and evolutionary perspectives. Cortex 49, 312e326.

Buxhoeveden, D.P., Switala, A.E., Litaker, M., 2001. Lateralization of
minicolumns in human planum temporale is absent in nonhuman
primate cortex. Brain, Behaviour and Evolution 57 (6), 349e358.

Cáceres, M., Lachuer, J., Zapala, M.A., Redmond, J., Kudo, L.,
Geschwind, D., Lockhart, D., Preuss, T., Barlow, C., 2003. Elevated
gene expression levels distinguish human from non-human primate
brains. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 100, 1330e1335.

von Bonin, G., Bailey, P., 1961. Patterns of the cerebral isocortex. In:
Hofer, H., Schultz, A.H., Starck, D. (Eds.), Primatologia. S. Karger,
Basel, pp. 1e42.

Caceres, M., Suwyn, C., Maddox, M., Thomas, J.W., Preuss, T.M., 2007.
Increased cortical expression of two synaptogenic thrombospondins in
human brain evolution. Cerebral Cortex 17, 2312e2321.

von Bonin, G., 1944. The architecture. In: Bucy, P.C. (Ed.), The Precentral

Motor Cortex. University of Illinois Press, Urbana, IL, pp. 7e82.

Bozek, K., Wei, Y., Yan, Z., Liu, X., Xiong, J., Sugimoto, M., Tomita, M.,
Pääbo, S., Sherwood, C.C., Hof, P.R., Ely,
J.J., Li, Y.,
Steinhauser, D., Willmitzer, L., Giavalisco, P., Khaitovich, P., 2015.
Organization and evolution of brain lipidome revealed by large-scale
analysis of human, chimpanzee, macaque, and mouse tissues. Neuron
85, 695e702.

Broadﬁeld, D.C., Holloway, R.L., 2010. The Human Brain Evolving:
Paleoneurological Studies in Honor of Ralph L. Holloway. Stone Age
Institute Press, Gosport, IN.

Brodmann, K., 1909. Vergleichende Lokalisationslehre der Gros-
shirnrhinde. Barth (reprinted as Brodmann’s ‘Localisation in the
Cerebral Cortex,’ translated and edited by L. J. Garey, London:
Smith-Gordon, 1994).

Brodmann, K., 1912. Neue Ergibnisse uber die vergleichende histologi-
sche Lokalisation der Grosshirnrinde mit besonderer Berucksichtigung
des Stirnhirns. Anatomischer Anzeiger 41 (Suppl.), 157e216.

Bruner, E., Preuss, T.M., Chen, X., Rilling, J.K., 2016. Evidence for
expansion of the precuneus in human evolution. Brain Structure and
Function 1e10.

Cantalupo, C., Oliver,

J., Smith,

J.P.,
Hopkins, W.D., 2009. The chimpanzee brain shows human-like
perisylvian asymmetries in white matter. European Journal of
Neuroscience 30, 431e438.

J., Nir, T., Taglialatela,

Charvet, C.J., Cahalane, D.J., Finlay, B.L., 2015. Systematic, cross-cortex
variation in neuron numbers in rodents and primates. Cerebral Cortex
25, 147e160.

Cohen, J., 2010. Almost Chimpanzee: Searching for What Makes Us
Human, in Rainforests, Labs, Sanctuaries, and Zoos, ﬁrst ed. Times
Books, New York.

Collins, C.E., 2011. Variability in neuron densities across the cortical sheet

in primates. Brain, Behaviour and Evolution 78, 37e50.

Colombo, J.A., Fuchs, E., Härtig, W., Marotte, L.R., Puissant, V., 2000.
“Rodent-like” and & “primate-like” types of astroglial architecture in
the adult cerebral cortex of mammals: a comparative study. Anatomy
and Embryology 201, 111e120.

Craig, A.D.B., 2011. Signiﬁcance of the insula for the evolution of human
awareness of feelings from the body. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences 1225, 72e82.

Crick, F., Jones, E., 1993. Backwardness of human neuroanatomy. Nature

361, 109e110.

Bruner, E., 2004. Geometric morphometrics and paleoneurology: brain
shape evolution in the genus Homo. Journal of Human Evolution 47,
279e303.

Darwin, C., 1871. The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex.
John Murray [Facsimile edition: Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 1981], London.

Bryant, K.L., Suwyn, C., Reding, K.M., Smiley, J.F., Hackett, T.A.,
Preuss, T.M., 2012. Evidence for ape and human specializations in
geniculostriate projections from VGLUT2 immunohistochemistry.
Brain, Behaviour and Evolution 80, 210e221.

de Sousa, A., Cunha, E., 2012. Hominins and the Emergence of the

Modern Human Brain, ﬁrst ed. Elsevier B.V, pp. 293e322.

de Sousa, A., Wood, B., 2007. The hominin fossil record and the emergence
In: Kaas, J.H.,

the modern human central nervous system.

of

Human Brain Evolution Chapter | 8 145

Preuss, T.M. (Eds.), Evolution of Nervous Systems, Primates, vol. 4.
Elsevier, Oxford, pp. 291e336.

Deacon, T.W., 1997. The Symbolic Species: The Co-evolution of

Khaitovich, P., 2011. Rapid metabolic evolution in human prefrontal
cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 108, 6181e6186.

Language and the Brain, ﬁrst ed. W.W. Norton.

Deacon, T.W., 2006. The Evolution of Language Systems in the Human

Brain, pp. 1e19.

del Río, M.R., DeFelipe, J., 1997. Colocalization of parvalbumin and
calbindin D-28k in neurons including chandelier cells of the human
temporal neocortex.
Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy 12,
165e173.

Denys, K., Vanduffel, W., Fize, D., Nelissen, K., Sawamura, H.,
Georgieva, S., Vogels, R., Van Essen, D., Orban, G.A., 2004. Visual
activation in prefrontal cortex is stronger in monkeys than in humans.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 16, 1505e1516.

Gannon, P.J., Holloway, R.L., Broadﬁeld, D.C., Braun, A.R., 1998.
Asymmetry of chimpanzee planum temporale: humanlike pattern
of Wernicke’s brain language area homolog. Science 279,
220e222.

Gaspard, N., Gaillard, A., Vanderhaeghen, P., 2009. Making cortex in a
dish: in vitro corticopoiesis from embryonic stem cells. Cell Cycle 8,
2491e2496.

Gazzaniga, M.S., 2008. Human: The Science Behind What Makes Us

Unique. Ecco, New York.

Geschwind, N., Levitsky, W., 1968. Human brain: left-right asymmetries

in temporal speech region. Science 161, 186e187.

Diamond, J.M., 1992. The Third Chimpanzee : The Evolution and Future

Geschwind, N., 1970. The organization of language and the brain. Science

of the Human Animal, ﬁrst ed. HarperCollins, New York, NY.

170, 940e944.

Eiraku, M., Watanabe, K., Matsuo-Takasaki, M., Kawada, M.,
Yonemura, S., Matsumura, M., Wataya, T., Nishiyama, A.,
Muguruma, K., Sasai, Y., 2008. Self-organized formation of polarized
cortical tissues from ESCs and its active manipulation by extrinsic
signals. Cell Stem Cell 3, 519e532.
Enard, W., Khaitovich, P., Klose,

J., Zollner, S., Heissig, F.,
Giavalisco, P., Nieselt-Struwe, K., Muchmore, E., Varki, A.,
Ravid, R., Doxiadis, G.M., Bontrop, R.E., Paabo, S., 2002a. Intra- and
interspeciﬁc variation in primate gene expression patterns. Science
296, 340e343.

Enard, W., Przeworski, M., Fisher, S.E., Lai, C.S.L., Wiebe, V.,
Kitano, T., Monaco, A.P., Pääbo, S., 2002b. Molecular evolution of
FOXP2, a gene involved in speech and language. Nature 418,
869e872.

Enard, W., Gehre, S., Hammerschmidt, K., Hölter, S.M., Blass, T.,
Somel, M., Brückner, M.K., Schreiweis, C., Winter, C., Sohr, R.,
Becker, L., Wiebe, V., Nickel, B., Giger, T., Müller, U., Groszer, M.,
Adler, T., Aguilar, A., Bolle,
I., Calzada-Wack, J., Dalke, C.,
Ehrhardt, N., Favor, J., Fuchs, H., Gailus-Durner, V., Hans, W.,
Hölzlwimmer, G., Javaheri, A., Kalaydjiev, S., Kallnik, M., Kling, E.,
Kunder, S., Mossbrugger, I., Naton, B., Racz, I., Rathkolb, B.,
Rozman, J., Schrewe, A., Busch, D.H., Graw, J.,
Ivandic, B.,
Klingenspor, M., Klopstock, T., Ollert, M., Quintanilla-Martinez, L.,
Schulz, H., Wolf, E., Wurst, W., Zimmer, A., Fisher, S.E.,
Morgenstern, R., Arendt, T., Hrabé de Angelis, M., Fischer, J.,
Schwarz, J., Pääbo, S., 2009. A humanized version of Foxp2 affects
cortico-basal ganglia circuits in mice. Cell 137, 961e971.

Falk, D., 1980. A reanalysis of the South African australopithecine natural
endocasts. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 53, 525e539.
Falk, D., 2014. Interpreting sulci on hominin endocasts: old hypotheses

and new ﬁndings. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 134.

Falk, D., 2015. Evolution of the primate brain. In: Henke, W., Tattersall, I.
(Eds.), Handbook of Paleoanthropology. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg,
pp. 1495e1525.

Fields, R.D., Araque, A., Johansen-Berg, H., Lim, S.-S., Lynch, G.,
Nave, K.-A., Nedergaard, M., Perez, R., Sejnowski, T., Wake, H.,
2014. Glial biology in learning and cognition. Neuroscientist 20,
426e431.

Finlay, B.L., Darlington, R.B., 1995. Linked regularities in the develop-
ment and evolution of mammalian brains. Science 268, 1578e1584.
Fu, X., Giavalisco, P., Liu, X., Catchpole, G., Fu, N., Ning, Z.-B., Guo, S.,
Yan, Z., Somel, M., Pääbo, S., Zeng, R., Willmitzer, L.,

Ghazanfar, A.A., Miller, C.T., 2006. Language evolution:

loquacious

monkey brains? Current Biology 16, R879eR881.

Gilissen, E.P., Hopkins, W.D., 2013. Asymmetries of the parietal oper-
culum in chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) in relation to handedness for
tool use. Cerebral Cortex 23, 411e422.

Glasser, M.F., Van Essen, D.C., 2011. Mapping human cortical areas
in vivo based on myelin content as revealed by T1- and T2-weighted
MRI. The Journal of Neuroscience 31, 11597e11616.

Glasser, M.F., Goyal, M.S., Preuss, T.M., Raichle, M.E., Van Essen, D.C.,
2014. Trends and properties of human cerebral cortex: correlations
with cortical myelin content. NeuroImage 93 (Pt 2), 165e175.

Gobbini, M.I., Koralek, A.C., Bryan, R.E., Montgomery, K.J.,
Haxby, J.V., 2007. Two takes on the social brain: a comparison of
theory of mind tasks. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 19,
1803e1814.

Goldman-Rakic, P.S., 1988. Topography of cognition: parallel distributed
networks in primate association cortex. Annual Review Neuroscience
11, 137e156.

Goodman, M., Porter, C.A., Czelusniak, J., Page, S.L., Schneider, H.,
Shoshani, J., Gunnell, G., Groves, C.P., 1998. Toward a phyloge-
netic
on DNA evidence
complemented by fossil evidence. Molecular Phylogenetics and
Evolution 9, 585e598.

classiﬁcation

of

primates

based

Gould, S.J., 1977. Ontogeny and Phylogeny. Belknap Press of Harvard

University Press, Cambridge, Mass.

Hammerschmidt, K., Schreiweis, C., Minge, C., Paabo, S., Fischer, J.,
Enard, W., 2015. A humanized version of Foxp2 does not affect ul-
trasonic vocalization in adult mice. Genes, Brain and Behavior 14,
583e590.

Hecht, E.E., Murphy, L.E., Gutman, D.A., Votaw, J.R., Schuster, D.M.,
Preuss, T.M., Orban, G.A., Stout, D., Parr, L.A., 2013. Differences in
neural activation for object-directed grasping in chimpanzees and
humans. The Journal of Neuroscience 33, 14117e14134.

Hecht, E.E., Gutman, D.A., Bradley, B.A., Preuss, T.M., Stout, D., 2015a.
Virtual dissection and comparative connectivity of the superior lon-
gitudinal fasciculus in chimpanzees and humans. NeuroImage 108,
124e137.

Hecht, E.E., Gutman, D.A., Khreisheh, N., Taylor, S.V., Kilner, J.,
Faisal, A.A., Bradley, B.A., Chaminade, T., Stout, D., 2015b.
Acquisition of Paleolithic toolmaking abilities involves structural
remodeling to inferior frontoparietal regions. Brain Structure and
Function 220, 2315e2331.

146 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

Henrich, J., 2015. The Secret of Our Success: How Culture Is Driving
Human Evolution, Domesticating Our Species, and Making Us
Smarter, ﬁrst ed. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Jefferies, E., 2013. The neural basis of semantic cognition: converging
evidence from neuropsychology, neuroimaging and TMS. Cortex 49,
611e625.

Herculano-Houzel, S., Collins, C.E., Wong, P., Kaas, J.H., Lent, R., 2008.
The basic nonuniformity of the cerebral cortex. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 105,
12593e12598.

Herndon, J.G., Tigges, J., Klumpp, S.A., Anderson, D.C., 1998. Brain
weight does not decrease with age in adult rhesus monkeys. Neuro-
biology of Aging 19, 267e272.

Hof, P.R., Sherwood, C.C., 2005. Morphomolecular neuronal phenotypes
in the neocortex reﬂect phylogenetic relationships among certain
mammalian orders. The Anatomical Record. Part A, Discoveries in
Molecular, Cellular, and Evolutionary Biology 287, 1153e1163.

Hof, P.R., Sherwood, C.C., 2007. The evolution of neuron classes in the
neocortex of mammals.
(Eds.),
Evolution of Nervous Systems, Mammals, vol. 3. Elsevier, Oxford,
pp. 113e124.

In: Kaas, J.H., Krubitzer, L.A.

Hof, P.R., Nimchinsky, E.A., Perl, D.P., Erwin, J.M., 2001. An unusual
population of pyramidal neurons in the anterior cingulate cortex of
hominids contains the calcium-binding protein calretinin. Neurosci-
ence Letters 307, 139e142.

Holloway, R.L., de la Coste-Lareymondie, M.C., 1982. Brain endocast
asymmetry in pongids and hominids: some preliminary ﬁndings on the
paleontology of cerebral dominance. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology 58, 101e110.

Holloway, R.L., Sherwood, C.C., Hof, P.R., Rilling, J.K., 2009. Evolution
of the Brain in Humans e Paleoneurology, Encyclopedia of Neuro-
science. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 1326e1334.

Holloway, R.L., 1966. Cranial capacity, neural

reorganization, and
hominid evolution: a search for more suitable parameters. American
Anthropologist 68, 103e121.

Holloway, R.L., 1981. Revisiting the South African Taung australopithe-
cine endocast: the position of the lunate sulcus as determined by the
stereoplotting technique. American Journal of Physical Anthropology
56, 43e58.

Holloway, R.L., 2002. Brief communication: how much larger is the
relative volume of area 10 of the prefrontal cortex in humans?
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 118, 399e401.

Holloway, R.L., 2008. The human brain evolving: a personal retrospective.

Annual Review of Anthropology 37, 1e19.

Hopkins, W.D., Marino, L., 2000. Asymmetries in cerebral width in
nonhuman primate brains as revealed by magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI). Neuropsychologia 38, 493e499.

Hopkins, W.D., Nir, T.M., 2010. Planum temporale surface area and grey
matter asymmetries in chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes): the effect of
handedness and comparison with ﬁndings in humans. Behavioural
Brain Research 208, 436e443.

Hopkins, W.D., Lyn, H., Cantalupo, C., 2009. Volumetric and lateralized
differences in selected brain regions of chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes)
and bonobos (Pan paniscus). American Journal of Primatology 71,
988e997.

Hrvoj-Mihic, B., Marchetto, M.C.N., Gage, F.H., Semendeferi, K.,
Muotri, A.R., 2014. Novel tools, classic techniques: evolutionary
studies using primate pluripotent stem cells. Biological Psychiatry 75,
929e935.

Huxley, T.H., 1863. Evidence as to Man’s Place in Nature. Williams and

Norgate [1959, Ann Arbor, University of Michigan], London.

Jerison, H.J., 1973. Evolution of the Brain and Intelligence. Academic

Press.

Jerison, H.J., 1977. Should phrenology be rediscovered? Current

Anthropology 744.

Kaas, J.H., Preuss, T.M., 2007. Evolution of Nervous Systems. In:

Primates, vol. 4. Elsevier, Oxford.

Kaas, J.H., Preuss, T.M., 2013. Human brain evolution. In: Squire, L.,
Berg, D., Bloom, F.E., du Lac, S., Ghosh, A., Spitzer, N.C. (Eds.),
Fundamental Neuroscience, fourth ed. Academic Press, San Diego,
CA, pp. 901e918.

Kaas, J.H., 1987. The organization and evolution of neocortex. In:
Wise, S.P. (Ed.), Higher Brain Function: Recent Explorations of the
Brain’s Emergent Properties. John Wiley, New York, pp. 347e378.
King, M.C., Wilson, A.C., 1975. Evolution at two levels in humans and

chimpanzees. Science 188, 107e116.

Kolster, H., Janssens, T., Orban, G.A., Vanduffel, W., 2014. The reti-
notopic organization of macaque occipitotemporal cortex anterior to
V4 and caudoventral to the middle temporal (MT) cluster. The Journal
of Neuroscience 34, 10168e10191.

Konopka, G., Bomar, J.M., Winden, K., Coppola, G., Jonsson, Z.O.,
Gao, F., Peng, S., Preuss, T.M., Wohlschlegel, J.A., Geschwind, D.H.,
2009. Human-speciﬁc transcriptional regulation of CNS development
genes by FOXP2. Nature 462, 213e217.

Konopka, G., Friedrich, T., Davis-Turak, J., Winden, K., Oldham, M.C.,
Gao, F., Chen, L., Wang, G.-Z., Luo, R., Preuss, T.M.,
Geschwind, D.H., 2012. Human-speciﬁc transcriptional networks in
the brain. Neuron 75, 601e617.

Lancaster, M.A., Renner, M., Martin, C.-A., Wenzel, D., Bicknell, L.S.,
Jackson, A.P.,
Hurles, M.E., Homfray, T., Penninger,
Knoblich, J.A., 2013. Cerebral organoids model human brain devel-
opment and microcephaly. Nature 501, 373e379.

J.M.,

Inoue, E.,

Inoue-Muruyama, M., Mitani,

Langergraber, K.E., Prufer, K., Rowney, C., Boesch, C., Crockford, C.,
Fawcett, K.,
J.C.,
Muller, M.N., Robbins, M.M., Schubert, G., Stoinski, T.S., Viola, B.,
Watts, D., Wittig, R.M., Wrangham, R.W., Zuberbuhler, K.,
Paabo, S., Vigilant, L., 2012. Generation times in wild chimpanzees
and gorillas suggest earlier divergence times in great ape and human
evolution. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 109, 15716e15721.

Lashley, K.S., 1949. Persistent problems in the evolution of mind. The

Quarterly Review Biology 24, 28e42.

Leigh, S.R., Shea, B.T., 1996. Ontogeny of body size variation in African

apes. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 99, 43e65.

Leroy, F., Cai, Q., Bogart, S.L., Dubois, J., Coulon, O., Monzalvo, K.,
Fischer, C., Glasel, H., Van der Haegen, L., Bénézit, A., Lin, C.-P.,
Kennedy, D.N.,
Ihara, A.S., Hertz-Pannier, L., Moutard, M.-L.,
Poupon, C., Brysbaert, M., Roberts, N., Hopkins, W.D., Mangin, J.-F.,
Dehaene-Lambertz, G., 2015. New human-speciﬁc brain landmark:
the depth asymmetry of superior temporal sulcus. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 112,
1208e1213.

Letinic, K., Rakic, P., 2001. Telencephalic origin of human thalamic

GABAergic neurons. Nature Neuroscience 4, 931e936.

Li, L., Hu, X., Preuss, T.M., Glasser, M.F., Damen, F.W., Qiu, Y.,
Rilling, J., 2013. Mapping putative hubs in human, chimpanzee and

rhesus macaque connectomes via diffusion tractography. NeuroImage
80, 462e474.

Liakakis, G., Nickel, J., Seitz, R.J., 2011. Diversity of the inferior frontal
gyrusdA meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies. Behavioural Brain
Research 225, 341e347.

Lyon, D.C., 2007. The evolution of visual cortex and visual systems. In:
Kaas, J.H., Preuss, T.M. (Eds.), Evolution of Nervous Sytems,
Primates, vol. 4. Elsevier, Oxford, pp. 267e306.

Mantini, D., Gerits, A., Nelissen, K., Durand, J.B., Joly, O., Simone, L.,
Sawamura, H., Wardak, C., Orban, G.A., Buckner, R.L.,
Vanduffel, W., 2011. Default mode of brain function in monkeys. The
Journal of Neuroscience 31, 12954e12962.

Mantini, D., Corbetta, M., Romani, G.L., Orban, G.A., Vanduffel, W.,
2013. Evolutionarily novel functional networks in the human brain?
The Journal of Neuroscience 33, 3259e3275.

Mars, R.B., Jbabdi, S., Sallet, J., O’Reilly, J.X., Croxson, P.L., Olivier, E.,
Noonan, M.P., Bergmann, C., Mitchell, A.S., Baxter, M.G.,
Behrens, T.E.J., Johansen-Berg, H., Tomassini, V., Miller, K.L.,
Rushworth, M.F.S., 2011. Diffusion-weighted imaging tractography-
based parcellation of the human parietal cortex and comparison with
human and macaque resting-state functional connectivity. The Journal
of Neuroscience 31, 4087e4100.

Mars, R.B., Neubert, F.-X., Noonan, M.P., Sallet,

I.,
Rushworth, M.F.S., 2012. On the relationship between the “default
mode network” and the “social brain”. Frontiers in Human Neuro-
science 189.

J., Toni,

Mars, R.B., Sallet, J., Neubert, F.X., Rushworth, M.F.S., 2013. Connec-
tivity proﬁles reveal the relationship between brain areas for social
cognition in human and monkey temporoparietal cortex. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
110, 10806e10811.

Martin, R.D., 1981. Relative brain size and basal metabolic rate in

terrestrial vertebrates. Nature 57e60.

Masten, C.L., Morelli, S.A., Eisenberger, N.I., 2011. An fMRI investi-
gation of empathy for ‘social pain’ and subsequent prosocial behavior.
NeuroImage 55, 381e388.

Mcbrearty, S., Brooks, A.S., 2000. The revolution that wasn’t: a new
interpretation of the origin of modern human behavior. Journal of
Human Evolution 39, 453e463.

Neubert, F.-X., Mars, R.B., Thomas, A.G., Sallet, J., Rushworth, M.F.S.,
2014. Comparison of human ventral frontal cortex: areas for cognitive
control and language with areas in monkey frontal cortex. Neuron 81,
700e713.

Nieuwenhuys, R., 2012. The insular cortex: a review. Progress in Brain

Research 195, 123e163.

Nimchinsky, E.A., Gilissen, E., Allman, J.M., Perl, D.P., Erwin, J.M.,
Hof, P.R., 1999. A neuronal morphologic type unique to humans and
great apes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 96, 5268e5273.

J.D., Pilcher, W., Ojemann,

Oberheim, N.A., Takano, T., Han, X., He, W., Lin, J.H., Wang, F., Xu, Q.,
Wyatt,
J.G., Ransom, B.R.,
Goldman, S.A., Nedergaard, M., 2009. Uniquely hominid features of
adult human astrocytes. The Journal of Neuroscience 29, 3276e3287.
Parr, L.A., Hecht, E., Barks, S.K., Preuss, T.M., Votaw, J.R., 2009. Face

processing in the chimpanzee brain. Current Biology 19, 50e53.

Parr, L.A., 2011. The evolution of face processing in primates. Philo-
sophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences
366, 1764e1777.

Human Brain Evolution Chapter | 8 147

Passingham, R.E., Smaers, J.B., 2014. Is the prefrontal cortex especially
enlarged in the human brain allometric relations and remapping fac-
tors. Brain, Behaviour and Evolution 84, 156e166.

Passingham, R.E., 1973. Anatomical differences between the neocortex
of man and other primates. Brain, Behaviour and Evolution
337e359.

Passingham, R.E., 1998. The specializations of the human cerebral cortex.
(Ed.), Comparative Neuropsychology. Oxford

In: Milner, A.D.
University Press, Oxford, pp. 271e298.

Passingham, R.E., 2002. The frontal cortex: does size matter? Nature

Neuroscience 5, 190e192.

Passingham, R.E., 2008. What Is Special about the Human Brain? Oxford

University Press, Oxford; New York.

Peeters, R., Simone, L., Nelissen, K., Fabbri-Destro, M., Vanduffel, W.,
Rizzolatti, G., Orban, G.A., 2009. The representation of tool use in
humans and monkeys: common and uniquely human features. The
Journal of Neuroscience 29, 11523e11539.

Peeters, R.R., Rizzolatti, G., Orban, G.A., 2013. Functional properties of

the left parietal tool use region. NeuroImage 78, 83e93.

Perelman, P., Johnson, W.E., Roos, C., Seuánez, H.N., Horvath, J.E.,
Moreira, M.A.M., Kessing, B., Pontius, J., Roelke, M., Rumpler, Y.,
Schneider, M.P.C., Silva, A., O’Brien, S.J., Pecon-Slattery, J., 2011.
A molecular phylogeny of
living primates. PLoS Genetics 7,
e1001342.

Petrides, M., Pandya, D.N., 1994. Comparative architectonic analysis of
the human and the macaque frontal cortex. In: Booler, F., Grafman, J.
(Eds.), Handbook of Neuropsychology. Elsevier, Amsterdam,
pp. 17e58.

Pinsk, M.A., Arcaro, M., Weiner, K.S., Kalkus, J.F.,

Inati, S.J.,
Gross, C.G., Kastner, S., 2008. Neural representations of faces and
body parts in macaque and human cortex: a comparative fMRI study.
Journal of Neurophysiology 101, 2581e2600.

Povinelli, D.J., Eddy, T.J., 1996. What young chimpanzees know about
seeing. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Develop-
ment 61 (ievi), 1e152 discussion 153e191.

Povinelli, D., Preuss, T.M., 2012. Afterword: World without Apes? World
without Weight: Perspectives on an Alien Mind. Oxford University
Press, pp. 330e332.

Premack, D., 2010. Why humans are unique: three theories. Perspectives

on Psychological Science 5, 22e32.

Preuss, T.M., Coleman, G.Q., 2002. Human-speciﬁc organization of pri-
mary visual cortex: alternating compartments of dense Cat-301 and
calbindin immunoreactivity in layer 4A. Cerebral Cortex 12,
671e691.

Preuss, T.M., Robert, J.S., 2014. Animal models of the human brain:
repairing the paradigm. In: Gazzaniga, M.S., Mangun, G. (Eds.), The
Cognitive Neurosciences V. MIT Press, pp. 59e66.

Preuss, T.M., Qi, H., Kaas, J.H., 1999. Distinctive compartmental orga-
nization of human primary visual cortex. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 96,
11601e11606.

Preuss, T.M., 1995. The argument from animals to humans in cognitive
neuroscience. In: Gazzaniga, M.S. (Ed.), The Cognitive Neurosci-
ences. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 1227e1241.

Preuss, T.M., 2001. The discovery of cerebral diversity: an unwelcome
scientiﬁc revolution. In: Falk, D., Gibson, K. (Eds.), Evolutionary
Anatomy of the Primate Cerebral Cortex. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp. 138e164.

148 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

Preuss, T.M., 2004. Specializations of the human visual system:

the
monkey model meets human reality. In: Kaas, J.H., Collins, C.E.
(Eds.), The Primate Visual System. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL,
pp. 231e259.

Preuss, T.M., 2007. Primate brain evolution in phylogenetic context. In:
Kaas, J.H., Preuss, T.M. (Eds.), Evolution of Nervous Systems, vol. 4:
Primates. Elsevier, Oxford, pp. 1e34.

Preuss, T.M., 2010. Reinventing primate neuroscience for the twenty-ﬁrst
century. In: Platt, M.L., Ghazanfar, A.A. (Eds.), Primate Neuro-
ethology. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 422e454.

Preuss, T.M., 2011. The human brain: rewired and running hot. Annals of
the New York Academy of Sciences 1225 (Suppl. 1), E182eE191.
Preuss, T.M., 2012a. Alien brains: a defense of exceptionalism. In:
Povinelli, D.J. (Ed.), World Without Weight: Perspectives on an Alien
Mind. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 30e31.

Preuss, T.M., 2012b. Human brain evolution: from gene discovery to
phenotype discovery. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences of the United States of America 109 (Suppl. 1), 10709e10716.
Price, C.J., 2012. A review and synthesis of the ﬁrst 20 years of PET and
fMRI studies of heard speech, spoken language and reading. Neuro-
Image 62, 816e847.

Raghanti, M.A., Stimpson, C.D., Marcinkiewicz, J.L., Erwin, J.M.,
Hof, P.R., Sherwood, C.C., 2007. Cholinergic innervation of the
frontal cortex: differences among humans, chimpanzees, and macaque
monkeys. Journal of Comparative Neurology 506, 409e424.

Raghanti, M.A., Stimpson, C.D., Marcinkiewicz, J.L., Erwin, J.M.,
Hof, P.R., Sherwood, C.C., 2008a. Cortical dopaminergic innervation
among humans, chimpanzees, and macaque monkeys: a comparative
study. Neuroscience 155, 203e220.

Raghanti, M.A., Stimpson, C.D., Marcinkiewicz, J.L., Erwin, J.M.,
Hof, P.R., Sherwood, C.C., 2008b. Differences in cortical serotonergic
innervation among humans, chimpanzees, and macaque monkeys: a
comparative study. Cerebral Cortex 18, 584e597.

Raghanti, M.A., Spocter, M.A., Stimpson, C.D., Erwin, J.M., Bonar, C.J.,
Allman, J.M., Hof, P.R., Sherwood, C.C., 2009. Species-speciﬁc distri-
butions of tyrosine hydroxylaseeimmunoreactive neurons in the pre-
frontal cortex of anthropoid primates. Neuroscience 158, 1551e1559.

Raghanti, M.A., Spocter, M.A., Butti, C., Hof, P.R., Sherwood, C.C.,
2010. A comparative perspective on minicolumns and inhibitory
GABAergic interneurons in the neocortex. Front. Neuroanat. 3.

Raghanti, M.A., Edler, M.K., Meindl, R.S., Sudduth, J., Bohush, T.,
Erwin, J.M., Stimpson, C.D., Hof, P.R., Sherwood, C.C., 2014.
Humans and great apes share increased neocortical neuropeptide Y
innervation compared to other haplorhine primates. Frontiers in Hu-
man Neuroscience 8, 101.

Raichle, M.E., MacLeod, A.M., Snyder, A.Z., Powers, W.J.,
Gusnard, D.A., Shulman, G.L., 2001. A default mode of brain func-
tion. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 98, 676e682.

Ramayya, A.G., Ramayya, A.G., Glasser, M.F., Glasser, M.F.,
Rilling, J.K., Rilling, J.K., 2010. A DTI investigation of neural sub-
strates supporting tool use. Cerebral Cortex 20, 507e516.

Reimers-Kipping, S., Hevers, W., Paabo, S., Enard, W., 2011. Humanized
Foxp2 speciﬁcally affects cortico-basal ganglia circuits. Neuroscience
175, 75e84.

Rilling, J.K., Insel, T.R., 1999. The primate neocortex in comparative
perspective using magnetic resonance imaging. Journal of Human
Evolution 37, 191e223.

Rilling, J.K., Stout, D., 2014. Evolution of the neural bases of higher
cognitive function in humans. In: Gazzaniga, M.S., Mangun, G.
(Eds.), The Cognitive Neurosciences, ﬁfth ed. MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA, pp. 41e49.

Rilling, J.K., Barks, S.K., Parr, L.A., Preuss, T.M., Faber, T.L.,
Pagnoni, G., Bremner, J.D., Votaw, J.R., 2007. A comparison of
resting-state brain activity in humans and chimpanzees. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
104, 17146e17151.

Rilling, J.K., Glasser, M.F., Preuss, T.M., Ma, X., Zhao, T., Hu, X.,
Behrens, T.E.J., 2008. The evolution of the arcuate fasciculus revealed
with comparative DTI. Nature Neuroscience 11, 426e428.

Rilling, J.K., Glasser, M.F., Jbabdi, S., Andersson, J., Preuss, T.M., 2011.
Continuity, divergence, and the evolution of brain language pathways.
Frontiers in Evolutionary Neuroscience 1e6.

Rilling, J.K., 2008. Neuroscientiﬁc approaches and applications within
anthropology. American Journal of Physical Anthropology (Suppl.
47), 2e32.

Rockel, A.J., Hiorns, R.W., Powell, T.P.S., 1980. The basic uniformity in

structure of the neocortex. Brain 103, 221e244.

Rosa, M.G., Tweedale, R., 2005. Brain maps, great and small: lessons
from comparative studies of primate visual cortical organization.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sci-
ences 360, 665e691.

Sallet, J., Mars, R.B., Noonan, M.P., Neubert, F.-X., Jbabdi, S.,
O’Reilly, J.X., Filippini, N., Thomas, A.G., Rushworth, M.F., 2013.
The organization of dorsal frontal cortex in humans and macaques.
The Journal of Neuroscience 33, 12255e12274.

Schenker, N.M., Buxhoeveden, D.P., Blackmon, W.L., Amunts, K.,
Zilles, K., Semendeferi, K., 2008. A comparative quantitative analysis
of cytoarchitecture and minicolumnar organization in Broca’s area in
humans and great apes. Journal of Comparative Neurology 510,
117e128.

Schoenemann, P.T., 2006. Evolution of the size and functional areas of the

human brain. Annual Review of Anthropology 35, 379e406.

Schoenemann, P.T., 2012. Evolution of brain and language. Progress in

Brain Research 195, 443e459.

Seeley, W.W., Merkle, F.T., Gaus, S.E., Craig, A.D., Allman, J.M.,
Hof, P.R., Economo, C.V., 2012. Distinctive neurons of the anterior
cingulate and frontoinsular cortex: a historical perspective. Cerebral
Cortex 22, 245e250.

Semendeferi, K., Damasio, H., 2000. The brain and its main anatomical
subdivisions in living hominoids using magnetic resonance imaging.
Journal of Human Evolution 38, 317e332.

Semendeferi, K., Armstrong, E., Schleicher, A., Zilles, K., Van
Hoesen, G.W., 2001. Prefrontal cortex in humans and apes: a
comparative study of area 10. American Journal of Physical Anthro-
pology 114, 224e241.

Semendeferi, K., Lu, A., Schenker, N., Damasio, H., 2002. Humans and
great apes share a large frontal cortex. Nature Neuroscience 5, 272e276.
Sherwood, C.C., Subiaul, F., Zawidzki, T.W., 2008. A natural history of
the human mind: tracing evolutionary changes in brain and cognition.
Journal of Anatomy 212, 426e454.

Somel, M., Franz, H., Yan, Z., Lorenc, A., Guo, S., Giger, T., Kelso, J.,
Nickel, B., Dannemann, M., Bahn, S., Webster, M.J., Weickert, C.S.,
Lachmann, M., Paabo, S., Khaitovich, P., 2009. Transcriptional
neoteny in the human brain. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 106, 5743e5748.

Stout, D., Passingham, R., Frith, C., Apel, J., Chaminade, T., 2011.
Technology, expertise and social cognition in human evolution. Eu-
ropean Journal of Neuroscience 33, 1328e1338.

Stout, D., 2011. Stone toolmaking and the evolution of human culture and
cognition. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Bio-
logical Sciences 366, 1050e1059.

Teffer, K., Semendeferi, K., 2012. Human prefrontal cortex: evolution,
development, and pathology. Progress in Brain Research 195,
191e218.

Tootell, R.B., Mendola, J.D., Hadjikhani, N.K., Ledden, P.J., Liu, A.K.,
Reppas, J.B., Sereno, M.I., Dale, A.M., 1997. Functional analysis of
V3A and related areas in human visual cortex. The Journal of
Neuroscience 17, 7060e7078.

Torta, D.M., Cauda, F., 2011. Different functions in the cingulate cortex, a
56,

connectivity modeling

study. NeuroImage

meta-analytic
2157e2172.

Uddin, M., Wildman, D.E., Liu, G., Xu, W., Johnson, R.M., Hof, P.R.,
Kapatos, G., Grossman, L.I., Goodman, M., 2004. Sister grouping of
chimpanzees and humans as revealed by genome-wide phylogenetic
analysis of brain gene expression proﬁles. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 101,
2957e2962.

van den Heuvel, M.P., Sporns, O., 2013. Network hubs in the human

brain. Trends in Cognitive Sciences (Regul. Ed.) 17, 683e696.

Van Essen, D.C., Lewis, J.W., Drury, H.A., Hadjikhani, N., Tootell, R.B.,
Bakircioglu, M., Miller, M.I., 2001. Mapping visual cortex in mon-
keys and humans using surface-based atlases. Vision Research 41,
1359e1378.

Van Essen, D.C., Smith, S.M., Barch, D.M., Behrens, T.E., Yacoub, E.,
Ugurbil, K., Consortium, W.U.-M.H, 2013. The WU-Minn human
connectome project: an overview. NeuroImage 80, 62e79.

Vanduffel, W., Fize, D., Mandeville, J.B., Nelissen, K., Van Hecke, P.,
Rosen, B.R., Tootell, R.B., Orban, G.A., 2001. Visual motion
processing investigated using contrast agent-enhanced fMRI in awake
behaving monkeys. Neuron 32, 565e577.

Vanduffel, W., Fize, D., Peuskens, H., Denys, K., Sunaert, S., Todd, J.T.,
Orban, G.A., 2002. Extracting 3D from motion: differences in human
and monkey intraparietal cortex. Science 298, 413e415.

Human Brain Evolution Chapter | 8 149

Vanduffel, W., Zhu, Q., Orban, G.A., 2014. Monkey cortex through fMRI

glasses. Neuron 83, 533e550.

Vargha-Khadem,

F., Watkins, K., Alcock, K.,

P.,
Passingham, R., 1995. Praxic and nonverbal cognitive deﬁcits in a
large family with a genetically transmitted speech and language
disorder. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 92, 930e933.

Fletcher,

Varki, A., Geschwind, D.H., Eichler, E.E., 2008. Explaining human
uniqueness: genome interactions with environment, behaviour and
culture. Nature Reviews Genetics 9, 749e763.

Vincent, J.L., Patel, G.H., Fox, M.D., Snyder, A.Z., Baker, J.T., Van
Essen, D.C., Zempel, J.M., Snyder, L.H., Corbetta, M., Raichle, M.E.,
2007. Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey
brain. Nature 447, 83e86.

Vogt, B.A., Hof, P.R., Zilles, K., Vogt, L.J., Herold, C., Palomero-
Gallagher, N., 2013. Cingulate area 32 homologies in mouse, rat,
macaque and human: cytoarchitecture and receptor architecture.
Journal of Comparative Neurology 521, 4189e4204.

Vogt, B.A., 2005. Pain and emotion interactions in subregions of the

cingulate gyrus. Nature Reviews 6, 533e544.

Whiten, A., McGuigan, N., Marshall-Pescini, S., Hopper, L.M., 2009.
Emulation, imitation, over-imitation and the scope of culture for child
and chimpanzee. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B:
Biological Sciences 364, 2417e2428.

Wood, B., Baker, J., 2011. Evolution in the genus Homo. Annual Review

of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics 42, 47e69.

Yeo, B.T., Krienen, F.M., Sepulcre, J., Sabuncu, M.R., Lashkari, D.,
Hollinshead, M., Roffman,
J.W., Zollei, L.,
Polimeni, J.R., Fischl, B., Liu, H., Buckner, R.L., 2011. The organi-
zation of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional
connectivity. Journal of Neurophysiology 106, 1125e1165.

J.L., Smoller,

Zahn, R., Moll, J., Krueger, F., Huey, E.D., Garrido, G., Grafman, J.,
2007. Social concepts are represented in the superior anterior temporal
cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 104, 6430e6435.

Chapter 9

How Different Are Humans and “Great
Apes”? A Matrix of Comparative
Anthropogeny

A. Varki and P. Gagneux
University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA, United States

THE CHALLENGE OF COMPARATIVE
ANTHROPOGENY
Comparisons of nonhuman hominids with humans are
difﬁcult, as so little is known about their phenotypic features
(great ape phenomes), in contrast to what we know about
humans (Varki et al., 1998). Ethical, ﬁscal, and practical
issues also limit collection of further data about these species
(Gagneux et al., 2005; McConkey and Varki, 2005), all of
which are currently endangered in the wild. A Matrix of
Comparative Anthropogeny (MOCA) has been established
at the website of the Center for Academic Research and
Training in Anthropogeny (CARTA), and attempts to collect
existing information about human-speciﬁc differences from
“great apes” currently scattered in the literature. Having such
information in one location could lead to new insights and
multidisciplinary interactions, and to ethically sound studies
to explain differences and uniquely human specializations. It
is for this reason that MOCA is called a matrix, ie, an
arrangement of information from which something else
originates, develops, or takes form. This approach could
allow us to connect the dots between different human spe-
cializations, and shed light on how and in what sequence
each difference came about.

OUR EVOLUTIONARY HERITAGE AND
PRIMATE NATURE

of a small rodent, to the several 100 pound gorilla silver-
backs (Martin, 2012). The fossil record places human origins
ﬁrmly in Africa, with w4 million years of bipedal hominin
evolution on that continent before the ﬁrst hominin fossils
appear outside Africa (Antón et al., 2014). Following initial
waves of migration of members of the genus Homo out of
Africa, there was a ﬁnal migration of behaviorally modern
Homo sapiens from Africa, a species that replaced all other
extant members of the hominin clade, with limited inter-
breeding (Varki, 2013; Pääbo, 2015).

Common Phenotypic Features of Humans
Like most other primates, humans are usually born as sin-
gletons, have long lactation periods, and manifest a rela-
tively slow development of the young. Like most nonhuman
hominids, humans are also long-lived, and belong to com-
plex social groups. Humans have the same number of bones
and teeth as chimpanzees (with the exception of a missing
baculum/penis bone in human males). Similarities in the
organization of our brains are also obvious, such as the
sharing of all major areas and a six-layered cortex. It is not
uncommon for a human observer of wild chimpanzees to be
reminded of human acquaintances through one of the ape
subjects. But these individuals have and use no names, never
sit around a ﬁre, and they do not discuss the details of
yesterday or plan for tomorrow.

Classiﬁcation
Humans are one of approximately 400 primate species.
Eighty million years of evolution have given rise to a
staggering range of primate species, ranging in size like that

Comparative Genomics
Our genomes have a very similar size (w3 billion base
pairs for each parental haploid genome) to those of our
closest relatives and even show similar packaging into

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00009-0
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

151

152 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

chromosomes (with the exception of a fused chromosome
in humans, we have 23 pairs as compared to the 24 pairs
found in great apes; Ventura et al., 2012). The total number
of genes is also similar. Complete sequencing of the great
ape genomes conﬁrmed that these are very similar to our
own (Prado-Martinez et al., 2013). At the level of alignable
sequences we are w99% identical. However, around 5% of
the total DNA in the chimpanzee genome differs from that
of humans, if one considers the DNA that is missing in
either species but present in the other (Britten, 2002). With
the discovery of novel functional elements in our genomes
comes the realization that noncoding DNA differences
probably play important roles in the regulation of gene
expression (Capra et al., 2013). This supports the classical
suggestion that regulatory changes likely explain much of
the phenotypic differences between humans and our ape
relatives (King and Wilson, 1975).

COMPARATIVE ANTHROPOGENY

What Is Anthropogeny?
Anthropogeny is a classic term encompassing the explo-
ration of the origins of the human species (Hooper, 1839).
It contrasts with traditional anthropology, which includes
the much broader study of modern humans and their varied
cultures and behaviors, as well as studies of other primates.

A Comprehensive Comparative Approach
Is Needed
Given the lack of understanding of the factors that shaped
the evolution of our species from ape-like ancestors over
the last 6 million years or so, explaining the origin of the
human phenomenon will critically rely on interactive in-
sights gained from drastically different scientiﬁc domains:
biological, social, medical, physical, and computational
(see Fig. 9.1).

Limited Information Is Available on the
Phenomes of Nonhuman Hominids
Compared with the vast store of information we have on
humans, our knowledge of great ape phenomes is very limited
(Fig. 9.2). All living great ape species are currently also en-
dangered due to the rapid destruction or deterioration of their
habitats (tropical forests in Africa and Southeast Asia), pre-
dation by human bush meat hunting, and emerging infectious
diseases arising from ecological disturbances. In the best of all
possible worlds there would be a concerted effort to more fully
understand the phenomes of their captive counterparts, not
only for the purposes of understanding human origins, but also
for improving the care for these endangered populations
(Gagneux et al., 2005). However, traditionally, only chim-
panzees have been kept for research purposes, with very few

FIGURE 9.1 A systematic approach to Anthropogeny. Updated by P. Gagneux, from Varki, A., Nelson, D., 2007. Genomic differences between humans
and chimpanzees. Annual Review of Anthropology 36, 191e209.

How Different Are Humans and “Great Apes”? A Matrix of Comparative Anthropogeny Chapter | 9 153

important ways. This, and a good dose of anthropocen-
trism, explain why our closest relatives the chimpanzees
were traditionally grouped into the nonexistent taxonomic
group that used to be called “pongids” or colloquially, the
“great apes.” A systematic approach to human differences
from these close evolutionary cousins is exempliﬁed by
MOCA.

MATRIX OF COMPARATIVE
ANTHROPOGENY

Origins and Rationale
MOCA started as a simple list of features allegedly unique
to humans kept by one of us (A.V.). With the establishment
of CARTA came the opportunity to expand and correct this
list, which has grown into over 500 items (topics) falling
into 24 different domains (see section: Organization Into
Domains of Human Knowledge in this chapter).

Goals
MOCA attempts to collect existing information currently
scattered in the literature about human-speciﬁc differences
from great apes (O’Bleness et al., 2012). Having such in-
formation in one location could lead to new insights and
multidisciplinary interactions, and to ethically sound
studies to explain differences, as well as uniquely human
specializations. This is why MOCA is called a matrix. This
approach will hopefully allow us to connect the dots among
different human specializations and shed light on how and
in what sequence these have evolved. Furthermore, it may
allow us to connect different specializations and potentially
discover which ones may have caused others. Importantly,
such a chronology will be very helpful in ruling out certain
scenarios due to inconsistencies in timing. By deﬁnition,
MOCA will always be a work in progress.

Organization Into Domains of Human
Knowledge
MOCA is organized into 24 different alphabetically sorted
domains based on areas of scientiﬁc knowledge, and each
topic is assigned to the domain it most closely relates to.
Topics are cross-listed with other topics across all domains
whenever warranted. For example the entry on “composi-
tion of milk” in the MOCA domain Biochemistry would be
cross-listed with blood group antigens
(Pathology),
domestication (Behavior), duration of lactation (Develop-
ment), parental investment (General Life History), sialic
acid content of the brain (Neuroscience), difﬁculty in
breastfeeding, and breast development without pregnancy/
lactation (Reproductive Biology and Disease), and should
further be cross-listed with microbiome (Ecology).

FIGURE 9.2 The need for more information about “great ape” phe-
nomes. Reproduced from McConkey, E.H., Varki, A., 2005. Genomics.
Thoughts on the future of great ape research. Science 309, 1499e1501.

bonobos, gorillas, or orangutans in captivity (mostly restricted
to zoos). Research activities on captive great apes have also
now all but ceased around the world with few notable ex-
ceptions: Japan, the United States, Gabon, and African ape
sanctuaries. There are several dozen great ape research sites
where great apes are studied in their natural environment, and
most of these sites have ape populations that are completely
habituated to the presence of human observers. These provide
precious remaining research opportunities but unfortunately,
also greatly increase the risk of predation and infectious dis-
ease to these populations (Kondgen et al., 2008).

Ethical and Practical Limitations on Further
Acquisition of Information
The phylogenetic proximity and psychological similarity of
great apes and humans have raised strong objections and
prompted legislation prohibiting any invasive or destructive
research on these species (Altevogt et al., 2011; de Waal,
2012). However, routine medical care of captive pop-
ulations remaining in sanctuaries could generate urgently
needed materials to enhance our knowledge of great ape
basic biology (Gagneux et al., 2005). In practice, oppor-
tunities to collect more phenotypic information on these
species remains limited, and the current situation of
asymmetric phenotypic information is unlikely to ever
change for the better.

Body, Mind, and Society of Humans Show
Major Departures From Those of “Great
Apes”
Humans differ from great ape species in external and in-
ternal anatomy, cognition, and social behavior in many

154 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

SELECTED EXAMPLES OF COMPARATIVE
ANTHROPOGENY
Space does not allow a systematic and complete summary
of the information currently in the MOCA resource. The
following is a brief mention of just a few topics in each of
the 24 domains.

of words by age three and often multiple languages. Human
children exhibit profound interest in others’ minds and
pronounced prosocial tendencies (Jaeggi et al., 2010). So-
cial cognition also develops earlier in human children
(Wobber et al., 2014), and could be related to cooperative
breeding in our species (Hrdy, 2009).

Anatomy and Biomechanics
Among the striking human features are reduced fur, upright
posture and ability for sustained running (Bramble and
Lieberman, 2004), visible sclera (whites) of
the eyes
(Tomasello et al., 2007), and a larger and better opposable
thumb (Tocheri et al., 2008). Great apes also appear to have
much stronger skeletal muscles (Walker, 2009).

Behavior
Humans are an “invasive species” that occupy a wide range
of habitats. Some other primate species use a ﬁxed place as
night shelter (eg, baboons). Humans build camps or villages
and use sites (home bases) for prolonged periods of time.
Places, individuals, and social groups have names. The use
of ﬁre allowed the transformation of materials (silcrete,
pitch, compound adhesives), which opened numerous new
possibilities uniquely to our species (Wadley et al., 2009).
Cooking with ﬁre profoundly affected the hominin lineage,
by allowing access to much wider variety of food sources:
plant tubers and seeds could be detoxiﬁed, and meat and
plants rendered much more easily digestible (Wrangham
et al., 1999). Fire also allowed an extension of human daily
activity into the night (Wiessner, 2014) and the colonization
of much colder ecosystems (Roebroeks and Villa, 2011).
The use of ﬁre and other controlled energy sources eventu-
ally launched the anthropocene, an epoch in which humans
have been altering landscapes, climate, and the fate of
countless animal species (Balter, 2013).

Cell Biology and Chemistry
The composition of milk is different between humans and
other hominids. Like humans, great apes produce milk with a
much higher number of free milk oligosaccharides than most
mammals do (over 200 compared to 50) (Urashima et al.,
2009). But humans appear to have longer oligosaccharides
and lack the ability to produce the sialic acid Neu5Gc in their
milk (and in the rest of their body) (Tao et al., 2011).

Cognition
Drastic differences in cognitive development include very
early tendencies of shared attention in humans and rapid
language acquisition by normal children learning thousands

ie,

Communication
Perhaps one of the most important human characteristics is
our linguistic capacity. Whereas other primates clearly
communicate, their communication system is not open-
ended,
they do not have means to convey inﬁnite
meanings and information about events displaced in time
and space (ie, displaced reference) (Penn et al., 2008).
Symbols open up possibilities of deﬁning identity and
practicing magic. Language also allows sharing of minds
by communication about events and concepts removed in
time and space. Importantly,
language also allows for
gauging individual reputation, the existence of which pro-
foundly affects the likelihood of altruistic acts, even when
these are not mutualistic (Fehr, 2004). The origin of human
language remains a very contested ﬁeld of research. The
role of gesture and music as launching systems for spoken
language are worth investigating (Fay et al., 2014) and so
are tantalizing connections between complex (Acheulian
and Levallois) stone tool manufacture and the need and
capacity for syntax (Stout and Chaminade, 2007; Stout
et al., 2015).

Culture
The effective intergenerational transmission of information
with language and theory of mind allows for rapid ratch-
eting of cultural innovations even across societies (Tennie
et al., 2009). Such networks made possible trade of rare
materials such as shells, pigments, and obsidian. All large
human societies have institutions, which are involved in
regulating the lives and interactions of society members.
Such institutions can also contribute to high levels of social
stress, as those individuals with the power to control the
institutions can strongly interfere with the lives of large
numbers of individuals in their societies. Key biological
phenomena regulated by cultures include sexual and
reproductive behaviors (Pemberton et al., 2012).

Dental Biology and Disease
Humans lack a pronounced sexual dimorphism in their
canines (Plavcan, 2012). The much shortened face and jaw
of humans contributes to the impaction of wisdom teeth.
While humans and their hominin ancestors also have much
thicker enamel than extant apes (Horvath et al., 2014), the
overall size of human molars is much reduced, possibly due

How Different Are Humans and “Great Apes”? A Matrix of Comparative Anthropogeny Chapter | 9 155

to the long history of consuming cooked food and much
reduced need for chewing (Wrangham et al., 1999).

especially neurodevelopment

Development
Human development,
is
delayed even further, far beyond that seen in other primates.
A high fetal rate of brain growth is maintained throughout
gestation and continues in the ﬁrst year of life (Leigh, 2004).
Myelination (the insulation of nerve ﬁbers) in humans is
only complete in the third decadedin contrast to chimpan-
zees, where the process completes around age 10 (Miller
et al., 2012).

Ecology
Humans occupy the highest trophic level in most envi-
ronments. The use of technology such as ﬁre, projectile
weapons, hunting machines (nets, traps, snares), and ani-
mals skins for warmth and protection has allowed humans
to colonize ecosystems around the world. Our species has
also increasingly engaged in niche construction (Rendell
et al., 2011; Creanza and Feldman, 2014). The ability to
swim and to manufacture watercraft (rafts, ﬂoats, and
boats) further supported the spread of our species.

Endocrinology
Chimpanzees may have higher levels of active thyroid
hormone in their circulation (Gagneux et al., 2001).
Evidence suggests potential changes in dehydroepiandros-
terone (DHEA) metabolism (Blevins et al., 2013) and a
unique adolescent growth spurt (Bogin, 1999), potentially
mediated by hormones.

General Life History
Childhood, deﬁned as a relative slowing in somatic growth
but continued brain development, and the postreproductive
survival of females appear to be uniquely human, among
primates. Both phenomena contribute to the transfer of
behavior, language, and culture between generations (Bogin,
2009) and are linked to the cooperative nature of human
child rearing (Hrdy, 2009).

(Varki, 2010). Human accelerated regions have been iden-
tiﬁed and include DNA coding for small regulatory RNA
(Capra et al., 2013). Several of these functional genomic
elements affect brain cortical development in utero (McLean
et al., 2011; Charrier et al., 2012; Boyd et al., 2015; Reilly
et al., 2015). Studies of gene expression patterns in a variety
of tissues and individuals of varying ages are rapidly adding
formidable amounts of data with high relevance for under-
standing human speciﬁc phenotypes, eg, brain gene
expression, testes gene expression (Khaitovich et al., 2006;
Somel et al., 2009).

Genomics
The levels of genetic diversity tend to be surprisingly high
in most great ape populations, which despite their low
numbers, maintain over
twice the diversity found in
humans. Notable exceptions are bonobo and mountain
gorillas, which exhibit levels of genetic diversity lower than
humans (Prado-Martinez et al., 2013). Unstable repeat el-
ements in the genome of great apes have differentially
expanded in chimpanzees and gorillas (Marques-Bonet
et al., 2009). Recent families of transposable elements
and endogenous retroviruses have differentially expanded
and inserted in humans and chimpanzees (Magiorkinis
et al., 2015). Most recently, evidence for differential and
strong selection on the X chromosomes of great apes has
been interpreted as resulting from lineage speciﬁc control
of selﬁsh (testis expressed, meiotic drive) elements on large
tracts of the X chromosome (Nam et al., 2015).

Immunology
Several aspects of the human immune system have recently
been modiﬁed by natural selection, possibly due to the
unique pathogen regimes that humans encountered. Possibly
related to this, humans have undergone biochemical changes
with regard to certain molecules found on the surface of
most of their cells as well as receptors on a variety of im-
mune cells (Parham et al., 2012; Varki, 2010). Much
research is currently focused on understanding how the
microbiome of humans and their closest living relatives
contributes to immune system maturation, and how humans
came to carry much reduced microbial diversity (Moeller
et al., 2014).

Genetics
While the vast majority of genes are shared between humans
and other hominids, there are a few that only exist func-
tionally in humans or in chimpanzees (O’Bleness et al.,
2012). Many regulatory regions in the genome have also
undergone changes unique to humans or to one of the other
ape (hominid) lineages. Examples abound. Multiple changes
have occurred in genes associated with sialic acid biology

Medical Diseases
There are many differences in disease susceptibility be-
tween humans and other hominids. Examples include fal-
ciparum Malaria, Inﬂuenza A, frequency of progression of
HIV infection to AIDS, and bacterial sexually transmitted
infections (chlamydia, chancroid, syphilis, and gonorrhea)
(Varki and Varki, 2015; Varki et al., 2011).

156 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

Mental Disease
Humans are prone to a range of mental diseases never so far
diagnosed in any ape. These include early onset syndromes
such as autism, but also later onset diseases such as bipolar
disorder, schizophrenia, and Alzheimer’s disease.

Neuroscience
Relative to body size, the human brain is three times larger
than any ape brain. However some of the early claims of major
regional allometric differences between human and other
primate brains have not been substantiated (Semendeferi et al.,
1997). But much new evidence has been found for differences
in cellular architecture, the packing of mini columns in several
cortical areas (Schenker et al., 2008), as well as in connec-
tivity, such as the massively increased arcuate fasciculus
connecting language areas in humans (Rilling et al., 2008).
Comparing gene expression in different brain regions across
species also revealed that micro RNAs are involved in shaping
human-speciﬁc brain development (Somel et al., 2011). The
emerging ﬁeld of stem cell and induced pluripotent cell
biology allows direct comparison of human and nonhominid
cells in vitro. Derived neuronal cell lineages exhibit interesting
differences in gene expression, motility, and branching pat-
terns (Marchetto et al., 2013).

Nutrition
Hominin ancestors used their technical and cognitive skills
to become top predators around 2 million years ago. While
some great apes regularly hunt and consume a range of
vertebrate prey, only humans habitually hunt and some-
times even cover much of their caloric intake with meat (at
higher latitudes). The use of ﬁre brought with it the in-
vention of cooking. Cooking allows access to novel food as
it detoxiﬁes tubers and seeds, renders food much more
digestible and easy to chew, and also permits the preserving
of animal foods by smoking (Smith et al., 2015).

Organ Physiology
Heat dissipation through eccrine sweating, and the phe-
nomenon of emotional lacrimation (crying) appear unusu-
ally pronounced in humans. Emotional blushing is a
physiological reaction to social embarrassment and has
never been described in nonhumans, and one of the most
peculiar emotions of humans (Darwin, 1872). The reaction
occurs in all humans but is more readily visible in in-
dividuals with light (melanin poor) skin.

Pathology
Cancers of epithelial origin (carcinomas) appear to be rare in
nonhuman hominids but are among the most common killers

in our species (Varki and Varki, 2015). Also not been
described in the great apes is Alzheimer’s disease (Finch and
Austad, 2014) or coronary thrombosis (Varki et al., 2009).

Pharmacology
Most human societies use mind-altering drugs. There are no
reports of wild apes using such agents, even though wild
chimpanzees have been shown to self-medicate by ingesting
plants (Huffman, 2003). Psychedelic drugs can contain psy-
choactive chemicals that induce altered states of conscious-
ness, including spiritual sensations (Sullivan and Hagen,
2002).

Reproductive Biology and Disease
While pair-bonding is very common in human societies, none
of the other primates exhibit prolonged pair-bonding in the
context of multimale, multifemale groups. A certain degree of
conﬁdence in paternity combined with personal names and
kinship terms allows for paternal kinship networks spanning
many social groups, allowing for the existence of clans and
tribes (Chapais, 2013). The prolonged postreproductive sur-
vival of females allows grandmothers to help with the care of
the young, and also to pass on much cultural information (Kim
et al., 2014). Cultural transmission by the elderly might even
have allowed selection for genetic variants that protect
cognitive capacities late in life (Schwarz et al., 2015; Hawkes,
2015). Cooperative breeding is also strongly distinctive of
humans, as compared to all the great apes (Hrdy, 2009).

Skin Biology and Disease
increased subcutaneous fat, and a great
Reduced hair,
variation in skin, hair, and eye pigmentation are unusual
human features (Jablonski, 2012; Kuzawa, 1998). Perma-
nent breast development in adult human females is another
obvious difference (Dixson, 2009).

Social Organization
For most of human prehistory, preagricultural humans lived
in small groups but large social networks. Larger groups,
even larger social networks, and complex hierarchies, arose
among agrarian societies (Smail, 2008).

TOPIC TIMELINES AND RELATIONSHIPS
How are these and other uniquely human features func-
tionally related to each other and which ones arose ﬁrst
along the lineage leading to humans? As an example, a
rough sequence of major items based on current evidence
would be as follows: facultative bipedality, changes in the
hand anatomy, full striding/running bipedality, control of
ﬁre, cooking, home base use, much larger brains, burials,

How Different Are Humans and “Great Apes”? A Matrix of Comparative Anthropogeny Chapter | 9 157

FIGURE 9.3 Example of timeline analysis derived from Matrix of Comparative Anthropogeny (MOCA) topic data.

symbolic capacity, and projectile weapons. There is a
special problem with obtaining deﬁnitive time lines for
various forms of cognitive behavior such as musicality and
language, which do not easily leave fossil evidence. This is
also true of more ephemeral materials like ropes and nets.
But with most apparently human-unique features it
is
possible to assign three rough time points at which the
emergence of the feature may have occurred: possible,
probable, and deﬁnite. Shown in Fig. 9.3 is an example of a
collection of such timelines for various prominent examples
of uniquely human features, relative to the great apes.
Someday, if such a diagram could contain deﬁnitive dating
for the emergence of all of the items in MOCA, the story of
human origins would essentially tell itself.

GENERATING NETWORKS OF
RELATIONSHIPS AMONG MATRIX OF
COMPARATIVE ANTHROPOGENY
TOPICS
Volunteer writers of MOCA topic entries are encouraged to
indicate relationships to other topics, designated at the same

three levels as above: possible, probable, and deﬁnitive. As
such entries are completed it will be increasingly feasible to
create complex networks of relationships between many
uniquely human features. An early example of such a
network is shown in Fig. 9.4. Connections arising from
genetic and genomic topic entries will eventually emerge,
bringing together the roles of nature and nurture in the origin
and evolution of our species.

SYNTHESIS WITH EXISTING THEORIES
OF HUMAN ORIGINS
There is no shortage of so-called “umbrella hypotheses,”
which try to explain most, if not all, human features based on
one underlying mechanism. Given the long time period during
which hominins evolved from one or possibly a combination
of some ancestral lineages giving rise to modern humans, this
is extremely unlikely. On the other hand each of the theories
may have something to contribute to understanding human
origins. They can all now be reexamined in the context of
MOCA Topics, Timelines, and Networks. Eventually, new
theories and syntheses may emerge.

158 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

FIGURE 9.4 Example of a relational Matrix of Comparative Anthro-
pogeny (MOCA) topics.

CAVEAT: ABSENCE OF EVIDENCE IN
NONHUMAN PRIMATES IS NOT
EVIDENCE FOR ABSENCE
Many aspects of claimed human uniqueness have been
challenged in recent times. For example, symbolic commu-
nication is well documented in several species of nonhuman
primates (vervets, guenons). Cultural phenomena have been
well described in common chimpanzees, where different
types of complex tool uses and foraging behaviors are
clearly passed on intergenerationally, by observational
learning (Tennie et al., 2009). By the same token, there is no
evidence that chimpanzees are aware (have a meta-
representation) of their own cultures (Gruber et al., 2015).

MOVING THE GOALPOSTS
With each discovery of a human-like behavior in a nonhuman
primate, there is a tendency to redeﬁne the human-like trait so
as to exclude the new observation. One is then accused of
“moving the goalposts” each time this happens. The problem
may lie with where the goalposts were placed to begin with.
We should be comparing the capabilities of the average adult
human with that of the average great ape, not that of the most
successful ape known with that of a four-year-old human. But
then, one might be accused of being anthropocentric and
promoting human exceptionalism. While there are indeed

many risks involved in pursuing such views, a balanced
approach to anthropogeny inherently requires an emphasis on
human uniqueness.

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE
PROSPECTS
It is abundantly clear that the long list of attributes setting
humans apart from their ape relatives did not arise overnight,
nor were they driven by a single factor. Rather, these traits are
the combinatorial outcome of over 6 million years of evolu-
tion, during which ancestral populations experienced succes-
sive and potentially conﬂicting selective pressures arising
from climate, competition with other species, infectious dis-
ease, demographic collapse and recovery, founder events
(bottle necks), and niche construction, whereby our ancestors
set in place ecological and social-cultural niches which in turn
exerted strong selection on past populations. While it is very
informative to ponder the circumstances that could have
exerted these combined effects on our species, the lack of any
other species with symbolic, linguistic, and ratcheting culture
makes for an immense challenge when attempting an
evidence-based approach to anthropogeny. Humans are both
“biologically cultural” with brain development requiring lin-
guistic input and “culturally biological” as cultural practices
such as cooking actively changed human biology. The evident
animal nature of humans combined with these many human-
unique attributes make for a striking paradox.

REFERENCES

Altevogt, B.M., Pankevich, D.E., Shelton-Davenport, M.K., Kahn, J.P.,
2011. Chimpanzees in Biomedical and Behavioral Research: Assess-
ing the Necessity. Washington, DC.

Antón, S.C., Potts, R., Aiello, L.C., 2014. Human evolution. Evolution of early

Homo: an integrated biological perspective. Science 345, 1236828.

Balter, M., 2013. Archaeology. Archaeologists say the ‘Anthropocene’ is

hereebut it began long ago. Science 340, 261e262.

Blevins, J.K., Coxworth, J.E., Herndon, J.G., Hawkes, K., 2013. Brief
communication: adrenal androgens and aging: female chimpanzees
(Pan troglodytes) compared with women. American Journal of
Physical Anthropology 151, 643e648.

Bogin, B., 1999. Evolutionary perspective on human growth. Annual

Review of Anthropology 28, 109e153.

Bogin, B., 2009. Childhood, adolescence, and longevity: a multilevel
model of the evolution of reserve capacity in human life history.
American Journal of Human Biology 21, 567e577.

Boyd, J.L., Skove, S.L., Rouanet, J.P., et al., 2015. Human-chimpanzee
differences in a FZD8 enhancer alter cell-cycle dynamics in the
developing neocortex. Current Biology 25, 772e779.

Bramble, D.M., Lieberman, D.E., 2004. Endurance running and the evo-

lution of Homo. Nature 432, 345e352.

Britten, R.J., 2002. Divergence between samples of chimpanzee and human
DNA sequences is 5%, counting indels. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 99, 13633e13635.

How Different Are Humans and “Great Apes”? A Matrix of Comparative Anthropogeny Chapter | 9 159

Capra, J.A., Erwin, G.D., McKinsey, G., Rubenstein, J.L., Pollard, K.S.,
2013. Many human accelerated regions are developmental enhancers.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B:
Biological Sciences 368, 20130025.

Chapais, B., 2013. Monogamy, strongly bonded groups, and the evolution

Khaitovich, P., Enard, W., Lachmann, M., Paabo, S., 2006. Evolution of

primate gene expression. Nature Reviews Genetics 7, 693e702.

Kim, P.S., McQueen, J.S., Coxworth, J.E., Hawkes, K., 2014. Grand-
mothering drives the evolution of longevity in a probabilistic model.
Journal of Theoretical Biology 353, 84e94.

of human social structure. Evolutionary Anthropology 22, 52e65.

King, M.C., Wilson, A.C., 1975. Evolution at two levels in humans and

Charrier, C., Joshi, K., Coutinho-Budd, J., et al., 2012. Inhibition of
SRGAP2 function by its human-speciﬁc paralogs induces neoteny
during spine maturation. Cell 149, 923e935.

Creanza, N., Feldman, M.W., 2014. Complexity in models of cultural niche
construction with selection and homophily. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 111 (Suppl. 3),
10830e10837.

chimpanzees. Science 188, 107e116.

Kondgen, S., Kuhl, H., N’Goran, P.K., et al., 2008. Pandemic human
viruses cause decline of endangered great apes. Current Biology 18,
260e264.

Kuzawa, C.W., 1998. Adipose tissue in human infancy and childhood: an
evolutionary perspective. American Journal of Physical Anthropology
(Suppl. 27), 177e209.

Darwin, C., 1872. The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals. J.

Leigh, S.R., 2004. Brain growth, life history, and cognition in primate and

Murray, London.

de Waal, F.B., 2012. Research chimpanzees may get a break. PLoS

Biology 10, e1001291.

Dixson, A.F., 2009. Sexual Selection and the Origins of Human Mating

Systems. Oxford University Press, Oxford; New York.

Fay, N., Lister, C.J., Ellison, T.M., Goldin-Meadow, S., 2014. Creating a
communication system from scratch: gesture beats vocalization hands
down. Frontiers in Psychology 5, 354.

Fehr, E., 2004. Human behaviour: don’t lose your reputation. Nature 432,

449e450.

Finch, C.E., Austad, S.N., 2014. Commentary: is Alzheimer’s disease

uniquely human? Neurobiology of Aging 36 (2), 553e555.

Gagneux, P., Amess, B., Diaz, S., et al., 2001. Proteomic comparison of
human and great ape blood plasma reveals conserved glycosylation
and differences in thyroid hormone metabolism. American Journal of
Physical Anthropology 115, 99e109.

Gagneux, P., Moore, J.J., Varki, A., 2005. The ethics of research on great

apes. Nature 437, 27e29.

Gruber, T., Zuberbühler, K., Clément, F., van Schaik, C., 2015. Apes have
culture but may not know that they do. Frontiers in Psychology 6, 91.
Hawkes, K., 2015. Genomic evidence for the evolution of human post-
menopausal longevity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences of the United States of America 113 (1), 17e18.

Hooper, R., 1839. A New Medical Dictionary Containing the Explanation of the
Terms in Anatomy, Chemistry, Physiology, Pharmacy, Practice of Physic,
Surgery, Materia Medica, Midwifery, and the Various Branches of Natural
Philosophy Connected With Medicine. M. Carey & Son, Benjamin
Warner, and Edward Parker. Griggs & Company Printers, Philadelphia.

Horvath, J.E., Ramachandran, G.L., Fedrigo, O., et al., 2014. Genetic
thickness

comparisons yield insight
during human evolution. Journal of Human Evolution 73, 75e87.

into the evolution of enamel

Hrdy, S.B., 2009. Mothers and Others: The Evolutionary Origins of
Mutual Understanding. Belknap Press of Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA.

Huffman, M.A., 2003. Animal self-medication and ethno-medicine:
exploration and exploitation of the medicinal properties of plants.
Proceedings of the Nutrition Society 62, 371e381.

Jablonski, N.G., 2012. Human skin pigmentation as an example of adaptive
evolution. Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 156, 45e57.
Jaeggi, A.V., Burkart, J.M., Van Schaik, C.P., 2010. On the psychology of
cooperation in humans and other primates: combining the natural
history and experimental evidence of prosociality. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological
Sciences 365, 2723e2735.

human evolution. American Journal of Primatology 62, 139e164.

Magiorkinis, G., Blanco-Melo, D., Belshaw, R., 2015. The decline of
human endogenous retroviruses: extinction and survival. Retro-
virology 12, 8.

Marchetto, M.C., Narvaiza, I., Denli, A.M., et al., 2013. Differential L1
regulation in pluripotent stem cells of humans and apes. Nature 503,
525e529.

Marques-Bonet, T., Kidd, J.M., Ventura, M., et al., 2009. A burst of
segmental duplications in the genome of the African great ape
ancestor. Nature 457, 877e881.

Martin, R.D., 2012. Primates. Current Biology 22, R785eR790.
McConkey, E.H., Varki, A., 2005. Genomics. Thoughts on the future of

great ape research. Science 309, 1499e1501.

McLean, C.Y., Reno, P.L., Pollen, A., et al., 2011. Human-speciﬁc loss of
regulatory DNA and the evolution of human-speciﬁc traits. Nature
471, 216e219.

Miller, D.J., Duka, T., Stimpson, C.D., et al., 2012. Prolonged myelination
in human neocortical evolution. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America 109, 16480e16485.

Moeller, A.H., Li, Y., Mpoudi Ngole, E., Ahuka-Mundeke, S., et al., 2014.
Rapid changes in the gut microbiome during human evolution. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 111, 16431e16435.

Nam, K., Munch, K., Hobolth, A., et al., 2015. Extreme selective sweeps
independently targeted the X chromosomes of the great apes. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 112, 6413e6418.

O’Bleness, M., Searles, V.B., Varki, A., Gagneux, P., Sikela, J.M., 2012.
Evolution of genetic and genomic features unique to the human
lineage. Nature Reviews Genetics 13, 853e866.

Pääbo, S., 2015. The diverse origins of the human gene pool. Nature

Reviews Genetics 16, 313e314.

Parham, P., Norman, P.J., Abi-Rached, L., Guethlein, L.A., 2012. Human-
speciﬁc evolution of killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptor recogni-
tion of major histocompatibility complex class I molecules. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological
Sciences 367, 800e811.

Pemberton, T.J., Absher, D., Feldman, M.W., Myers, R.M.,
Rosenberg, N.A., Li, J.Z., 2012. Genomic patterns of homozygosity in
worldwide human populations. American Journal of Human Genetics
91, 275e292.

Penn, D.C., Holyoak, K.J., Povinelli, D.J., 2008. Darwin’s mistake:
explaining the discontinuity between human and nonhuman minds.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 31, 109e130 discussion 130.

160 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

Plavcan, J.M., 2012. Sexual size dimorphism, canine dimorphism, and
male-male competition in primates: where do humans ﬁt in? Human
Nature 23, 45e67.

Tocheri, M.W., Orr, C.M., Jacofsky, M.C., Marzke, M.W., 2008. The
evolutionary history of the hominin hand since the last common
ancestor of Pan and Homo. Journal of Anatomy 212, 544e562.

Prado-Martinez, J., Sudmant, P.H., Kidd, J.M., et al., 2013. Great ape

genetic diversity and population history. Nature 499, 471e475.

Reilly, S.K., Yin, J., Ayoub, A.E., et al., 2015. Evolutionary genomics.
Evolutionary changes in promoter and enhancer activity during human
corticogenesis. Science 347, 1155e1159.

Rendell, L., Fogarty, L., Laland, K.N., 2011. Runaway cultural niche
construction. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London. Series B: Biological Sciences 366, 823e835.

Rilling, J.K., Glasser, M.F., Preuss, T.M., et al., 2008. The evolution of the
arcuate fasciculus revealed with comparative DTI. Nature Neurosci-
ence 11, 426e428.

Roebroeks, W., Villa, P., 2011. On the earliest evidence for habitual use of
ﬁre in Europe. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 108, 5209e5214.

Schenker, N.M., Buxhoeveden, D.P., Blackmon, W.L., et al., 2008.
A comparative quantitative analysis of cytoarchitecture and mini-
columnar organization in Broca’s area in humans and great apes.
Journal of Comparative Neurology 510, 117e128.

Schwarz, F., Springer, S.A., Altheide, T.K., et al., 2015. Human-speciﬁc
derived alleles of CD33 and other genes protect against post-
reproductive cognitive decline. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America 113 (1), 74e79.

Semendeferi, K., Damasio, H., Frank, R., Van Hoesen, G.W., 1997. The
evolution of the frontal lobes: a volumetric analysis based on three-
dimensional reconstructions of magnetic resonance scans of human
and ape brains. Journal of Human Evolution 32, 375e388.

Smail, D.L., 2008. On Deep History and the Brain. University of Cali-

fornia Press, Berkeley.

Smith, A.R., Carmody, R.N., Dutton, R.J., Wrangham, R.W., 2015. The
signiﬁcance of cooking for early hominin scavenging. Journal of
Human Evolution 84, 62e70.

Somel, M., Franz, H., Yan, Z., et al., 2009. Transcriptional neoteny in the
human brain. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 106, 5743e5748.

Somel, M., Liu, X., Tang, L., et al., 2011. MicroRNA-driven develop-
mental remodeling in the brain distinguishes humans from other pri-
mates. PLoS Biology 9, e1001214.

Tomasello, M., Hare, B., Lehmann, H., Call, J., 2007. Reliance on head
versus eyes in the gaze following of great apes and human infants: the
cooperative eye hypothesis.
Journal of Human Evolution 52,
314e320.

Urashima, T., Odaka, G., Asakuma, S., et al., 2009. Chemical character-
ization of oligosaccharides in chimpanzee, bonobo, gorilla, orangutan,
and siamang milk or colostrum. Glycobiology 19, 499e508.

Varki, A., 2010. Colloquium paper: uniquely human evolution of sialic
acid genetics and biology. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 107 (Suppl. 2), 8939e8946.
Varki, A., 2013. Thought experiment: dating the origin of us. The Scientist

27, 28e29.

Varki, A., Nelson, D., 2007. Genomic differences between humans and

chimpanzees. Annual Review of Anthropology 36, 191e209.

Varki, A., Wills, C., Perlmutter, D., et al., 1998. Great ape phenome

project? Science 282, 239e240.

Varki, N., Anderson, D., Herndon, J.G., et al., 2009. Heart disease is
common in humans and chimpanzees, but is caused by different
pathological processes. Evolutionary Applications 2, 101e112.

Varki, N.M., Strobert, E., Dick, E.J., Benirschke, K., Varki, A., 2011.
Biomedical differences between human and nonhuman hominids:
potential roles for uniquely human aspects of sialic acid biology.
Annual Review of Pathology 6, 365e393.

Varki, N.M., Varki, A., 2015. On the apparent rarity of carcinomas in the
“great apes”. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London. Series B: Biological Sciences 34 (22), 2775e2788.

Ventura, M., Catacchio, C.R., Sajjadian, S., Vives, L., Sudmant, P.H.,
Marques-Bonet, T., Graves, T.A., Wilson, R.K., Eichler, E.E., 2012.
The evolution of African great ape subtelomeric heterochromatin and
the fusion of human chromosome 2. Genome Research 22,
1036e1049.

Wadley, L., Hodgskiss, T., Grant, M., 2009. From the cover: implications
for complex cognition from the hafting of tools with compound ad-
hesives in the Middle Stone Age, South Africa. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 106,
9590e9594.

Walker, A., 2009. The strength of great apes and the speed of humans.

Stout, D., Chaminade, T., 2007. The evolutionary neuroscience of tool

Current Anthropology 50, 229e234.

making. Neuropsychologia 45, 1091e1100.

Stout, D., Hecht, E., Khreisheh, N., Bradley, B., Chaminade, T., 2015.
Cognitive demands of lower paleolithic toolmaking. PLoS One 10,
e0121804.

Sullivan, R.J., Hagen, E.H., 2002. Psychotropic substance-seeking:

evolutionary pathology or adaptation. Addiction 97, 389e400.

Wiessner, P.W., 2014. Embers of society: ﬁrelight talk among the Ju/
’hoansi Bushmen. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America 111, 14027e14035.

Wobber, V., Herrmann, E., Hare, B., Wrangham, R., Tomasello, M., 2014.
Differences in the early cognitive development of children and great
apes. Developmental Psychobiology 56, 547e573.

Tao, N., Wu, S., Kim, J., et al., 2011. Evolutionary glycomics: charac-
terization of milk oligosaccharides in primates. Journal of Proteome
Research 10, 1548e1557.

Wrangham, J., Laden, P., Conklin, B., 1999. The raw and the stolen.
Cooking and the ecology of human origins. Current Anthropology 40,
567e594.

Tennie, C., Call, J., Tomasello, M., 2009. Ratcheting up the ratchet: on the
evolution of cumulative culture. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences 364, 2405e2415.

Chapter 10

Human Intergroup Variation and Disease
Genetics

M. Tibayrenc
Maladies Infectieuses et Vecteurs Ecologie, Génétique, Evolution et Contrôle, MIVEGEC (IRD 224-CNRS 5290-UM1-UM2), IRD Center,
Montpellier, Cedex 5, France

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AFA African American
AIM Ancestry informative marker
AJ Ashkenazi Jew
CD/CV Common disease/common variant hypothesis
CV Common variant
EURA European American
GWAS Genome Wide Association Study
HLA Human leukocyte antigens
LFV Low frequency variant
MHC Major histocompatibility complex
MRV Multiple rare variant hypothesis
OOA Out-of-Africa
RV Rare variant
SCZ Schizophrenia
SRA Self-reported ancestry
VBD Vector-borne diseases
WES Whole exome sequencing
WGS Whole genome sequencing

INTRODUCTION
In the last 30 years, human genetic variation at the indi-
vidual and population levels has received considerable
research attention. The need to shed light on human
evolution is of course a goal in itself. However, the ﬁndings
of applied research constitute a major targeted pay-off of
this exploration. It appears that most of, if not all, human
diseases result from both the environment in the broad
sense and the genetic background of
individuals and
populations, as indeed it would be the case for any
phenotype. Exploring human genetic variability in depth
therefore appears to be a major hope for ﬁnding radical
cures for disease and drug resistance, leading us toward the

ultimate end target of personalized medicine (Lee and
Mudaliar, 2009).

The present chapter does not claim to be a compre-
hensive review of the topic, but instead aims to describe the
most recent advances and the main currents in this ﬁeld.
With the impressive technological advances made in recent
years, exploring the genetic background of pathological
traits is progressing very rapidly, so that data from a few
years ago may be outdated. Moreover, this chapter will
focus on disease gene diversity at the population rather than
the individual level. Indeed, (1) group comparisons are
highly relevant where preventive medicine, which focuses
on populations more than on individuals, is concerned.
Consequently, the recommendations made by Lee et al.
(2008) for “maintaining focus on the individual rather than
the group” are adapted for individual medicine but not for
preventive medicine, which should look for group charac-
teristics, and as we will see in this chapter, (2) the most
remarkable feature of the genetic background of patho-
logical
they are unevenly distributed
throughout
the world. This is not unexpected, since
different populations have undergone radically dissimilar
selective pressures in diversiﬁed environments since the
out-of-Africa (OOA) migrations.

traits

is

that

BRIEF REVIEW OF POPULATION
STRUCTURE AND RECENT EVOLUTION
IN HUMANS
An evolutionary view of medicine requires insight into
human genetic and genomic variability, not only at the
individual level, but also at the population scale. Different
human groups after
the major OOA migrations have

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00010-7
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

161

162 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

undergone radically different selective pressures in highly
diversiﬁed environments (in terms of climate, food sources,
and pathogen burden). It can therefore be expected that,
together with a common background, pathological proﬁles
of human populations will exhibit group differences.

Human population structure and recent evolution have
been developed at length in Chapter 6. Only a brief review
will be provided here.

Since pioneering studies of the late 1970s (Nei, 1978),
high-resolution genetic markers have been massively used
for the study of human populations. Today, studies using
several 100,000 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
are not exceptional (Li et al., 2008; López Herráez et al.,
2009). Convergent results have been gathered through
these studies. They can be summarized as follows:
1. When common (frequency 5%) markers that do not
undergo natural selection (“neutral”) are considered,
most (from 85% to 95% depending on the marker)
human genetic variability is found within continental
groups (eg, within Sub-Saharan Africa) rather than
between them (eg, Africa vs. Europe).

2. The use of randomly selected markers makes it possible
to uncover major continental groups (in general, Africa,
Europe, Asia, Oceania, and the Americas), which
conﬁrms early studies that investigated low-resolution
markers (Nei, 1978). The groups revealed by genetic
labeling are not strictly separated and show some
overlapping.

3. When a large number of high-resolution power markers
are used, ancestry and degree of admixture of individ-
uals can be reliably inferred, in particular using ancestry
informative markers (AIMs).

4. Modern markers reveal a high stratiﬁcation (Russian
doll pattern; Tibayrenc and Ayala, 2013) within major
continental groups. These major groups are far from
being uniform and show many subgroups and/or clinal
patterns related to geographical distance, geographical
obstacles, and cultural (linguistic) barriers.
5. Low-frequency genetic variants (LFVs)

(frequency
ranging from 0.5% to 5%) and even more, rare variants
(RVs)
than 0.5%) are far more
numerous than common variants (CVs). LFVs and
RVs are recent, geographically localized, and are
assumed to play a major role in phenotypic and disease
variability.

(frequency lower

6. Copy number variation (CNV), gene regulation, epige-
netics, and epistasis also have a major role in pheno-
types and disease, more than coding variation (which
commands protein synthesis).

7. Lastly, evidence for abundant, geographically localized,
recent adaptation is growing: it seems that natural selec-
tion has not stopped with the advent of modern humans

40,000e50,000 years ago, as was classically believed,
but rather has strongly acted on human populations until
recently, and probably still does.

This brief summary gives us the picture necessary to
consider disease burden in humans at the population level.
One could adopt the approach of directly looking for the
genes suspected of being responsible for disorders. It is
instead recommended to ﬁrst establish a general picture of
the population structure of
the human groups under
survey, and then to see where the disease genes map onto
this
the
relationships between disease genetic background and the
overall evolution of the species under study can be thus
obtained (phylogenetic character mapping, PCM; Avise,
2004).

framework. A clear

general

view on

LOOKING FOR DISEASE GENES:
CANDIDATE GENES, GWAS, WGS;
CD/CV, RV
The search for disease genes makes use of different stra-
tegies according to the kind of disease involved. The easiest
case is that of Mendelian diseases, where only one gene,
inherited according to Mendelian laws, is the culprit. The
search is easier when the penetrance of the gene is strong. A
typical case of Mendelian disease is sickle cell anemia (see
“Transmissible Diseases” in this chapter). Unfortunately,
Mendelian diseases are the exception rather than the rule.
Most diseases (complex diseases) are commanded by many
genes, the penetrance of each being low (see the inﬁnites-
imal model, Fisher, 1918), and are inﬂuenced by both
genetics and the environment. It seems that LFVs and RVs
(see earlier and Chapter 6), as well as CNV, gene regula-
tion, epigenetics, and epistasis, play a major
role in
complex diseases. All this makes elucidating the genetic
command of complex diseases a tough job. It will be more
or less arduous depending on the transmission model of the
disease. The common disease/common variant (CD/CV)
hypothesis postulates that the genetic factors involved are
evenly distributed among populations and are CVs
(frequency 5%). The multiple rare variant
(MRV)
hypothesis, on the other hand, considers that most complex
diseases are caused by RVs or LFVs (Keita et al., 2004). As
we will see, many if not most diseases have uneven
geographical distributions and are caused by RVs or LFVs.
This strongly inﬂuences the methods used to look for the
genetic background of diseases.

In the candidate gene approach, the working hypothesis
is that a given gene or a given set of genes is responsible for
a given disease. For example, a given gene or set of genes
is suspected because it is associated with biological pro-
cesses that frequently play a role in the disease under study.

Human Intergroup Variation and Disease Genetics Chapter | 10 163

With transmissible diseases, this is the case for the genes
that are involved in immunological defense, in particular
the genes that belong to the major histocompatibility
complex (MHC), which are referred to as human leukocyte
antigens (HLA) in the human species. These families of
genes are therefore frequently analyzed when the putative
genetic background of a given infectious process is
explored. Another case is when a homologous gene plays
an important role in infectious processes in animal models.
However, this last deduction may well be wrong. Indeed,
comparable gene sequences may encode totally different
functions in different animal species (Blackwell, 1996):
“Evolution is constantly re-using old genes for new pur-
poses” (Birky, 2009).

In the “linkage approach,” a speciﬁc segment of the
genome is identiﬁed through whole genome mapping
(Genome-Wide Association Study, GWAS), with a broad
set of microsatellite markers or, increasingly today, SNPs,
and association analyses based on twin sib pair, family, or
pedigree studies. The null hypothesis is a total lack of
linkage disequilibrium between the explored trait (disease)
linkage
and the DNA segment.
disequilibrium is strong,
the region
identiﬁed by the microsatellite or SNP mapping contains
genes that are involved in the pathology under survey.

If, on the contrary,
this suggests that

Lastly,

the search for disease genes is increasingly
based on high-throughput whole-genome
sequencing
(WGS). When the MRV hypothesis is veriﬁed, both the
candidate gene approach and the GWAS often miss the
target.

Let us now consider how diseases and their genes are

distributed among populations throughout the world.

MENDELIAN DISEASES AROUND THE
WORLD
Most Mendelian disorders have a recessive mode of
transmission (only homozygous subjects suffer from the
disease). If the deleterious allele is dominant (both homo-
zygous and heterozygous subjects are ill),
it would be
rapidly eliminated.

According to Jorde and Wooding (2004), Mendelian
(single-gene) diseases are the ones that show the clearest
distinctions among geographical populations, although
population differences are seen for common diseases as
well. Gonzaga-Jauregui et al. (2012) stated that whole-
exome sequencing (WES) was able to detect genes
involved in Mendelian diseases. However, WES ignores
98% of the genome, and this neglected part is probably
highly relevant for disease studies. Using WES, Fu et al.
(2013) found that Europeans had an excess of deleterious
alleles linked to Mendelian diseases compared to African
Americans (AFAs). SNPs linked to Mendelian disorders

tended to be RVs (Fu et al., 2013), which suggests that they
are geographically restricted, and of recent origin (The
1000 Genomes Project Consortium, 2012). Some examples
of Mendelian diseases with uneven distribution among
geographical populations are presented below.

l Phenylketonuria is a classic case of a Mendelian disor-
der. Only one mutation in the phenylalanine hydroxy-
lase (PAH) gene has dramatic consequences on ill
children, who suffer from mental retardation. However,
an appropriate phenylalanine-free diet
is enough to
counter the negative effects of the disease. This shows
that even a typical Mendelian disorder can be
profoundly modulated by environmental parameters.
The distribution of the disease is not balanced among
populations of different ancestries. In a UK survey,
birth prevalence per 10,000 live births was estimated
to be 1.14 (0.96e1.33) among Europeans, 0.11
(0.02e0.37) among Africans, and 0.29 (0.10e0.63)
among Asians (Hardelid et al., 2008).

l Cystic ﬁbrosis and hemochromatosis are other Mende-
lian disorders whose geographic distribution is quite un-
even. Cystic ﬁbrosis is the result of a mutation in both
copies of the CFTR gene, the cystic ﬁbrosis transmem-
brane conductance regulator protein. This leads to a
hypersecretion of thick mucus in the lungs, multiple
lung infections, and respiratory insufﬁciency. Heredi-
tary hemochromatosis results from excess iron absorp-
tion from the food. Iron is stocked in the pancreas,
heart, and liver, and these organs may become
damaged. Most cases are caused by a mutation in the
High Iron Fe (HFE) gene. Both cystic ﬁbrosis and he-
mochromatosis are much more frequent
in Europe
than in other parts of the world (González Burchard
et al., 2003; Jorde and Wooding, 2004; Mersha and
Abebe, 2015; Mountain and Risch, 2004; Risch et al.,
2002; Spielman et al., 2007). It does not mean that
this disease does not exist outside Europe. Cystic
ﬁbrosis could be linked to a phenomenon of balanced
selection (that is to say, the homozygotes are ill, while
the heterozygotes are advantageous). As a matter of
fact, it has been hypothesized that heterozygous individ-
uals could be protected from cholera to some extent
(Jordan, 2008, Chapter 4).

l Factor V Leiden thrombophilia, which provokes a blood
clotting disorder, is the result of a single mutation of
the Factor V (F5) gene. Contrary to many Mendelian
disorders, it is a dominant trait. However, its penetrance
is incomplete. This mutation has a frequency of 5% in
people of European ancestry and is virtually absent in
other populations (Jordan, 2008, Chapter 11).

l Jewish communities, especially Ashkenazi Jews (AJs),
suffer from a heavy burden of Mendelian diseases.
Several of them are linked to sphingolipid storage

164 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

disorders: Tay-Sachs, Gaucher, Niemann-Pick, mucoli-
pidosis type IV (Cochran et al., 2006). Cystic ﬁbrosis,
which is present at much higher rates in people of
European ancestry than in Africans and Asians (see
earlier in this section) is particularly frequent in AJs
(Guha et al., 2012). So is Usher syndrome, a rare ge-
netic disorder that leads to visual impairment and hear-
ing loss (Guha et al., 2012). These high rates of
Mendelian disorders in AJs are classically assumed to
result from a founder effect (present AJ communities
were founded by a limited number of individuals) and
endogamy. For many centuries, Jews have usually
married Jews both for religious reasons and because
of discrimination against them. An innovative hypothe-
sis has been proposed by Cochran et al. (2006). A high
rate of Mendelian disorders linked to the sphingolipid
storage pathway could be the result of a balanced
selection process. The advantage for heterozygous
subjects would be a high IQ. Indeed, the average IQ
in AJs is 115, while it
is 100 in other people of
European ancestry. In Europe, for historical reasons,
AJs specialized in jobs related to money trade, requiring
high intellectual ability. This, together with endogamy
and reproductive success (at that time, richer people
had more children) may have established the conditions
for fast selective pressure. Cochran and Harpending
(2009, Chapter 7) noted that in Israel, the percentage
of Gaucher disease patients having top jobs was 11
times higher than in the general population. Whatever
explanation holds true for Mendelian disorders in their
community, three important features should be under-
lined about AJs and disease:
l AJs constitute a relevant target population for the
GWAS, since they are genetically rather homoge-
neous, with little stratiﬁcation (Guha et al., 2012),
both in Israel and the United States.

l The AJ community has been pioneering in personal-
ized medicine, with extensive screening for Mende-
lian disorders and early breast cancer
surgery
(Ostrer and Skorecki, 2013).

l The illustrative case of AJs shows that in disease
surveys, major continental groups may often be too
broad proxies. Subgroup-speciﬁc features should be
looked for within major continental groups in
many cases, due to the Russian doll structure of
human populations (see “Brief Review on Popula-
tion Structure and Recent Evolution in Humans”)
and the fact that natural selection can speciﬁcally
act at ﬁne geographic and population scales. The
relevance of considering stratiﬁcation within major
geographical groups for both evolution and disease
studies was underlined by Barbujani and Colonna
(2010), Chapman and Hill (2012), and Rosenberg
et al. (2005).

Mendelian disorders linked to transmissible diseases
(eg, sickle cell anemia) will be treated separately (see
“Transmissible Diseases”).

GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION OF
COMPLEX DISEASES
Complex diseases are also called common diseases,
because they are much more numerous than Mendelian
disorders. Exploring these diseases is a challenge for
two reasons: (1) many different genes, each having a
weak impact, may be involved in their etiology and
(2) environmental causes play a major role in many, if not
most, complex disorders. Although modern genomics is
more efﬁcient
for exploring Mendelian traits (Cavalli
Sforza, 2007), it has contributed to signiﬁcant progress in
elucidating the genetic background of complex diseases.
Without modern genomic tools,
it would have been
extremely difﬁcult to separate environmental from genetic
causes.

Complex diseases, such as hypertension, diabetes,
and obesity, differ
in frequency across ethnic groups
(Tishkoff and Kidd, 2004). According to Tennessen et al.
(2012), RVs and LFVs could explain most of
the
heritability of common diseases and CVs would account for
only a modest proportion of the heritability of most traits.
Spielman et al. (2007) have proposed that differences in
gene expression in different ethnic groups could account
for prevalence differences of complex diseases (diabetes,
high blood pressure) in these populations.

We will consider below cardiovascular diseases,
diabetes, psychological disorders and mental illness, res-
piratory diseases, and cancer. Autoimmune disorders will
be treated with transmissible diseases.

Cardiovascular Diseases
In cardiovascular diseases distinguishing between envi-
ronmental and genetic factors is a challenge. Indeed, it is
well known that lifestyle (smoking, diet, exercise, weight)
plays a major role in these disorders. However,
is
the genetic background has a strong
indisputable that
impact as well, and that
this impact strikes different
ancestry groups unevenly.

it

High blood pressure is more frequent in AFAs than
in European Americans (EURAs); consequently, patient
ancestry should be taken into account in cardiovascular
disease management (Betancourt and López, 1993; Sarich
and Miele, 2004, Chapter 7). According to Tate and
Goldstein (2004), AFAs have twice as many heart
attacks as EURAs. Helgadottir et al. (2006) found that the
HapK haplotype of the Leukotriene A4 hydrolase (LTA4H)
gene increased the risk of myocardial infarction three times
more in AFAs than in EURAs. The presence of this variant

Human Intergroup Variation and Disease Genetics Chapter | 10 165

in AFAs is due to European admixture, since it is very rare
in Africa.
Within

the African Genome Variation Project,
Gurdasani et al. (2015) showed high frequency differences
between Europeans and Africans for loci under selection
related to hypertension susceptibility. These genes could
be related to the high burden of hypertension and differ-
ences in salt sensitivity observed in Sub-Saharan Africa
(Gurdasani et al., 2015). This would conﬁrm the hypothesis
proposed by Laland et al. (2010) that populations after the
OOA migrations underwent different selective pressures for
salt sensitivity related to adaptation to different climates.
According to Miller (1994), the high rate of hypertension in
AFAs could be attributable to a selective advantage that the
genes responsible for it confer in malaria-endemic areas.
One of the origins of the higher burden of hypertension
in AFAs is kidney disease. A polymorphism at
the
Apolipoprotein L1 (APOL1) gene could be responsible for
this higher frequency of kidney diseases and would be a
case of balanced selection. It may be involved in resistance
to human African trypanosomiasis, also known as sleeping
sickness (Karlsson et al., 2014; Lachance and Tishkoff,
2013; Lander, 2011).

(2013)

Ayub et al.

surveyed signals of positive
selection on the target genes of the transcription factor
FOXP2. They found that overall there was evidence for
strong selection for these target genes in their European
sample but not in the African and Asian samples. Intrigu-
ingly, among the target genes identiﬁed as signiﬁcant
outliers in the European sample,
there were 13 genes
associated with cardiac arteriopathy (Ayub et al., 2013).

infants,

other

autoimmune

Diabetes and the Thrifty Hypothesis
Type 2 diabetes (noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus,
or NIDDM) is a polygenic disease strongly inﬂuenced
by environmental parameters (diet, weight, lifestyle). Its
heritability is only 35% (Hyman, 2014). It is quite different
from type 1 diabetes, which strikes
is an
autoimmune disease in 90% of cases, and will therefore be
discussed with
disorders. The
thrifty hypothesis (Neel, 1962) proposes that the genotype
of modern populations is not adequately adapted to
present diet conditions, which leads to the diseases of
modernity, with type 2 diabetes a leading example. The
episodic starving undergone by ancestral hunter-gatherer
populations is hypothesized to have led to a strong selec-
tion for lipid storage, which is a disaster in this McDonald’s
world. The thrifty hypothesis has been invoked to explain
high rates of
type 2 diabetes in Polynesians, whose
ancestors are thought to have undergone starvation during
their
long-term ocean voyages (Laland et al., 2010).
Cochran and Harpending (2009, Chapter 3) challenged the
thrifty hypothesis. They observed that
starving was

certainly more frequent in early agricultural societies than
in hunter-gatherer groups. The last hunter-gatherers in
existence today do not suffer from starving. According to
these authors, the rate of type 2 diabetes is 2.5 times higher
in Navajo Native Americans and four times higher in
Australian natives than in Europeans. This is assumed to be
caused by these populations adapting too late to the diet of
agricultural societies, which is richer in carbohydrates than
the food of the hunter-gatherers.

Fraser (2013) found that

the frequency of type 2
diabetes risk alleles was negatively correlated with the
distance to the equator, which suggests that alleles that are
advantageous in cold climates confer protection to type 2
diabetes alleles and does not argue in favor of the thrifty
hypothesis. Whatever the historical reasons, type 2 dia-
betes and its genetic risk background are quite unevenly
distributed among geographical populations.

Corona et al. (2013) calculated the genetic risk of 102
diseases in 1043 individuals in 51 populations. They found
that the genetic risk for type 2 diabetes was the highest in
African populations,
followed by the populations of
Europe, the Middle East, and Asia. According to González
Burchard et al. (2003), the rate of complications from type
2 diabetes is ancestry-dependent in members of the same
health organization, in spite of homogeneous services and
after adjustment for levels of education and income, health
behavior, and clinical characteristics. The same authors
reported that in Pima Native Americans, the degree of
European admixture as estimated by self-reported ancestry
(SRA) was strongly correlated with protection from type 2
diabetes. Heyn et al. (2013) found that DNA methylation
(a process of gene regulation) could inﬂuence the differ-
ence of susceptibility to type 2 diabetes in human pop-
ulations. Differential methylation was observed in genes
[HLA-B/C, Protein Kinase C, Zeta (PRKCZ)] related to the
different penetrance of type 2 diabetes in distinct human
groups. Pickrell et al. (2009) found that the frequencies of
the genomic regions associated with type 2 diabetes risk
were clearly differentiated in different geographical pop-
ulations. The level of statistical signiﬁcance for these dif-
ferences was p ¼ 0.006 for Europe versus Africa, and
p ¼ 0.02 for East Asia versus Africa.

Psychological Disorders and Mental Illness
This section concerns only those mental traits that are
generally considered as pathological. Stories on brain
genes, cognition, and behavioral differences are presented
in Chapter 6. The border between “normal” and “patho-
logical” is sometimes blurred where brain functioning is
concerned, as has been masterfully explained by Frances
(2013). The thresholds for deﬁning psychiatric illness, as
established by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (DSM-5), are arbitrary (Hyman, 2014).

166 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

This is the case for many, if not all, thresholds used in
medicine, such as threshold levels on hypertension.
However, hypertension is a much simpler parameter than
schizophrenia (SCZ) or autism spectrum disorder (ASD),
and its epidemiological
risks have been thoroughly
studied.

The heritability of major psychological disorders is far
from being negligible: it is 35% for depression and up to
65e80% for SCZ (Hyman, 2014). Looking for risk variants
is challenging, due to the unclear deﬁnition of many
syndromes. However, it gives the hope of ﬁnding new
drugs
(Hyman, 2014). Associations between genetic
variants and increased risk for SCZ, ASD, major depres-
sion, and bipolar disorder
(BPD) have been fully
conﬁrmed. In most cases, the loci identiﬁed by the GWAS
involve regulatory regions rather
than speciﬁc genes
(Geschwind and Flint, 2015). It is probable that many risk
variants are shared among several mental disorders, as is
the case between autoimmune and inﬂammatory diseases
(Hyman, 2014). In fact, inﬂammatory and immunity genes
are associated with psychiatric diseases,
including SCZ
and ASD (Karlsson et al., 2014). Genetic ﬁndings blur
the boundaries between psychiatric diseases, as well as
the limits between normal and pathological. It seems that
the increased polygenic risk for BPD and SCZ favors
creativity.
there are individuals
who are not ill and exhibit intermediary phenotypes or
“endophenotypes” (Geschwind and Flint, 2015). Identi-
fying the precise genetic background of mental illnesses
could lead to a nosological redeﬁnition of these diseases,
from symptomatological to causal (Cross-Disorder Group
of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium, 2013; Geschwind
and Flint, 2015).

In patients’

families,

(Steven Hyman, personal

This chapter focuses on differences among geographical
populations. Unfortunately, ﬁshing for population-speciﬁc
psychological disorder variation may provide a meager
catch: “The vast preponderance of psychiatric genetic data
comes from Europeans, having relied on Scandinavian
and European national health
population registries,
systems”
communication).
Empirical evidence for differences in mental illness prev-
alence among groups of different ancestries is available
(Harris et al., 2005; Williams et al., 2007). Differences in
mental
illness prevalence among ancestral groups is
conﬁrmed by the data from the US Centers for Disease
Control
http://www.cdc.gov/mentalhealth/
basics/burden.htm). However,
these rough data are not
evidence for genetic causes of these prevalence differences,
since obvious environmental parameters
(sociological,
economic, familial) certainly play a major role in mental
illness etiology. In the two following cases, genetic data are
available.

(CDC;

see

The genetic background of SCZ appears to be complex.
Rare deletions (Lander, 2011), CVs (Lander, 2011; Zietsch

et al., 2015), and microdeletions at speciﬁc loci in the
22q11.2, 1q21.1, and 15q13.3 chromosomes (Belizário,
2013) have been incriminated, as well as rare CNVs
(Gonzaga-Jauregui et al., 2012). No common CNVs
are known to be associated with SCZ (Zietsch et al., 2015).
The Dystrobrevin Binding Protein 1 (DTNBP1) gene on
the sixth chromosome has been demonstrated to have an
impact on SCZ risk and may also inﬂuence general
cognitive ability (Burdick et al., 2006). Regulatory
phenomena are also involved in the etiology of SCZ
(Geschwind and Flint, 2015). Lastly,
inﬂammatory and
immunity genes are associated with SCZ (Karlsson et al.,
2014). When differences among populations are involved,
the broad GWAS based on CV tagging suggests that
many SCZ risk alleles are shared across ethnic groups
and predate African-European divergence (de Candia et al.,
2013). However, this study deals with CVs only and does
not consider the possible role played by RVs, which tend to
be geographically restricted. Common variation is consid-
ered to account for more than 33% of SCZ heritability
(Lander, 2011).

among populations of different

Alzheimer’s disease is known to show uneven fre-
quencies
ancestries
(Armengol et al., 2009; Farrer et al., 1997). The Apolipo-
protein E (APOE) gene and its ε variants play a major role
in the etiology of the disease. The APOEε4 variant
is
recorded in all geographical populations, although with
different frequencies: Japanese 9%, Europeans 14%, and
AFAs 19% (González Burchard et al., 2003). Homozy-
gosity of the ε4 allele increases the risk of Alzheimer’s
disease by a factor of 33 in Japanese individuals, 15 in
Europeans, and 6 in AFAs. For heterozygous subjects, the
ﬁgures are 5.6, 3.0, and 1.1,
respectively (González
Burchard et al., 2003). Rare and common CNVs are also
incriminated in Alzheimer’s etiology (Armengol et al.,
2009; Gonzaga-Jauregui et al., 2012). If rare CNVs play a
role in Alzheimer’s disease, this should increase a differ-
ential geographic distribution of the disease, since RVs tend
to be population-speciﬁc.

Respiratory Diseases: Asthma
Burchard et al. (2015) noted that studies including well-
analyzed minorities were dramatically underrepresented
in grants dealing with respiratory diseases supported by the
National Institutes of Health (NIH), while genetic and
environmental risk factors varied dramatically across racial
and ethnic groups. These authors warned that this lack of
knowledge ultimately had considerable ﬁnancial costs.
As proposed by Bustamante et al. (2011), evaluating the
degree of admixture is crucial for proper medical care. In
respiratory diseases, physicians compare measurements of
lung function (using a spirometer) to a reference standard
for healthy people of the same gender and the same

Human Intergroup Variation and Disease Genetics Chapter | 10 167

ancestry. The diagnosis is better when the actual genetic
ancestry is known. This means that the limits of normal
respiratory capacity are not the same among groups of
different ancestries, a crucial fact for respiratory disease
care. Pulmonary function tests (PFTs) are important
parameters for asthma care.
In Mexican Americans,
European ancestry is associated with more severe asthma,
as measured by PFTs
(Mersha and Abebe, 2015).
According to Moreno-Estrada et al. (2014), depending on
one’s ancestry background,
the same value of forced
expiratory volume per second (a classical measure of lung
function) could be considered as either normal or indica-
tive of pulmonary disease. These authors found a signiﬁ-
cant association between lung function and degree of
admixture in Mexican populations. It has been proposed
that populations of
tropical ancestry introduced into
temperate regions had a higher risk of developing asthma,
as is the case for AFAs and Asians living in the United
Kingdom (Vasseur and Quintana-Murci, 2013). Ancestry
may have a higher impact than environment on differences
in the prevalence of asthma (Vasseur and Quintana-Murci,
2013).

Cancer

Group Differences in Various Forms of
Cancer

impact

According to the US CDC, the rate of cancer varies widely
among ancestral groups in the United States (http://www.
cdc.gov/cancer/dcpc/data/ethnic.htm). The
of
ancestry has been conﬁrmed for the prevalence of the
following forms of cancer: breast (Need et al., 2009;
Ostrer and Skorecki, 2013; Vasseur and Quintana-Murci,
2013), prostate (Keita et al., 2004), bladder, pancreas
(Corona et al., 2013), and skin (melanoma) (Harris, 2015;
Shendure and Akey, 2015). AFA males have a 60%
greater risk of developing prostate cancer, twice the risk of
developing its aggressive form and twice the mortality
relative to EURAs. However, geographical, environ-
mental, and genetic parameters should be separated out in
this rough statistical data (Keita et al., 2004). According to
Corona et al.
the risk of pancreatic cancer
diminished as humans migrated toward Asia. This genetic
risk is highly variable among geographical populations
worldwide, as is the genetic risk for bladder cancer
(Corona et al., 2013).

(2013),

Leukemia

Ancestry matters in the cure of infant lymphoblastic leu-
kemia. Children with more than 10% Native American
ancestry need an additional round of chemotherapy for the
treatment to be successful (Bustamante et al., 2011; Mersha
and Abebe, 2015).

Melanoma

0

0

0

-TTC-3

-TCC-
According to Harris (2015), the somatic mutation 5
0 / 5
3
is a speciﬁc signature for melanoma,
which is the most malignant form of cancer. Melanoma is
associated with ultraviolet (UV) radiation exposure, but
also with ancestry. The annual age-adjusted incidence of
melanoma cases per 100,000 people is 0.8e0.9 for Asians,
0.7e1.0 for AFAs, and 11.3e17.2 for EURAs. Melanoma
incidence
strongly correlated with
European admixture. The transition TCC / T has been
found in the ﬁve European subpopulations of the 1000
genome project: Italians (TSI), Spanish (IBS), Utah resi-
dents of European descent (CEU), British (GBR), and
Finnish (FIN). Its increasing frequency in Europeans is
assumed to have occurred in the
last 40,000 to
80,000 years, after Europeans
started diverging from
Asians (Harris, 2015).

in Hispanics

is

Breast Cancer

Migrant studies are informative to distinguish between
environmental and genetic parameters in disease etiology.
The incidence of breast cancer is lower in Asian than in
European women. In Asian-American women, this differ-
ence disappears, which indicates a strong environmental
component (Risch et al., 2002). However, susceptibility
breast cancer genes (BRCA1 and BRCA2) have been
clearly evidenced in hereditary forms of breast cancer and
explain the high incidence of this disease in AJs (Need
et al., 2009; Ostrer and Skorecki, 2013). The Glucur-
onosyltransferase 2 Family, Polypeptide B4 (UGT2B4)
gene has been strongly associated with increased risk of
breast cancer in Nigerians and to a lesser extent in AFAs
(Vasseur and Quintana-Murci, 2013).

From the above discussions, it is quite clear that genetic
ancestry is a parameter to be taken into account in disease
etiology, not only in Mendelian disorders, but also in
complex, common diseases.
It can therefore only be
claimed tentatively that life conditions are responsible for
most of the differences observed in disease incidence be-
tween different communities in the United States (Jordan,
2008, Chapter 11). Culture, education, environment, life-
style, economic conditions, and access to health care
should undoubtedly be carefully taken into account in this
matter. All physicians are aware of this. However, attrib-
uting only a minor role to genes could be misleading. The
progress of genomics will make it possible to clarify this
question, to directly evidence the genetic backgrounds that
can be incriminated in disease disparities among pop-
ulations of different ancestries, and at the same time to
show what stems mainly from environmental parameters.
As we have seen, admixed populations are an informative
tool for deciphering the genetic background of disease

168 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

causes. Lastly, with their very speciﬁc disease burden, the
case of AJs illustrates that major geographical groups
could be excessively broad proxies in many cases for
considering the genetic basis of diseases. The relevance of
studying such ancestry subgroups and admixed pop-
ulations as well will again be underlined in the case of
transmissible diseases.

TRANSMISSIBLE DISEASES, STILL THE
MAIN FACTOR OF NATURAL SELECTION
IN HUMANS
In this section we will consider: (1) human genetic sus-
ceptibility to infectious diseases, a coevolution phenome-
non between the host, the pathogen, and the vector in
vector-borne diseases (VBDs); (2) autoimmune and in-
ﬂammatory diseases, which seem to be linked to pathogen
selective pressure (the hygiene hypothesis).

Transmissible diseases can be caused by: (1) viruses
(eg, AIDS, yellow fever); (2) bacteria (eg, tuberculosis,
typhoid fever); (3) parasitic protozoa (eg, malaria, sleeping
sickness); (4) yeasts and fungi (eg, cryptococcosis, candi-
dosis); and (5) parasitic helminths (eg, river blindness,
taeniasis).

Coevolution Between Humans and
Pathogens: A Red Queen Story

Selective Pressure and Agriculture

Haldane (1949) proposed that transmissible diseases have
been the strongest selective pressure on humankind in the
last 5000 years. This selective pressure is assumed to have
played an important role mainly in malaria in Africa and
tuberculosis in Europe (Miller, 1994). Historical epi-
demics such as the black plague, or more recently the
Spanish ﬂu, which killed tens of millions of people, had
considerable demographic consequences. However, it is
probable that endemic diseases such as malaria and
tuberculosis, which act continuously over thousands of
years, and massively strike young subjects, have a
stronger selective effect. In fact, it is probable that the
selective impact of transmissible diseases is much older
than 5000 years and acted throughout the evolutionary
process of the human species. However, epidemics spread
more easily in human populations grouped in large
communities than in the scattered, small pre-Neolithic
hunter-gatherer populations. Cochran and Harpending
(2009, Chapter 4) hypothesized that the advent of agri-
culture, accompanied by domestication of animals (acting
as disease reservoirs) and the increase in trade and travel
boosted the selective pressure of infectious diseases on
humans.

Human Leukocyte Antigen Features

Strong evidence of the impact of transmissible diseases on
human evolution is the particular genetic pattern of the
HLA system. Some HLA human alleles have a very ancient
coalescence time, prior to the evolutionary split among Old
World monkeys, and are genetically closer
to some
Macacus alleles than to other human HLA alleles. Ayala
and Escalante (1996) hypothesized that this was due to
balanced selection by pathogens, mainly malaria. Since
malaria exerted its strongest selective pressure in Africa,
people of African and European descent have very different
HLA polymorphisms. Before the advent of sequence
characterization, HLA typing in AFAs lacked precision,
which was the cause of a higher rate of organ transplant
rejections in this group. According to Fu and Akey (2013)
and Racimo et al. (2015), archaic adaptive introgression
(AAI) (capture by modern humans of some genomic parts
from Neandertals
limited
admixture) played a major role in shaping the HLA poly-
morphism of non-African populations.

and Denisovans

through

Coevolution and the Red Queen Hypothesis

Since the advent of mankind, our species has undergone a
constant race with pathogens, according to the “red queen
hypothesis” (Van Valen, 1973): “Those who do not move
on, move back.” The host had to constantly adapt to its
pathogens, and the pathogens had to succeed in being
transmitted. The pathogen panoply of a given host (here,
humans) can be considered to be a characteristic, a
phenotype of the host, and vice-versa (Tibayrenc, 1998). A
third partner, the vector, enters the dance in the case of
VBDs such as malaria and yellow fever. All this is a
complex phenomenon of coevolution. Many parts of our
genome have been shaped by this race and continue to be
so inﬂuenced. Infectious diseases still impose their tax on
humankind. Every year, they cause the death of millions of
babies and infants, mainly in tropical areas and low-income
countries. It is logical to infer that survivors are better
armed genetically to face the pathogen challenge.

Geographical Differences

is also logical

It
to assume that populations living in
different geographical areas, hosting different pathogen and
vector species, had to adapt accordingly (Tibayrenc, 2004,
2007a,b). In Medieval times, malaria raged as far north as
Flanders, and it continues to be transmitted in Corsica.
However, this is the mild malaria caused by the parasite
Plasmodium vivax. Europe never had to confront the threat
of the serial killer Plasmodium falciparum. It is obvious
that all transmissible diseases exhibit a strongly differential
geographical distribution (Gentillini et al., 2012). So the

Human Intergroup Variation and Disease Genetics Chapter | 10 169

selective pressure of pathogens on humans has been quite
uneven. Prugnolle et al. (2005) proposed that HLA poly-
morphism paralleled pathogen diversity in different
countries. In the same population, there can be considerable
individual differences in genetic susceptibility to infectious
diseases (Abel and Dessein, 1997), as in all diseases.
However, especially in the case of transmissible diseases,
group differences, which are the main theme of this chapter,
deserve to be explored in depth.

Infectious Diseases and History
Cochran and Harpending (2009, Chapter 6) proposed that
this uneven distribution of disease resistance genes in
human populations had a strong impact on historical
events. The Spanish conquistadores had to ﬁght against
well-trained Native American armies, the Incas and the
Aztecs, who were inﬁnitely more numerous. Of course the
Spaniards had (primitive) ﬁrearms. However, they brought
luggage a better weapon, namely European
in their
infectious diseases,
to which Native Americans were
immunologically naïve. Bacteria more than muskets and
blunderbusses committed a Native American genocide that
may have considerably facilitated the Spanish conquista.
Later, European colonization in Africa may have been
slowed down by tropical diseases the Europeans were not
adapted to.

Before this, Arab penetration into Africa may have been
stopped by sleeping sickness. It is notable that the limits of
Islam in Africa are more or less those of the area of distribu-
tion of this disease’s vector, the tsetse ﬂy (Glossina spp.).

Let us now have a closer look at how much genetic
transmissible diseases varies

susceptibility to different
around the world.

Different Populations, Different Diseases,
Different Genes

Malaria

Malaria is our number one assassin. It is caused by four
different species of blood parasites, Plasmodium falciparum
(the most harmful form of the disease), P. vivax, P.
malariae, and P. ovale. Malaria is a strict VBD. Its vectors
are anopheline mosquitoes. The bulk of transmission oc-
curs between the tropics or at least in warm countries,
Africa being the main victim. This can be seen in human
genes. Threatened populations have developed a genetic
arsenal for resisting malaria. According to Cochan and
Harpending (2009, Chapter 5), Phoenician and Roman
colonization around the Mediterranean may have contrib-
uted to disseminating the pathogen. According to Tishkoff
(2015),
geographically

populations

human

exhibit

localized adaptive traits of malaria resistance. The most
classic case is sickle cell anemia, which is a paradigmatic
example of balanced selection. Homozygous individuals
suffer from a very severe form of the anemia, while het-
erozygous individuals, who are much more numerous,
have no anemia and are protected from malaria (Allison,
1956). It is remarkable that the genetic trait persisted in
AFAs, who have not faced falciparum malaria for cen-
turies. Melanesian ovalocytosis (Tanner et al., 1991) is
another disease in which heterozygous individuals are
protected from malaria. Malaria’s area of distribution
parallels that of not only sickle cell anemia and ovalocy-
tosis, but also a-thalassemia and glucose 6-phosphate de-
hydrogenase deﬁciency, which are also involved in the
defense against this disease (Karlsson et al., 2014). Less
classic genetic mechanisms involved in malaria resistance
have been uncovered. The Duffy antigen receptor for
chemokines (DARC) gene, which codes for the Duffy
blood group antigen O allele, is associated with resistance
to malaria in Africans. Its rs2814778 variant seems to have
undergone recent positive selection (Colonna et al., 2014).
Many deletions (including in genes such as globins and
Solute Carrier Family 4 (Anion Exchanger), Member 1
(SCL4A1)) are found only in regions where malaria is
endemic because they confer resistance to malaria (Conrad
and Hurles, 2007). Daub et al. (2013) looked for selection,
not at the level of independent genes, but instead at the
level of pathway gene sets. Their approach was based on
population differentiation (Fst; see Chapter 6) computed
for many populations worldwide. They found indications
of polygenic positive
strong
geographical differentiation, as revealed by Fst analysis)
for malaria pathway genes, some of which were already
known. New loci under positive selection linked to malaria
resistance were identiﬁed by Gurdasani et al. (2015).
Malaria shows an interesting case of speciﬁc genetic
resistance of a particular human subgroup. The Fulani,
who are West African pastoralists, resist the disease much
better than other African groups (Mossi) with whom they
live in sympatry (Modiano et al., 1999). As already noted
in the case of AJs, this shows that disease studies should
look for stratiﬁcation and subgroups within the major
human continental groups.

selection (and hence,

AIDS

The disease is caused by HIV-1 and -2 (human immuno-
deﬁciency virus). It shows a counterintuitive case of genetic
resistance, since Africans appear to be more vulnerable to
AIDS than Europeans. The hypothesis to explain this
feature is based on allelic frequency differences for a
deletion in the CCR-5 chemokine receptor gene. This
deletion (CCR5D32) is much more frequent in Europeans

170 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

individuals

homozygous

(CeC motif)

than in Africans (Dean et al., 1996). Individuals who
are heterozygous for CCR5D32 have a slower disease
progression. Moreover,
for
CCR5D32 (about 1% of Europeans) are highly resistant to
acquiring HIV-1 infection, even after multiple exposures
(Chapman and Hill, 2012). At the genomic level, extreme
population differentiation was noted for the CNV of the
Chemokine
ligand 3-like 1 CCL3L1
polymorphism, which also inﬂuences human susceptibility
to HIV infection (Conrad and Hurles, 2007; Gonzalez et al.,
2005). Rare CNVs (hence bound to be geographically
restricted) also seem to be involved in HIV susceptibility
(Gonzaga-Jauregui et al., 2012). Heyn et al.
(2013)
compared the methylation proﬁles (involved in gene
regulation) of the b-lymphocytes of 96 AFAs, 96 EURAs,
and 96 Han Chinese. They found population-speciﬁc
methylation proﬁles for genes associated with different
disease penetrance levels, including AIDS. Grossman et al.
(2013) identiﬁed various polymorphisms having undergone
recent evolution (and therefore likely to be geographically
restricted), associated with susceptibility to infectious
diseases. Among them were two genes related to HIV
infection, namely tyrosyl protein sulfotransferase 1
(TPST1) and C-X-C chemokine receptor type 4 (CXCR4).
Much remains to be learned in the genetics of HIV
loci and
susceptibility. Taken together, HLA class I
the CCR5 polymorphism account
the
observed variability of HIV control only (Chapman and
Hill, 2012).

for 23% of

Human African Trypanosomiasis

(HAT;

trypanosomiasis
is one of

formerly
Human African
the most devastating
sleeping sickness)
transmissible diseases of Sub-Saharan Africa. It is caused
by the parasitic protozoan Trypanosoma brucei, transmitted
by hematophagous tsetse ﬂies. African populations have
developed speciﬁc genetic mechanisms to control
the
disease. The role of various cytokine molecules has been
demonstrated (Ilboudo et al., 2014). The haptoglobin-
related protein (HPR) is found in a CNV region that
exhibits a higher copy number in the Yoruba individuals (of
African ancestry) than in the individuals of Asian and
European ancestry. This pattern could be related to adap-
tation to HAT. The linked SNPs also show high Fst values
(¼ differentiation)
different
ancestries (Armengol et al., 2009). AFAs suffer from
kidney diseasedincluding focal segmental glomerulo-
sclerosis (FSGS) and hypertension-attributed end-stage
kidney disease (H-ESKD)dat higher rates than EURAs.
Two independent coding variants of the Apolipoprotein L1
(APOL1) gene are strongly associated with FSGS and
H-ESKD. It has been suggested that these variants were
involved in resistance against T. brucei (Karlsson et al.,

populations

among

of

2014; Lachance and Tishkoff, 2013; Sudmant et al., 2015).
Passed adaptation to HAT is therefore hypothesized to be at
the origin of the present kidney disease burden in AFAs.

Other Transmissible Diseases

tuberculosis,

Visceral leishmaniosis (caused by the parasitic protozoan
Leishmania infantum) shows strong ethnic differences in
the ratio of asymptomatic to symptomatic infections
(Bucheton et al., 2002). The GWAS involved in tubercu-
losis show that accurate identiﬁcation of populations is
indispensable for ruling out
the misleading impact of
stratiﬁcation. The GWAS conducted on Gambians and
Ghanaians reported an 8% imputation error rate when using
the Nigerian Yoruban reference population (Chapman and
Hill, 2012). Among the various polymorphisms having
undergone recent evolution (and therefore likely to be
geographically restricted) identiﬁed by Grossman et al.
(2013) were genes related to infection by Yiersinia pestis,
the agent of plague, Mycobacterium leprae, which causes
leprosy, Mycobacterium
Salmonella
typhimurium, the agent of typhoid fever, Lassa virus, and
measles virus. Heyn et al. (2013) evidenced differential
methylation (related to gene regulation), among distinct
human groups, in genes related to the different penetrance
rates of infection by enteropathogenic Escherichia coli,
measles virus, and hepatitis B virus. The genes involved in
leprosy resistance are not the same in Indian and Chinese
populations (Karlsson et al., 2014).
In Brazil, some
genes are potential markers for susceptibility to leprosy
development, while others are potential markers
for
the severe clinical multibacillary (MB)
form (Pinto
et al., 2015). These markers are inﬂuenced by ancestry.
European admixture increases the risk of leprosy develop-
ment, while African admixture is protective against
leprosy (Pinto et al., 2015). Smallpox resistance seems to
have been selected in African populations. In AFAs, the
cytokine response to smallpox vaccination is stronger
than in EURAs, which supports a larger effect due to
selection in Africa (Karlsson et al., 2014). Hepatitis C
susceptibility differs among human geographical groups,
due to HLA variation (Thio et al., 2001). A hepatitis
C-protective C allele of the Interleukin 28B (IL28B) gene is
most prevalent in Asians, has an intermediary frequency in
Europeans, and has its lowest prevalence in Africans. The
higher frequency in non-African populations may be the
result of positive selection (Manry and Quintana-Murci,
2013).

Different Human Populations Carry
Different Pathogen Strains
The genetic evolution of the Helicobacter pylori bacterium
(which causes gastric ulcers) is related to the evolution of

Human Intergroup Variation and Disease Genetics Chapter | 10 171

tuberculosis)

human populations since the advent of modern humans.
Different human populations harbor distinct genotypes of
the bacterium (Moodley et al., 2012). Hirsh et al. (2004)
showed that strains of M.
tuberculosis (the bacterium
responsible for
isolated from patients of
different ancestry groups in San Francisco reﬂected the
genetic polymorphism of the strains of their country of
origin. These authors evidenced a Southeast Asian cluster,
a Filipino cluster, and two clusters having the dominant
North American M. tuberculosis type. Lastly, in admixed
Colombian populations characterized by AIMs, the geno-
types of M. leprae (the bacterium responsible for leprosy)
are correlated with the degree of either African or European
ancestry (Cardona-Castro et al., 2015).

Impact of Human Behavior on Infectious
Disease Transmission: The Niche
Construction Theory and the Baldwin Effect
The niche construction theory (Laland et al., 2010)
states that, by modifying their environments, organisms
inﬂuence the natural selection acting on themselves. In
tropical areas, sweet potato farming increased the density
of water pools, which favored the proliferation of
anopheline mosquito larvae and the spread of malaria.
This is assumed to have increased selection for malaria
genetic resistance (Cochran and Harpending, 2009,
Chapter 4; Laland et al., 2010). The same probably
occurred in Southeast Asia with rice farming and all
diseases transmitted by mosquitoes. In Egypt, the con-
struction of the Aswan dam, with its huge reservoir,
favored the transmission of schistosomiasis, a disease
brought on by a worm whose larvae are transmitted by
freshwater snails. In contrast, sanitation of the Pontine
marshes in Italy before the Second World War interrupted
the transmission of malaria in the Rome area. Every time
men modify their environment,
they inﬂuence the
transmission and hence the selective pressure of infectious
diseases. The Baldwin effect postulates the impact on
natural selection of learned behavior through cultural
transmission. Richerson et al. (2010) proposed that its
impact on human biological evolution was considerable.
Obviously, newly acquired behavior may play an
important role on infectious disease transmission. For
example, medical education in tropical Africa seeks to
change the habit of keeping used tires in one’s garden.
Tires ﬁll with rainwater and become a mosquito larva
nursery. Both niche construction and the Baldwin effect
act unevenly on different geographical populations having
different cultures and behaviors and will therefore have
dissimilar impacts on the natural selection caused by
pathogens.

INFLAMMATORY AND AUTOIMMUNE
DISEASES: THE HYGIENE HYPOTHESIS
The hygiene hypothesis (Sironi and Clerici, 2010) states
that the human immune system has been selected to face a
considerable pathogen pressure. In modern societies, this
pressure is relaxed. As a result, the immune system runs on
empty and “overspeeds,” leading to allergic, inﬂammatory,
and autoimmune diseases. The forces related to the hygiene
hypothesis are obviously stronger in industrialized coun-
tries, which should lead to an uneven distribution of these
diseases throughout the world.

As a matter of fact, autoimmune diseases such as
alopecia areata, membranous nephropathy, primary biliary
cirrhosis, systemic lupus erythematosus, systemic sclerosis,
ulcerative colitis, and vitiligo underwent genetic risk
differentiation in 51 populations of the Human Genome
Diversity panel
(2013).
Fumagalli et al. (2011) found that the diversity of the local
pathogen environment was the predominant driver of local
adaptation. They looked for loci
targeted by pathogen-
driven local selection, and found an enrichment of genes
associated with autoimmune diseases, such as celiac
disease, Crohn’s disease,
type 1 diabetes, and multiple
sclerosis.

surveyed by Corona et al.

Asthma is an inﬂammatory respiratory disease. As we
have seen above in “Respiratory diseases,” it has an uneven
distribution among people of different ancestries. Asthma
could be caused by an inappropriate response of the
immune system in modern, hygienically cleaned environ-
ments (Richerson et al., 2010). Crohn’s disease is almost
exclusively found in people of European ancestry
(Mountain and Risch, 2004). The autoimmune skin disease
pemphigus vulgaris has a high frequency in AJs (Guha
et al., 2012). Multiple sclerosis is the most common
autoimmune disorder
central nervous
system.
in Northern Europeans
(Compston and Coles, 2008). Migrant studies have shown
that
the frequency of multiple sclerosis remains lower
in Canadian Asians than in Canadian Europeans (Risch
et al., 2002), which suggests that genetics plays a stronger
role than the environment as a cause of this disease.

is more frequent

affecting the

It

diseases

autoimmune

The GWAS of

revealed
extensive overlap in genetic variants linked to a diverse
range of disorders,
including celiac disease, Crohn’s
disease, multiple sclerosis, psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis,
systemic lupus erythematosus, and type 1 diabetes (Cross-
Disorder Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium,
2013). This suggests a common selective pressure (hygiene
hypothesis?) for these clinically diversiﬁed disorders. The
range of diseases affected by ancient pathogen pressure
actually extends beyond infectious and autoimmune
diseases, since inﬂammatory and immunity genes are also

172 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

associated with mental disorders, including SCZ and autism
(Karlsson et al., 2014).

for disease genes

RESISTANCE ALLELES
At the end of this world tour of disease genes, it should be
noted that the search for disease genes has been more
widely undertaken in people of European ancestry than in
other groups. There is now a tendency to emphasize large
multiethnic WGS surveys to encourage ﬁlling this gap
(Harper et al., 2015). Moreover, until now, researchers have
looked more
for disease
resistance genes. This research theme now appears to be
fast-developing and promising, especially in the perspec-
tive of improved drug development. Protective alleles often
function by loss of function (LoF), by attenuating a genic
activity. Regulatory phenomena are important in modu-
lating their action. These protective alleles often are
RVs and sometimes are speciﬁc of given ancestry groups.
A strategy to look for them is to compare disease distri-
bution among ancestry groups. If a given disease has a high
prevalence in a given group, it is inferred that the other
groups have protective alleles (Harper et al., 2015).

than

CONCLUDING REMARKS
The wealth of data yielded by modern genomics has
considerably clariﬁed our view on the genetic background
of many diseases.
It has conﬁrmed that Mendelian,
monogenic diseases tend to be geographically restricted.

When complex diseases are considered, this geograph-
ical uneven distribution is veriﬁed in many cases, which is
probably the result of local adaptation to speciﬁc selective
pressures. More and more genetic variants involved in
complex diseases are coming to light,
including in
psychological disorders. This will make it possible to
partition the respective impact of the environment and the
genetic background, and the interactions between the two,
in the etiology of these diseases. However, this research is
made difﬁcult by the fact that many complex disorders are
caused by RVs, requiring that vast population samples be
surveyed.

As for infectious diseases and autoimmune disorders,
geographical differentiation is especially clear,
since
pathogen and vector pressures are highly dependent upon
climatic conditions, and hygiene measures have dramati-
cally impacted different
in countries with
different cultures and economic levels.

situations

imply that

Uneven geographical

they are totally absent

repartition of many diseases
does not
in some
geographical populations. The concern that the notion of a
higher
(cystic ﬁbrosis,
hemoglobinopathies) in certain populations could lead to
misdiagnoses (Yudell et al., 2016) is unfounded. Any

some diseases

frequency of

physician is aware that ancestry may give higher proba-
bilities of diagnosis in some cases, but not certainty.

The new research on protective alleles shows that these
protective variants are often rare and sometimes are
ancestry-group speciﬁc.

Lastly, genetic heterogeneity within major continental
groups (structuration) and admixture should be carefully
taken into account in the study of disease genetics.

The

genes,

between

complex

interplay

culture,
environment, and socioeconomic factors in the etiology and
severity of diseases calls for extensive multidisciplinary
collaborations among specialists in the biological, medical,
and social sciences. This need is reﬂected in the design of
the present book.

GLOSSARY
Cytokine An intercellular messenger protein that

is released by
lymphocytes and macrophages. Cytokines favor communication
among cells of the immune system and between immune system
cells and cells belonging to other tissue categories. They play an
important role in the defense against infectious agents.

Human leukocyte antigens (HLA) Cell-surface proteins detected by
blood tests that exhibit huge diversity among humans and deter-
mine an individual’s leukocyte type. The HLA set of genes is
involved in the presentation of antigenic peptides to the immune
system and plays a major role in tissue compatibility and infec-
tious processes.

Linkage disequilibrium nonrandom association of genotypes

occurring at different loci.

Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) A complex of genes
found in mammals (HLA in humans) that function in determining
the histocompatibility antigens found on cell surfaces.

REFERENCES

Abel, L., Dessein, A.J., 1997. The impact of host genetics on susceptibility
to human infectious diseases. Current Opinion in Immunology 9,
509e516.

Allison, A.C., 1956. The sickle-cell and haemoglobin C genes in some

African populations. Annals of Human Genetics 21, 67e89.

Armengol, L., Villatoro, S., González, J.R., et al., 2009. Identiﬁcation of
copy number variants deﬁning genomic differences among major
human groups. PLoS One e7230. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0007230.

Avise, J.C., 2004. Molecular Markers, Natural History and Evolution,

second ed. Chapman & Hall, New York London.

Ayala, F.J., Escalante, A., 1996. The evolution of human populations: a
molecular perspective. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 5,
188e201.

Ayub, Q., Yngvadottir, B., Chen, Y., Xue, Y., Hu, M., Vernes, S.C.,
Fisher, S.E., Tyler-Smith, C., 2013. FOXP2 targets show evidence of
positive selection in European populations. The American Journal of
Human Genetics 92, 696e706.

Barbujani, G., Colonna, V., 2010. Human genome diversity: frequently

asked question. Trends in Genetics 26, 285e295.

Belizário, J.E., 2013. The humankind genome: from genetic diversity to

the origin of human diseases. Genome 56, 705e716.

Human Intergroup Variation and Disease Genetics Chapter | 10 173

Betancourt, H., López, S.R., 1993. The study of culture, ethnicity, and race

in American Psychology. American Psychologist 48, 629e637.

Birky, C.W., 2009. Giardia sex? Yes, but how and how much? Trends in

Parasitology 26, 70e74.

Blackwell, J.M., 1996. Genetic susceptibility to Leishmanial infections:

studies in mice and man. Parasitology 112 (Suppl.), S67eS74.

Bucheton, B., Kheir, M.M., El-Saﬁ, S.H., et al., 2002. The interplay be-
tween environmental and host factors during an outbreak of visceral
leishmaniasis
and Infection 4,
1449e1457.

in eastern Sudan. Microbes

Burchard, E.G., Oh, S.S., Foreman, M.G., Celedón, J.C., 2015. Moving
toward true inclusion of racial/ethnic minorities in federally funded
studies. A key step for achieving respiratory health equality in the
United States. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care
Medicine 191, 514e521.

Burdick, K.E., Lencz, T., Funke, B., et al., 2006. Genetic variation in
DTNBP1 inﬂuences general cognitive ability. Human Molecular Ge-
netics 15, 1563e1568.

Bustamante, C.D., González Burchard, E., De La Vega, F.M., 2011. Ge-

nomics for the world. Nature 475, 163e165.

Cardona-Castro, N., Cortés, E., Beltrán, C., et al., 2015. Human genetic
ancestral composition correlates with the origin of Mycobacterium
leprae strains in a leprosy endemic population. PLoS Neglected
Tropical Diseases 9 (9),
e0004045. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pntd.0004045.

Farrer, L.A., Cupples, L.A., Haines, J.L., et al., 1997. Effects of age, sex,
and ethnicity on the association between apolipoprotein E genotype
and Alzheimer disease. A meta-analysis. APOE and Alzheimer Dis-
ease Meta Analysis Consortium. JAMA 278, 1349e1356.

Fisher, R.A., 1918. The correlations between relatives on the supposition
of Mendelian inheritance. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of Edinburgh 52, 399e433.

Frances, A., 2013. Saving Normal: An Insider’s Revolt Against Out-of-
control Psychiatric Diagnosis, -5, Big Pharma, and the Medicalization
of Ordinary Life. William Morrow, New York.

Fraser, H.B., 2013. Gene expression drives local adaptation in humans.

Genome Research 23, 1089e1096.

Fu, W., Akey, J.M., 2013. Selection and adaptation in the human genome.

Annual Review of Genomics and Human Genetics 14, 467e489.

Fu, W., O’Connor, T.D., Jun, G., et al., 2013. Analysis of 6515 exomes
reveals the recent origin of most human protein-coding variants. Na-
ture 493, 216e220.

Fumagalli, M., Sironi, M., Pozzoli, U., et al., 2011. Signatures of envi-
ronmental genetic adaptation pinpoint pathogens as the main selective
pressure through human evolution. PLoS Genetics 7 (11), e1002355.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1002355.

Gentillini, M., Caumes, E., Danis, M., et al., 2012. Médecine Tropicale, 6e

éd. Lavoisier, Paris.

Geschwind, D.H., Flint, J., 2015. Genetics and genomics of psychiatric

disease. Science 349, 1489e1494.

Cavalli-Sforza, L., 2007. Human evolution and its relevance for scientiﬁc
epidemiology. Annual Review of Genomics and Human Genetics 8,
1e15.

Gonzaga-Jauregui, C., Lupski, J.R., Gibbs, R.A., 2012. Human genome
sequencing in health and disease. Annual Review of Medicine 63,
35e61.

Chapman, S.J., Hill, A.V.S., 2012. Human genetic susceptibility to in-

fectious disease. Nature Reviews Genetics 13, 175e188.

Cochran, G., Harpending, H., 2009. The 10,000 Year Explosion- How
Civilization Accelerated Human Evolution. Basic Books. A Member
of the Perseus Books Group, New York.

Cochran, G., Hardy, J., Harpending, H., 2006. Natural history of ashkenazi

intelligence. Journal of Biosocial Science 38, 659e693.

Colonna, V., Ayub, Q., Chen, Y., et al., 2014. Human genomic regions
with exceptionally high levels of population differentiation identiﬁed
from 911 whole-genome sequences. Genome Biology 15, R88.

Compston, A., Coles, A., 2008. Multiple sclerosis. Lancet 372 (9648),

1502e1517.

Conrad, D.F., Hurles, M.E., 2007. The population genetics of structural

variation. Nature Genetics 39 (Suppl.), 530e536.

Corona, E., Chen, R., Sikora, M., et al., 2013. Analysis of the genetic basis
of disease in the context of worldwide human relationships and
migration. PLoS Genetics 9 (5), e1003447. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pgen.1003447.

Cross-Disorder Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium, 2013.
Identiﬁcation of risk loci with shared effects on ﬁve major psychiatric
disorders: a genome-wide analysis. Lancet 381, 1371e1379.

Daub, J.T., Hofer, T., Cutivet, E., et al., 2013. Evidence for polygenic
adaptation to pathogens in the human genome. Molecular Biology and
Evolution 30, 1544e1558.

de Candia, T.R., Hong Lee, S., Yang, J., et al., 2013. Additive genetic
variation in schizophrenia risk is shared by populations of African and
European descent. The American Journal of Human Genetics 93,
463e470.

race

González Burchard, E., Ziv, E., Coyle, N., et al., 2003. The importance
of
research and
clinical practice. The New England Journal of Medicine 348,
1170e1175.

and ethnic background in biomedical

Gonzalez, E., Kulkarni, H., Bolivar, H., et al., 2005. The inﬂuence of
CCL3L1 gene-containing segmental duplications on HIV-1/AIDS
susceptibility. Science 307, 1434e1440.

Grossman, S.R., Andersen, K.G., Shlyakhter,

al., 2013.
Identifying recent adaptations in large-scale genomic data. Cell 152,
703e713.

I.,

et

Guha, S., Rosenfeld, J.A., Malhotra, A.K., et al., 2012. Implications for
health and disease in the genetic signature of the Ashkenazi Jewish
population. Genome Biology 13, R2.

Gurdasani, D., Carstensen, T., Tekola-Ayele, F., et al., 2015. The African
genome variation project shapes medical genetics in Africa. Nature
517, 327e332.

Haldane, J.B.S., 1949. Disease and evolution. La ricerca scientiﬁca Suppl.

19, 68e76.

Hardelid, P., Cortina-Borja, M., Munro, A., et al., 2008. The birth prev-
alence of PKU in populations of European, South Asian and Sub-
Saharan African ancestry living in South East England. Annals of
Human Genetics 72, 65e71.

Harper, A.R., Nayee, S., Topol, E.J., 2015. Protective alleles and modiﬁer
variants in human health and disease. Nature Reviews Genetics 16,
689e701.

Harris, K.M., Edlund, M.J., Larson, S., 2005. Racial and ethnic differences
in the mental health problems and use of mental health care. Medical
Care 43, 775e784.

Dean, M., Carrington, M., Winckler, C., et al., 1996. Genetic restriction of
HIV-1 infection and progression to AIDS by a deletion allele of the
CKR5 structural gene. Science 273, 1856e1862.

Harris, K., 2015. Evidence for recent, population-speciﬁc evolution of the
human mutation rate. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences of the United States of America 112, 3439e3444.

174 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

Helgadottir, A., Manolescu, A., Helgason, A., et al., 2006. A variant of the
gene encoding leukotriene A4 hydrolase confers ethnicity-speciﬁc risk
of myocardial infarction. Nature Genetics 38, 68e74.

Heyn, H., Moran, S., Hernando-Herraez, I., et al., 2013. DNA methylation
contributes to natural human variation. Genome Research 23,
1363e1372.

Hirsh, A.E., Tsolaki, A.G., DeRiemer, K., Feldman, M.W., Small, P.M.,
2004. Stable association between strains of Mycobacterium tubercu-
losis and their human host populations. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 101,
4871e4876.

Hyman, S., 2014. Depression needs large human-genetics studies. Nature

515, 189e191.

Ilboudo, H., Bras-Gonçalves, R., Camara, M., et al., 2014. Unravelling
human trypanotolerance: IL8 is associated with infection control
whereas IL10 and TNFa are associated with subsequent disease
development. PLoS Pathogens 10 (11), e1004469. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1371/journal.ppat.1004469.

Jordan, B., 2008. L’humanité au pluriel. La génétique et la question des

races. Editions du Seuil, Paris.

Modiano, D., Chiucchiuini, A., Petrarca, V., et al., 1999. Interethnic dif-
ferences in the humoral response to non-repetitive regions of the
Plasmodium falciparum circumsporozoite protein. American Journal
of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 61, 663e667.

Moodley, Y., Linz, B., Bond, R.P., et al., 2012. Age of the association
between Helicobacter pylori and man. PLoS Pathogens 8 (5),
e1002693. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1002693.

Moreno-Estrada, A., Gignoux, C.R., Fernández-López, J.C., et al., 2014.
The genetics of Mexico recapitulates Native American substructure
and affects biomedical traits. Science 344, 1280e1285.

Mountain, J.L., Risch, N., 2004. Assessing genetic contribution to
phenotypic differences among “racial” and “ethnic” groups. Nature
Genetics 36 (Suppl.), S48eS53.

Need, A.C., Kasperaviciut_e, D., Cirulli, E.T., Goldstein, D.B., 2009.
A genome-wide genetic signature of Jewish ancestry perfectly sepa-
rates individuals with and without full Jewish ancestry in a large
random sample of European Americans. Genome Biology 10, R7.

Neel, J., 1962. Diabetes mellitus: a “thrifty” genotype rendered detrimental
by “progress”? The American Journal of Human Genetics 14,
353e362.

Jorde, L.B., Wooding, S.P., 2004. Genetic variation, classiﬁcation and

Nei, M., 1978. The theory of genetic distance and evolution of human

“race”. Nature Genetics 36 (Suppl.), S28eS32.

races. Japanese Journal of Human Genetics 23, 341e369.

Karlsson, E.K., Kwiatkowski, D.P., Sabeti, P.C., 2014. Natural selection
and infectious disease in human populations. Nature Reviews Ge-
netics 15, 379e383.

Keita, S.O.Y., Kittles, R.A., Royal, C.D.M., et al., 2004. Conceptualizing

human variation. Nature Genetics 36 (Suppl.), S17eS20.

Lachance, J., Tishkoff, S.A., 2013. Population genomics of human adap-
tation. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics 44,
123e143.

Laland, K.N., Odling-Smee, J., Myles, S., 2010. How culture shaped the
human genome: bringing genetics and the human sciences together.
Nature Reviews Genetics 11, 137e148.

Lander, E.S., 2011. Initial impact of the sequencing of the human genome.

Nature 470, 187e197.

Lee, S.S., Mudaliar, A., 2009. Racing forwards:

the genomics and

personalized medicine act. Science 323, 342.

Lee, S.S., Mountain, J., Koenig, B., et al., 2008. The ethics of character-
izing difference: guiding principles on using racial categories in hu-
man genetics. Genome Biology 9, 404. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/gb-
2008-9-7-404.

Ostrer, H., Skorecki, K., 2013. The population genetics of the Jewish

people. Human Genetics 132, 119e127.

Pickrell, J.K., Coop, G., Novembre, J., et al., 2009. Signals of recent
positive selection in a worldwide sample of human populations.
Genome Research 19, 826e837.

Pinto, P., Salgado, C., Pereira Carneiro Santos, N., Santos, S., Ribeiro-dos-
Santos, A., 2015. Inﬂuence of genetic ancestry on INDEL markers of
NFKb1, CASP8, PAR1, IL4 and CYP19A1 genes in leprosy patients.
PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases 9 (9), e0004050. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pntd.0004050.

Prugnolle, F., Manica, A., Charpentier, M., et al., 2005. Pathogen-driven
selection and worldwide HLA class I diversity. Current Biology 15,
1022e1027.

Racimo, F., Sankararaman, S., Nielsen, R., Huerta-Sánchez, E., 2015.
Evidence for archaic adaptive introgression in humans. Nature Re-
views Genetics 16, 359e371.

Richerson, P.J., Boyd, R., Henrich, J., 2010. Gene-culture coevolution in
the age of genomics. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences of the United States of America 107 (Suppl. 2), 8985e8992.

Li, J.Z., Absher, D.M., Tang, H., et al., 2008. Worldwide human re-
lationships inferred from genome-wide patterns of variation. Science
319, 1100e1104.

Risch, N., Burchard, E., Ziv, E., Tang, H., 2002. Categorization of humans
in biomedical research: genes, race and disease. Genome Biology 3 (7)
comment2007.1ecomment2007.12.

López Herráez, D., Bauchet, M., Tang, K., et al., 2009. Genetic variation
and recent positive selection in worldwide human populations: evi-
dence from nearly 1 million SNPs. Plos One 4 (11), e7888. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0007888.

Manry, J., Quintana-Murci, L., 2013. A genome-wide perspective of hu-
man diversity and its implications in infectious disease. Cold Spring
Harbor Perspectives in Medicine 3, a012450.

Mersha, T.B., Abebe, T., 2015. Self-reported race/ethnicity in the age of
genomic research: its potential impact on understanding health dis-
parities. Human Genomics. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s40246-014-
0023-x.

Miller, L.H., 1994. Impact of malaria on genetic polymorphism and ge-
netic diseases in Africans and African Americans. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences United States of America 91,
2415e2419.

Rosenberg, N.A., Mahajan, S., Ramachandran, S., et al., 2005. Clines,
clusters, and the effect of study design on the inference of human
population structure. PLoS Genetics 1 (6), e70.

Sarich, V., Miele, F., 2004. Race: The Reality of Human Differences.

Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado, USA.

Shendure, J., Akey, J.M., 2015. The origins, determinants, and conse-

quences of human mutations. Science 345, 1478e1483.

Sironi, M., Clerici, M., 2010. The hygiene hypothesis: an evolutionary

perspective. Microbes and Infection 12, 421e427.

Spielman, R.S., Bastone, L.A., Burdick, J.T., et al., 2007. Common genetic
variants account for differences in gene expression among ethnic
groups. Nature Genetics 39, 226e231.

Sudmant, P.H., Mallick, S., Nelson, B.J., et al., 2015. Global diversity,
population stratiﬁcation, and selection of human copy-number varia-
tion. Science. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.aab3761.

Human Intergroup Variation and Disease Genetics Chapter | 10 175

Tanner, M.J., Bruce, L., Martin, P.G., Rearden, D.M., Jones, G.L., 1991.
Melanesian hereditary ovalocytes have a deletion in red cell band 3.
Blood 78, 2785e2786.

Tibayrenc, M., 2007b. Human genetic diversity and the spread of infec-
tious diseases. In: Tibayrenc, M. (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Infectious
Diseases: Modern Methodologies. Wiley & Sons, pp. 321e335.

Tate, S.K., Goldstein, D.B., 2004. Will tomorrow’s medicine work for

everyone? Nature Genetics 36 (Suppl.), S34eS42.

Tennessen, J.A., Bigham, A.W., O’Connor, T.D., et al., 2012. Evolution
and functional impact of rare coding variation from deep sequencing
of human exomes. Science 337, 64e69.

Tishkoff, S.A., Kidd, K.K., 2004. Implications of biogeography of human
populations for “race” and medicine. Nature Genetics 36 (Suppl.),
S21eS27.

Tishkoff, S., 2015. Strength in small numbers. Science 349, 1282e1283.
Van Valen, L., 1973. A new evolutionary law. Evolutionary Theory 1,

The 1000 Genomes Project Consortium, 2012. An integrated map of ge-

1e30.

netic variation from 1,092 human genomes. Nature 491, 56e65.

Thio, C.L., Thomas, D.L., Goedert, J.J., et al., 2001. Racial differences in
HLA class ii associations with hepatitis C virus outcomes. Journal of
Infectious Diseases 184, 16e21.

Tibayrenc, M., Ayala, F.J., 2013. How clonal are trypanosoma and

Leishmania? Trends in Parasitology 29, 264e269.

Tibayrenc, M., 1998. Genetic epidemiology of parasitic protozoa and other
infectious agents: the need for an integrated approach. International
Journal for Parasitology 28 (1), 85e104.

Tibayrenc, M., 2004. The impact of human genetic diversity in the
transmission and severity of infectious diseases. In: Dronamraju, K.
(Ed.), Infectious Disease: Host-pathogen Evolution. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, pp. 315e324.

Tibayrenc, M., 2007a. Human genetic diversity and epidemiology of
parasitic and other transmissible diseases. Advances in Parasitology
64, 378e428.

Vasseur, E., Quintana-Murci, L., 2013. The impact of natural selection on
health and disease: uses of the population genetics approach in
humans. Evolutionary Applications 6, 596e607.

Williams, D.R., González, H.M., Neighbors, H.,

al., 2007.
Prevalence and distribution of major depressive disorder in African
Americans, Caribbean blacks, and non-Hispanic Whites. Results from
the national survey of American life. Archives of General Psychiatry
64, 305e315.

et

Yudell, M., Roberts, D., DeSalle, R., Tishkoff, S., 2016. Taking race out of

human genetics. Science 351, 564e565.

Zietsch, B.P., de Candia, T.R., Keller, M.C., 2015. Evolutionary
behavioral genetics. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences 2,
73e80.

Chapter 11

Natural Selection Associated With
Infectious Diseases

M. Fumagalli and F. Balloux
University College London, London, United Kingdom

INFECTIOUS DISEASES AND HUMAN
EVOLUTION

It

Evolution of Anatomically Modern Humans
remains of anatomically modern humans
The earliest
(AMHs) were found in central East Africa and dated to
around 150,000 years ago (White et al., 2003).
is
believed AMHs greatly expanded the distribution range
after the out-of-Africa (OOA) dispersal some 50,000 years
ago (Pagani et al., 2015) eventually colonizing the
vast majority of
landmasses (Raghavan et al., 2015).
During this migration, humans were exposed to new
environments, including different climatic conditions and
novel zoonotic pathogens, and had to adapt their diet to
local food availability (Balaresque et al., 2007). Such
exposure
to new environments generated selective
pressures that in turn led to genetic adaptations that are
believed to have played an important
role in human
evolution (Harris and Meyer, 2006) and contributed to
differentiation between human populations (Barreiro et al.,
2008).

The ancient human migration to colder climates with
less incident sunlight had adaptive consequences for
pigmentation and metabolic traits (Hancock et al., 2011,
2008; Izagirre et al., 2006). Likewise, changes in the
subsistence strategy (for
the advent of
agriculture) led to the establishment of larger and more
connected social groups and to the availability of novel
sources of food, with a notable impact on metabolism
(Hardy et al., 2015). Finally, population expansion, recent
human migrations, and colonization of new habitats
enhanced the exposure to novel infective agents; the spread
of such new diseases imposed selective pressures on the

instance, after

immune system (Fumagalli and Sironi, 2014), some of
which left a detectable signature in the apportionment of
genetic diversity in the human genome.

Several adaptations of human populations to novel
environments led to phenotypes that are easy to charac-
terize biochemically or even visually. Such examples
include lower melanin pigmentation in populations living
far from the equator due to reduced UV radiation (Alonso
et al., 2008) and increased hemoglobin concentration in
high altitude populations, such as Tibetans reﬂecting hyp-
oxia at high altitude (Huerta-Sánchez et al., 2014; Yi et al.,
2010). A spectacular example of genetic adaptation to diet
is lactase persistence, where a mutation found at high fre-
quency in Europeans, but essentially absent anywhere else,
maintains the ability to degrade lactose through life which
provides a selective advantage in populations practicing
dairy farming (Gerbault, 2013).

Most genetic adaptations underpin phenotypes that are
more difﬁcult to characterize. This is true in particular for
genetic adaptations providing resistance to infectious
diseases. In such cases, the best guess is to identify sig-
natures in the human genome that are characteristic of
past natural selection rather than the traditional approach of
linking genetic variants with phenotypes. Interestingly,
many biological pathways involved in the regulation of
the immune system, and in particular susceptibility to
infectious diseases, are enriched with signatures of non-
neutral evolution, likely reﬂecting past genetic adaptation
to pathogen exposure (Barreiro and Quintana-Murci, 2010).

Human and Pathogens Coevolution
Infectious agents have exerted strong selective pressure on
human populations as they represented the main cause of

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00011-9
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

177

178 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

death until
recently. Despite medical progress, global
selective pressure imposed by pathogens remains high
today, with infectious diseases still representing one of the
major causes of mortality.

In addition to the pressure of constant exposure to
endemic diseases, new infectious diseases emerge and
wane and can have dramatic demographic impacts on the
populations affected. Examples include the Black Death,
which killed nearly half of the human population in Europe
in the Middle Ages (Benedictow, 2004), or the exposure of
indigenous populations from Central and South America to
novel diseases such as smallpox and typhus after the arrival
of Europeans during the 15th and 16th centuries (Waldman,
2009). Despite all the medical progress in recent decades,
pandemics of novel
infectious agents still occur. One
example of an ongoing pandemic is HIV, which entered the
human population around 1920 and has led to around
75 million cases so far (Faria et al., 2014).

Throughout

their evolutionary history, humans have
been exposed to a wide and varying array of pathogens.
Like all other living organisms, humans have had a direct
effect on the ﬁtness of all organisms they interact with and
have had to constantly adapt to cope with a wide range of
pathogens. This need for constant adaptation of hosts and
pathogens is often referred as an arms race, or the red queen
hypothesis (Williams, 1975), as an analogy with Lewis
Carroll’s Red Queen, where both Alice and the Red Queen
have to run just to stay in place.

DETECTING NATURAL SELECTION IN
THE HUMAN GENOME

Forms of Natural Selection
Natural selection is the process whereby a heritable trait
that increases the ﬁtness of its carrier (ie, the organism’s
chance to survive and reproduce) becomes more common
over time, as it is more likely to be passed on to offspring.
While mutations arise (essentially) at
random in the
genome, their fate (change in frequency) is a function of
their effect on the carrier’s phenotype. Different forms of
natural selection alter the change in frequency of the
functional allele in different ways
(Nielsen, 2005).
Different
forms of natural selection have been both
characterized from a theoretical perspective and described
in nature.

Selection may lead to an increase in the frequency of
a beneﬁcial allele (positive selection) until all individuals
will carry such advantageous allele, a process which is
referred to as ﬁxation of the allele in the population.
Negative selection will
instead tend to reduce the fre-
quency of deleterious mutations and eventually remove
them from the pool of individuals. As new mutations are
more likely to be either neutral or deleterious than

beneﬁcial, negative selection is the most widespread
form of selection (Nielsen, 2005). Background selection
refers to the continuous removal of new deleterious alleles
in the human genome.

In some cases, the individual’s phenotype is the result
of
the interaction between multiple alleles at a site.
Balancing selection is the selective process that maintains
high levels of genetic variation at a particular locus by
keeping all beneﬁcial alleles at common frequency in the
population (Charlesworth, 2006). Typical examples of
balancing selection are heterozygote advantage (or over-
dominance, where heterozygous individuals have a higher
ﬁtness than homozygotes) and frequency-dependent selec-
tion (where common alleles are maintained in a context of
equilibrium in communities).

Historically, positive selection has attracted consider-
able attention among researchers. One reason for this is that
adaptation (the observation that particular phenotypes are
advantageous in a speciﬁc environment) is thought to be
primarily driven by positive selection. Positive selection
also leaves clear and peculiar genomic footprints, while
other forms of selection may lead to uninformative or
cryptic distortions of genetic variation.

The identiﬁcation of mutations under natural selection
in the human genome has a twofold meaning. Firstly,
these loci are informative on which selective events have
shaped genome diversity, and allow gaining insight on
past evolutionary events that characterized human history.
Secondly, since natural selection acts only on sites that
affect
the phenotype, alleles targeted by selection are
likely to be of biological and functional relevance. For
instance, alleles highlighted in studies aiming at identi-
fying signals of natural selection are often associated with
resistance to infectious diseases (Karlsson et al., 2014),
which is in line with the hypothesis that pathogens have
exerted some of the strongest selective pressures during
human evolution.

allele

frequencies,

Methods to Detect Signatures of Natural
Selection
forms of selection leave distinct molecular
Different
signatures at the local genomic level, such as variation in
polymorphism levels,
haplotype
diversity, and population differentiation (Nielsen, 2005).
Various statistical approaches to identify genomic regions
targeted by natural selection have been devised. These
methods differ in the type of selection they are aiming to
and exhibit different power depending on
detect
selection timing and strength. Nevertheless,
the main
rationale is similar overall, as these strategies compute
summary statistics to compare the observed local genetic
variation with expectations under the null hypothesis of
neutral evolution.

long

evolutionary

timescales, which

The ﬁrst class of methods ever developed to detect
selection in the human genome is based on the comparison
of orthologous genes among primate species. These
approaches are useful to detect positive selection acting
over
created
phenotypic changes between species (Kosiol et al., 2008).
By identifying homologous sequences that show low
variation among species (ie, evolutionary conserved), it is
possible to identify functional loci, such as coding regions
or
among related taxa.
Conversely, one can potentially identify genomic regions
that exhibit accumulation of substitutions in particular
branches, and thus lineage-speciﬁc accelerations in the
rate
positive
selection having affected some of the lineages (Pollard
et al., 2010).

shared regulatory elements

suggestive

evolution

strong

of

of

rate

substitutions

In this context, the most-commonly used statistic for
detecting selection is dN/dS which computes the ratio
between nonsynonymous
and the
synonymous substitutions rate (Yang and Bielawski, 2000).
The idea underlying this statistic is that synonymous
changes (which do not affect the protein sequence) are
more likely to be functionally neutral, while non-
synonymous changes also alter the amino acid sequence
and thus potentially the individual’s phenotype. Under
these assumptions, the action of positive selection may
result in an excess of nonsynonymous substitutions, as
novel protein structures are beneﬁcial. A dN/dS value
greater than 1 is suggestive of positive selection acting on
the locus under scrutiny. On the contrary, negative
selection will tend to decrease the nonsynonymous changes
rate and dN/dS value will fall below 1.

the McDonald-Kreitman (MK)

Since the availability of multiple genomes from human
richer statistics have been proposed. For
populations,
test extends
instance,
statistic by incorporating intraspeciﬁc diversity
dN/dS
(McDonald and Kreitman, 1991; Messer and Petrov, 2013).
If the between-species dN/dS value is greater than the
within-species dN/dS value, then positive selection acting on
differentiating the two species might have created such
a scenario. Using a similar
the Hudson-
Kreitman-Aguade (HKA) method tests whether a partic-
ular locus or gene exhibits an excess or deﬁciency of
polymorphism levels compared to the baseline replacement
rate, with the assumption that positive selection in one
species causes a relative reduction of polymorphisms
compared to ﬁxed differences (Hudson et al., 1987; Wright
and Charlesworth, 2004).

rationale,

studies

Comparative genomics

therefore focus on
elements, which tend to be conserved in most of the species
analyzed but show a signiﬁcantly accelerated rate of
substitution in a particular lineage. In genetic regions under
strong background selection, mutations
are quickly
removed from the gene pool, resulting in highly conserved

Natural Selection and Infectious Diseases Chapter | 11 179

stretches of the genome (ie, regions where variation is not
observed). This approach has been used to identify several
hundred human-speciﬁc
regions
(Lindblad-Toh et al., 2011).

and primate-speciﬁc

to detect

A second class of methods

selection
signatures compares genetic variation within and between
human populations. These methods are designed to high-
light recent adaptive events. Rapid events of positive
selection may result in a distortion of the allele frequency
distribution in proximity of the beneﬁcial allele arising in
frequency, creating nucleotide diversity reduction within a
genomic region surrounding a locus which has been
affected by recent positive selection (selective sweep)
(Kim and Nielsen, 2004). Such localized decay of genetic
diversity, usually associated with increased homozygosity,
has been exploited by several approaches aiming at
detecting selection signatures
in human populations
(Nielsen et al., 2005; Pavlidis et al., 2013; Williamson
et al., 2007).

The site frequency spectrum (SFS) records the propor-
tion of sites with a certain sample allele frequency. As an
illustration, assuming that the sample comprises N diploids
individuals and for each single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) we could assign the ancestral and derived allelic
states, the unfolded SFS is described by 2Nþ1 proportions
of sites with derived allele frequency (DAF) from 0 to
2N. While the whole-genome SFS is informative on
the demographic history of the examined population, the
local SFS is affected by nonneutral factors as well (if
any). Positive and negative selection will produce an excess
of
rare variants, with a selective sweep speciﬁcally
creating a higher proportion of high DAF sites than
neutral expectations. An excess of intermediate frequency
alleles is a hallmark of balancing selection. As an
illustration, Fig. 11.1 depicts the expected SFS under
neutrality,
selective
sweep with the beneﬁcial mutation at 70% in frequency.
Under selective regimes, high derived frequency variants
are overrepresented compared to neutral expectations.

selection,

positive

partial

and

Several statistics have been proposed that quantify
the distortion in the SFS due to selection. Tajima’s D
was the ﬁrst, and for many years the most common test to
detect such deviation; it compares the average pairwise
nucleotide differences between individuals with the
number of polymorphic sites (Tajima, 1989). Negative
values of D suggest an overrepresentation of low-frequency
variants (and thus positive selection), as they do not
increase pairwise differences as much as intermediate-
frequency variants. Positive values of D are an indication
of an excess of
that
could be
signal of balancing selection. Several
extensions of this metric have been proposed, either to
account for the number of SNPs affecting internal or
external branches of the gene tree, eg, Fu and Li’s D and F

intermediate-frequency variants

a

Neutral Evolution
Partial Sweep
Positive Selection

180 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

n
o

i
t
r
o
p
o
r
P

4

.

0

3

.

0

2

.

0

1
0

.

.

0
0

1 3 5 7 9

12

15

18

21

24

27

30

33

36

39

Derived Allele Frequency

FIGURE 11.1 The effect of natural selection on the site frequency spectrum. The proportion of sites with distinct frequencies of the derived allele for
20 diploid individuals is recorded under different evolutionary histories. Outputs from single simulations under neutral evolution, positive selection
(selection coefﬁcient of 3%), or partial selective sweep (selection coefﬁcient of 0.5% and current frequency of 70%) are shown. All simulations were run
using a constant population size model.

statistics (Fu and Li, 1993), or to take into account an
excess of high frequency derived alleles, eg, Fay and Wu’s
H statistic (Fay and Wu, 2000).

Along with an excess of intermediate-frequency alleles,
balancing selection is characterized by other features, such
as high polymorphism, divergent and common haplotypes,
and a deep coalescent
time, which could be further
exploited to test for selection acting at the locus analyzed
(Charlesworth, 2006). Additionally,
long-term balancing
selection may result in the maintenance of shared poly-
morphisms (also called trans-speciﬁc SNPs) if the same
selection pressures acted prior to the time of speciation
between the species under scrutiny (Cagliani et al., 2010;
Gao et al., 2015). Local excess of polymorphism levels in
the genome can be tested using a classical HKA test
(Hudson et al., 1987) or via statistical modeling (Andrés
et al., 2009; DeGiorgio et al., 2014).

When the beneﬁcial allele increases in frequency due to
selection, neighboring SNPs in linkage disequilibrium (LD)
will also increase in frequency (Payseur and Nachman,
2002). The long haplotype formed at
the end of the
selective sweep will eventually be broken down by
recombination events over
time. Methods based on
identifying extended regions in LD have power to detect
signatures of recent positive selection, when the beneﬁcial

mutation has not reached ﬁxation in the population yet.
After ﬁxation, mutation and recombination will blur the LD
signal making the detection of the selective event more
challenging. Tests based on LD measures are generally
based on the calculation of the homozygosity for the
extended haplotype starting from the putative causal
variant, and highlight regions where the decay of such
metrics across the genome is lower compared to neutral
expectations (Tang et al., 2007; Voight et al., 2006; Zhang
et al., 2006). Extreme values of extended homozygosity
for long genomic distances are an indication of positive
selection. Many genome-wide scans for selection have
successfully identiﬁed putative nonneutrally evolving
regions with a reduction of haplotype diversity and
increased homozygosity (Grossman et al., 2013, 2010;
Sabeti et al., 2007).

Presumably the most powerful approach to detect
signatures of natural selection in the human genome is to
compare the genetic variation between populations from
distinct geographical areas. Human phenotypes are often
distributed according to geographical gradients, as each
trait value might be adapted to a particular environment.
When one population is under a selective pressure, which is
not present in another one, then the locus responsible for
that speciﬁc adaptation will behave differently between

those populations. Speciﬁcally, its allele frequency might
be remarkably different in distinct population, with the
beneﬁcial allele being at high frequency in regions where it
confers an adaptive advantage, and low frequency where it
behaves neutrally (Novembre and Di Rienzo, 2009). Tests
based on detecting signals of population genetic differen-
tiation as evidence of selection rely on this concept.

is

genetic

population

Historically,

differentiation

the most commonly used statistic to
quantify
the
ﬁxation index (FST) (Weir and Hill, 2002; Wright, 1951),
which computes the ratio between the genetic variance
between populations and the total genetic variance
(Reynolds et al., 1983). Large values of FST (up to 1) reﬂect
extensive allelic (or haplotypic) differentiation between
selection
a pair of population,
acting speciﬁcally on that
the two
striking examples of
populations. One of
strong differentiation is the FY*O allele at
the DARC
gene, which leads to the absence of Fy antigen on red
blood cells and protects against P. vivax infection. The
allele is at or near ﬁxation in most Sub-Saharan African
populations but is very rare outside Africa leading to an FST
close to unity, which is the highest recorded for any
genetic markers in human populations (Cavalli-Sforza
et al., 1994).

suggesting positive
locus in one of

the most

Conversely, small values of FST (down to 0) reﬂect a
small degree of differentiation, either due to neutral,
negative, or balancing selection. A number of variations
from the original FST statistic have been proposed, gener-
ally based on statistical modeling of the allele frequency
differentiation (Balding, 2003). By comparing allele fre-
quencies in three populations, it is possible to understand in
which population selection is speciﬁcally increasing the
frequency of the beneﬁcial allele. This is the rationale for
the population branch statistic (PBS), which has been used,
for instance, to detect selection in Tibetans by comparing
allele frequencies against both Chinese and Europeans (Yi
et al., 2010).

In cases where an allele confers a weak advantage to the
carrier in a speciﬁc environment and such environment
varies according to a cline across different geographical
regions, it is expected to lead to a pattern of parallel vari-
ation between the frequency of the advantageous mutation
and the environmental variable that acted as selective
pressure (Hancock et al., 2010). This is the idea behind
methods based on statistical correlations between popula-
tion allele frequencies and environmental variables, as a
strategy to identify patterns of local adaptation (Coop et al.,
2010; Frichot et al., 2013; Raj et al., 2013). As an illus-
tration, the genetic diversity of human genes of the major
histocompatibility complex (MHC), human leukocyte an-
tigens (HLA) Class I system, correlates with the number of
endemic infectious diseases found in different parts of the
world, possibly as a result of increased natural selection for

Natural Selection and Infectious Diseases Chapter | 11 181

diversity in the MHC genes in environments with higher
diversity of pathogens (Prugnolle et al., 2005).

As each selection test captures a speciﬁc feature of the
adaptive process, methods aiming at increasing the sensi-
tivity of selection detection are based on combining the
information from multiple statistics (Grossman et al.,
2010). These approaches usually achieve a greater resolu-
tion at identifying the region, or even the speciﬁc variant,
under selection.

of

the

neutral

An important factor to consider when assessing whether
selection has been responsible for the establishment of a
speciﬁc genomic pattern, is that neutral factors may lead to
of
rejection
evolution.
hypothesis
Demographic events can distort
the patterns of genetic
variation and mimic those expected under natural selection.
For instance, a population expansion creates an excess of
low frequency variants (compared to a constant evolving
size population), a feature that could be interpreted as
positive selection. Similarly, a population bottleneck pro-
duces a deﬁcit of rare mutations in favor of common alleles,
as expected under a balancing selection regime.

One way to circumvent this problem is based on the
notion that while demography affects genetic diversity at
the level of the whole genome, natural selection speciﬁcally
acts on the frequency of single targeted sites or regions.
Empirical strategies are often adopted by highlighting
genes or SNPs that are outliers in the genome-wide distri-
bution for a speciﬁc summary statistics. For instance, genes
that show a degree of population genetic differentiation
above the 99th percentile of the empirical distribution
may be good candidates for genes under positive selection.
In addition to this ranking based on their selection test
statistics, enrichment for speciﬁc biological processes or
molecular
test
whether selection is targeting a particular class of loci or
domains.

performed

functions

usually

to

is

use,

such

Despite

their widespread

empirical
approaches are unable both to statistically test for selection
and to estimate the fraction of the genome under positive
selection (Kelley et al., 2006). A valid alternative would be
to explicitly model human demographic history:
the
inclusion of demographic parameters, such as population
size changes or migration rates, allows simulating genetic
data that mimic the expectations under neutral evolution.
Statistics computed for a gene are then compared to such
simulated neutral distribution to assess statistical signiﬁ-
cance for the rejection of null hypothesis of no selection
acting. This approach has become popular with recent
progress in methods allowing to simulate large genetic data
in a reasonably short computation time (Yuan et al., 2012).
Moreover, several demographic models for human evolu-
tion have been proposed, enabling their use in the context
of testing for positive selection at the level of the gene
(Gutenkunst et al., 2009; Harris and Nielsen, 2013).

182 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

Classic cases of selective sweeps from de novo
mutations have been shown to be less common than
previously hypothesized (Hernandez et al., 2011). Instead,
selection acting on preexisting mutations might be a more
effective mechanism for genetic adaptation to novel
environments (Pritchard et al., 2010). Positive selection on
standing variation is more challenging to identify as its
footprints depend on various parameters, such as the time
of onset and initial allele frequency of the beneﬁcial mu-
tation (Wilson et al., 2014). Similarly, when multiple
beneﬁcial alleles rise in frequency, a scenario called soft
sweeps, the unusual haplotype pattern generated does not
lead to straightforward genomic signatures of natural
selection (Garud et al., 2015; Garud and Rosenberg, 2015).
Statistical methods based on simulating large-scale genetic
data under a wide spectrum of evolutionary parameters may
help unveiling such complex selection signatures (Peter
et al., 2012).

studies

aiming

Regardless

of methodology,

at
detecting signals of natural
selection in the human
genome share the ultimate goal of pinpointing functional
variants to be prioritized for further in vitro/vivo experi-
ments or targeted association studies (Grossman et al.,
2013). Indeed, functional analyses are the only way to
deﬁnitely identify the causal allele behind a phenotype of
interest.

Resources Available: Data Sets and
Bioinformatic Tools
Historically, the detection of signatures of natural selection
has been hampered by the lack of extensive population
genetic data. Limited sequencing data for
few genes
allowed the description of a handful of cases of adaptive
evolution in the human genome (Akey, 2009). However,
since the completion of the Human Genome Project in 2001
(Lander et al., 2001), our understanding of human genetic
diversity has steadily increased. With the continuous
technological advancement, researchers can now rely on a
wide range of data sets of human genome variability, each
one with its beneﬁts and drawbacks.

The ﬁrst genome-wide scans for positive selection in the
human genome were based on the analysis of SNP data, a
collection of pre-chosen sites genotyped in a large sample
from different geographical locations. Widely used data
sets within this context are the HapMap Consortium data
collection (International HapMap 3 Consortium et al.,
2010; International HapMap Consortium et al., 2007) and
resource (Cann et al., 2002;
the HGDP-CEPH Panel
Rosenberg, 2006). These data sets
from an
intrinsic bias, as genotyped SNPs are based on previously
characterized polymorphisms,
they do not represent an
unbiased sample of the overall genomic diversity (Clark
et al., 2005).

suffer

Conversely, sequencing projects, such as the NHLBI-
Exome Sequencing Project have the ability to recover
unbiased allelic variation across the vast majority of genes
(Fu et al., 2013). With the introduction of high-throughput
sequencing machines (Metzker, 2010), complete whole-
genome sequences of multiple individuals allow the
identiﬁcation of rare and population-speciﬁc genetic var-
iants in the human genome. For instance, the 1000 Ge-
nomes Project characterized more than 50 million SNPs
from whole-genome sequencing data of more than 1000
individuals (1000 Genomes Project Consortium et al.,
2015, 2012, 2010), and the database is continuously
growing.

While the large volume of sequence data generated by
modern sequencing technologies is undoubtedly attractive,
there are several challenging issues associated to such data.
The data ﬁles generated are huge and the development of ad
hoc computational tools is required to properly process the
information (Nielsen et al., 2011). Despite these limitations,
large-scale genomic data produced by high-throughput
sequencing machines provide researchers with the oppor-
tunity to unveil signatures of natural selection in the
genome of different human populations at an unprece-
dentedly ﬁne-scale resolution.

SIGNATURES OF PATHOGEN-DRIVEN
NATURAL SELECTION IN THE HUMAN
GENOME

The Selective Pressure Imposed by
Pathogens
By using the aforementioned methods and data sets,
genome-wide scans for signatures of natural selection in the
human genome identiﬁed genes under nonneutral evolution
associated to particular biological pathways. For instance,
loci
and
pigmentation are often found to have been targeted by
positive selection in human populations, as a consequence
of adaptation to lifestyle (eg, diet) (Bersaglieri et al., 2004;
Tishkoff et al., 2007) and environment (eg, UV light
exposure) (Wilde et al., 2014).

in metabolism-related

processes

involved

Moreover, extensive signatures of adaptive evolution
are also often detected in immunity-related genes (Barreiro
and Quintana-Murci, 2010). This observation conﬁrms an
old hypothesis of pathogens having imposed strong selec-
tive pressure throughout human evolution. Adaptation to
infectious agents has left remarkably many genomic foot-
prints and shaped genetic variation across many loci in the
human genome (Daub et al., 2013; Fumagalli et al., 2011).
Furthermore,
signatures of pathogen-driven selection
(where infective agents represent the most likely selective
pressure) have been identiﬁed in genes not strictly related to
immune defense as well (Ferrer-Admetlla et al., 2009).

Natural Selection and Infectious Diseases Chapter | 11 183

The idea that infectious pathogens acted as the strongest
selective force on human populations is perhaps not
entirely surprising.
Infectious diseases have exerted a
terrible toll on human populations until recently and are still
responsible for considerable loss of
life. Childhood
diseases, acting prior to reproductive age, in particular,
represented a very strong and constant selective pressure
(Galvani and Slatkin, 2003). These selective pressures were
not constant over space and time. The maintenance of many
epidemic infectious diseases is dependent on host popula-
tion density (May and Anderson, 1983) and human
populations at higher densities have historically paid a
higher burden.

The distribution of pathogens is also highly heteroge-
neous in space. The highest diversity of human infectious
diseases is found close to the equator (Guernier et al.,
2004). Human migrations have also led to a complex
dynamics of loss and gain of speciﬁc pathogens. For
example, the early colonizers of the Americas came from
Asia through the Bering Strait, which is too far north to
allow malaria parasites to fulﬁll its cycle in mosquitoes. As
such, early settlers of the Americas were not affected by
malaria, which only arrived later with the European
colonization and the slave trade (Yalcindag et al., 2012).
Conversely, many novel zoonotic diseases started infecting
humans as our ancestors ventured further into various
regions of the world, and interestingly, the region of the
world with the largest number of endemic infectious
diseases is Central America (Prugnolle et al., 2005).
Pathogens are therefore responsible for exerting a contin-
uous and at the same time variable pressure during human
evolution. The effects of pathogen-driven selection on the
human genome are highly variable and depend on a host of
factors (Novembre and Han, 2012).

Evolution of the Adaptive Immune System
Arguably the most notable example of pathogen-driven
selection in the human genome is the case of the MHC,
also referred to as the HLA system. The human MHC is
located on the short arm of chromosome 6, spanning a large
region of around four mega base pairs and including more
than 100 genes. Not only are most of the MHC genes
involved in the immune system, but they also are key
players in the adaptive immune response. Indeed, T cells,
triggered from cell signals of altered function or infection,
participate in the lysis of the infected cell or the secretion of
cytokines to activate other immune cells. However, T
lymphocytes can recognize pathogen peptides only when
bound with a speciﬁc MHC molecule.

Genes in the HLA system, along with their interactors,
are highly polymorphic: more than 2000 alleles have been
described for the two most variable genes, HLA-A and
HLA-B (Meyer and Thomson, 2001). High levels of

polymorphisms in the human MHC can be interpreted in a
functional context: individuals who are heterozygote at the
MHC genes have the opportunity to respond to a broader
range of
infective agents, since speciﬁc MHC-peptide
combinations are needed to activate an immune response
(Qutob et al., 2012).

The observation that the enrichment of polymorphic
sites and high-frequency alleles in the HLA genes has a
functional role raises the question of whether such patterns
of genetic diversity are expected under neutral evolution or
are the results of a selective process. Several
lines of
evidence suggest that the high genetic diversity in HLA
genes has been maintained by natural
selection in
humans (Meyer et al., 2006). For instance, an excess of
nonsynonymous (and thus functional) substitutions occur-
ring in the functional region for antigen binding compared
to synonymous (and thus silent) substitutions indicates that
natural
these
functional changes at the protein level (Hughes and Nei,
1989).

selection favored the maintenance of

Perhaps the strongest argument for the action of selec-
tion in the HLA gene is the presence of multiple trans-
speciﬁc polymorphisms
shared between humans and
chimpanzees (Azevedo et al., 2015). The age of these
alleles has been estimated to predate the divergence time
between human and chimpanzee. For this reason, trans-
speciﬁc polymorphisms are unlikely to occur under
neutrality and are a typical hallmark of long-term balancing
selection (Charlesworth, 2006). Overdominance, or het-
erozygote advantage, is the most likely cause for the onset
of balancing selection in the HLA genes (Penn et al., 2002).
Finally, since pathogens are expected to vary in
number across geographical locations, identifying alleles,
which correlate in frequency with the local pathogen load,
is a useful strategy to test for pathogen-driven selection in
the human MHC. Following this reasoning, populations
from areas with high pathogen diversity are expected to
harbor an increased HLA genetic diversity as
such
individuals would be able to cope with a broader range of
pathogens. The proportion of HLA diversity, which is not
explained by demographic factors,
is signiﬁcantly and
positively correlated with pathogen richness, a measure for
the abundance of different pathogenic species
in a
geographical
location (Prugnolle et al., 2005). Human
populations exposed to a more diverse spectrum of
pathogens exhibit higher HLA diversity than those exposed
to fewer pathogens. This suggests that the high levels of
HLA genetic diversity are primarily maintained by
pathogen-driven balancing selection.

Balancing selection is a major force shaping the genetic
diversity of immune-related genes even outside the HLA
region. As an illustration,
two common haplotypes in
TAP2, a gene encoding for a protein which forms a trans-
porter complex involved in the translocation of antigenic

184 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

peptides, have been maintained in humans by balancing
selection (Cagliani et al., 2011). The putative causal vari-
ants targeted by selection affect TAP2 splicing, suggesting
that balancing selection acted to maintain different isoforms
of TAP2, presumably to increase the ability to respond to a
larger set of pathogens (Cagliani et al., 2011).

Evolution of the Innate Immune System
The innate immune system is the other important compo-
nent of the host defense and interaction between host and
microbiota. The innate system constitutes the ﬁrst barrier of
immunity and precedes the adaptive immune response:
changes at the innate immunity level inﬂuence the B and
T cells activation at the adaptive system level. Toll-like
receptors
(TLR), RIG-I-like receptors, and NOD-like
receptors are part of the innate immunity system among
others. These receptors induce the activation of effector
molecules, such as interferons, which eliminate pathogenic
agents.

Innate immunity genes evolved under a complex
dynamic, with several genes targeted by negative purifying
selection and others following a scenario of relaxation of
constraints
(Quintana-Murci and Clark, 2013). TLRs
comprise a wide variety of molecules, mainly divided in
those expressed on the cell surface, and those expressed
within the cell. Cell-surface TLRs exhibit high levels of
nucleotide diversity presumably due to relaxation of
functional constraints (or balancing selection). On the other
hand, within-cell TLRs are targeted by purifying selection,
where even mildly damaging mutations are rapidly
removed from the population. Finally, TLRs activate
signaling pathways mediated by the toll/interleukin-1 re-
ceptor
(TIR)-containing adapters, which are another
example of targets for positive selection in human pop-
ulations (Fornarino et al., 2011). Similar to TLRs, the ge-
netic variation at human defensins, a gene family with a
wide spectrum of antimicrobial activities, has been shaped
by events of purifying, positive, and balancing selection
(Cagliani et al., 2008; Hollox and Armour, 2008). Overall,
the complex selection patterns in the innate immunity
molecules indicate the need to maintain their functionality,
allowing, in some cases, for an increased genetic diversity
to provide a rapid and effective response to a wide spec-
trum of pathogens (Ferrer-Admetlla et al., 2008).

Pathogen-Driven Selection Outside the
Immune System
In the late 1940s, J. B. S. Haldane, a pioneer in many
ﬁelds of science including genetics, ﬁrst hypothesized that
infectious diseases have exerted a major burden on humans,
the selective pressure imposed by pathogenic
and that
agents might be responsible for
the maintenance of

in current human populations
deleterious mutations
(Haldane, 1949). He suggested that
the prevalence of
thalassemia, a blood disorder widespread in Mediterranean
regions, resulted from the selective pressure imposed by
malaria (Haldane, 1949).

The speciﬁc example pointed out by Haldane highlights
link between an infectious agent (the malaria-
a direct
causing agent P.
falciparum) and natural selection in
human genes. The allele that causes the defective hemo-
globin is maintained in the population by balancing selec-
tion at a frequency of 10% in regions with a high
prevalence of P. falciparum, with heterozygous individuals
having a reduced risk of developing severe malaria. This
case further points to an important observation about
pathogen-driven selection as thalassemia is caused by
mutations in globin genes, which do not encode immune
response effectors: pathogen-driven selection does not
solely target immune-related genes. Perhaps one of the
most striking examples of pathogen-driven selection genes
not directly linked to immune functions is the case of blood
group antigen (BGA) genes.

In humans, 29 blood group systems have been identi-
ﬁed, each one speciﬁed by a BGA constituted by a protein
or carbohydrate molecule expressed on the membrane of
the erythrocyte. For most systems, the molecular bases are
known with polymorphisms accounting for the individual
blood group phenotype (Blumenfeld and Patnaik, 2004).
BGA genes belong to different functional categories, such
as receptors, transporters, channels, adhesion molecules,
and enzymes. The number of different alleles, including
missense or nonsense mutations, is highly variable among
BGA genes. BGA polymorphisms have been extensively
studied as their association with infections susceptibility
has been reported for several diseases, for instance with
malaria (Moulds and Moulds, 2000) and Norwalk virus
(Lindesmith et al., 2003). BGA genes have been frequently
targeted by pathogen-driven natural selection to maintain
variability at multiple loci (Fumagalli et al., 2009a).

The ABO blood group was one of the ﬁrst cases of
human polymorphisms ever identiﬁed, with a large vari-
ability of A and B blood group frequencies across human
populations. Human ABO genetic diversity is over an order
of magnitude higher than the genomic average polymorphic
rate (Calafell et al., 2008; Ségurel et al., 2012). Moreover,
multiple common haplotypes are maintained in human
populations, as a consequence of high genetic diversity
promoting haplotypic differentiation (Fig. 11.2). In other
primates (such as chimpanzees and orangutans) ABO
antigens are also highly polymorphic, with the same two
amino acid changes responsible for A and B blood group
phenotypes. A and B blood groups result from a trans-
speciﬁc polymorphism that has been selectively main-
tained for over 20 million years (Ségurel et al., 2012).
Trans-speciﬁc polymorphisms are rare outside the MHC

Natural Selection and Infectious Diseases Chapter | 11 185

FIGURE 11.2 Network of ABO haplotypes in human populations. A median-joining network of ABO haplotypes in distinct human macro-
populations is shown. Each circle represents a distinct haplotype with size proportional (in log2 scale for graphic purposes) to its frequency, and it is
color-coded according to its frequency in the following populations: Africans (AFR), Americans (AMR), East Asians (EAS), Europeans (EUR), and South
Asians (SAS). Haplotypes are connected by arcs whose lengths are proportional to how many mutations separate them. Haplotypes were extracted from
the 1000 Genomes Project database and only coding mutations (either missense or nonsense) were retained.

system and are a hallmark of long-term balancing selection.
The long-standing selective pressure on ABO is at least
partially explained by adaptation to pathogens, as ABO
blood groups modulate the susceptibility to several patho-
gens, including P. falciparum, H. pylori, and V. cholerae
(Borén et al., 1993; Moulds et al., 1996).

The expression of ABO antigens in secretions depends
on the action of a fucosyltransferase encoded by FUT2
gene. FUT2 antigens belong to the Lewis blood group
system. A common FUT2 null allele is responsible for most
nonsecretor phenotypes in Europe and Africa, while a
missense allele is common in East Asians (Koda et al.,
2001). Homozygous individuals for
the null variants
present the nonsecretor phenotype, which means that they
cannot express ABO antigens in secretions. While most
FUT2 variants have been subjected to a long history of
balancing
and African
populations, one novel variant is spreading fast in East
Asia due to positive selection (Ferrer-Admetlla et al.,
2009). Nevertheless, selection on FUT2 is at least partially
pathogen-driven.

among Eurasian

selection

Adaptation to Local Pathogenic
Environments
Different kinds of pathogens (viruses, protozoa, helminths)
are expected to affect a different
range of biological
pathways. Viruses have exerted a continuous selective
pressure on human genes throughout evolution, as some
have affected humans even before they emerged as a spe-
cies. A substantial fraction of repeat elements in the human
genome (representing between 5% and 10% of the entire
sequence) is comprised by endogenous retroviruses left by
past infections (Lander et al., 2001).

few Genome-Wide Association Studies

Genetic adaptation to viruses is extremely challenging
due to the viruses’ fast evolutionary rate. Nevertheless, only
a
(GWAS)
identiﬁed mutations associated with increased susceptibility
to viral
infections, with most of the detected variants
located in the HLA region (Fellay et al., 2007). On the
other hand,
subjected to
virus-driven selective pressure led to the discovery of a
complex network enriched in viral products-interacting

the identiﬁcation of SNPs

186 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

proteins (Fumagalli et al., 2010a). Most of the genes
responsible for adaptation to viruses display very low
connectivity (and thus fewer interactions) with other genes,
in line with the observation that genes found on less-
connected nodes in networks are more likely to evolve
rapidly in response to changes
in the environment
(Fumagalli et al., 2010a).

to

In

human

resistance

populations,

infectious
diseases, and in particular to viral infections, is thought to
be under a complex and multigenic control with single
SNPs playing a small protective role. Despite the strong
selective pressure that viruses exerted, variants with a
well-established role in resistance to viral infections may be
evolving neutrally. This is the case for a deletion in the
CCR5 gene, the C-to-C chemokine receptor 5, where a
32-base pair deletion confers resistance to HIV in homo-
zygous carriers. The haplotype carrying the resistance
allele, which confers strong protection against HIV-1
infection and possibly against other pathogens, displays
no signature of selection (Sabeti et al., 2005). Nevertheless,
there are several examples of variants modulating virus
resistance being targeted by selection. Some of
these
examples involve variants associated with HIV progression
or multiple sclerosis,
like in the case of a zinc-ﬁnger
gene, ZC3HAV1, which exhibits one human-chimpanzee
trans-speciﬁc polymorphism that modulates susceptibility
to multiple sclerosis in Europeans (Cagliani et al., 2012).
infection with protozoa, and
especially malaria parasites, has imposed strong selective
pressures. Malaria still exacts a huge toll on human health
with nearly 500 million people infected worldwide and
up to one million dying each year, most of them young
children. In the absence of any effective vaccine, antima-
larial drugs represent a major
to reduce malaria
incidence and eventually eradicate the disease. However,
P. falciparum, the main malaria parasite, has the potential
to develop resistance to antimalarial drugs by evolutionary
adaptation. For all these reasons, malaria is considered to
exert one of the strongest selective pressures in the recent
history of humans (Kwiatkowski, 2005).

In addition to viruses,

tool

Indeed,

The high frequency of deleterious mutations

for
thalassemia in the Mediterranean region or sickle cell dis-
orders in African populations is the result of heterozygous
individuals being less susceptible to malaria (Ackerman
et al., 2005).
the malaria parasite binds to
molecules at the erythrocyte surface and enters the eryth-
rocyte initiating a cascade of events to escape from the
immune response. Two genes that carry an unusually high
extended haplotype homozygosity with putative malaria-
resistant mutations are G6PD and TNFSF5 (Sabeti et al.,
2002a). Such patterns of extended haplotypes with high
homozygosity are suggestive of the action of positive
selection. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (or G6PD)
is a well-known example of a gene carrying variants that

confer malaria resistance. A common variant in this gene
confers partial protection against malaria, with a 50%
reduction in disease risk (Tishkoff et al., 2001). TNFSF5 is
the CD40 ligand gene, which has a common variant in the
promoter
region associated with a steady decrease of
malaria infection (Sabeti et al., 2002b).

Infections by helminths (parasitic worms) represent a
heavy burden on humans. Two billion individuals are
infected worldwide and helminths are responsible for the
highest prevalence of chronic infectious diseases (Hotez
et al., 2008). Despite parasitic worms leading to severe
clinical symptoms only in a minority of heavily infected
individuals, even low exposure to parasite burdens can
result in impaired nutritional status and growth retardation.
Helminths evolve more slowly than viral agents and their
complex life cycle results in a stable temporal and
spatial geographical distribution (Dunne and Cooke,
2005). Among the most notable examples of loci targeted
by helminth-driven selection are the interleukin and their
receptors genes, and genes involved in cytokine-mediated
inﬂammation and integrin signaling (Fumagalli et al.,
2010b, 2009b).

EVOLUTIONARY CAUSES OF
SUSCEPTIBILITY TO INFECTIOUS
DISEASES
Viruses and protozoa shaped the genetic resistance to
several infectious diseases, including malaria and multiple
sclerosis (Karlsson et al., 2014). In the case of helminths,
which affect the genetic variability at inﬂammatory-related
genes (Fumagalli et al., 2010b), the link between adaptation
and predisposition to disease is more complex and
interesting from an evolutionary point of view. Indeed, the
incidence of most allergies and chronic inﬂammatory
diseases has increased in the industrialized world. The
so-called “hygiene hypothesis” was formulated to explain
this observation (Sironi and Clerici, 2010).

the

that

states

changes

The hypothesis

reduced exposure of

the environment. This

in the
environmental conditions and in the healthcare system in
the industrialized world have resulted in higher sterilization
of
the
immune system to pathogens leads to an imbalance in
immune responses that favors the development of chronic
inﬂammatory disease (Bufford and Gern, 2005). The
hygiene hypothesis was ﬁrst formulated by epidemiologists
who observed that atopic diseases were less frequent in
families with a larger number of siblings, children who
attended day care centers, and individuals who grew up in
the countryside. These observations led to the idea that
dirtier environments may have a protective effect toward
the development of autoimmune diseases and allergies.

From an immunological point of view, the T regulatory
cells are responsible for the regulation of the homeostasis of

the immune system, allowing the removal of invaders,
but preventing the immune-mediated attack of the host.
Alterations of such cells bring an inﬂammatory response,
favoring the onset of autoimmune conditions (Sironi and
Clerici, 2010).

Several reports have suggested that a portion of sus-
ceptibility alleles for autoimmune diseases might be
maintained in human populations because they confer
increased resistance against
infection. Among the best
candidate genes, several loci targeted by selection have
been associated with celiac disease, ulcerative colitis, type
1 diabetes, Crohn’s disease, and multiples
sclerosis
(Cagliani et al., 2013; Karlsson et al., 2014). Therefore, the
identiﬁcation
genes
targeted by natural selection is at least consistent with the
hygiene hypothesis.

diseaseerelated

of

autoimmune

While risk alleles are often shared among different
autoimmune diseases, some alleles predispose to one
condition but protect against another disorder (Cagliani
et al., 2011). One possibility for the maintenance of these
potentially deleterious alleles is that they confer some other
advantage,
therefore resulting in a balancing selection
regime, or that a fraction of these variants has behaved
neutrally during most of human history because past
environmental conditions did not predispose to a disease
(Cagliani et al., 2011).

The removal of several pathogens from our environ-
ment might have activated many alleles that were once
balanced or neutral but are deleterious today. In this
evolutionary perspective, population genetics
studies
represent a powerful approach to pinpoint candidate
variants harboring autoimmune disease susceptibility.

FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
Over the last decades, GWAS has become the standard
approach to characterize the genetic basis of phenotypes of
interest (Welter et al., 2014). This methodology compares
the allele frequency over a large number of loci in a vast
number of cases and controls, which are matched as well as
possible for confounding variables such as age, sex, or
ethnic origin. GWAS have not been particularly successful
for detecting variants involved in susceptibility or resis-
tance to infectious diseases (Hill, 2012). This is partly
due to the difﬁculty of recruiting sufﬁciently large and well-
controlled cohorts of patients for infectious diseases, which
tend to be far more transient than chronic diseases. An
additional complication is that pathogens are themselves
often extremely genetically diverse and different strains or
lineages can differ
is
interesting in this context that arguably the most successful
GWAS for infectious diseases was on leprosy (Liu et al.,
2015; Zhang et al., 2009), which is possibly the least
genetically variable human pathogen, with only a few SNPs

in virulence and symptoms.

It

Natural Selection and Infectious Diseases Chapter | 11 187

differentiating strains from different continents (Monot
et al., 2009; Singh et al., 2015).

To circumvent the limitations of GWAS in the ﬁeld of
infectious diseases, researchers have adopted alternative
strategies
to link genetic with functional variation.
Genome-wide scans for selection identiﬁed hundreds of
regions putatively carrying variants targeted by positive
selection (Akey, 2009). However, only a few studies aimed
at characterizing the impact of such selected variants and,
for the majority of cases, the functional role of adaptive
variants, has not been elucidated.

Researchers are now tackling the issue of identifying
functional variants by adopting an integrative approach.
Sites predicted to be under selection could then be tested
for molecular functionality using gene annotation, protein
structure, epigenetics, and genetic association data. The
resulting causal variant will
then be prioritized and
selected for an experimental follow-up. In 2013, Gross-
man and coworkers selected a few candidate variants from
a list of almost 500 regions under selection in human
populations (Grossman et al., 2013). They produced a
shorter
list of candidate variants by using functional
annotation, giving priority to coding and regulatory mu-
tations as well as noncoding RNAs and sites associated
with a variety of phenotypes. One of the variants is
located in the toll-like receptor 5 (TLR5), which plays a
role in the innate immune system. Their scan for selection
identiﬁed a nonsynonymous variant highly conserved in
the primate lineage. Authors then experimentally charac-
terized this candidate variant in TLR5, and showed that it
leads to altered proinﬂammatory signaling in response to
stimulation with bacterial ﬂagellin (Grossman et al.,
2013).

This example shows how research is moving from a
pure computational prediction of selection targets at the
genome-wide level, to deep analysis of a few candidate
variants which can be functionally characterized by in vitro
or in vivo experiments. This integrative approach appears
to be particularly promising for polymorphisms affecting
susceptibility to infectious diseases, since resistance to
the coevolution
pathogenic infections (and in general
between humans and pathogens) is thought
to involve
complex and nonstable genetic patterns, which would be
hard to capture with traditional association studies.

REFERENCES

Ackerman, H., Usen, S., Jallow, M., et al., 2005. A comparison of case-
the example of

control and family-based association methods:
sickle-cell and malaria. Annals of Human Genetics 69, 559e565.

Akey, J.M., 2009. Constructing genomic maps of positive selection in
humans: where do we go from here? Genome Research 19, 711e722.
Alonso, S., Izagirre, N., Smith-Zubiaga, I., et al., 2008. Complex signa-
tures of selection for the melanogenic loci TYR, TYRP1 and DCT in
humans. BMC Evolutionary Biology 8, 74.

188 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

Andrés, A.M., Hubisz, M.J., Indap, A., et al., 2009. Targets of balancing
selection in the human genome. Molecular Biology and Evolution 26,
2755e2764.

Clark, A.G., Hubisz, M.J., Bustamante, C.D., Williamson, S.H.,
Nielsen, R., 2005. Ascertainment bias in studies of human genome-
wide polymorphism. Genome Research 15, 1496e1502.

Azevedo, L., Serrano, C., Amorim, A., Cooper, D.N., 2015. Trans-species
polymorphism in humans and the great apes is generally maintained
by balancing selection that modulates the host immune response.
Human Genomics 9, 21.

Balaresque, P.L., Ballereau, S.J., Jobling, M.A., 2007. Challenges in hu-
man genetic diversity: demographic history and adaptation. Human
Molecular Genetics 16 (Spec. No. 2), R134eR139.

Balding, D.J., 2003. Likelihood-based inference for genetic correlation

coefﬁcients. Theoretical Population Biology 63, 221e230.

Coop, G., Witonsky, D., Di Rienzo, A., Pritchard, J.K., 2010. Using
environmental correlations to identify loci underlying local adaptation.
Genetics 185, 1411e1423.

Daub, J.T., Hofer, T., Cutivet, E., et al., 2013. Evidence for polygenic
adaptation to pathogens in the human genome. Molecular Biology and
Evolution 30, 1544e1558.

DeGiorgio, M., Lohmueller, K.E., Nielsen, R., 2014. A model-based
approach for identifying signatures of ancient balancing selection in
genetic data. PLOS Genetics 10, e1004561.

Barreiro, L.B., Laval, G., Quach, H., Patin, E., Quintana-Murci, L., 2008.
Natural selection has driven population differentiation in modern
humans. Nature Genetics 40, 340e345.

Dunne, D.W., Cooke, A., 2005. A worm’s eye view of the immune sys-
tem: consequences for evolution of human autoimmune disease. Na-
ture Reviews Immunology 5, 420e426.

Barreiro, L.B., Quintana-Murci, L., 2010. From evolutionary genetics to
human immunology: how selection shapes host defence genes. Nature
Reviews Genetics 11, 17e30.

Benedictow, O.J., 2004. The Black Death, 1346e1353: The Complete

Faria, N.R., Rambaut, A., Suchard, M.A., et al., 2014. The early spread
and epidemic ignition of HIV-1 in human populations. Science 346,
56e61.

Fay, J.C., Wu, C.I., 2000. Hitchhiking under positive Darwinian selection.

History. Boydell Press.

Genetics 155, 1405e1413.

Bersaglieri, T., Sabeti, P.C., Patterson, N., et al., 2004. Genetic signatures
the lactase gene. American

of strong recent positive selection at
Journal of Human Genetics 74, 1111e1120.

Fellay, J., Shianna, K.V., Ge, D., et al., 2007. A whole-genome association
study of major determinants for host control of HIV-1. Science 317,
944e947.

Blumenfeld, O.O., Patnaik, S.K., 2004. Allelic genes of blood group an-
tigens: a source of human mutations and cSNPs documented in the
Blood Group Antigen Gene Mutation Database. Human Mutation 23,
8e16.

Ferrer-Admetlla, A., Bosch, E., Sikora, M., et al., 2008. Balancing se-
lection is the main force shaping the evolution of innate immunity
genes.
Immunology (Baltimore, MD) 1950 (181),
1315e1322.

Journal of

Borén, T., Falk, P., Roth, K.A., Larson, G., Normark, S., 1993. Attach-
ment of Helicobacter pylori to human gastric epithelium mediated by
blood group antigens. Science 262, 1892e1895.

Ferrer-Admetlla, A., Sikora, M., Laayouni, H., et al., 2009. A natural
history of FUT2 polymorphism in humans. Molecular Biology and
Evolution 26, 1993e2003.

Bufford, J.D., Gern, J.E., 2005. The hygiene hypothesis revisited. Immu-

nology and Allergy Clinics of North America 25, 247e262 vevi.

Cagliani, R., Fumagalli, M., Biasin, M., et al., 2010. Long-term balancing
selection maintains trans-speciﬁc polymorphisms in the human
TRIM5 gene. Human Genetics 128, 577e588.

Cagliani, R., Fumagalli, M., Riva, S., et al., 2008. The signature of long-
standing balancing selection at the human defensin beta-1 promoter.
Genome Biology 9, R143.

Cagliani, R., Guerini, F.R., Fumagalli, M., et al., 2012. A trans-speciﬁc
polymorphism in ZC3HAV1 is maintained by long-standing
balancing selection and may confer susceptibility to multiple scle-
rosis. Molecular Biology and Evolution 29, 1599e1613.

Cagliani, R., Pozzoli, U., Forni, D., et al., 2013. Crohn’s disease loci are
common targets of protozoa-driven selection. Molecular Biology and
Evolution 30, 1077e1087.

Cagliani, R., Riva, S., Pozzoli, U., et al., 2011. Balancing selection is
common in the extended MHC region but most alleles with opposite
risk proﬁle for autoimmune diseases are neutrally evolving. BMC
Evolutionary Biology 11, 171.

Calafell, F., Roubinet, F., Ramírez-Soriano, A., et al., 2008. Evolutionary
dynamics of the human ABO gene. Human Genetics 124, 123e135.
Cann, H.M., de Toma, C., Cazes, L., et al., 2002. A human genome di-

versity cell line panel. Science 296, 261e262.

Cavalli-Sforza, L.L., Menozzi, P., Piazza, A., 1994. The History and

Geography of Human Genes. Princeton University Press.

Charlesworth, D., 2006. Balancing selection and its effects on sequences in

nearby genome regions. PLOS Genetics 2, e64.

Fornarino, S., Laval, G., Barreiro, L.B., et al., 2011. Evolution of the
TIR domain-containing adaptors in humans: swinging between
constraint and adaptation. Molecular Biology and Evolution 28,
3087e3097.

Frichot, E., Schoville, S.D., Bouchard, G., François, O., 2013. Testing for
associations between loci and environmental gradients using latent
factor mixed models. Molecular Biology and Evolution 30,
1687e1699.

Fumagalli, M., Cagliani, R., Pozzoli, U., et al., 2009a. Widespread
balancing selection and pathogen-driven selection at blood group
antigen genes. Genome Research 19, 199e212.

Fumagalli, M., Pozzoli, U., Cagliani, R., et al., 2010a. Genome-wide
identiﬁcation of susceptibility alleles for viral infections through a
population genetics approach. PLOS Genetics 6, e1000849.

Fumagalli, M., Pozzoli, U., Cagliani, R., et al., 2010b. The landscape of
human genes involved in the immune response to parasitic worms.
BMC Evolutionary Biology 10, 264.

Fumagalli, M., Pozzoli, U., Cagliani, R., et al., 2009b. Parasites represent a
major selective force for interleukin genes and shape the genetic
predisposition to autoimmune conditions. Journal of Experimental
Medicine 206, 1395e1408.

Fumagalli, M., Sironi, M., 2014. Human genome variability, natural se-
lection and infectious diseases. Current Opinion In Immunology 30,
9e16.

Fumagalli, M., Sironi, M., Pozzoli, U., et al., 2011. Signatures of envi-
ronmental genetic adaptation pinpoint pathogens as the main selective
pressure through human evolution. PLOS Genetics 7, e1002355.

Natural Selection and Infectious Diseases Chapter | 11 189

Fu, W., O’Connor, T.D., Jun, G., et al., 2013. Analysis of 6,515 exomes
reveals the recent origin of most human protein-coding variants. Na-
ture 493, 216e220.

Fu, Y.X., Li, W.H., 1993. Statistical tests of neutrality of mutations. Ge-

netics 133, 693e709.

Harris, K., Nielsen, R., 2013. Inferring demographic history from a
spectrum of shared haplotype lengths. PLOS Genetics 9, e1003521.
Hernandez, R.D., Kelley, J.L., Elyashiv, E., et al., 2011. Classic
selective sweeps were rare in recent human evolution. Science 331,
920e924.

Genomes Project Consortium, Abecasis, G.R., Altshuler, D., et al., 2010.
A map of human genome variation from population-scale sequencing.
Nature 467, 1061e1073.

Hill, A.V.S., 2012. Evolution, revolution and heresy in the genetics of
infectious disease susceptibility. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society of London B Biological Sciences 367, 840e849.

Genomes Project Consortium, Abecasis, G.R., Auton, A., et al., 2012. An
integrated map of genetic variation from 1,092 human genomes.
Nature 491, 56e65.

Genomes Project Consortium, Auton, A., Brooks, L.D., et al., 2015.
A global reference for human genetic variation. Nature 526, 68e74.
Galvani, A.P., Slatkin, M., 2003. Evaluating plague and smallpox as
historical selective pressures for the CCR5-D32 HIV-resistance allele.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 100, 15276e15279.

Gao, Z., Przeworski, M., Sella, G., 2015. Footprints of ancient-balanced
polymorphisms in genetic variation data from closely related spe-
cies. Evolution:
International Journal of Organic Evolution 69,
431e446.

Garud, N.R., Messer, P.W., Buzbas, E.O., Petrov, D.A., 2015. Recent
selective sweeps in north American Drosophila melanogaster show
signatures of soft sweeps. PLOS Genetics 11, e1005004.

Garud, N.R., Rosenberg, N.A., 2015. Enhancing the mathematical prop-
erties of new haplotype homozygosity statistics for the detection of
selective sweeps. Theoretical Population Biology 102, 94e101.

Gerbault, P., 2013. The onset of lactase persistence in Europe. Human

Heredity 76, 154e161.

Grossman, S.R., Andersen, K.G., Shlyakhter, I., et al., 2013. Identifying

recent adaptations in large-scale genomic data. Cell 152, 703e713.

Grossman, S.R., Shlyakhter, I., Karlsson, E.K., et al., 2010. A composite
of multiple signals distinguishes causal variants in regions of positive
selection. Science 327, 883e886.

Guernier, V., Hochberg, M.E., Guégan, J.-F., 2004. Ecology drives the

worldwide distribution of human diseases. PLoS Biology 2, e141.

Gutenkunst, R.N., Hernandez, R.D., Williamson, S.H., Bustamante, C.D.,
2009. Inferring the joint demographic history of multiple populations
from multidimensional SNP frequency data. PLOS Genetics 5,
e1000695.

Hollox, E.J., Armour, J.A.L., 2008. Directional and balancing selection in

human beta-defensins. BMC Evolutionary Biology 8, 113.

Hotez, P.J., Brindley, P.J., Bethony, J.M., et al., 2008. Helminth in-
fections: the great neglected tropical diseases. The Journal of Clinical
Investigation 118, 1311e1321.

Hudson, R.R., Kreitman, M., Aguadé, M., 1987. A test of neutral
molecular evolution based on nucleotide data. Genetics 116,
153e159.

Huerta-Sánchez, E., Jin, X., Asan, et al., 2014. Altitude adaptation in
Tibetans caused by introgression of Denisovan-like DNA. Nature 512,
194e197.

Hughes, A.L., Nei, M., 1989. Nucleotide substitution at major histocom-
patibility complex class II loci: evidence for overdominant selection.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 86, 958e962.

International HapMap 3 Consortium, Altshuler, D.M., Gibbs, R.A., et al.,
2010. Integrating common and rare genetic variation in diverse human
populations. Nature 467, 52e58.

International HapMap Consortium, Frazer, K.A., Ballinger, D.G., et al.,
2007. A second generation human haplotype map of over 3.1 million
SNPs. Nature 449, 851e861.

Izagirre, N., García, I., Junquera, C., de la Rúa, C., Alonso, S., 2006.
A scan for signatures of positive selection in candidate loci for skin
pigmentation in humans. Molecular Biology and Evolution 23,
1697e1706.

Karlsson, E.K., Kwiatkowski, D.P., Sabeti, P.C., 2014. Natural selection
and infectious disease in human populations. Nature Reviews Ge-
netics 15, 379e393.

Kelley, J.L., Madeoy, J., Calhoun, J.C., Swanson, W., Akey, J.M., 2006.
Genomic signatures of positive selection in humans and the limits of
outlier approaches. Genome Research 16, 980e989.

Kim, Y., Nielsen, R., 2004. Linkage disequilibrium as a signature of se-

Haldane, J.B.S., 1949. The rate of mutation of human genes. Hereditas 35,

lective sweeps. Genetics 167, 1513e1524.

267e273.

Hancock, A.M., Alkorta-Aranburu, G., Witonsky, D.B., Di Rienzo, A.,
2010. Adaptations to new environments in humans: the role of subtle
allele frequency shifts. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal So-
ciety of London B Biological Sciences 365, 2459e2468.

Hancock, A.M., Witonsky, D.B., Alkorta-Aranburu, G., et al., 2011. Ad-
aptations to climate-mediated selective pressures in humans. PLOS
Genetics 7, e1001375.

Hancock, A.M., Witonsky, D.B., Gordon, A.S., et al., 2008. Adaptations
to climate in candidate genes for common metabolic disorders. PLOS
Genetics 4, e32.

Koda, Y., Tachida, H., Pang, H., et al., 2001. Contrasting patterns of
polymorphisms at
the ABO-secretor gene (FUT2) and plasma
alpha(1,3)fucosyltransferase gene (FUT6) in human populations. Ge-
netics 158, 747e756.

Kosiol, C., Vinar, T., da Fonseca, R.R., et al., 2008. Patterns of positive
selection in six Mammalian genomes. PLOS Genetics 4, e1000144.
Kwiatkowski, D.P., 2005. How malaria has affected the human genome
and what human genetics can teach us about malaria. American
Journal of Human Genetics 77, 171e192.

Lander, E.S., Linton, L.M., Birren, B., et al., 2001. Initial sequencing and

analysis of the human genome. Nature 409, 860e921.

Hardy, K., Brand-Miller, J., Brown, K.D., Thomas, M.G., Copeland, L.,
2015. The importance of dietary carbohydrate in human evolution.
Quarterly Review of Biology 90, 251e268.

Lindblad-Toh, K., Garber, M., Zuk, O., et al., 2011. A high-resolution map
of human evolutionary constraint using 29 mammals. Nature 478,
476e482.

Harris, E.E., Meyer, D., 2006. The molecular signature of selection un-
derlying human adaptations. American Journal of Physical Anthro-
pology 43, 89e130.

Lindesmith, L., Moe, C., Marionneau, S., et al., 2003. Human suscepti-
bility and resistance to Norwalk virus infection. Nature Medicine 9,
548e553.

190 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

Liu, H., Irwanto, A., Fu, X., et al., 2015. Discovery of six new suscepti-
bility loci and analysis of pleiotropic effects in leprosy. Nature Ge-
netics 47, 267e271.

Pritchard, J.K., Pickrell, J.K., Coop, G., 2010. The genetics of human
adaptation: hard sweeps, soft sweeps, and polygenic adaptation.
Current Biology 20, R208eR215.

May, R.M., Anderson, R.M., 1983. Parasite host coevolution.

In:

Coevolution. Sinauer.

McDonald, J.H., Kreitman, M., 1991. Adaptive protein evolution at the

Adh locus in Drosophila. Nature 351, 652e654.

Messer, P.W., Petrov, D.A., 2013. Frequent adaptation and the McDonald-
Kreitman test. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 110, 8615e8620.

Metzker, M.L., 2010. Sequencing technologies - the next generation.

Nature Reviews Genetics 11, 31e46.

Prugnolle, F., Manica, A., Charpentier, M., et al., 2005. Pathogen-driven
selection and worldwide HLA class I diversity. Current Biology 15,
1022e1027.

Quintana-Murci, L., Clark, A.G., 2013. Population genetic tools for dis-
secting innate immunity in humans. Nature Reviews Immunology 13,
280e293.

Qutob, N., Balloux, F., Raj, T., et al., 2012. Signatures of historical
demography and pathogen richness on MHC class I genes. Immu-
nogenetics 64, 165e175.

Meyer, D., Single, R.M., Mack, S.J., Erlich, H.A., Thomson, G., 2006.
Signatures of demographic history and natural selection in the human
major histocompatibility complex Loci. Genetics 173, 2121e2142.

Raghavan, M., Steinrücken, M., Harris, K., et al., 2015. Genomic evidence
for the Pleistocene and recent population history of Native Americans.
Science 349, aab3884.

Meyer, D., Thomson, G., 2001. How selection shapes variation of the
human major histocompatibility complex: a review. Annals of Human
Genetics 65, 1e26.

Raj, S.M., Pagani, L., Gallego Romero, I., Kivisild, T., Amos, W., 2013.
linear model-based approach for inferring selection to

A general
climate. BMC Genetics 14, 87.

Monot, M., Honoré, N., Garnier, T., et al., 2009. Comparative genomic
and phylogeographic analysis of Mycobacterium leprae. Nature Ge-
netics 41, 1282e1289.

Reynolds, J., Weir, B.S., Cockerham, C.C., 1983. Estimation of the
coancestry coefﬁcient: basis for a short-term genetic distance. Ge-
netics 105, 767e779.

Moulds, J.M., Moulds, J.J., 2000. Blood group associations with parasites,

bacteria, and viruses. Transfusion Medicine Reviews 14, 302e311.

Moulds, J.M., Nowicki, S., Moulds, J.J., Nowicki, B.J., 1996. Human
blood groups: incidental receptors for viruses and bacteria. Trans-
fusion (Paris) 36, 362e374.

Nielsen, R., 2005. Molecular signatures of natural selection. Annual Re-

view of Genetics 39, 197e218.

Rosenberg, N.A., 2006. Standardized subsets of the HGDP-CEPH Human
Genome Diversity Cell Line Panel, accounting for atypical and
duplicated samples and pairs of close relatives. Annals of Human
Genetics 70, 841e847.

Sabeti, P.C., Reich, D.E., Higgins, J.M., et al., 2002a. Detecting recent
positive selection in the human genome from haplotype structure.
Nature 419, 832e837.

Nielsen, R., Paul, J.S., Albrechtsen, A., Song, Y.S., 2011. Genotype and
SNP calling from next-generation sequencing data. Nature Reviews
Genetics 12, 443e451.

Sabeti, P.C., Varilly, P., Fry, B., et al., 2007. Genome-wide detection and
characterization of positive selection in human populations. Nature
449, 913e918.

Nielsen, R., Williamson, S., Kim, Y., et al., 2005. Genomic scans for
selective sweeps using SNP data. Genome Research 15, 1566e1575.
Novembre, J., Di Rienzo, A., 2009. Spatial patterns of variation due to
natural selection in humans. Nature Reviews Genetics 10, 745e755.
Novembre, J., Han, E., 2012. Human population structure and the adaptive
response to pathogen-induced selection pressures. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London B Biological Sciences
367, 878e886.

Pagani, L., Schiffels, S., Gurdasani, D., et al., 2015. Tracing the route of
modern humans out of Africa by using 225 human genome sequences
from Ethiopians and Egyptians. American Journal of Human Genetics
96, 986e991.

Pavlidis, P., Zivkovic, D., Stamatakis, A., Alachiotis, N., 2013. SweeD:
likelihood-based detection of selective sweeps in thousands of ge-
nomes. Molecular Biology and Evolution 30, 2224e2234.

Sabeti, P.C., Walsh, E., Schaffner, S.F., et al., 2005. The case for selection

at CCR5-Delta32. PLoS Biology 3, e378.

Sabeti, P., Usen, S., Farhadian, S., et al., 2002b. CD40L association with

protection from severe malaria. Genes Immunology 3, 286e291.

Ségurel, L., Thompson, E.E., Flutre, T., et al., 2012. The ABO blood
group is a trans-species polymorphism in primates. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 109,
18493e18498.

Singh, P., Benjak, A., Schuenemann, V.J., et al., 2015. Insight into the
evolution and origin of leprosy bacilli from the genome sequence of
Mycobacterium lepromatosis. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America 112, 4459e4464.

Sironi, M., Clerici, M., 2010. The hygiene hypothesis: an evolutionary

perspective. Microbes and Infection/Institut Pasteur 12, 421e427.

Tajima, F., 1989. Statistical method for testing the neutral mutation hy-

Payseur, B.A., Nachman, M.W., 2002. Natural selection at linked sites in

pothesis by DNA polymorphism. Genetics 123, 585e595.

humans. Gene 300, 31e42.

Penn, D.J., Damjanovich, K., Potts, W.K., 2002. MHC heterozygosity
confers a selective advantage against multiple-strain infections. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 99, 11260e11264.

Peter, B.M., Huerta-Sanchez, E., Nielsen, R., 2012. Distinguishing be-
tween selective sweeps from standing variation and from a de novo
mutation. PLOS Genetics 8, e1003011.

Pollard, K.S., Hubisz, M.J., Rosenbloom, K.R., Siepel, A., 2010. Detec-
tion of nonneutral substitution rates on mammalian phylogenies.
Genome Research 20, 110e121.

Tang, K., Thornton, K.R., Stoneking, M., 2007. A new approach for using
genome scans to detect recent positive selection in the human genome.
PLoS Biology 5, e171.

Tishkoff, S.A., Reed, F.A., Ranciaro, A., et al., 2007. Convergent adap-
tation of human lactase persistence in Africa and Europe. Nature
Genetics 39, 31e40.

Tishkoff, S.A., Varkonyi, R., Cahinhinan, N., et al., 2001. Haplotype di-
versity and linkage disequilibrium at human G6PD: recent origin of
alleles that confer malarial resistance. Science 293, 455e462.

Voight, B.F., Kudaravalli, S., Wen, X., Pritchard, J.K., 2006. A map of
recent positive selection in the human genome. PLoS Biology 4, e72.

Natural Selection and Infectious Diseases Chapter | 11 191

Yalcindag, E., Elguero, E., Arnathau, C., et al., 2012. Multiple indepen-
dent
introductions of Plasmodium falciparum in South America.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 109, 511e516.

Yang, Z., Bielawski, J.P., 2000. Statistical methods for detecting molecular

adaptation. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 15, 496e503.

Yi, X., Liang, Y., Huerta-Sanchez, E., Jin, X., et al., 2010. Sequencing of
50 human exomes reveals adaptation to high altitude. Science 329,
75e78.

Yuan, X., Miller, D.J., Zhang, J., Herrington, D., Wang, Y., 2012. An
overview of population genetic data simulation. Journal of Compu-
tational Biology 19, 42e54.

Zhang, C., Bailey, D.K., Awad, T., et al., 2006. A whole genome long-
range haplotype (WGLRH) test for detecting imprints of positive
selection in human populations. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England) 22,
2122e2128.

Zhang, F.-R., Huang, W., Chen, S.-M., et al., 2009. Genomewide asso-
ciation study of leprosy. New England Journal of Medicine 361,
2609e2618.

Waldman, C., 2009. Atlas of the North American Indian. Checkmark

Books, New York.

Weir, B.S., Hill, W.G., 2002. Estimating F-statistics. Annual Review of

Genetics 36, 721e750.

Welter, D., MacArthur, J., Morales, J., et al., 2014. The NHGRI GWAS
Catalog, a curated resource of SNP-trait associations. Nucleic Acids
Research 42, D1001eD1006.

White, T.D., Asfaw, B., DeGusta, D., et al., 2003. Pleistocene Homo

sapiens from Middle Awash, Ethiopia. Nature 423, 742e747.

Wilde, S., Timpson, A., Kirsanow, K., et al., 2014. Direct evidence for
positive selection of skin, hair, and eye pigmentation in Europeans
during the last 5,000 y. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 111, 4832e4837.

Williams, G.C., 1975. Sex and Evolution. Princeton University Press,

Princeton, NJ.

Williamson, S.H., Hubisz, M.J., Clark, A.G., et al., 2007. Localizing
recent adaptive evolution in the human genome. PLOS Genetics 3,
e90.

Wilson, B.A., Petrov, D.A., Messer, P.W., 2014. Soft selective sweeps in

complex demographic scenarios. Genetics 198, 669e684.

Wright, S., 1951. The genetical structure of populations. Annals of Eu-

genics 15, 323e354.

Wright, S.I., Charlesworth, B., 2004. The HKA test revisited: a maximum-
likelihood-ratio test of the standard neutral model. Genetics 168,
1071e1076.

Chapter 12

Aging, Somatic Evolution, and Cancer

A.I. Rozhok and J. DeGregori
University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, United States

MULTICELLULARITY AND SOMATIC
EVOLUTION

While we can only speculate on the selective pressures that
drove the evolution of multicellular organisms (improved
predation, protection from predators, facilitated reproduc-
tion, etc.), it is clear that the evolution of multicellularity
drove cooperation of cells for a common purpose (ﬁtness),
and the differentiation of cells into different cell types with
speciﬁc functions in the body. Complex multicellular or-
ganisms, such as humans, consist of multiple functionally
specialized cell types that are organized in tissues, such as
epithelial layers or muscle. Tissues, in turn, are organized
into more complex structures called organs which typically
consist of several different
tissues types and serve for
speciﬁc body functions, such as food uptake, respiration, or
reproduction. Most cells in the human body are called so-
matic cells and only serve within a human lifespan, as
opposed to germ cells that give rise to gametes and are
passed on to develop the next generation of progeny.

For tissues such as the skin, gut, and blood system, each
specialized, or terminally differentiated, somatic cell typi-
cally cannot self-renew and serves its particular function for
a certain short period of time after which it dies and is
replaced by new cells. On the other hand, neuronal and
muscle cells (such as in the brain and heart, respectively)
are very long-lived (sometimes for the life of the organism);
still, these cells cannot self-renew. The ultimate source of
new cells in the body comes from cells that are capable of
multiple divisions and self-renewal, called stem cells. In
humans, like in other mammals, most types of stem cells
are known to divide, giving rise to two daughter cells, each
of which either remains a stem cell itself or commits to
differentiation with a certain probability. In this way, stem
cells serve two basic functions: they renew their own pool
of stem cells for a particular type of tissue, and they

maintain the tissue by supplying it with new differentiated
cells.

The evolution of cooperation among multiple highly
specialized cells and their stem cell compartments is real-
ized through germ cells, on which selection acts to favor
gamete combinations that harbor the most adaptive devel-
opmental programs for the multicellular organisms. Thus
the evolution of a multicellular body, the cells it comprises,
and its adaptation to the environment are driven by selec-
tion at the germline level. However, multicellularity has
given rise to another type of evolution, one that occurs in
the body within the organism’s lifespan. Stem cells
renewing the body tissues are typically organized in various
kinds of stem cell pools which differ in the number of cells
and organization in a tissue-speciﬁc manner. Each tissue,
thus, is replenished with new cells derived from different
stem cells and consists of cells of diverse clonal origin. As
stem cell fate decisions, to differentiate or remain a stem
cell, are typically stochastic and depend on external factors
(Abkowitz et al., 1996; Klein and Simons, 2011; Lopez-
Garcia et al., 2010; Vermeulen et al., 2013), the represen-
tation of particular stem cell clonal progeny in the pool
changes over time. If after division a stem cell preferen-
tially produces stem cells, its progeny (clone) will expand
in the stem cell compartment. On the other hand, if the
cell’s daughter cells preferentially commit to differentiate,
its clone will eventually disappear from the pool. Following
such dynamics in stem cell compartments,
the clonal
composition of terminally differentiated cells composing
tissues similarly changes over time. Mutations and alter-
ations in the tissue microenvironment cause changes in
particular cells’ proclivity to expand into a stem cell clone
or differentiate and can also affect the stem cells’ death
rates or cause senescence (Alsberg et al., 2006; DeGregori,
2012; Fleenor et al., 2014; Vermeulen et al., 2013). Alto-
gether these changes in the clonal diversity of tissues and

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00012-0
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

193

194 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

their underlying stem cell compartments are called somatic
evolution.

Stem cells are known to reside in highly specialized
microenvironments in the human body, called the stem cell
niche. These environments usually harbor specialized cells
that serve to control the behavior of stem cells via speciﬁc
signals (Li and Xie, 2005). A large part in response to this
signaling, stem cells make cell
fate decisions, which
include cell division, differentiation, death, or senescence.
These cell fate decisions are key determinants of the clonal
diversity and dynamics in stem cell pools, and thus deter-
mine the character of somatic evolution. Therefore, the
evolution of stem cells is shaped by two levels of selection.
At the germline level, selection acts to produce stem cells
that are best adapted to their niche microenvironment and
in parallel ﬁne tunes this microenvironment to the needs of
stem cells for optimal tissue maintenance and the resulting
body ﬁtness. On the other hand, during an individual’s
lifespan, selection at the somatic level acts to favor stem
cells that are capable of expanding their clonal progeny in
the stem cell compartment, favoring clones that tend to
produce more stem cells at the expense of tissue renewal.
Typically, this process is restrained by certain physiological
limits and does not signiﬁcantly affect tissue maintenance
and health. However, understanding the nature of somatic
evolution is important because one particular type of it,
carcinogenesis, leads to one of the most prevalent and
deadly diseases: cancer. Carcinogenesis,
like somatic
evolution in general, can to some extent be compared to
evolution in bacterial populations, whereby mutations
provide various degrees of adaptive advantages or disad-
vantages to clonally reproducing cells and thus cause
changes in the relative representation of particular cellular
phenotypes in the population. In this context, carcinogen-
esis is believed to be driven by a series of uncontrolled
clonal expansions of cells that acquire oncogenic mutations
(Armitage, 1985; Armitage and Doll, 1954; Nowell, 1976).
Carcinogenesis typically initiates in stem cells or in
progenitors (cells committed to differentiate but not yet
terminally differentiated), and is generally known to require
several oncogenic mutations and/or epigenetic changes,
such as altered DNA methylation patterns. In competitive
stem and progenitor pools, oncogenic mutations must give
the recipient cells the ability to preferentially produce
stem-like cell progeny so that their clones can expand and
increase the chances that another oncogenic mutation
happens in cells already harboring the ﬁrst one (Nowell,
1976; Rozhok et al., 2014). Thus, since the early ideas by
Nordling, Armitage, and Doll published in the mid-1950s
(Armitage and Doll, 1954; Nordling, 1953), it has gener-
ally been accepted that oncogenic mutations provide this
type of advantage to the recipient cells upon incidence, and
carcinogenesis is thus rate-limited by the occurrence of
such mutations. Oncogenic mutations have thus been the

major focus of cancer biologists through this time, and
somatic evolution has often been used as a synonym to
carcinogenesis.

While understanding cancer and somatic evolution
from this perspective was a dramatic improvement in our
understanding of cancer more than half a century ago, an
appreciable body of new evidence which has accumulated
since then suggests that a substantial revision of this the-
ory is in order. It is evident from the bulk of recent studies
that somatic mutations, including oncogenic ones, do not
have universal power to promote somatic evolution and
carcinogenesis (Bissell and Hines, 2011; DeGregori, 2011;
Ford et al., 2015; Gatenby and Vincent, 2003; Henry
et al., 2010; Vermeulen et al., 2013). Their ability to drive
clonal expansions turns out to be dependent on external
factors, such as the state of
tissue microenvironment
(Rozhok and DeGregori, 2015; Rubin, 2001). It is also
now clear that about half of all mutations and epigenetic
changes in the human body accumulate early during body
growth and maturation and their accumulation slows down
with age (Horvath, 2013; Vijg et al., 2005), while cancers
are universally postponed to postreproductive ages. This
evidence was not available several decades ago and is
different
from the assumption used by early cancer
theorists.

In the following sections, we will present recent evi-
dence that provides clues to the links between somatic and
organismal evolution, and demonstrate that somatic evo-
lution and carcinogenesis follow the same principles known
for organismal evolution. We will show that oncogenic
mutations are just the basic necessary condition for carci-
nogenesis, just like mutations in organismal evolution, but
that factors such as aging, smoking, or other carcinogenic
contexts determine the rates of cancer progression and
promote somatic evolution by imposing major changes to
tissue microenvironments. We will present an evolutionary
theory for how age and health of the human body can
directly regulate various forms of selection in human tis-
sues and thus impact somatic evolution, as well as explain
why cancer
incidence universally scales to the vastly
different lifespans of different mammal species, and why
larger longer lived animals that have more cells and pro-
duce more mutations are not more prone to cancer.

ORGANISMAL FITNESS VERSUS STEM
CELL FITNESS

Fitness is a central concept in organismal evolution as it
constitutes the basic property of an organism through which
selection can act. In populations, ﬁtness is generally un-
derstood as the likelihood that a given genotype will be
passed on to subsequent generations and is primarily
determined by reproduction and survival rates. An alter-
native deﬁnition of ﬁtness is the ratio of the frequency of a

Aging, Somatic Evolution, and Cancer Chapter | 12 195

it

given genotype in a population before selection to its fre-
quency after selection. All in all, ﬁtness is a measure of
how well an organism with a given genotype/phenotype is
adapted to the complex environment
inhabits. For
humans, like other animals, selection thus acts through the
germline, favoring higher body ﬁtness, the latter increasing
the chances of reproduction, longevity, and capability to
withstand disease. As these properties of the body ensure
higher rates of transmission of the genotype to subsequent
generations, this type of selection therefore is mostly active
during the reproductive period of the human lifespan, and it
weakens with age, as chances to reproduce drop and make
body ﬁtness no longer “visible” to germline selection
(Fig. 12.1).

There are a number of mechanisms for how germline
selection can promote high body ﬁtness during reproduc-
tive ages by improving tissue maintenance. DNA damage
of various forms (including failure to maintain the epige-
netic code) is a primary cell-intrinsic mechanism of aging
(Lopez-Otin et al., 2013; Rossi et al., 2005). One of the key
cell compartments affected by genetic and epigenetic
damage is stem cells, as these often persist through the
entire lifespan and are the ultimate source of somatic cells
for many tissues with fast cell turnover. Stem cells, though,
are less important for some adult human tissues, such as
muscle cells or neurons, the bulk of which are maintained
in their terminally differentiated state throughout the entire
lifespan. Most DNA damage happens during cell division,
and there exist three primary strategies to deal with DNA
damage in complex multicellular organisms such as mam-
mals. First of all, evolution has favored a certain degree of
ﬁdelity in the DNA replication machinery to avoid errors in
DNA during cell division. However, there may be limits to
evolving extremely precise DNA replication and DNA
repair machinery, as mutations are necessary for evolution,
and total elimination of mutations in germline cells is not
favored by selection in the long run. It has also been
speculated that there are energetic costs for developing

extremely precise DNA replication and repair machineries,
which create limits to what precision can be favored by
selection. However, another serious (and perhaps more
important) barrier
is imposed by the population size
(Lynch, 2010). Large long-lived multicellular organisms
tend to have small population sizes due to environmental
capacity limitations relative to simpler, smaller organisms.
Insect populations are typically much more numerous than
those of mammals, and are vastly outnumbered in turn by
single-cell organisms, such as bacteria. The power of se-
lection is known to be positively related to population size,
while the power of random processes that interfere with
selection in a stochastic manner, called drift, is inversely
proportional in strength to the effective population size.
This rule means that
in smaller populations mutation-
induced phenotypic changes in organisms must be larger
to ensure that selection for them can overcome drift. It has
thus been argued that in populations of large long-lived
animals, selection is more limited in its ability to increase
the precision of DNA replication and repair machinery
(Lynch, 2010). Evidence demonstrates that indeed large,
long-lived animals, such as humans, have not evolved more
efﬁcient DNA replication and repair machineries compared
to smaller short-lived organisms. And the somatic mutation
rates in mammals are even higher than those in the germ-
line (Lynch, 2010; Welch et al., 2012). So even if lowering
the rate of somatic mutation would appear to be a strategy
to increase the lifespan of large animals, evolution of long
life spans and large multicellular bodies does not appear to
have actually employed this strategy.

Alongside DNA replication and repair machineries,
the accumulation of DNA
another strategy to control
damage and resulting tissue impairment
is realized in
cellular systems that are active in surveying for overly
damaged cells. The most well-known of such systems is
controlled by the protein p53, and if excessive DNA
damage in a stem cell is detected, a p53-dependent pathway
signals the affected cell to be permanently removed from

FIGURE 12.1 The effect of evolution at the germline level on body ﬁtness at different ages. Tissue and body performance are subject to germline
level selection during the pre- and reproductive portions of life, driving coevolution of stem cells and tissue microenvironment. During the post-
reproductive years, changes in microenvironment and stem cell performance are not visible to germline selection.

196 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

the replicative cell pool by processes such as senescence or
apoptosis (Roos and Kaina, 2013; Spike and Wahl, 2011).
In this way,
the total pool of stem cells is regularly
“cleansed” of cells with excessive DNA damage. The p53
and other surveillance pathways can also eliminate cells
with deregulated signaling pathways, providing yet another
means to eliminate potentially dangerous cells. That p53 is
mutationally or otherwise inactivated in the majority of
cancers highlights the importance of this mechanism for
eliminating cells with potentially oncogenic DNA damage
(Rivlin et al., 2011).

Another important cellular mechanism that prevents
tissue degradation is called autophagy, or autophagocytosis
(Glick et al., 2010; Mizushima, 2007). Autophagy is a
process whereby cells degrade damaged and dysfunctional
cellular components in order
to recycle the chemical
compounds from which these components (such as organ-
elles) are built. The process prevents cellular damage and
the accumulation of dysfunctional products and organelles
in cells. Interestingly, mutations in various organisms,
including ﬂies and worms, which promote autophagy also
extend lifespan, while mutations that
impair autophagy
correspondingly lead to shorter lifespans. Moreover, dietary
restriction and exercise promote both autophagy and
increased lifespan from worms to mice (He et al., 2012;
Morselli et al., 2010; Nair and Klionsky, 2011). Thus,
autophagy may constitute a major antiaging process, and
autophagy is also considered to be a tumor suppressive
mechanism.

Together with strategies to cope with DNA and cellular
damage, selection at the germline level for optimal tissue
maintenance and body ﬁtness acts to ﬁne-tune the behavior
of stem cells within the contexts of their niche microenvi-
ronment. This ﬁne-tuned interaction requires a bidirectional
process, whereby organisms evolve stem cells that are well-
adapted to the characteristics of their microenvironment
(including other cells, extracellular matrix, and the milieu
of intercellular signaling molecules) and a tissue microen-
vironment that evolves to optimize stem cell performance
(Fig. 12.1). While serving to improve body ﬁtness and
longevity, this coevolution of stem cells and tissue micro-
environment should have important effects on selection
within tissues and somatic evolution. To understand how
evolution at the germline level (organismal evolution) im-
pacts the character of somatic evolution in tissues, a brief
summary of how selection at the germline level works in
animal populations would be appropriate. Mutations are the
ultimate source of genetic diversity in populations. Most
mutations are known to have no or minimal effects on
phenotype (neutral, or nonfunctional mutations), and of
those that do have functional consequences (alter pheno-
type) most are known to be detrimental (Eyre-Walker and
Keightley, 2007). Functional mutations often have well-
deﬁned, ﬁxed phenotypic manifestations, such as by

changing the color, shape, or quantity of a trait. However,
the effects of such functional mutations on ﬁtness are not an
intrinsic property of genetic change, but are deﬁned at the
interface of phenotype and environment (Gorban et al.,
2011; Orr, 2009). The white fur color of some hares is
adaptive (increases ﬁtness) in the presence of snow cover,
but maladaptive (decreases ﬁtness) in the absence of snow
by making white hares more visible to predators. Selection
can only act on genetic changes that have phenotypic
manifestation and it
is “blind” to neutral mutations.
Although mutations that can improve ﬁtness and promote
selection favoring them are known to be rare relative to the
frequency of neutral and detrimental mutations,
they
become even rarer as organisms become better adapted to
their environments. In other words, as organisms adapt to
external environments the rate and frequency at which they
are evolving new adaptations decrease (a process known as
stabilizing selection) (Silander et al., 2007; Smith, 1976). It
is major changes in environments that can trigger a rapid
evolution of the resident biota by increasing the frequency
of mutations that are adaptive (which were much less
frequent in the previously well-adapted state).

This general principle can provide important insights
into why cancers, as a type of rapid somatic evolution, are
mostly postponed to the later portions of the human life-
span. Moreover, the increased incidence of cancers uni-
versally scales to the later postreproductive portions of
vastly different lifespans in different mammalian species.
Based on the general evolutionary principle mentioned
earlier, the coevolution of stem cells and tissue microen-
vironment that is driven by selection at the germline level
for improved body ﬁtness should in parallel reduce the
probability of somatic mutations in stem cells that can
improve their ﬁtness at the somatic competition level. It is
not clear so far if stem cells in young and healthy mammals
are at their peak of adaptation to their niches in the tissue.
However, both stem cells and tissue microenvironments
within the reproductive portion of the lifespan (a young
animal) are under the pressure of germline selection, while
during the postreproductive ages their function is no longer
shaped by germline selection to optimize tissue mainte-
nance. This means that changes in tissue microenvironment
that occur during the postreproductive portion of life are
more impacted by random processes, and the degrading
microenvironment does not represent an environment stem
cells are adapted to by evolution at the germline level.
Relaxation of the germline level selection at advanced ages
thus leaves somatic evolution as the only means for stem
to the age-altered microenvironment.
cells
Following current evolutionary theory,
such changes
should increase the frequency and adaptive value of a
subset of mutations that did not confer adaptive beneﬁts in
the microenvironment of tissues within the reproductive
portion of
the lifespan. As oncogenic mutations are

to adapt

typically functional mutations that have phenotypic mani-
festation, their positive ﬁtness effects on stem cells capable
of driving somatic evolution should increase in the post-
reproductive tissues relative to younger ages.

AGING AND SOMATIC EVOLUTION

For the last several decades, the link between aging and
cancer has generally been recognized as aging representing
the time necessary to accumulate oncogenic mutations in
cells that drive carcinogenesis (Armitage, 1985; Armitage
and Doll, 1954; Nowell, 1976; Vogelstein et al., 2013).
Aging itself is often viewed in biomedical literature as
primarily caused by the accumulation of mutations in cells
which cause impaired cellular function (Lopez-Otin et al.,
2013; Rossi et al., 2005). However, an increasing body of
evidence demonstrates that the links between aging, mu-
tations, and cancer are more complicated. This evidence
indicates that the causative model “mutations cause aging
and cancer” should be reconsidered, and the model “aging
together with mutations promotes cancer” appears more
plausible. It is important to distinguish the time component
of aging from the functional component of aging, as there is
not a linear association of the two. First of all, there is a
marked discrepancy in how aging is explained in biomed-
ical and evolutionary literature. Evolutionary models of
aging suggest that longevity is an evolved process, and
aging is dramatically promoted after
the reproductive
period or a period past which an individual of a particular
species is unlikely to survive (Fabian and Flatt, 2011;
Kirkwood, 2005). The prevailing evidence demonstrates
that during the reproductive period of lifespan, selection for
high body ﬁtness postpones aging, likely through mecha-
nisms of investing in tissue maintenance. Thus, functional
decline with aging does not simply result from the passage
of time, but is largely postponed to postreproductive pe-
riods by germline selection.

It has long been assumed that mutations accumulate
linearly with age and cause a gradual body ﬁtness decline.
However, a sound body of evidence from mice and humans
demonstrates that 40e50% of all mutations and epigenetic
changes in the body accumulate before maturity when body
growth stops (Horvath, 2013; Vijg et al., 2005). After this
period,
the accumulation of mutations markedly slows
down, as the rate of cell divisions, particularly for stem
cells, drops dramatically, as part of a switch from the
developmental phase into a maintenance phase (Bowie
et al., 2006; Sidorov et al., 2009). Still, the decline in body
ﬁtness does not follow this pattern and is postponed until
middle to old ages. This delayed aging curve correlates
with cancer incidence, and both are discrepant with the
timing of the most intensive period of mutation accumu-
lation. This evidence suggests that mutations alone are
neither sufﬁcient to cause aging nor cancer. The evolution

Aging, Somatic Evolution, and Cancer Chapter | 12 197

of vastly different lifespans in mammals, often within close
groups, corroborates this view in that within basically the
same mutation rates and DNA maintenance machinery,
evolution has been able to extensively modulate longevity
in different mammal species. One excellent example for
how quickly longevity can evolve comes from a study of
Virginia opossums, Didelphis virginiana, which occur in
eastern and southern parts of North America. Within just
several 1000 years an insular population of the species,
which experiences the absence of the mainland predators,
has evolved a roughly 1.5 times reduced rate of aging (as
evidenced by senescence in tissues) than the mainland
populations (Austad, 1993). Reduced predation in its
insular habitat promoted selection for delayed aging
(functional decline), as this reduced predation presumably
increased the odds of successful reproduction at ages where
such success was much less likely on the mainland. On a
broader scale, rodents represent a beautiful example of the
evolution of vastly different
lifespans and body sizes.
Within one order Rodentia, species, such as the naked mole
rat, Heterocephalus glaber, can live at least up to 30 years
(Buffenstein and Jarvis, 2002), while the house mouse, Mus
musculus, can only survive up to the max of 4 years in
captivity. This evidence, alongside other such examples,
demonstrates that
the dynamics of aging is primarily
determined by evolutionary forces acting at the germline
level, depending on a particular
species’ population
biology, but not by the characteristics of DNA maintenance
machinery and mutation accumulation dynamics.

Similar to the delayed aging dynamics curve, most
the
cancers are known to increase exponentially past
reproductive period. This association suggests that
the
aging process may have a direct causative effect on so-
matic evolution and cancer, rather than represent just the
time factor for mutation accumulation. Multiple studies of
the human hematopoietic system corroborate this idea. It
has been shown that clonality in the hematopoietic stem
cell compartment increases exponentially with age, being
most rapid and profound during the postreproductive
period (Genovese et al., 2014; Jacobs et al., 2012; Jaiswal
et al., 2014; Laurie et al., 2012; McKerrell et al., 2015; Xie
et al., 2014). The size and frequency of expanded large
clones in hematopoietic stem cell system increase expo-
nentially with age, with some clones occupying up to a
third of the whole compartment, while early in life the
clonal diversity generated by mutations is represented
with a large number of clones of small size. This evidence
is consistent with the idea that somatic evolution in gen-
eral, beyond carcinogenesis, is promoted in advanced ages
and suppressed earlier in life. This causative link between
aging and somatic evolution is further corroborated by the
evidence that longer lived laboratory mouse strains also
demonstrate delayed cancer incidence relative to shorter-
lived strains (Smith et al., 1973).

198 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

that

lead

in many ways,

The mechanism for how aging can promote somatic
evolution and cancer can be inferred from the mechanisms
mentioned in the previous section. Relaxed selection for
body ﬁtness at
the germline level during the post-
reproductive period causes reduced investment in tissue
maintenance and degradation of tissue microenvironments.
This degradation manifests
such as
increased chronic inﬂammation and altered intercellular
signaling, metabolite byproduct accumulation, fat accu-
mulation, alterations in structural integrity, and other phe-
nomena
tissue
microenvironment. By this time, mutations that have
accumulated create genetic and phenotypic diversity in the
stem cell compartments. Early in life such diversity is
mostly represented with neutral and maladaptive changes
due to the coevolution of stem cells and tissue microenvi-
ronment which favors wild-type cell phenotype. However,
in an altered microenvironment, normal wild-type stem
cells are no longer as ﬁt, and somatic evolution favors new
cell phenotypes generated by somatic mutations. Unlike
early in life, somatic evolution is the only means of adap-
tation to the niche for stem cells during the post-
reproductive period.

altered

state

to

an

of

It has long been assumed that oncogenic mutations that
promote somatic evolution and carcinogenesis have im-
mediate ﬁxed ﬁtness effects on stem and progenitor cells.
Attempts have been made to measure this advantage for
speciﬁc mutations (Bozic et al., 2010). However, multiple
studies clearly demonstrate that oncogenic mutations have
varying effects on stem cell ﬁtness which depends on the
context/microenvironment
(Fleenor et al., 2010, 2014;
Henry et al., 2010; Marusyk et al., 2009; Vermeulen et al.,
2013). Many oncogenic mutations have been shown to
promote somatic evolution only in altered microenviron-
ments, such as those affected by inﬂammation, ionizing
irradiation, or aging. And it is clear that a cell resistant to
hypoxia (which often develops in tumors) or a certain drug,
although being a ﬁxed deﬁned cellular phenotype, will only
have selective advantage over other cells in presence of
these environmental factors. As hypoxia or drug application
can negatively affect other cells, the ﬁtness advantage of
the mutant resistant cell lines will be proportional to the
severity of these environmental factors, and thus is not a
stationary value. Following these examples, similar con-
clusions about physiological conditions can be made. In an
aged, degraded tissue microenvironment not
tuned by
evolution at the germline level, the selective forces acting
on somatic cells will be dramatically different from those
acting during the reproductive period in an evolved tissue
microenvironment. Why changing selective pressures
acting on stem cells will inevitably follow changes in a
tissue’s physiological state and microenvironment stems
from the very mechanism of how the phenomenon of
ﬁtness arises. Fig. 12.2A and B demonstrates a simple

example with two hypothetical species of bacteria, whereby
each species has different adaptation to two environmental
factors: media acidity and oxygen concentration. As shown
in Fig. 12.2C and D, it is not the genetic makeup of the
species itself that deﬁnes its ﬁtness in a multifactorial
environment, but the interaction between the phenotype
and particular states of the environment. Therefore, ﬁtness
is not a ﬁxed property of genetic change and cannot be
measured as a deﬁned property characteristic of any
particular oncogenic mutation in regard to the affected cells
without considering external microenvironmental signaling
cues that govern stem or progenitor cell fate decisions.

The character of somatic evolution early and late in life,
on the other hand, may have important consequences for
evolution at the organismal level. If high rates of clonal
evolution in somatic tissues were equally likely early and
late in life, mutations in the male germline stem cell (GSC)
compartment could markedly affect organismal evolution.
A mutant GSC clone that expands signiﬁcantly increases
the chances of inheritance of any mutation that occurs
within it. Thus suppression of somatic evolution during the
early and reproductive ages should be an important mech-
anism that minimizes the chances of inheritance of somatic
mutations in GSC through the male lineage, which should
be favored by selection at the organismal level. There are
many reports that the risk of certain mutation-associated
diseases, such as schizophrenia or autism,
in children
positively correlates with father’s age, and more mutations
are passed to progeny by aged fathers (Callaway, 2012;
Kong et al., 2012). It is unclear so far if this association is a
consequence solely of the accumulation of mutations in
sperm cells or whether elevated rates of mutation-induced
somatic
of mutants)
contribute to these statistics. Positive selection for mutant
GSCs and their clonal expansion that ensues will greatly
elevate the probability that the mutation is inherited by
progeny. Indeed, positive selection in GSC is known to be
responsible for higher rates of inheritance of one mutation
in the RET proto-oncogene from older fathers (Choi et al.,
2012). This mutation is causative of the syndrome called
multiple endocrine neoplasia that precedes a highly
aggressive thyroid cancer. As germline (spermatogonial)
stem cells in humans divide relatively frequently (approx-
imately every 16 days), mutation accumulation and
mutation-driven somatic evolution should signiﬁcantly
elevate the rate of mutation inheritance over a lifetime if the
ﬁtness beneﬁts of new mutations are not suppressed
through typical
reproductive ages by the mechanisms
described earlier. Important questions remain: is competi-
tion in GSC pools more effective in early life but becomes
less effective past ages when men were unlikely to be
around to pass their genes on, at least for the majority of
our evolutionary history? What would be the mechanism
for
acquire potentially

selecting against GSCs

expansions

evolution

(clonal

that

Aging, Somatic Evolution, and Cancer Chapter | 12 199

FIGURE 12.2 Fitness is an environment-dependent, dynamic property. Hypothetical ciliated bacterium and cocci demonstrate different tolerance to
media acidity (A) and oxygen concentration in the media (B). Following the Sprengel-Liebig Law of the Minimum, organismal ﬁtness is limited by the
factor that the organism is worst adapted to, called the limiting factor. In a bifactorial environment, in acidic media (C), the ciliated bacteria’s ﬁtness will
depend on oxygen concentration (the limiting factor), while the cocci’s ﬁtness will be low independent of the oxygen concentration as media acidity is the
limiting factor for the cocci. In a basic bifactorial media (D), the limiting factors that determine ﬁtness for the two species switch.

dangerous mutations, such as a mutation that could pro-
mote increased cancer risk if passed on to offspring?

Evidence presented thus far brings the theory of carci-
nogenesis
in accord with evolutionary theory and
strengthens the idea that aging is not only a factor associ-
ated with increased cancer incidence, but one that directly
promotes carcinogenesis.

EVOLUTIONARY STRATEGIES FOR
CANCER SUPPRESSION

Cancer is a malignant form of somatic evolution that often
leads to death and thus lowers organismal ﬁtness. Therefore
selection during the evolutionary history of multicellular
animals has acted to prevent cancer during the reproductive
portions of a lifespan. Mammals have evolved some
general cancer suppression mechanisms, and some of
these mechanisms appear to be shared across metazoans.

In addition, specialized group-speciﬁc strategies are known.
Carcinogenesis is initiated by oncogenic mutations and
epigenetic changes. However, its progression is a somatic
evolutionary process which requires certain conditions.
Under favorable conditions, oncogenic mutations drive
clonal expansions of the recipient cell clones. By multi-
plying the initiated premalignant clonal context, clonal
expansions dramatically increase the number of cells con-
taining an initiating mutation, and thus proportionally in-
crease the probability that another oncogenic mutation will
happen within the effected clone. This process is thought to
happen sequentially as other mutations promote such clonal
evolution even further, leading to the formation of tumors.
Typically a number of cancer driver mutations are neces-
sary to make a stem or progenitor cell malignant, eventually
leading to a cancer. Cancerous cells typically have several
crucial characteristics that distinguish them from most
healthy cells. First, cancerous cells are often capable of

200 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

uncontrolled and unlimited number of cell divisions and
produce more progeny than normal cells (and that is why
tumors form). Cancers can relinquish normal physiological
constraints, including migration throughout the body and
the establishment of new cancerous growths in other parts
of the body, the process called metastasis.

If left untreated, cancer is typically a lethal disease and
thus lowers the ﬁtness of the affected individuals in animal
populations,
if occurring during the prereproductive or
reproductive portion of the lifespan. Alterations in ﬁtness
inevitably alter selection acting on particular organisms,
and thus cancer prevention, or suppression, during early
portions of the lifespan must have evolved over evolu-
tionary time, especially in large and long-lived animals
such as mammals. It is now becoming clear that strategies
to prevent cancer may differ in different mammals (Caulin
and Maley, 2011), although common mechanisms related
to the general evolution of multicellularity and lifespan are
also active. Moreover, evidence indicates that
limiting
cancer is achieved by different means in different tissues of
the body that differ in the organization of their stem and
progenitor pools.

(TSGs). Oncogenes

There are two major types of genes that are linked to
cancer initiation and progression upon mutation or alter-
ation in their expression: oncogenes and tumor suppressor
typically are mutated to
genes
generate
constitutively activated versions of proto-
oncogenes which normally regulate important cellular
functions, such as cell division; they promote cancer when
hyperactivated, either by mutation of the coding sequence
to increase activity (or
remove control) or by over-
expression (such as via promoter changes or by gene
ampliﬁcation). TSGs, on the other hand, prevent cells
from becoming malignant. As already mentioned, the p53
protein produced in humans by the gene TP53 (Trp53 in
mice) is an example of a TSG that directs mutant cells to a
form of programmed cell death, apoptosis (among p53’s
many activities related to tumor suppression). TSGs often
require inactivation of both alleles (two mutation hit
model) to promote cancer. Therefore, the evolution of
TSGs represents one of the cell-intrinsic evolutionary
strategies to prevent cancer. Redundancy in the number or
copy number of TSG has been suggested as one evolu-
tionary strategy to prevent cancer in larger and longer
lived animals (Caulin and Maley, 2011). For example,
elephants have extra copies of the TP53 homolog (Caulin
et al., 2015; Caulin and Maley, 2011). Such multiplication
of TSGs speciﬁcally in a particular species or genus
would be an example of what we will call boutique
strategies (for being specialized to particular groups of
animals). More TSG copies or TSGs would necessitate
more oncogenic mutations to make a cell malignant.
There’s evidence, for example, that more cell signaling
pathways in which TSGs are involved need to be mutated

least some cell

this potential mechanism.

in humans than in mice in at
types
(Rangarajan et al., 2004). Still, solid evidence that would
support the evolution of TSG redundancy as a strategy to
prevent cancer in a larger animal is still lacking. The
rapidly increasing number of animal species for which
whole-genome sequences are available now allows for a
direct examination of
If
selection for multiple copies of TSGs is active in larger
animals, then multiple TSGs with an open reading frame
(intact coding sequence that suggests functional expres-
sion of the gene) should be found in their genomes.
Basically, the extra TSGs should exhibit signatures of
purifying selection, with continued conservation of coding
sequence. Inactive copies with stop codons within the
coding sequences (or changes in key residues), on the
other hand, will
indicate that such events of gene
duplications were incidental, and only one copy is under
purifying selection, which would oppose the idea of TSG
multiplication as an anticancer strategy.

Maintenance of telomeres is another mechanism to
limit the risk of cancer through reproductive years (Caulin
and Maley, 2011). Telomeres are terminal parts of chro-
mosomes. Telomeres shorten with each cell division, due
to the requirement for templating during DNA replication.
When this shortening reaches a certain threshold, the cell
recognizes these ends as double-strand DNA breaks,
which typically leads to cell elimination via apoptosis or
senescence (the latter being a permanent exit from the cell
cycle). An enzyme called telomerase is capable of pro-
tecting telomeres from shortening during cell division,
and high expression in germline cells maintains telomere
length from generation to generation of organisms.
However, in mammalian tissues this enzyme is expressed
only in stem and progenitor cells, and its expression is
insufﬁcient
telomere attrition.
Therefore the ability of stem cells to divide and self-renew
is limited by the process called replicative senescence.
This mechanism, thought to function as a “clock” to limit
the number of cell divisions, likely represents an impor-
tant evolved anticancer strategy. It has been proposed that
shorter
telomeres should have evolved in larger and
longer lived animals as a strategy to reduce the increased
risk postulated to be conferred by the greater number of
cell divisions required for the development and mainte-
nance of such animals. Indeed, telomerase activity has
been found to negatively correlate with body size in ro-
dents, although not with longevity (Seluanov et al., 2007).
comparative
Comprehensive
even
within mammal
taxa, are lacking, and the idea needs
further investigation.

to completely prevent

studies, however,

Above the intracellular level, the immune system has a
role in cancer prevention by monitoring the body for cells
expressing tumor-related markers on their surface and
eliminating such cells. This process is called immune

for

example, demonstrate

surveillance (Kim et al., 2007; Vesely et al., 2011). Mice
with deﬁciencies in both the adaptive (eg, T and B lym-
phocytes) and innate (eg, natural killer cells) immune sys-
tem,
signiﬁcantly higher
frequencies of spontaneous tumors, as well as tumors
induced by carcinogens (Kim et al., 2007). Immune sur-
veillance thus inhibits and delays the development of tu-
mors and cancer. However, tumors are known to develop
phenotypic diversity within their cellular population, and
over time cells capable of escaping immune surveillance
appear in a process called immunoediting. Successful can-
cers also sculpt their tumor microenvironment, such as by
recruiting and supporting a type of macrophage that pro-
motes cancer progression and inhibits immune elimination.
Thus the immune system appears to be limited in its power
to suppress cancer. Improved immune surveillance has
been hypothesized to have evolved in larger, long-lived
animals (Caulin and Maley, 2011), but evidence support-
ing the idea is currently lacking. Regardless, immunity is
clearly a contributor to cancer prevention in mammals (and
likely other animals).

Tissue maintenance has been proposed as another
general anticancer mechanism (DeGregori, 2011, 2012).
Evidence indicates that aging and tissue degradation is
caused by systemic aging-related changes in tissue main-
tenance that operate above the cellular level, rather than by
the accumulation of genetic damage in cells as believed
previously (Austad, 1993; Kirkwood and Rose, 1991;
Rozhok et al., 2014; Yuan et al., 2009). The already dis-
cussed rapid evolution of lifespan diversity within closely
related groups indicates that the dynamics of aging and
tissue ﬁtness decline are highly pliable to selection at the
germline level (Austad, 1993; Harrison and Roderick,
1997). The age-dependent incidence of cancers and other
diseases appears to scale to lifespan as well. While mice
develop cancers at increased frequency mostly after their
ﬁrst year of life (Pompei et al., 2001), in humans a similar
pattern occurs roughly starting from age 45e50 years. A
similar scaling to the end of the reproductive portion of life
is known for cats and dogs (Vascellari et al., 2009). Also,
longer lived laboratory strains of mice demonstrate delayed
cancer incidence increase relative to their conspeciﬁcs,
demonstrating a rapid evolution (with human-managed
artiﬁcial selection in this case) of the age-dependent can-
cer incidence curve to scale to the extended lifespan.
Additionally, there is experimental evidence demonstrating
that oncogenic mutations are differentially selected in
young and aged tissues (Henry et al., 2010, 2015; Vas
et al., 2012a,b). Most of the typical oncogenic mutations,
including those in the Ras, Myc, AKT, b-catenin, and other
key cell signaling pathways, while positively regulating
stem cell divisions rates, have been shown to decrease stem
cell self-renewal by inducing higher rates of cell differen-
tiation (DeGregori, 2012). This effect should cause the

Aging, Somatic Evolution, and Cancer Chapter | 12 201

affected stem cells to leave the stem cell compartment and
differentiate into tissue-speciﬁc cell types which have a
limited lifespan. Thus, this mechanism should eliminate
oncogenic mutations from the body. However, it has been
shown that
in aged or damaged tissue, such as those
affected by inﬂammation or irradiation, oncogenic muta-
tions can now confer selective advantages to stem cells
relative to the rest of the stem cell compartment, leading to
clonal evolution of premalignant clones and eventually to
cancer (Bilousova et al., 2005; Fleenor et al., 2010, 2014;
Henry et al., 2010; Marusyk et al., 2009, 2010; Vermeulen
et al., 2013). Basically, aging or damage-induced re-
ductions in the ﬁtness of stem cells in a tissue create se-
lective pressure for adaptive mutations (some of which can
be oncogenic).

Thus,

the dynamics of aging, which evolves at

the
germline level as part of the evolution of lifespan, is in
itself a mechanism directly impacting cancer incidence.
One of the best-known factors that promote carcinogenesis
in an aging-dependent manner is chronic inﬂammation.
Inﬂammation has been shown in multiple experiments to
promote various cancers in different tissues and appears to
be a universal procancer factor (Coussens and Werb, 2002;
Hanahan and Weinberg, 2011; Vermeulen et al., 2013;
Westphalen et al., 2014). Chronic inﬂammation is known to
universally increase with aging and promote aging by
damaging tissues and affecting the stem cell capability of
tissue renewal. This process is so universal to mammals and
other animals that
there exists the term inﬂammaging
referring to the tight link between inﬂammation and aging
(Goto, 2008). Thus, as part of the aging process, inﬂam-
mation is thought to be one of the factors associated with
increased cancer rates in the elderly. In accord with this
view,
that demonstrate low
inﬂammation proﬁles are also less prone to cancer. In
humans,
regular administration of nonsteroidal antiin-
ﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as aspirin, is known to
associate with reduced cancer risk, in some cases elimi-
nating as much as 40% of the risk for particular cancers
(Rostom et al., 2007). Inﬂammation may itself result from
tissue breakdown during the aging process, such as
following loss of effective barrier function in the intestinal
tract (leading to inﬁltration of bacteria and their products).
Thus, while inﬂammation is a highly beneﬁcial program for
combating infections
and repairing damaged tissue
(explaining the strong selective pressure underlying its
evolution), it can promote diseases including cancer late in
human life (largely beyond reproductive periods inﬂuenced
by natural selection).

laboratory mice strains

Additional cellular and systemic mechanisms, such as
those controlling mTOR signaling (Guertin and Sabatini,
2007) and autophagy (Rosenfeldt and Ryan, 2009), are also
key modulators of aging and carcinogenesis, indicating that
aging is not only associated with higher cancer rates as a

202 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

time factor needed for mutation accumulation, but is a
direct cancer-promoting agent altering selective pressures
acting on the genetic diversity of dividing cells in the body.
This view suggests that practices that help maintain higher
body ﬁtness are capable of providing an additional cancer
suppressive mechanism by inhibiting the previously
mentioned procancer aging-related processes in the body.
Indeed, lifespan-extending/cancer reducing practices such
as caloric restriction and exercise are known to promote
autophagy and reduce chronic inﬂammation, which should
contribute to prolonged tissue maintenance (and thus
delayed promotion of oncogenic adaptation).

The diversity of cancer-suppressing mechanisms among
various groups of mammals is still poorly understood.
Open questions exist as to why longer lived and larger
mammals, sometimes differing seven orders of magnitude
in size and up to 100-fold in lifespan, such as whales and
mice, demonstrate similar avoidance of cancer during their
natural lifespans (the period when survival is likely in the
environments in which they evolved). This question is
known as Peto’s paradox. Intuitively, larger animals have
more stem and progenitor cells that represent a larger target
pool for oncogenic mutations. Longer lifespans also pro-
vide more cell divisions for the mutations to accumulate. So
far most cancer models have been primarily focused on the
occurrence of mutations, assuming that each oncogenic
mutation immediately and inevitably leads to clonal pro-
liferation and is thus rate-limiting for cancer progression.
From the standpoint of this paradigm it is indeed puzzling
why whales are not more prone to cancer than mice. Hence,
the paradox was formulated. However, the mechanisms and
evidence discussed above in this chapter, as well as an
improved evolutionary understanding of cancer suggest
that carcinogenesis is not just a succession of mutations, but
rather is a complex somatic evolutionary process that is
regulated above the cellular level. When the dynamic
evolutionary concept of ﬁtness is incorporated in the cancer
model, then cancer progression, as a type of somatic evo-
lution, can primarily be understood as an environment-
dependent process. At the organismal level, it is major
environmental perturbations that lead to rapid evolution as
organisms try to adapt to the new environment. As a pop-
ulation adapts to a particular environment, its evolution
slows down. Basically, once a population of organisms is
well adapted to their environment, stabilizing selection fa-
voring the status quo becomes more dominant (purifying
selection, which removes mutations reducing organismal
ﬁtness, will be dominant over positive selection). A similar
process should hold for stem cells and their clonal evolu-
tion. Thus, somatic evolution and cancer should be pro-
moted in aged tissues as the primary means of cellular
adaptation to the altered, nonoptimal environment. This
view of cancer can resolve Peto’s paradox regarding the
differences in lifespan among mammals. The power of

stabilizing selection that suppresses clonal evolution in
animal tissues should be proportional to the pool sizes of
stem and progenitor cells, as it is in organismal populations,
and thus dictates that an oncogenic cell in the large tissue of
a whale has a lower capability to overcome competition
with the large number of nonaffected cells than it would
have in a mouse tissue. Such stabilizing selection could
counteract the increased risk of occurrence of oncogenic
mutations due to larger tissues and longer lives (and thus, a
greater number of cell divisions).

Alongside the general cancer suppression mechanisms
described previously, additional specialized species/group-
speciﬁc cancer prevention strategies are known in some
mammals. As already mentioned, in rodents the activity of
telomerase negatively correlates with body mass (Seluanov
et al., 2007). Thus in larger rodents, as shown for ﬁbroblast
cells, telomerase activity is repressed and the cells undergo
replicative senescence after a number of cell divisions,
which incapacitates their ability to divide and accumulate
oncogenic mutations. However, no correlation with life-
span has been found. It has been shown, however, that
among small rodents, in which telomerase is active and
cells do not undergo replicative senescence,
long-lived
species exhibit slower cell division rates. Consistent with
these observations, stem cells from humans are also known
to have lower division frequencies relative to their murine
counterparts. Thus slower stem cell division rates could
represent a mechanism ensuring lower risk of oncogenic
mutations in long-lived species.

A species with an exceptionally long lifespan among
rodents,
the naked mole rat, can live over 30 years
(Buffenstein and Jarvis, 2002) and appears to be resistant
to cancers, as no cancer incidence has been observed
(Tian et al., 2013). It should be noted, however,
that
cancer appears to be rare in most if not all species in the
wild, as natural selection has limited cancer to periods of
life when an individual was unlikely to survive and thus
reproduce. Most humans and of course laboratory mice, in
which cancers and aging are largely studied, are no longer
“in the wild.” Captivity or life in protection from natural
hazards markedly affects a species’ survival curve as
shown in (Fig. 12.3) in that it is only under such condi-
tions that survival is limited by the species’ maximum
physiological lifespan. As shown in Fig. 12.3A, cancer
incidence to a large extent mirrors the physiological
decline (for which survival curves are a good indication in
protected conditions). Likewise, mouse strains of different
longevity demonstrate corresponding cancer
incidence
frequency “adjustments” that scale cancer incidence to the
changes in the lifespan that have happened with the strain
as a result of selection in captivity (Fig. 12.3B). Thus, a
simple explanation of the rare occurrence of cancer in
wild animals can be that they simply do not survive to the
age at which senescence promotes cancer or other

Aging, Somatic Evolution, and Cancer Chapter | 12 203

FIGURE 12.3 Survival curves for wild and protected/captive animals differ. (A) Survival curves for wild (thin black line) and captive (thick black
line) animals differ; cancer incidence (dashed blue line) mirrors the extended lifespan of humans and captive animals. (B) Survival/longevity proﬁles
(solid lines) of different laboratory mouse strains (colors) incur corresponding changes in cancer incidence (dashed lines).

diseases. Over half a century ago, the “father of trans-
plantation” Peter Medawar was among the ﬁrst to propose
this explanation in his famous 1951 lecture at University
College London:

Animals do not in fact live long enough in the wild to
disclose the senile changes that can be made apparent by
their domestication. It is of vital importance to remember
that senility is in a real and important sense an artifact of
domestication;
is, something revealed and made
manifest only by the most unnatural experiment of pro-
longing an animal’s life by sheltering it from the hazards of
its ordinary existence.

that

From this perspective, the longevity and cancer resis-
tance of naked mole rats may not really be “exceptional,” in
that investigators have not followed sufﬁcient numbers of
animals to ages much beyond the lifespans observed in the
wild. Nonetheless, ﬁbroblasts of this species have been
shown to secrete a unique form of the molecule hyalur-
onan, a major component of the extracellular matrix in
many tissues that is important
to cell proliferation and
migration (Tian et al., 2013). Their hyaluronan has a larger
molecular weight compared to humans and mice and ac-
cumulates abundantly in tissues throughout the body. The
cells of this species are also more sensitive to hyaluronan-
induced signaling. While the naked mole rats do not appear
to develop cancer during their natural lifespans, perturba-
tions in hyaluronan signaling have been shown to make
normally transformation-resistant ﬁbroblasts pliable for
malignant transformation. The high molecular mass hya-
luronan of the naked mole rat has been found to increase
the cells’ response to contact inhibitionda mechanism that
arrests cell division in animal cells upon contact with other
cells. Tumor cells escape this inhibition and thus can grow
in an uncontrolled manner. It is thus believed that the naked
mole rats have evolved a modiﬁed version of hyaluronan as
one cancer protective mechanism that
is speciﬁc (and
perhaps unique) to this group.

Another distinctive trait is that typical signs of aging
have not been observed in the naked mole rats, and in
captivity they remain ﬁt and healthy well into their third
decade of life, maintaining high reproductive capability
(Buffenstein, 2008). The relative lack of predators and
other external hazards in their sealed underground burrows
likely facilitated the evolution of long life in these mole
rats, as the investment in tissue maintenance for several
decades could be rewarded by successful reproduction. The
vast majority of deaths observed in captivity are from ﬁghts
between individuals for dominance in the social hierarchy.
Therefore,
lifespan of the species is
probably underestimated. From this perspective the absence
of observed cancers in naked mole rats may also stem from
their retarded aging within at least three decades of life,
which may be tumor suppressive as a general strategy
whereby selection at the germline level acts to suppress
cancer and ﬁtness decline within reproductive years. It
might well be that in their natural environment ﬁghts for
social dominance is a major cause of deaths in the naked
mole rat. This could also be a possible explanation of their
longevity, as it would create a positive selective pressure on
late-life physical ﬁtness.

the true potential

A multitude of other group-speciﬁc cancer preventive
mechanisms could have evolved in different mammals, and
studies of these mechanisms could reveal novel
tumor
suppressive strategies that could be applied to humans,
even when humans did not evolve these same mechanisms.
Alternatively, group-speciﬁc mechanisms might turn out to
be rare at
the same
evolutionary strategic “task” (cancer avoidance) operates
within what is principally the same physiologic system.

least among mammals, given that

TISSUE ORGANIZATION AND TUMOR
SUPPRESSION

The character of somatic evolution, and thus the evolu-
tionary forces that determine progression toward cancer,

204 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

differ in different tissues of the body. The underlying stem
and progenitor cell pools are organized in a tissue-speciﬁc
manner, and the spatial architecture of stem and progenitor
pools and their function is believed to have been part of
anticancer strategies in animal evolution. For example,
from the standpoint of somatic selection, hematopoietic
stem cells (HSCs) represent effectively one large popula-
tion competing for the limited niche space of the bone
marrow (Abkowitz et al., 1996; Catlin et al., 2011; Wright
et al., 2001). The size of the HSC pool, according to
various estimates, totals from 11,000 to z300,000 cells in
the adult human body (Abkowitz et al., 2002; Wang et al.,
1997). HSCs are spatially separated from each other and
their competition is thought to be realized in their differ-
ential proclivity to divide, die, senesce, or differentiate.
HSCs are known to migrate to different parts of the body
through the blood stream and return to their bone marrow
niches with certain frequency, setting up what resembles
the game of musical chairs (each division and migration
comes with a risk of losing one’s niche). Similar organi-
zation and properties appear to be true for mesenchymal
stem cells that give rise to a variety of specialized cells
contributing to the bone, cartilage, muscle, and other tis-
sues. These large effective population sizes and competi-
tion structures are conducive to various forms of selection.
As already mentioned, signiﬁcant changes in clonal fre-
quencies and massive expansions of certain HSC clones
within the HSC compartment are known to occur with age
(Genovese et al., 2014; Jaiswal et al., 2014; McKerrell
et al., 2015; Xie et al., 2014).

On the other hand, animal epithelia are organized in a
different way. These are compartmentalized into small
replicative units with a limited number of stem cells
physically conﬁned into small niches. For example, gut
epithelial stem cells are separated into crypts,
tiny in-
vaginations of the gut epithelium that contain on the order
of 15e20 stem cells. Such segregation leads to a multitude
of small stem cell populations for which competition is
mostly limited to that occurring within crypts (Fig. 12.4).
Such a small effective population size leads to substantially
weakened selection and increased drift (random changes in
clonal frequencies). And gut epithelia stem cell clones have
actually been shown in multiple studies to follow the drift-
dominated scenario (Lopez-Garcia et al., 2010; Snippert
et al., 2010; Vermeulen et al., 2013). Such architecture
might be a powerful cancer suppressive mechanism.
Epithelia, and the gut surface in particular, increase enor-
mously with increased body size, representing increased
target size for oncogenic mutations. It has been shown in
mice, however,
that some typical oncogenic mutations,
such as in TRP53, Kras, and Apc genes, do not give a
robust selective advantage in intestinal stem cell pools and
their fate is signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by drift. Such mutant
cells are often replaced by normal stem cells in intestinal
crypts. This small population size and the domination of
drift in clonal dynamics should prevent early premalignant
cells that contain oncogenic mutations from expanding in
the stem cell compartment. While an oncogenic mutation
could be ﬁxed within a crypt-limited stem cell pool by
chance alone (and perhaps ampliﬁed by positive selection),

FIGURE 12.4 Stem cell pools for different tissues have different structural organization. (A) Intestinal epithelial stem cells are segregated in small
clusters of 15e20 cells per crypt; clonal dynamics within each crypt are dominated by random drift. (B) hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) of the bone
marrow compete as one large population and can migrate to other parts of the hematopoietic tissue in the body via blood vessels; clonal dynamics in HSC
are stronger, affected by selection.

this clone would still be of limited size (15e20 cells). As
already mentioned, expansions of oncogenically initiated
clones have a dramatic effect on the probability of accu-
mulating several oncogenic mutations in one clonal context
and are thus a critical
rate-limiting step in cancer
development.

It is not clearly understood so far if such differences in
tissue organization have been part of cancer prevention
strategies during animal evolution. HSC population size
does not appear to scale with body size, as cats appear to
have similar numbers of HSC as mice, and humans may
have similar to not much more than 10-fold more HSC
(Abkowitz et al., 2002). Thus, one evolved mechanism for
tumor suppression with larger body size would be to simply
limit the increase in stem cell number (a key target of
oncogenesis). On the other hand,
the size of epithelia
populations for tissues such as skin and the gut should be
proportional to body size, and given the segmental orga-
nization of epithelial stem cell pools, these numbers should
relatively scale with body size. Between a whale and a
mouse this difference is seven orders of magnitude (in
weight and presumably in cell numbers). Such a dramatic
increase in the target size for oncogenic mutations in
epithelia could have required a different stem cell organi-
zation that would prevent clonal evolution. Interestingly,
hematopoietic cancers are more prevalent than carcinomas
(epithelial cancers) in mice, but in humans the opposite is
true. This epidemiology is consistent with the idea that the
difference in the target size for oncogenic mutations be-
tween human and mice epithelia is greater than that for
hematopoietic cells. Based on the structure of HSC and
epithelial stem cell pools, we would also predict that the
former should be more sensitive to smaller phenotypic ef-
fects of mutations, while effective selection (whether pur-
ifying or positive) within the latter should require greater
phenotypic effects.

EVOLUTIONARY UNDERSTANDING OF
CANCER: AN IMMINENT PARADIGM
SHIFT

Cancer is a major cause of human deaths worldwide. Most
cancers generally follow an exponential increase with age,
being prevalent mostly during the postreproductive period
of the lifespan. Thus aging is the most straightforward risk
factor for cancer. However, some speciﬁc types of cancer
disobey this pattern. The incidence of testicular cancer is
mostly concentrated within the reproductive portion of life,
when spermatogenic cells are most active. Bone cancers, in
addition to late-life increase, also have a substantial peak of
incidence during early ages when the skeleton is growing.
Moreover, the natural incidence of cancers can be sub-
stantially modulated by environmental cancer risk factors.
Exposure to carcinogens like radiation and benzene,

Aging, Somatic Evolution, and Cancer Chapter | 12 205

smoking, alcohol abuse, and obesity are among the many
factors linked with elevated cancer risk. Changes in the
modern lifestyle can have dramatic impacts on some can-
cers as well. For example, breast cancer is very rare in
primitive tribal communities but is among the most com-
mon cancers in modern women. Such an increase is
explained by a substantial role of hormones in breast cancer
etiology. Women with suppressed menstrual cycles, such as
by pregnancy and lactation, are thought to be under lower
risk, and the frequency of pregnancy per lifespan and the
length of nursing per child has dramatically decreased with
the development of modern society. Beyond such speciﬁc
examples, however, cancer is generally thought to be rate-
limited by the occurrence of oncogenic mutations in cells.
Most cancers require several such mutations to produce a
malignant cell. Therefore, factors such as exposure to car-
cinogens or smoking are thought to promote cancer pri-
marily by inducing more mutations, including oncogenic
ones. As described previously, aging is thought
to be
associated with increased cancer risk primarily as the time
factor needed for more mutations to accumulate. However,
increasing evidence has been emerging over the last de-
cades indicating that the relationship between aging, so-
matic evolution, and cancer
is more intricate than
previously believed. An increasing body of evidence in-
dicates that it is not the occurrence of oncogenic mutations
per se, but changing, context-dependent somatic evolu-
tionary forces determining the fate of these mutations that
are the primary rate-limiting mechanism for cancer.

The prevailing explanation of human age-dependent
cancer incidence, which has been around since the 1950s,
assumes that mutations accumulate linearly with age, and
oncogenic mutations drive clonal proliferation of
the
recipient cells. As oncogenically initiated clones expand
and become represented with more dividing cells, they
increase the likelihood that other oncogenic mutations will
happen within the same clonal context. Over time, this
process is supposed to promote the accumulation of mul-
tiple cancer driver mutations in one cell clone, which re-
sults in a malignant cell clone that leads to cancer. As the
frequency of such cells (and thus cancer) is supposed to
increase linearly with age, the number of such mutations
has been inferred from the exponential curve of cancer
incidence, assuming that each oncogenic mutation in a
sequence adds a certain ﬁtness advantage to the recipient
cell. The impact of this paradigm on the investment of
effort and money in cancer research is clear; for example,
despite the fact that cancer is largely a disease of old age,
almost all cancer modeling in mice employs only young
mice (based on the mutation centric view, providing the
oncogenic mutations should sufﬁce to understand cancer).
But as we have argued, the age of the host really does
matter. Moreover, the cataloging of cancer mutations across
thousands of human cancers through genome sequencing

206 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

for The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project has required
hundreds of millions of dollars of National Institutes of
Health research funds, and has largely been driven by the
view that understanding the constituent drivers will be key
to understanding the cancer. Finally, most studies of cancer
prevention focus on how the intervention impacts the
developing cancer cells and most therapies target the cancer
cells; these strategies largely overlook the tissue microen-
vironment, with notable exceptions, such as the explosion
in the development of immune modulatory therapies (Joyce
and Pollard, 2009).

However, evidence clearly indicates that almost half of
all mutations and epigenetic changes (including oncogenic
events) accumulate early (before age 20 years) during
development and body growth, and the occurrence of all
these forms of genetic damage dramatically slows down
thereafter. This pattern is caused by a signiﬁcant slowdown
in stem cell division rates after body maturation. Therefore,
the frequency of oncogenic initiation within cells in tissues
should follow a similar pattern. But most cancers are
extremely rare before age 20 years, and their incidence is
still
is now well
appreciated that oncogenic mutations and microtumors are
indeed very common in normal human tissue even through
young ages (DeGregori, 2012; Martincorena et al., 2015),
corroborating the idea that a substantial portion of onco-
genic mutations do happen early, consistent with the gen-
eral mutation accumulation pattern. However,
these
oncogenically initiated cells and microtumors rarely lead to
cancer, suggesting that
their progression is dictated by
external factors.

low until age 45 years. Moreover,

it

The idea of a simple mechanistic explanation of cancer
progression as solely determined by the constant positive
ﬁtness effects of oncogenic mutations thus fails to explain
just as it fails to explain the Peto’s
this discrepancy,
paradox and scaling of cancer
incidence to different
mammalian lifespans. And the current paradigm of cancer,
being primarily centered on mutation occurrence, suffers
from not considering key aspects of somatic evolutiondthe
factors that determine the fate of somatic (including onco-
genic) mutations. The key problem of early cancer
modeling (including recent modeling), in addition to the
assumption of linear mutation accumulation, has been the
idea of a ﬁxed ﬁtness effect of somatic mutations on stem
and progenitor cells. While mutations often have deﬁned
phenotypic effects on cells and organisms, their ﬁtness ef-
fect is a dynamic property, which is determined at the
interface of a phenotype and its environment. The magni-
tude of ﬁtness effects of mutations is thus not a stationary
parameter, but depends on external environment. If a cell
acquires a hypoxia or drug resistance mutation, this deﬁned
phenotype will have no ﬁtness advantage under normoxic
tissue conditions or in the absence of the drug, respectively,
while in a hypoxic tumor tissue of a tumor or under drug

application the mutated cells will enjoy an advantage over
nonmutant cells. Moreover, this advantage is not a sta-
tionary value as well, as it will increase proportionally as
the conditions become more severe. In the complex tissue
microenvironment, many such factors exist
that affect
signaling and cell fate decisions, and tissue microenviron-
ment is known to degrade with age. During reproductive
years, tissue maintenance is selected at the germline level
and tissue microenvironment is thus kept relatively stable.
Stem cells evolve at the germline level to optimally function
in this environment; as part of their adaptation, germline
selection should lead to increases in their ﬁtness at the so-
matic level to prevent somatic evolution and cancer. This
coevolution and the relative stability of tissue microenvi-
ronments provide a very different evolutionary landscape
compared to older ages, for which germline selection is no
longer active to support the evolved state. Therefore, in late
life, somatic evolution is the only means of stem cell
adaptation to tissue microenvironment. As the rates of aging
accelerate during postreproductive years, so too should the
rates of somatic evolution in response to these changes. And
we know now that this scenario takes place indeed, at least
in some tissues, and changes in clonal diversity and rapid
clonal expansions, which are not typical in early life, occur
in old age as a result of
the increased ﬁtness value
of functional somatic mutations (Genovese et al., 2014;
Jaiswal et al., 2014; McKerrell et al., 2015; Xie et al., 2014).
risk-
associated factors increase cancer incidence. While it is
traditionally thought
that carcinogens promote mutation
accumulation and thus the occurrence of oncogenic muta-
tions, this may be only part of the story. Insults, such as
smoking and irradiation do induce mutations, but these
factors also dramatically alter tissue microenvironments,
including by causing severe damage and by elevating
inﬂammation. Inﬂammation is also known to be induced by
excessive alcohol consumption and obesity, which are also
among factors that elevate cancer risk. So factors, such as
carcinogens and radiation, do not only induce mutations,
they also change tissue microenvironment in a way that
should be conducive to clonal evolution.

interesting question is how cancer

Another

Therefore, a body of new knowledge and evidence in-
dicates that carcinogenesis, just like somatic evolution in
general, is likely to be a process that follows the same
evolutionary principles known from organismal biology. It
starts with the occurrence of
functional mutations in
competitive stem and progenitor cell populations, which
generates phenotypic diversity. This increasing diversity is
subject to the balance of stabilizing and positive selection,
which is primarily deﬁned by the amount of alteration of
the tissue microenvironment compared to its evolved state,
which is maintained relatively stable during the reproduc-
tive portion of the lifespan and degrades thereafter. This
degradation, analogous to that for natural ecosystems,

reduces stabilizing selection and promotes positive selec-
tion for a subset of the accumulated phenotypic diversity as
a means of stem cell adaptation to a new environment.
Somatic evolution, as we now know, is also subject to
population size-induced drift, as shown for
intestinal
epithelia, which is likely one of the cancer preventive
mechanisms harnessed by the evolution of long-lived, large
multicellular animals. Other extrinsic factors, such as im-
mune surveillance,
likely also change with age and
contribute to late-life cancer development. Thus, our un-
derstanding of the factors that govern the fate of somatic
mutations in animal
tissues will hopefully help merge
cancer and evolutionary theories in a model of cancer that
would be able to explain the many unexplained phenomena
and paradoxes of cancer biology mentioned above, and to
understand better the phenomenon of somatic evolution and
its interaction with evolution at the organismal level.

REFERENCES

Abkowitz, J.L., Catlin, S.N., Guttorp, P., 1996. Evidence that hemato-
poiesis may be a stochastic process in vivo. Nature Medicine 2,
190e197.

Abkowitz, J.L., Catlin, S.N., McCallie, M.T., Guttorp, P., 2002. Evidence
that the number of hematopoietic stem cells per animal is conserved in
mammals. Blood 100, 2665e2667.

Alsberg, E., von Recum, H.A., Mahoney, M.J., 2006. Environmental cues
to guide stem cell fate decision for tissue engineering applications.
Expert Opinion on Biological Therapy 6, 847e866.

Armitage, P., Doll, R., 1954. The age distribution of cancer and a multi-

stage theory of carcinogenesis. British Journal of Cancer 8, 1e12.

Armitage, P., 1985. Multistage models of carcinogenesis. Environmental

Health Perspectives 63, 195e201.

Austad, S.N., 1993. Retarded senescence in an insular population of virginia
opossums (Didelphis virginiana). Journal of Zoology 229, 695e708.
Bilousova, G., Marusyk, A., Porter, C.C., Cardiff, R.D., DeGregori, J.,
2005. Impaired DNA replication within progenitor cell pools promotes
leukemogenesis. PLoS Biology 3, 2135e2147.

Bissell, M.J., Hines, W.C., 2011. Why don’t we get more cancer? A
proposed role of the microenvironment in restraining cancer pro-
gression. Nature Medicine 17, 320e329.

Bowie, M.B., McKnight, K.D., Kent, D.G., McCaffrey, L.,
Hoodless, P.A., Eaves, C.J., 2006. Hematopoietic stem cells prolif-
erate until after birth and show a reversible phase-speciﬁc engraftment
defect. Journal of Clinical Investigation 116, 2808e2816.

Bozic,

I., Antal, T., Ohtsuki, H., Carter, H., Kim, D., Chen, S.,
Karchin, R., Kinzler, K.W., Vogelstein, B., Nowak, M.A., 2010.
Accumulation of driver and passenger mutations during tumor pro-
gression. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 107, 18545e18550.

Buffenstein, R., Jarvis, J.U., 2002. The naked mole ratea new record for
the oldest living rodent. Science of Aging Knowledge Environment
2002, pe7.

Buffenstein, R., 2008. Negligible senescence in the longest living rodent,
the naked mole-rat: insights from a successfully aging species. Journal
of Comparative Physiology B 178, 439e445.

Aging, Somatic Evolution, and Cancer Chapter | 12 207

Callaway, E., 2012. Fathers bequeath more mutations as they age. Nature

488, 439.

Catlin, S.N., Busque, L., Gale, R.E., Guttorp, P., Abkowitz, J.L., 2011.
The replication rate of human hematopoietic stem cells in vivo. Blood
117, 4460e4466.

Caulin, A.F., Maley, C.C., 2011. Peto’s Paradox: evolution’s prescrip-
tion for cancer prevention. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 26,
175e182.

Caulin, A.F., Graham, T.A., Wang, L.S., Maley, C.C., 2015. Solutions to
Peto’s paradox revealed by mathematical modelling and cross-species
cancer gene analysis. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
London Series B 370.

Choi, S.K., Yoon, S.R., Calabrese, P., Arnheim, N., 2012. Positive se-
lection for new disease mutations in the human germline: evidence
from the heritable cancer syndrome multiple endocrine neoplasia type
2B. PLoS Genetics 8, e1002420.

Coussens, L.M., Werb, Z., 2002. Inﬂammation and cancer. Nature 420,

860e867.

DeGregori, J., 2011. Evolved tumor suppression: why are we so good at

not getting cancer? Cancer Research 71, 3739e3744.

DeGregori, J., 2012. Challenging the axiom: does the occurrence of
oncogenic mutations truly limit cancer development with age?
Oncogene 32, 1869e1875.

Eyre-Walker, A., Keightley, P.D., 2007. The distribution of ﬁtness effects

of new mutations. Nature Reviews Genetics 8, 610e618.

Fabian, D., Flatt, T., 2011. The evolution of aging. National Education

Knowledge 3, 9.

Fleenor, C.J., Marusyk, A., DeGregori, J., 2010. Ionizing radiation and
hematopoietic malignancies: altering the adaptive landscape. Cell
Cycle 9, 3005e3011.

Fleenor, C.J., Rozhok, A.I., Zaberezhnyy, V., Mathew, D., Kim, J.,
Tan, A., Bernstein, I.D., DeGregori, J., 2014. Contrasting roles for
C/EBPalpha and notch in irradiation-induced multipotent hematopoi-
etic progenitor cell defects. Stem Cells 33 (4), 1345e1358.

Ford, A.M., Mansur, M.B., Furness, C.L., van Delft, F.W., Okamura, J.,
Suzuki, T., Kobayashi, H., Kaneko, Y., Greaves, M., 2015. Protracted
dormancy of pre-leukaemic stem cells. Leukemia 29 (11), 2202e2207.
Gatenby, R.A., Vincent, T.L., 2003. An evolutionary model of carcino-

genesis. Cancer Research 63, 6212e6220.

Genovese, G., Kahler, A.K., Handsaker, R.E., Lindberg, J., Rose, S.A.,
Bakhoum, S.F., Chambert, K., Mick, E., Neale, B.M., Fromer, M.,
et al., 2014. Clonal hematopoiesis and blood-cancer risk inferred from
blood DNA sequence. The New England Journal of Medicine 371,
2477e2487.

Glick, D., Barth, S., Macleod, K.F., 2010. Autophagy: cellular and mo-

lecular mechanisms. Journal of Pathology 221, 3e12.

Gorban, A.N., Pokidysheva, L.I., Smirnova, E.V., Tyukina, T.A., 2011.
Law of the minimum paradoxes. Bulletin of Mathematical Biology 73,
2013e2044.
Goto, M., 2008. Inﬂammaging (inﬂammation þ aging): a driving force for
human aging based on an evolutionarily antagonistic pleiotropy the-
ory? Bioscience Trends 2, 218e230.

Guertin, D.A., Sabatini, D.M., 2007. Deﬁning the role of mTOR in cancer.

Cancer Cell 12, 9e22.

Hanahan, D., Weinberg, R.A., 2011. Hallmarks of cancer: the next gen-

eration. Cell 144, 646e674.

Harrison, D.E., Roderick, T.H., 1997. Selection for maximum longevity in

mice. Experimental Gerontology 32, 65e78.

208 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

He, C., Bassik, M.C., Moresi, V., Sun, K., Wei, Y., Zou, Z., An, Z.,
Loh, J., Fisher, J., Sun, Q., et al., 2012. Exercise-induced BCL2-
regulated autophagy is required for muscle glucose homeostasis.
Nature 481, 511e515.

Henry, C.J., Marusyk, A., Zaberezhnyy, V., Adane, B., DeGregori, J.,
2010. Declining lymphoid progenitor ﬁtness promotes aging-
associated leukemogenesis. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America 107, 21713e21718.

Henry, C.J., Casas-Selves, M., Kim, J., Zaberezhnyy, V., Aghili, L.,
Daniel, A.E., Jimenez, L., Azam, T., McNamee, E.N., Clambey, E.T.,
et al., 2015. Aging-associated inﬂammation promotes selection for
adaptive oncogenic events in B cell progenitors. Journal of Clinical
Investigation 125, 4666e4680.

Horvath, S., 2013. DNA methylation age of human tissues and cell types.

Genome Biology 14, R115.

Jacobs, K.B., Yeager, M., Zhou, W., Wacholder, S., Wang, Z., Rodriguez-
Santiago, B., Hutchinson, A., Deng, X., Liu, C., Horner, M.J., et al.,
2012. Detectable clonal mosaicism and its relationship to aging and
cancer. Nature Genetics 44, 651e658.

Jaiswal, S., Fontanillas, P., Flannick, J., Manning, A., Grauman, P.V.,
Mar, B.G., Lindsley, R.C., Mermel, C.H., Burtt, N., Chavez, A.,
et al., 2014. Age-related clonal hematopoiesis associated with
adverse outcomes. The New England Journal of Medicine 371,
2488e2498.

Marusyk, A., Casas-Selves, M., Henry, C.J., Zaberezhnyy, V.,
Klawitter, J., Christians, U., Degregori, J., 2009. Irradiation alters
selection for oncogenic mutations in hematopoietic progenitors.
Cancer Research 69, 7262e7269.

Marusyk, A., Porter, C.C., Zaberezhnyy, V., DeGregori, J., 2010. Irradi-
ation selects for p53-deﬁcient hematopoietic progenitors. PLoS
Biology 8, e1000324.

McKerrell, T., Park, N., Moreno, T., Grove, C.S., Ponstingl, H.,
Stephens, J., Crawley, C., Craig, J., Scott, M.A., Hodkinson, C., et al.,
2015. Leukemia-associated somatic mutations drive distinct patterns
of age-related clonal hemopoiesis. Cell Reports 10, 1239e1245.

Mizushima, N., 2007. Autophagy: process and function. Genes and

Devlopment 21, 2861e2873.

Morselli, E., Maiuri, M.C., Markaki, M., Megalou, E., Pasparaki, A.,
Palikaras, K., Criollo, A., Galluzzi, L., Malik, S.A., Vitale, I., et al.,
2010. Caloric restriction and resveratrol promote longevity through
the Sirtuin-1-dependent induction of autophagy. Cell Death and Dis-
ease 1, e10.

Nair, U., Klionsky, D.J., 2011. Activation of autophagy is required for
exercise. Autophagy 7,

muscle homeostasis during physical
1405e1406.

Nordling, C.O., 1953. A new theory on the cancer-inducing mechanism.

British Journal of Cancer 7, 68e72.

Nowell, P.C., 1976. The clonal evolution of tumor cell populations. Sci-

Joyce, J.A., Pollard, J.W., 2009. Microenvironmental

regulation of

ence 194, 23e28.

metastasis. Nature Reviews Cancer 9, 239e252.

Orr, H.A., 2009. Fitness and its role in evolutionary genetics. Nature

Kim, R., Emi, M., Tanabe, K., 2007. Cancer immunoediting from immune

Reviews Genetics 10, 531e539.

surveillance to immune escape. Immunology 121, 1e14.

Kirkwood, T.B., Rose, M.R., 1991. Evolution of senescence: late survival
sacriﬁced for reproduction. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society London Series B 332, 15e24.

Kirkwood, T.B., 2005. Understanding the odd science of aging. Cell 120,

437e447.

Klein, A.M., Simons, B.D., 2011. Universal patterns of stem cell fate in

cycling adult tissues. Development 138, 3103e3111.

Kong, A., Frigge, M.L., Masson, G., Besenbacher, S., Sulem, P.,
Magnusson, G., Gudjonsson, S.A., Sigurdsson, A., Jonasdottir, A.,
Wong, W.S., et al., 2012. Rate of de novo mutations and the impor-
tance of father’s age to disease risk. Nature 488, 471e475.

Laurie, C.C., Laurie, C.A., Rice, K., Doheny, K.F., Zelnick, L.R.,
McHugh, C.P., Ling, H., Hetrick, K.N., Pugh, E.W., Amos, C., et al.,
2012. Detectable clonal mosaicism from birth to old age and its
relationship to cancer. Nature Genetics 44, 642e650.

Li, L., Xie, T., 2005. Stem cell niche: structure and function. Annual

Review of Cell and Developmental Biology 21, 605e631.

Lopez-Garcia, C., Klein, A.M., Simons, B.D., Winton, D.J., 2010. Intes-
tinal stem cell replacement follows a pattern of neutral drift. Science
330, 822e825.

Lopez-Otin, C., Blasco, M.A., Partridge, L., Serrano, M., Kroemer, G.,

2013. The hallmarks of ageing. Cell 153, 1194e1217.

Lynch, M., 2010. Evolution of the mutation rate. Trends in Genetics 26,

345e352.

Martincorena, I., Roshan, A., Gerstung, M., Ellis, P., Van Loo, P.,
McLaren, S., Wedge, D.C., Fullam, A., Alexandrov, L.B., Tubio, J.M.,
et al., 2015. Tumor evolution. High burden and pervasive positive
selection of somatic mutations in normal human skin. Science 348,
880e886.

Pompei, F., Polkanov, M., Wilson, R., 2001. Age distribution of cancer in
mice: the incidence turnover at old age. Toxicology and Industrial
Health 17, 7e16.

Rangarajan, A., Hong, S.J., Gifford, A., Weinberg, R.A., 2004. Species-
and cell type-speciﬁc requirements for cellular transformation. Cancer
Cell 6, 171e183.

Rivlin, N., Brosh, R., Oren, M., Rotter, V., 2011. Mutations in the p53
tumor suppressor gene: important milestones at the various steps of
tumorigenesis. Genes and Cancer 2, 466e474.

Roos, W.P., Kaina, B., 2013. DNA damage-induced cell death: from
speciﬁc DNA lesions to the DNA damage response and apoptosis.
Cancer Letters 332, 237e248.

Rosenfeldt, M.T., Ryan, K.M., 2009. The role of autophagy in tumour
therapy. Expert Reviews in Molecular

development and cancer
Medicine 11, e36.

Rossi, D.J., Bryder, D., Zahn, J.M., Ahlenius, H., Sonu, R., Wagers, A.J.,
Weissman, I.L., 2005. Cell intrinsic alterations underlie hematopoietic
stem cell aging. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 102, 9194e9199.

Rostom, A., Dube, C., Lewin, G., 2007. In: Use of Aspirin and NSAIDs to

Prevent Colorectal Cancer, Rockville, MD.

Rozhok, A.I., DeGregori, J., 2015. Toward an evolutionary model of
cancer: considering the mechanisms that govern the fate of somatic
mutations. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 112, 8914e8921.

Rozhok, A.I., Salstrom, J.L., DeGregori, J., 2014. Stochastic modeling
indicates that aging and somatic evolution in the hematopoietic system
are driven by non-cell-autonomous processes. Aging 6, e1e16.

Rubin, H., 2001. The role of selection in progressive neoplastic trans-

formation. Advances in Cancer Research 83, 159e207.

Seluanov, A., Chen, Z., Hine, C., Sasahara, T.H., Ribeiro, A.A.,
Catania, K.C., Presgraves, D.C., Gorbunova, V., 2007. Telomerase
activity coevolves with body mass not lifespan. Aging Cell 6, 45e52.
Sidorov, I., Kimura, M., Yashin, A., Aviv, A., 2009. Leukocyte telomere
dynamics and human hematopoietic stem cell kinetics during somatic
growth. Experimental Hematology 37, 514e524.

Silander, O.K., Tenaillon, O., Chao, L., 2007. Understanding the evolu-
tionary fate of ﬁnite populations: the dynamics of mutational effects.
PLoS Biology 5, e94.

Smith, J.M., 1976. What determines the rate of evolution? The American

Naturalist 110, 331e338.

Smith, G.S., Walford, R.L., Mickey, M.R., 1973. Lifespan and incidence
of cancer and other diseases in selected long-lived inbred mice and
their F1 hybrids. Journal of the National Cancer Institute 50 (5),
1195e1213.

Snippert, H.J., van der Flier, L.G., Sato, T., van Es, J.H., van den Born, M.,
Kroon-Veenboer, C., Barker, N., Klein, A.M., van Rheenen, J.,
Simons, B.D., Clevers, H., 2010. Intestinal crypt homeostasis results
from neutral competition between symmetrically dividing Lgr5 stem
cells. Cell 143, 134e144.

Spike, B.T., Wahl, G.M., 2011. p53, stem cells, and reprogramming: tumor
suppression beyond guarding the genome. Genes and Cancer 2, 404e419.
Tian, X., Azpurua, J., Hine, C., Vaidya, A., Myakishev-Rempel, M.,
Ablaeva, J., Mao, Z., Nevo, E., Gorbunova, V., Seluanov, A., 2013.
High-molecular-mass hyaluronan mediates the cancer resistance of the
naked mole rat. Nature 499, 346e349.

Vas, V., Senger, K., Dorr, K., Niebel, A., Geiger, H., 2012a. Aging of the
microenvironment inﬂuences clonality in hematopoiesis. PLoS One 7,
e42080.

Vas, V., Wandhoff, C., Dorr, K., Niebel, A., Geiger, H., 2012b. Contri-
bution of an aged microenvironment to aging-associated myelopro-
liferative disease. PLoS One 7, e31523.

Vascellari, M., Baioni, E., Ru, G., Carminato, A., Mutinelli, F., 2009.
Animal tumour registry of two provinces in northern Italy: incidence of
spontaneous tumours in dogs and cats. BMC Veterinary Research 5, 39.
Vermeulen, L., Morrissey, E., van der Heijden, M., Nicholson, A.M.,
Sottoriva, A., Buczacki, S., Kemp, R., Tavare, S., Winton, D.J., 2013.

Aging, Somatic Evolution, and Cancer Chapter | 12 209

Deﬁning stem cell dynamics in models of intestinal tumor initiation.
Science 342, 995e998.

Vesely, M.D., Kershaw, M.H., Schreiber, R.D., Smyth, M.J., 2011. Nat-
innate and adaptive immunity to cancer. Annual Review of

ural
Immunology 29, 235e271.

Vijg, J., Busuttil, R.A., Bahar, R., Dolle, M.E., 2005. Aging and genome
maintenance. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1055,
35e47.

Vogelstein, B., Papadopoulos, N., Velculescu, V.E., Zhou, S.,
Diaz Jr., L.A., Kinzler, K.W., 2013. Cancer genome landscapes.
Science 339, 1546e1558.

Wang, J.C., Doedens, M., Dick, J.E., 1997. Primitive human hematopoi-
etic cells are enriched in cord blood compared with adult bone marrow
or mobilized peripheral blood as measured by the quantitative in vivo
SCID-repopulating cell assay. Blood 89, 3919e3924.

Welch,

J.S., Ley, T.J., Link, D.C., Miller, C.A., Larson, D.E.,
Koboldt, D.C., Wartman, L.D., Lamprecht, T.L., Liu, F., Xia, J., et al.,
2012. The origin and evolution of mutations in acute myeloid leuke-
mia. Cell 150, 264e278.

Westphalen, C.B., Asfaha, S., Hayakawa, Y., Takemoto, Y., Lukin, D.J.,
Nuber, A.H., Brandtner, A., Setlik, W., Remotti, H., Muley, A., et al.,
2014. Long-lived intestinal tuft cells serve as colon cancer-initiating
cells. Journal of Clinical Investigation 124, 1283e1295.

Wright, D.E., Wagers, A.J., Gulati, A.P., Johnson, F.L., Weissman, I.L.,
2001. Physiological migration of hematopoietic stem and progenitor
cells. Science 294, 1933e1936.

Xie, M., Lu, C., Wang, J., McLellan, M.D., Johnson, K.J., Wendl, M.C.,
McMichael, J.F., Schmidt, H.K., Yellapantula, V., Miller, C.A., et al.,
2014. Age-related mutations associated with clonal hematopoietic
expansion and malignancies. Nature Medicine 20, 1472e1478.

Yuan, R., Tsaih, S.W., Petkova, S.B., Marin de Evsikova, C., Xing, S.,
Marion, M.A., Bogue, M.A., Mills, K.D., Peters, L.L., Bult, C.J.,
et al., 2009. Aging in inbred strains of mice: study design and interim
report on median lifespans and circulating IGF1 levels. Aging Cell 8,
277e287.

Chapter 13

Evolution of the Human Leukocyte
Antigen System

S. Gaudieri1,2,3 and M. John3
1University of Western Australia, Nedlands, WA, Australia; 2Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, United States; 3Murdoch University,
Murdoch, WA, Australia

INTRODUCTION
The human leukocyte antigen (HLA) genes are located
on the short arm of chromosome six within the major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) that
includes other
genes with immune-related functions. The HLA genes are
distinguished by their exceptional polymorphism with
over 10,000 alleles described to date (Robinson et al.,
2015), which is driven by the long-standing evolutionary
arms race with pathogens (Prugnolle et al., 2005). This
coevolution between host and pathogens has occurred as
the HLA molecules play a central
role in adaptive
immunity by presenting to T cells fragments of self and
nonself (ie, microbial) proteins. The importance of this
interplay in the context of infectious disease is evidenced
by the various mechanisms utilized by pathogens to
evade HLA-restricted T cell immune responses (Nolan
et al., 2006).

genetic

(GWAS),

The relevance of the HLA genes in the context of
disease is further emphasized by the large volume of
disease association studies, both case-control studies and
genome-wide association studies
that have
repeatedly identiﬁed the HLA genes, or the MHC, as a hot
spot
for candidate disease gene(s). For a number of
autoimmune and infectious diseases HLA remains the
strongest
outcome. However,
although the HLA genes have been identiﬁed in many
disease association studies, the actual causal mechanism
for many of
these diseases has only recently been
elucidated for some, but for others, remains elusive. The
main obstacle to better understanding the speciﬁc involve-
ment of the HLA genes in disease is due to their inherent
characteristics: multicopy gene family with overlapping
functions, extreme allelic polymorphism, and extensive
linkage disequilibrium (LD) between different loci.

predictor

of

Multicopy Gene Families Due to Segmental
Duplications: Evolution of Different but
Related Functions
The HLA genes can be broadly grouped into two
types based on functional and structural features: class I
and class II. Phylogenetic analysis of the different HLA
class I and II genes suggest
they are likely to have
diverged about 500 million years ago (mya) from a com-
mon ancestor, with the different HLA class II
loci
diverging from each other about 170e200 mya (Nei et al.,
1997). The different HLA class I loci are thought to have
diverged later than the duplication of the class II genes but
a HLA class I-like molecule is likely to have been part of
the “proto-MHC” given the existence of MHC class I-like
molecules, and not class II-like genes, on other chromo-
somes suggesting the existence of an ancestor prior to
large-scale genome duplications in vertebrate evolution
(reviewed in Parham, 2015).

The HLA class I locus HLA-F was present

in the
primate genome at least 46e66 mya giving rise to HLA-G
and E, and then HLA-A and B about 35e49 mya
(Piontkivska and Nei, 2003). The duplication of HLA-B
giving rise to HLA-C is thought to have occurred about
21e28 mya. The phylogenetic clustering of the HLA and
homologous primate HLA sequences
these
divergence times. For example, orthologs of HLA-E are
present in Old and New World Monkeys, while HLA-A
and HLA-B are shared with other apes and Old World
Monkeys, and HLA-C is shared only with chimpanzee,
gorilla, and orangutan (Adams and Parham, 2001).
Interestingly, in contrast to humans, many of the nonhuman
primates have additional HLA-A and -Belike genes that
are likely to be lineage speciﬁc and may have evolved
nonoverlapping functions (Adams and Parham, 2001).

supports

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00013-2
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

211

212 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

Early genetic studies by Nei et al. showed an interre-
lationship between species for the different HLA genes
rather than close relationships for the different genes within
each species (ie, the individual loci form single clusters; as
also shown in Fig. 13.1 based on currently available HLA
sequences at www.imgt.org) (Nei et al., 1997). This rela-
tionship suggested limited evidence for interlocus gene
conversion or recombination and that the genes are likely to
reﬂect a mode of birth and death evolution. In this model,
new genes are created by duplications of genes with some

of these new genes deleted from the region or becoming
nonfunctional by deleterious mutations; surviving copies
can evolve with the development of distinct functions (Nei
et al., 1997) as is clearly observed for the HLA genes.

The HLA class II genes encode glycoproteins that
exist as a heterodimer of an a and b chain encoded by
different, but closely linked, genes in the MHC. These
molecules are predominantly expressed on professional
antigen-presenting cells and are involved in presenting
extracellular antigens to helper T cells. The loci include the

 Human HLA-B alleles

 Popy-B*01

 Human HLA-B alleles

 Papa-B*01
 B*27:05:02
 B*73:01

 Gogo-B*01:01

 Hyla-B*01

 Patr-B*01:01

 Gogo-C*01:01

 Popy-C*01:01:01

 Human-Chimpanzee HLA-C alleles

 Mamu-A1*001:01

 Paan-A*01

 Mane-A1*003:01
 Chsa-A*01:01
 Pacy-A*01

 Human HLA-A alleles

 Human HLA-A alleles

 Popy-A*01:01

 Hyla-A*01

 Human-Chimpanzee-Gorilla HLA-A alleles

 Mamu-B*001:01:01

 Paan-B*01

 Mane-B*004:01

 Chsa-B*01:01

 Pacy-B*01

0.02

FIGURE 13.1 Phylogenetic analysis of primate major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I exon 2 and 3 sequences using the neighbor-joining
method. MHC sequences obtained from www.imgt.org. Apes include Patr, Common Chimpanzee; Gogo, Western Gorilla; Popy, Bornean Orangutan;
Papa, Bonobo; Hyla, Lar Gibbon. Old World Monkeys include Pacy, Yellow Baboon; Mamu, Rhesus Monkey; Mane, Southern Pig-Tailed Macaque;
Paan, Olive Baboon; Chsa, Green Monkey. Human HLA class I sequences include all alleles to two-digit resolution. Distance bar indicates substitutions/
site.

Evolution of the Human Leukocyte Antigen System Chapter | 13 213

highly diverse HLA-DR, -DQ genes, and the less diverse
HLA-DM, -DP genes. In contrast, the HLA class I genes
encode glycoproteins that comprise three extracellular
domains, including the a1 and a2 domains that form the
peptide binding region, and a conserved a3 domain that is
noncovalently bound to b2-microglobulin, which is enco-
ded on a different chromosome.

The HLA class I genes can be further separated into the
highly polymorphic classical class Ia genes HLA-A, -B,
and -C that are expressed on all nucleated cells and the
nonclassical HLA class Ib genes HLA-E, -G, and -F that
are relatively oligomorphic and are typically restricted in
expression to speciﬁc tissues or cell types. There are also a
number of HLA class I pseudogenes (eg, HLA-J). The
classical class Ia proteins are associated with presenting self
and nonself peptides to cytotoxic T cells and the majority of
variation between alleles is concentrated in the peptide-
binding domains. These glycoproteins also act as ligands
for the Natural Killer (NK) cell killer immunoglobulin-like
receptors (KIRs) but their propensity to act as KIR ligands
varies (Wilson et al., 2000; Trowsdale, 2001) with only a
subset of HLA-A and -B alleles able to bind NK receptors
with HLA-C alleles likely to be the dominant NK cell re-
ceptor ligand. This dual functionality of the HLA class I
genes represents two coevolving strategies and reﬂects the
development of nonoverlapping functions
the
duplication of ancestral HLA class I genes.

since

The functional specialization of the closely related HLA
class I genes following duplication is also supported by a
study examining HLA class I binding preferences for
peptides derived from human proteins and different virus
families (Hertz et al., 2011). The analysis in this study
showed that binding preferences for HLA-A alleles and for
those HLA-B lineages that predate the human-chimpanzee
split favor conserved epitopes in human proteins and DNA
viruses such as Herpesviridae and Adenoviridae in which
host mimicry is a prominent mechanism of
immune
evasion. The longer coevolution with these viruses suggest
that this pattern of targeting would ﬁt with such viruses
exploiting “holes” in the mature T cell repertoire created by
thymic negative selection of self-reactive T cells (Louzoun
et al., 2006; Vider-Shalit et al., 2007; Frankild et al., 2008),
whereas HLA-B alleles,
in general, efﬁciently target
conserved epitopes in RNA viruses (including the human-
speciﬁc Paramyxoviridae) whose replicative characteris-
tics allow them to additionally evade HLA-restricted
immunity by mutational escape. The same analysis was
then used on a well-characterized cohort of HIV-1-infected
individuals to show that HLA-B binding efﬁciency (based
on a subject’s HLA genotype) to conserved T cell epitopes
strongly correlated with viral load, supporting the known
immunological data
are
important
in determining the natural history of HIV
infection (Kiepiela et al., 2007). This study and others

showing HLA-B responses

suggest different evolutionary pressures on the HLA class I
loci (Prugnolle et al., 2005; Watkins et al., 1992) and may
reﬂect different rates of change including via intra-allelic
recombination (Piontkivska and Nei, 2003).

The functional repertoire of the nonclassical class I
proteins has not been as well characterized. HLA-E
displays the least polymorphism among the HLA class I
loci, having, in Caucasian populations, only two alleles that
differ by a single amino acid (Ulbrecht et al., 1999). The
discovery that HLA-E binds conserved strictly nonameric
leader peptides of coexpressed HLA-A, -B, -C, and -G and
ligates with inhibitory CD94/NKG2A NK receptors sug-
gested that this locus evolved to monitor HLA class I
expression, the downregulation of which is an important
immune evasion mechanism of many pathogens (Borrego
et al., 1998). Cytomegalovirus (CMV) has devised an
interesting counter measure for the immune-surveillance
function of HLA-E by actively upregulating the expres-
sion of HLA-E (while downregulating expression of
classical HLA class I) (Tomasec et al., 2000; Wang et al.,
2002) and loading viral peptides identical to HLA leader
sequences onto HLA-E through a TAP-independent
mechanism, leading to inhibition of NK-mediated lysis of
CMV-infected cells (Wang et al., 2002). HLA-G is also
linked to the immunomodulation of NK cell function,
particularly in the context of the fetalematernal interface,
as it can act as a ligand for another type of inhibitory NK
cell receptor (KIR2DL4) (reviewed in Amodio et al., 2014).
Recent data suggest a novel HLA-E-restriction element
for T cells via the presentation of noncanonical peptides
derived from stress-related and pathogen-associated proteins
(reviewed in Pietra et al., 2009). For example, studies have
þ
demonstrated HLA-E-restricted
antigen-speciﬁc CD8
T cell responses activated through ab T cell receptors in a
number of infections, including those caused by Epstein-
Barr virus (EBV), Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Salmo-
nella, Hepatitis C virus (HCV), and against HLA-E-
expressing tumors (Pietra et al., 2010). Furthermore, HLA-
þ
E-restricted regulatory CD8
T cells suppressed activation
þ
of simian immunodeﬁciency virus (SIV)-infected CD4
T cells inhibiting viral transmission in the macaque SIV
vaccine model (Andrieu et al., 2014). These observations
suggest the involvement in NK and T cell function is a
feature of classical and nonclassical HLA class I genes but
the mode of action and likely extent of involvement in the
innate and adaptive arm of the immune response varies.

A detailed examination of the duplication process for
the HLA class I genes reveals that the HLA class I genes
and the closely linked polymorphic MHC class I chain
related (MIC) genes form part of segments that have
duplicated over time,
likely facilitated by retroelements
including human endogenous retroviruses (Gaudieri et al.,
1999a; Kulski et al., 1999). This process of segmental
duplication in the MHC class I region has resulted in the

214 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

generation of sets of closely related HLA and MIC gene
families and in some cases leading to haplotypes that have
speciﬁc combinations of alleles for these multicopy gene
families (discussed later in this chapter). However, in some
instances the segmental duplications may be imperfect or
are associated with large deletions creating nonfunctional
gene products. For example, the HLA-B*48 haplotype in
East Asian populations contains a large 100 kb deletion in
the region between MICB and HLA-B resulting in a null
MICA allele and a premature stop in MICB (Komatsu-
Wakui et al., 2001). Similarly,
the
same region has a large deletion of w95 kb creating a
single fused MICA/MICB gene (Anzai et al., 2003). Other
large insertions/deletions occur in humans and other pri-
mates in the area containing and surrounding HLA-A to
HLA-F (Watanabe et al., 1997) that also contains a number
of HLA class I pseudogenes and gene fragments suggesting
recent expansion/contraction in the region with unknown
functional consequences.

in the chimpanzee,

Extensive Allelic Polymorphism: Evidence
for Multiple Selection Pressures
Studies on the genetic variation between human HLA
alleles suggested the maintenance of the observed diversity
in the population was due to overdominant or heterozygote
advantage based on the higher rate of nonsynonymous
(replacement) changes over synonymous (silent) changes in
the peptide binding region compared to the nonpeptide
binding regions of the protein (Hughes and Nei, 1988)
and the presence of alleles that predate speciation events
(trans-species polymorphism) (reviewed in Hughes and
Yeager, 1998). Such heterozygote advantage would suggest
that individuals expressing different HLA alleles at the
different loci would be at an advantage in an environment
in which they are exposed to a wide array of pathogens, as
originally proposed by Doherty and Zinkernagel (1975) for
the murine H-2 system that is homologous to the HLA
system. In essence, each HLA allele “sees” a unique set of
processed pathogen peptides (epitopes) and accordingly
individuals who express different HLA types (heterozy-
gotes) are in principle able to present a broader response
and provide better protection. Certainly this has been
shown in the context of HLA class I for the highly mutable
pathogens HIV (Carrington et al., 1999) and HCV (Hraber
et al., 2007). A systematic analysis of the DNA sequences
of
thousands of alleles from about 200 populations
supports a reﬁnement of this model called “asymmetric
overdominant” selection suggesting an advantage for those
individuals expressing distant HLA molecules (Buhler and
Sanchez-Mazas,
the
adaptive potential of many pathogens, rare HLA alleles in
the population may be favored resulting in frequency-
dependent selection, but this mode of evolution alone is

Furthermore,

2011).

given

unlikely to explain the long-term maintenance of
the
polymorphism exhibited at the HLA loci. Evidence of gene
conversion also exists to support
the extreme variation
observed in this genetic system, particularly for HLA-B
(Buhler and Sanchez-Mazas, 2011).

The HLA genetic system may also be subject to sexual
selection. In the American Hutterites, an example of an
isolated founder population, mate choice was found to be
favored between couples with dissimilar HLA types and in
turn these couples were more fertile than HLA concordant
couples (Ober, 1999). The inﬂuence of HLA on mate
choice has been an intriguing area given the use of HLA (or
equivalent
in other species) peptides as chemosensory
signals (Leinders-Zufall et al., 2004; Milinski et al., 2013),
the preference for MHC-dissimilarity based on odor in
some populations (Chaix et al., 2008 and human studies
reviewed in Havlicek and Roberts, 2009), and the close
proximity of the olfactory receptor genes to the HLA genes
in the MHC (Ziegler et al., 2010).

There are also data to support an intriguing mode of
adaptation via introgression of DNA from archaic homi-
nids. Parham et al. have suggested that a substantial pro-
portion of the HLA alleles currently observed in Eurasians
is from admixture with Neandertals and the Denisovans, a
sister group to Neandertals, that lived in Eurasia about
30,000e200,000 years ago (Abi-Rached et al., 2011).
The suggestion stems from the observation of the HLA-C
variants (HLA-C*12 and C*15) found in the Denisovan
genome that are linked to the HLA-B allele HLA-B*73, an
allele that appears
in West Asian populations but
absent from African tribes although similar to alleles in
chimpanzees and gorillas. In addition, HLA-A*11 with
HLA-C*12 and C*15 haplotypes may also have been
obtained via admixture. Similar analyses suggest
that
Neandertals contributed HLA-B*07, B*51, C*07:02, and
C*16:02. It is likely that selection and drift had a major
inﬂuence on the early hominid populations given the
relatively small effective population sizes and it would have
been advantageous for a population to obtain such preex-
isting allele(s) in a new environment with a different
pathogen load. For example, HLA-A*11 provides T
cell-mediated protection against some strains of EBV
(de Campos-Lima et al., 1993), and when binding an EBV
peptide can bind KIR3DL2 (only one of two ligands for this
KIR) (Hansasuta et al., 2004).

It

is not only the peptide binding domains of the
HLA genes within the MHC that are characterized by high
levels of diversity but also in non-HLA genes and
intervening sequencesdsome of which is likely explained
by “hitchhiking” effects (Gaudieri et al., 1999b, 2000). In
fact there is a strong inverse correlation between diversity
in the intergenic regions of the MHC and sites of recom-
bination (Gaudieri et al., 2000). These regions in turn reﬁne
regions of disease susceptibility that can limit GWAS and

Evolution of the Human Leukocyte Antigen System Chapter | 13 215

other genetic association studies. Another outcome from
this phenomenon is the formation of polymorphic frozen
blocks that contain a certain combination of alleles at
different genes, many of which have an immunological
function such as HLA and MIC (Dawkins et al., 1999).

Potential Bottlenecks
The extent to which constrictions in HLA repertoires may
have been caused by the negative selection effect of past
pathogens is difﬁcult to determine. It is known that Euro-
pean contact with native Amerindians led to transmissions
of measles and small pox, among other pathogens, with
devastating consequences on population sizes (McMichael,
2004). The case for pathogen-associated bottlenecks is
much more clear for our nearest closest living relatives,
the chimpanzee, with whom humans shared a common
ancestor about 5 mya (McAdam et al., 1995). Though this
would predict a large degree of sharing of HLA-A and -B
lineages, there is a marked speciﬁc restriction in MHC class
I intron variation and numbers of unique alleles in chimps
compared to humans, due to a probable “selective sweep”
about 2 mya, predating the subspeciation of chimpanzees
(Abi-Rached et al., 2011). This is likely to have been
caused by an ancient primate lentivirus
resembling
SIVcpz/HIV-1, which killed a large number of individuals
and selected out a restricted range of Patr class I allotypes.
Thus modern chimps, particularly those in West African
populations, appear adapted to SIV as a nonpathogenic
infection. This would account for data showing similar
peptide binding characteristics of Patr class I allotypes
-B*27:05
and HLA-B alleles HLA-B*57:01
associated with preferential
conserved
epitopes in HIV and natural antiviral control (de Groot
et al., 2010; Gleimer et al., 2011; van Deutekom et al.,
2011).

and
restriction of

Extensive Linkage Disequilibrium Between
Human Leukocyte Antigen Loci
The MHC is characterized by extensive LD that can cover
up to 4 Mb of sequence. From the original complotypes to
ancestral haplotypes it has been known that
there are
combinations of alleles that are inherited en bloc (Dawkins
et al., 1999). The reasoning behind the maintenance of such
combinationsdfor example MICA/B alleles and HLA-B/C
combinations is still uncleardbut some studies of cell lines
with different ancestral haplotypes have shown varying
levels of immune responsiveness (eg,
levels of tumour
necrosis factor) (Abraham et al., 1993). The combination of
speciﬁc HLA class I and class II alleles in MHC haplotypes
that appear
to be well maintained in populations is
intriguing and may reﬂect some adaptive advantage as
suggested by Penman et al. (2013) who provide theoretical

evidence that pathogen selection can drive long-range and
long-term haplotypes.

An interesting new model for the MHC has been
proposed,
termed the “associative balancing complex
evolution,” which attempts to explain the many features of
the MHC such as extensive diversity at both HLA and
non-HLA genes, epistasis of the multicopy gene families
resulting in the haplotype structure and the strong associ-
ation of the MHC with different diseases (van Oosterhout,
2009). One of the main components of the model suggests
that potential
recessive disease-causing mutations are
maintained in the region due to a likely lack of purifying
selection resulting in a “sheltered load”. Disease manifests
only when homozygosity results, which is likely to be
relatively rare due to the allelic nature of the MHC and
selection against this form, also leading to maintenance of
epistasis of the genes within the haplotype blocks resulting
in the described polymorphic frozen blocks that span the
MHC (Dawkins et al., 1999).

and CD8

COMPETING EVOLUTIONARY
PRESSURES: HLAeNK CELL INTERACTION
As mentioned previously, aside from presenting peptides
to T cells, HLA class I proteins also act as ligands for NK
cell receptors. NK cells constitute a crucial component of
the host’s innate immune response, but data also show that
NK cells may modulate the host’s adaptive immune
þ
response by directly deleting activated CD4
T cells (Nielsen et al., 2012; Peppa et al., 2013), hence
these cells are important contributors to the overall host
immune response to pathogens and disease. The cytotoxic
capacity of NK cells is regulated via signals derived from
a complex array of inhibitory and activating receptors
such as the variable KIRs and the more conserved NKG2
family including CD94/NKG2A that binds HLA-E (Jamil
and Khakoo, 2011). These receptors allow NK cells to
sample cells for the presence of HLA class I molecules
that are expressed on healthy cells (indicate “normal self”
to the immune system); however, target cells, such as
virally infected cells or tumor cells, typically have low or
no expression of HLA class I molecules on their surface
in order to escape detection from cytotoxic CD8
T cells,
and they can be recognized and lysed by NK cells in a
process referred to as missing-self recognition (Karre
et al., 1986).

þ

þ

The genes that encode the KIR proteins are present in
the leukocyte receptor complex on chromosome 19 and the
genomic region shares some features with the MHC;
extensive LD between closely related KIR members,
genetic diversity (although unlikely to be as diverse as the
HLA genes even with greater sampling of KIR genes), and
evidence for balancing selection. Furthermore, there are
known KIR haplotypes (mainly of type A or B) and they

216 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

can differ in gene content (A has mainly inhibitory KIRs
and also found in chimpanzees while B is only found in
humans) and frequency in different populations (Parham
and Moffett, 2013). Accordingly, the HLA/KIR interaction
is highly variable and this evolution, as for the HLA/T cell
interaction, is driven by selective pressure from exposure to
pathogens (Parham et al., 2010; Hershberger et al., 2001;
Khakoo et al., 2000). Supporting evidence for this selection
pressure includes reports showing the presence of particular
combinations of HLA class I alleles and KIRs within a host
that have been associated with a number of infectious
disease outcomes (Martin et al., 2002; Khakoo et al., 2004).
However, the HLA/KIR interaction is also important in
reproduction (incurring signiﬁcant ﬁtness costs based on
certain HLA/KIR combinations) as reviewed by Moffett
and Colucci (2015) and the frequency of the KIR haplo-
types and HLA ligands in different human populations
likely reﬂects this evolutionary interplay. Interestingly,
although human and chimpanzee have closely related
homologs for HLA-A, -B, and -C the KIR gene content
and haplotypes are different, reﬂecting lineage-speciﬁc
evolution.

Finally, data suggest that the sequence content of the
peptide presented by the HLA class I molecule may be
relevant in the context of NK cells (Alter et al., 2011) and
for speciﬁc HLA/KIR interactions (Holzemer et al., 2015),
akin to the viral immune escape mutations known to affect
the T celleHLA peptide complex and observed at
the
population level as HLA-associated viral escape (Moore
et al., 2002). Furthermore, the binding area of the HLA/
KIR interaction overlaps with that of the HLA/T cell
receptor (Boyington et al., 2000). Collectively, these data
suggest the two interactions are not independent and reﬂect
a competing evolutionary pressure on the HLA system to
maintain its role in NK cell function but retain the ability to
present varying sets of peptides to T cells.

FUTURE CONSIDERATIONS

Inﬂuence of Human Leukocyte Antigen on
the Microbiome (Commensal and
Symbiotic Microorganisms)
Although much has been examined in the context of HLA
(and the MHC) and infectious diseases, there have been few
studies examining the inﬂuence of HLA on the human
microbiome and how this interaction may have inﬂuenced
the evolution of the HLA system or vice versa. For
example, it is known that the human diet inﬂuences the gut
microbiome, and levels of protein and carbohydrates have
been shown to inﬂuence the bacterial enterotype in the gut
(Arumugam et al., 2011). Dietary adaptations throughout
human evolution have been documented and potentially

may have affected this host
interaction.

immune/gut microbiome

The human microbiota is associated with an increasing
number of phenotypes and is inﬂuenced by early life
interactions as well as later environmental insults. The gut
contains the most diverse and largest community of
commensal and symbiotic microorganisms in the body.
Genetics (evidenced by transgenerational
inheritance of
microbiomes) and environment
factors
inﬂuence the
composition of this community and not surprisingly, diet is
an important factor as well as infections. It is likely that the
microbiome is important in shaping the host’s adaptive
immune response,
including tolerance to self-antigens.
There have been some studies that have examined how
HLA may inﬂuence the microbiota. Rishi et al. have
reviewed data from human and animal studies to better
understand the immunogenetics of
the gut microbiota
(Marietta et al., 2015). A comparison of monozygotic (MZ)
versus dizygotic (DZ) twins showed a higher concordance
rate of pathogen carriage in MZ over DZ twins, as may be
expected given heritability for a phenotype (in this case
pathogen load) (reviewed in Marietta et al., 2015). Another
example using a humanized mouse model showed animals
with the HLA-DRB1*04 alleles, associated with differential
predisposition to rheumatoid arthritis, exhibited varied gut
microbiomes suggesting these molecules may be involved
in shaping the microorganisms that colonize the gut
(Taneja, 2014; Gomez et al., 2012); similar results were
shown for humans (Scher et al., 2013). Another animal
model showed the presence of HLA-B27, associated with
ankylosing spondylitis, altered the gut microbiome (Lin
et al., 2014). The HLA-DQ2 allele associated with the
development
to celiac disease was found to inﬂuence
microbial diversity in infants (Olivares et al., 2015; De
Palma et al., 2010). It remains to be seen how critical the
HLA repertoire we inherit and our environment inﬂuences
our microbiomednot only in the gut but elsewhere in the
body.

CONCLUSIONS
The ability to differentiate self and nonself with immuno-
logical memory is common to vertebrates. In humans and
many other species the HLA or homologous genes maintain
this function. In humans, the HLA genes reside within the
MHC; an area of the genome that is a reservoir for immune-
related genes involved in NK cell activation, inﬂammation,
and antigen processing supporting the large volume of
studies that have shown an association between the MHC
and disease. However, the features of the MHC have also
provided geneticists with an information-rich template from
which to examine our ancestry, migrations, diet, and in-
teractions with pathogens. While many speciﬁc drivers of
MHC evolution have been elucidated, there is still much

Evolution of the Human Leukocyte Antigen System Chapter | 13 217

more to be understood, particularly in the less studied
nonclassical HLA loci, the HLA receptors such as KIRs,
and in variable HLA expression (as an additional layer of
polymorphism)
as
indicated for HIV infection (Apps et al., 2013). It is hoped
that continued investment in understanding this aspect of
human variation will continue to provide beneﬁts to human
health and the ongoing human story.

that has biological

consequences

REFERENCES

Abi-Rached, L., Jobin, M.J., Kulkarni, S., McWhinnie, A., Dalva, K.,
Gragert, L., et al., 2011. The shaping of modern human immune
systems by multiregional admixture with archaic humans. Science 334
(6052), 89e94.

Abraham, L.J., French, M.A., Dawkins, R.L., 1993. Polymorphic MHC
ancestral haplotypes affect the activity of tumour necrosis factor-
alpha. Clinical and Experimental Immunology 92 (1), 14e18.

Adams, E.J., Parham, P., 2001. Species-speciﬁc evolution of MHC class I

genes in the higher primates. Immunological Reviews 183, 41e64.

Alter, G., Heckerman, D., Schneidewind, A., Fadda, L., Kadie, C.M.,
Carlson, J.M., et al., 2011. HIV-1 adaptation to NK-cell-mediated
immune pressure. Nature 476 (7358), 96e100.

Amodio, G., Sales de Albuquerque, R., Gregori, S., 2014. New insights

into HLA-G mediated tolerance. Tissue Antigens 84 (3), 255e263.

Andrieu, J.M., Chen, S., Lai, C., Guo, W., Lu, W., 2014. Mucosal SIV
vaccines comprising inactivated virus particles and bacterial adjuvants
induce CD8(þ) T-regulatory cells that suppress SIV-positive CD4(þ)
T-cell activation and prevent SIV infection in the macaque model.
Frontiers in Immunology 5, 297.

Anzai, T., Shiina, T., Kimura, N., Yanagiya, K., Kohara, S., Shigenari, A.,
et al., 2003. Comparative sequencing of human and chimpanzee MHC
class I regions unveils insertions/deletions as the major path to
genomic divergence. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences of the United States of America 100 (13), 7708e7713.

Apps, R., Qi, Y., Carlson, J.M., Chen, H., Gao, X., Thomas, R., et al.,
2013. Inﬂuence of HLA-C expression level on HIV control. Science
340 (6128), 87e91.

Arumugam, M., Raes, J., Pelletier, E., Le Paslier, D., Yamada, T.,
Mende, D.R., et al., 2011. Enterotypes of the human gut microbiome.
Nature 473 (7346), 174e180.

Borrego, F., Ulbrecht, M., Weiss, E.H., Coligan, J.E., Brooks, A.G.,
1998. Recognition of human histocompatibility leukocyte antigen
(HLA)-E complexed with HLA class I signal sequence-derived
peptides by CD94/NKG2 confers protection from natural killer
cell-mediated lysis. The Journal of Experimental Medicine 187 (5),
813e818.

Boyington, J.C., Motyka, S.A., Schuck, P., Brooks, A.G., Sun, P.D., 2000.
Crystal structure of an NK cell
immunoglobulin-like receptor in
complex with its class I MHC ligand. Nature 405 (6786), 537e543.
Buhler, S., Sanchez-Mazas, A., 2011. HLA DNA sequence variation
among human populations: molecular signatures of demographic and
selective events. PloS One 6 (2), e14643.

de Campos-Lima, P.O., Gavioli, R., Zhang, Q.J., Wallace, L.E.,
Dolcetti, R., Rowe, M., et al., 1993. HLA-A11 epitope loss isolates of
EpsteineBarr virus from a highly A11þ population. Science 260
(5104), 98e100.

Carrington, M., Nelson, G.W., Martin, M.P., Kissner, T., Vlahov, D.,
Goedert, J.J., et al., 1999. HLA and HIV-1: heterozygote advantage
and B*35-Cw*04 disadvantage. Science 283 (5408), 1748e1752.

Chaix, R., Cao, C., Donnelly, P., 2008. Is mate choice in humans MHC-

dependent? PLoS Genetics 4 (9), e1000184.

Dawkins, R., Leelayuwat, C., Gaudieri, S., Tay, G., Hui, J., Cattley, S.,
et al., 1999. Genomics of the major histocompatibility complex:
haplotypes, duplication, retroviruses and disease. Immunological Re-
views 167, 275e304.

De Palma, G., Capilla, A., Nadal, I., Nova, E., Pozo, T., Varea, V., et al.,
2010. Interplay between human leukocyte antigen genes and the mi-
crobial colonization process of the newborn intestine. Current Issues
in Molecular Biology 12 (1), 1e10.

van Deutekom, H.W., Hoof,

I., Bontrop, R.E., Kesmir, C., 2011.
A comparative analysis of viral peptides presented by contemporary
human and chimpanzee MHC class I molecules. Journal of Immu-
nology 187 (11), 5995e6001.

Doherty, P.C., Zinkernagel, R.M., 1975. Enhanced immunological sur-
veillance in mice heterozygous at the H-2 gene complex. Nature 256
(5512), 50e52.

Frankild, S., de Boer, R.J., Lund, O., Nielsen, M., Kesmir, C., 2008.
Amino acid similarity accounts for T cell cross-reactivity and for
“holes” in the T cell repertoire. PloS One 3 (3), e1831.

Gaudieri, S., Kulski, J.K., Dawkins, R.L., Gojobori, T., 1999a. Different
evolutionary histories in two subgenomic regions of the major histo-
compatibility complex. Genome Research 9 (6), 541e549.

Gaudieri, S., Kulski,

J.K., Dawkins, R.L., Gojobori, T., 1999b.
Extensive nucleotide variability within a 370 kb sequence from the
central region of the major histocompatibility complex. Gene 238 (1),
157e161.

Gaudieri, S., Dawkins, R.L., Habara, K., Kulski, J.K., Gojobori, T., 2000.
SNP proﬁle within the human major histocompatibility complex re-
veals an extreme and interrupted level of nucleotide diversity. Genome
Research 10 (10), 1579e1586.

Gleimer, M., Wahl, A.R., Hickman, H.D., Abi-Rached, L., Norman, P.J.,
Guethlein, L.A., et al., 2011. Although divergent in residues of the
peptide binding site, conserved chimpanzee Patr-AL and polymorphic
human HLA-A*02 have overlapping peptide-binding repertoires.
Journal of Immunology 186 (3), 1575e1588.

Gomez, A., Luckey, D., Yeoman, C.J., Marietta, E.V., Berg Miller, M.E.,
Murray, J.A., et al., 2012. Loss of sex and age driven differences in
the gut microbiome characterize arthritis-susceptible 0401 mice but
not arthritis-resistant 0402 mice. PloS One 7 (4), e36095.

de Groot, N.G., Heijmans, C.M., Zoet, Y.M., de Ru, A.H.,
Verreck, F.A., van Veelen, P.A., et al., 2010. AIDS-protective
HLA-B*27/B*57 and chimpanzee MHC class I molecules target
analogous conserved areas of HIV-1/SIVcpz. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
107 (34), 15175e15180.

Hansasuta, P., Dong, T., Thananchai, H., Weekes, M., Willberg, C.,
Aldemir, H., et al., 2004. Recognition of HLA-A3 and HLA-A11 by
KIR3DL2 is peptide-speciﬁc. European Journal of Immunology 34
(6), 1673e1679.

Havlicek, J., Roberts, S.C., 2009. MHC-correlated mate choice in humans:

a review. Psychoneuroendocrinology 34 (4), 497e512.

Hershberger, K.L., Shyam, R., Miura, A., Letvin, N.L., 2001. Diversity of
the killer cell Ig-like receptors of rhesus monkeys. Journal of Immu-
nology 166 (7), 4380e4390.

218 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

Hertz, T., Nolan, D., James, I., John, M., Gaudieri, S., Phillips, E., et al.,
2011. Mapping the landscape of host-pathogen coevolution: HLA
class I binding and its relationship with evolutionary conservation in
human and viral proteins. Journal of Virology 85 (3), 1310e1321.

Holzemer, A., Thobakgale, C.F.,

Jimenez Cruz, C.A., Garcia-
Beltran, W.F., Carlson, J.M., van Teijlingen, N.H., et al., 2015. Se-
lection of an HLA-C*03:04-restricted HIV-1 p24 Gag sequence
variant is associated with viral escape from KIR2DL3þ natural killer
cells: data from an observational cohort in South Africa. PLoS Med-
icine 12 (11), e1001900.

Hraber, P., Kuiken, C., Yusim, K., 2007. Evidence for human leukocyte
antigen heterozygote advantage against hepatitis C virus infection.
Hepatology 46 (6), 1713e1721.

Hughes, A.L., Nei, M., 1988. Pattern of nucleotide substitution at major
histocompatibility complex class I loci reveals overdominant selec-
tion. Nature 335 (6186), 167e170.

Hughes, A.L., Yeager, M., 1998. Natural selection and the evolutionary
history of major histocompatibility complex loci. Frontiers in
Bioscience: A Journal and Virtual Library 3, d509ed516.

Jamil, K.M., Khakoo, S.I., 2011. KIR/HLA interactions and pathogen

immunity. Journal of Biomedicine & Biotechnology 2011, 298348.

Karre, K., Ljunggren, H.G., Piontek, G., Kiessling, R., 1986. Selective
lymphoma variants suggests alternative

rejection of H-2-deﬁcient
immune defence strategy. Nature 319 (6055), 675e678.

Khakoo, S.I., Rajalingam, R., Shum, B.P., Weidenbach, K., Flodin, L.,
Muir, D.G., et al., 2000. Rapid evolution of NK cell receptor systems
demonstrated by comparison of chimpanzees and humans. Immunity
12 (6), 687e698.

Khakoo, S.I., Thio, C.L., Martin, M.P., Brooks, C.R., Gao, X.,
Astemborski, J., et al., 2004. HLA and NK cell inhibitory receptor
genes in resolving hepatitis C virus infection. Science 305 (5685),
872e874.

Kiepiela, P., Ngumbela, K., Thobakgale, C., Ramduth, D., Honeyborne, I.,
Moodley, E., et al., 2007. CD8
T-cell responses to different HIV
proteins have discordant associations with viral load. Nature Medicine
13 (1), 46e53.

þ

McAdam, S.N., Boyson, J.E., Liu, X., Garber, T.L., Hughes, A.L.,
Bontrop, R.E., et al., 1995. Chimpanzee MHC class I A locus alleles
are related to only one of the six families of human A locus alleles.
Journal of Immunology 154 (12), 6421e6429.

McMichael, A.J., 2004. Environmental and social inﬂuences on emerging
infectious diseases: past, present and future. Philosophical Trans-
actions of the Royal Society of London Series B, Biological Sciences
359 (1447), 1049e1058.

Milinski, M., Croy, I., Hummel, T., Boehm, T., 2013. Major histocom-
patibility complex peptide ligands as olfactory cues in human body
odour assessment. Proceedings Biological Sciences/The Royal Society
280 (1755), 20122889.

Moffett, A., Colucci, F., 2015. Co-evolution of NK receptors and HLA
ligands in humans is driven by reproduction. Immunological Reviews
267 (1), 283e297.

Moore, C.B., John, M., James, I.R., Christiansen, F.T., Witt, C.S.,
Mallal, S.A., 2002. Evidence of HIV-1 adaptation to HLA-restricted
immune responses at a population level. Science 296 (5572),
1439e1443.

Nei, M., Gu, X., Sitnikova, T., 1997. Evolution by the birth-and-death
process in multigene families of the vertebrate immune system. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 94 (15), 7799e7806.

Nielsen, N., Odum, N., Urso, B., Lanier, L.L., Spee, P., 2012. Cytotoxicity
þ
of CD56(bright) NK cells towards autologous activated CD4
T cells
is mediated through NKG2D, LFA-1 and TRAIL and dampened via
CD94/NKG2A. PloS One 7 (2), e31959.

Nolan, D., Gaudieri, S., Mallal, S., 2006. Host genetics and viral in-
fections: immunology taught by viruses, virology taught by the im-
mune system. Current Opinion in Immunology 18 (4), 413e421.

Ober, C., 1999. Studies of HLA, fertility and mate choice in a human

isolate. Human Reproduction Update 5 (2), 103e107.

Olivares, M., Neef, A., Castillejo, G., Palma, G.D., Varea, V., Capilla, A.,
et al., 2015. The HLA-DQ2 genotype selects for early intestinal
microbiota composition in infants at high risk of developing coeliac
disease. Gut 64 (3), 406e417.

Komatsu-Wakui, M., Tokunaga, K.,

Ishikawa, Y., Leelayuwat, C.,
Kashiwase, K., Tanaka, H., et al., 2001. Wide distribution of the MICA-
MICB null haplotype in East Asians. Tissue Antigens 57 (1), 1e8.

van Oosterhout, C., 2009. A new theory of MHC evolution: beyond se-
lection on the immune genes. Proceedings Biological Sciences/The
Royal Society 276 (1657), 657e665.

Kulski, J.K., Gaudieri, S., Martin, A., Dawkins, R.L., 1999. Coevolution
of PERB11 (MIC) and HLA class I genes with HERV-16 and retro-
elements by extended genomic duplication. Journal of Molecular
Evolution 49 (1), 84e97.

Leinders-Zufall, T., Brennan, P., Widmayer, P., Prashanth, C.S., Maul-
Pavicic, A., Jager, M., et al., 2004. MHC class I peptides as chemo-
sensory signals in the vomeronasal organ. Science 306 (5698),
1033e1037.

Lin, P., Bach, M., Asquith, M., Lee, A.Y., Akileswaran, L., Stauffer, P.,
et al., 2014. HLA-B27 and human b2-microglobulin affect the gut
microbiota of transgenic rats. PloS One 9 (8), e105684.

Louzoun, Y., Vider, T., Weigert, M., 2006. T-cell epitope repertoire as
predicted from human and viral genomes. Molecular Immunology 43
(6), 559e569.

Marietta, E., Rishi, A., Taneja, V., 2015. Immunogenetic control of the

intestinal microbiota. Immunology 145 (3), 313e322.

Parham, P., Moffett, A., 2013. Variable NK cell receptors and their MHC
class I ligands in immunity, reproduction and human evolution. Nature
Reviews Immunology 13 (2), 133e144.

Parham, P., Abi-Rached, L., Matevosyan, L., Moesta, A.K., Norman, P.J.,
Older Aguilar, A.M., et al., 2010. Primate-speciﬁc regulation of nat-
ural killer cells. Journal of Medical Primatology 39 (4), 194e212.

Parham, P., 2015. Co-evolution of lymphocyte receptors with MHC class

I. Immunological Reviews 267 (1), 1e5.

Penman, B.S., Ashby, B., Buckee, C.O., Gupta, S., 2013. Pathogen se-
lection drives nonoverlapping associations between HLA loci. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 110 (48), 19645e19650.

Peppa, D., Gill, U.S., Reynolds, G., Easom, N.J., Pallett, L.J.,
Schurich, A., et al., 2013. Up-regulation of a death receptor renders
antiviral T cells susceptible to NK cell-mediated deletion. The Journal
of Experimental Medicine 210 (1), 99e114.

Martin, M.P., Gao, X., Lee, J.H., Nelson, G.W., Detels, R., Goedert, J.J.,
et al., 2002. Epistatic interaction between KIR3DS1 and HLA-B de-
lays the progression to AIDS. Nature Genetics 31 (4), 429e434.

Pietra, G., Romagnani, C., Moretta, L., Mingari, M.C., 2009. HLA-E and
HLA-E-bound peptides: recognition by subsets of NK and T cells.
Current Pharmaceutical Design 15 (28), 3336e3344.

Evolution of the Human Leukocyte Antigen System Chapter | 13 219

Pietra, G., Romagnani, C., Manzini, C., Moretta, L., Mingari, M.C., 2010.
þ
T lymphocytes in the
The emerging role of HLA-E-restricted CD8
adaptive immune response to pathogens and tumors. Journal of
Biomedicine & Biotechnology 2010, 907092.

Piontkivska, H., Nei, M., 2003. Birth-and-death evolution in primate MHC
class I genes: divergence time estimates. Molecular Biology and
Evolution 20 (4), 601e609.

Prugnolle, F., Manica, A., Charpentier, M., Guegan, J.F., Guernier, V.,
Balloux, F., 2005. Pathogen-driven selection and worldwide HLA
class I diversity. Current Biology: CB 15 (11), 1022e1027.

Robinson, J., Halliwell, J.A., Hayhurst, J.D., Flicek, P., Parham, P.,
Marsh, S.G., 2015. The IPD and IMGT/HLA database: allele variant
databases. Nucleic Acids Research
issue),
D423eD431.

(Database

43

Scher, J.U., Sczesnak, A., Longman, R.S., Segata, N., Ubeda, C.,
Bielski, C., et al., 2013. Expansion of intestinal Prevotella copri cor-
relates with enhanced susceptibility to arthritis. eLife 2, e01202.

Taneja, V., 2014. Arthritis susceptibility and the gut microbiome. FEBS

Letters 588 (22), 4244e4249.

Tomasec, P., Braud, V.M., Rickards, C., Powell, M.B., McSharry, B.P.,
Gadola, S., et al., 2000. Surface expression of HLA-E, an inhibitor of
natural killer cells, enhanced by human cytomegalovirus gpUL40.
Science 287 (5455), 1031.

Trowsdale, J., 2001. Genetic and functional relationships between MHC

and NK receptor genes. Immunity 15 (3), 363e374.

Ulbrecht, M., Couturier, A., Martinozzi, S., Pla, M., Srivastava, R.,
Peterson, P.A., et al., 1999. Cell surface expression of HLA-E:

interaction with human beta2-microglobulin and allelic differences.
European Journal of Immunology 29 (2), 537e547.

Vider-Shalit, T., Fishbain, V., Raffaeli, S., Louzoun, Y., 2007. Phase-
dependent immune evasion of herpesviruses. Journal of Virology 81
(17), 9536e9545.

Wang, E.C., McSharry, B., Retiere, C., Tomasec, P., Williams, S.,
Borysiewicz, L.K., et al., 2002. UL40-mediated NK evasion during
productive infection with human cytomegalovirus. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 99
(11), 7570e7575.

Watanabe, Y., Tokunaga, K., Geraghty, D.E., Tadokoro, K., Juji, T.,
1997. Large-scale comparative mapping of the MHC class I region of
predominant haplotypes
Immunogenetics 46 (2),
135e141.

in Japanese.

Watkins, D.I., McAdam, S.N., Liu, X., Strang, C.R., Milford, E.L.,
Levine, C.G., et al., 1992. New recombinant HLA-B alleles in a tribe
of South American Amerindians indicate rapid evolution of MHC
class I loci. Nature 357 (6376), 329e333.

Wilson, M.J., Torkar, M., Haude, A., Milne, S., Jones, T., Sheer, D., et al.,
2000. Plasticity in the organization and sequences of human KIR/ILT
gene families. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 97 (9), 4778e4783.

Ziegler, A., Santos, P.S., Kellermann, T., Uchanska-Ziegler, B., 2010.
Self/nonself perception, reproduction and the extended MHC. Self/
Nonself 1 (3), 176e191.

Chapter 14

Human Life History Evolution: New
Perspectives on Body and Brain Growth

S.N. Austad1 and C.E. Finch2
1University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United States; 2University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, United States

INTRODUCTION

Humans are primates but differ importantly from other
speciesdeven the great apesdin body, brain, and life
history traits. Allometry, the study of how body size scales
nonlinearly with various traits, reveals broad interspecies
patterns in a wide variety of physiological and life-history
traits across vertebrate taxa (Calder, 1986)
including
mammals and subgroups of mammals (Promislow and
Harvey, 1990). For example, among primate species, body
size scales consistently with both longevity and age at
sexual maturation (Fig. 14.1A and B). Despite numerous
individual species exceptions, there exists a clear pattern
that larger mammal species reach sexual maturity later,
have slower
reproduction, and live longer
compared with smaller species.

rates of

Mechanisms underlying these relationships

remain
obscure, however. Early hypotheses attributing these re-
lationships to either whole-body metabolic rate or
to
metabolic rate of speciﬁc organs such as the brain (Sacher,
1959; Mallouk, 1975) have failed as complete explanations
(Austad and Fischer, 1991; Speakman, 2005). Not only
that, consideration of actual energy expenditure rather than
basal energy expenditure reveals somewhat different re-
lationships between body size and life history traits
(Speakman, 2005). Nonetheless, energetics is likely to play
some role in allometric relationships.

Similar patterns, albeit with quantitative variation, are
seen within mammalian orders as well as across them.
Compared with other mammalian orders, primates are
characterized by their exceptionally slow life history and
long life even after accounting for body size. Although
primates are not
the longest-lived mammalian order in
either absolute or relative terms, primates are certainly

among the longest-lived (Austad and Fischer, 1992).
Without question, primates have the largest brains among
mammalian orders, adjusting for body size (Eisenberg,
1981). In fact, it is their combination of relatively large
brains and long life that largely drives theories of the causal
relationship among relative brain size and long life (Sacher,
1959; Mallouk, 1975). Primates may also be the slowest to
reach sexual maturity among all mammals for their size.

How does the human life history ﬁt into the general
mammalian and primate patterns? Are we as unique as we
imagine or do we happen to be little more than a large
bodied, large brained, fully bipedal mammal? Or, more
speciﬁcally, how different are human life histories from one
that might be expected from a great ape of our size? If we
are different, what unique selective pressures may have
made us so? These are the questions that inform the ﬁrst
part of this chapter. The second part examines cell and
genomic features of brain development, and the role of the
human APOE allele system, which is uniquely human
among all primates examined.

MAMMALIAN PATTERNS

Because so many biological variables correlate with
mammalian body mass, and because these relationships
tend to be linear on logelog plots (Calder, 1986), a
reasonable way to compare species that differ in size is to
remove the effects of size by using the ratios of the actual
variable of interest to that expected from regressions of the
logelog plots of the variable of interest versus body size
across an entire group. This is analogous to the analysis of
regression residuals. For example, encephalization quotient
(EQ) is the ratio of actual brain size to that expected for an
average mammal of the same body size (Jerison, 1973).

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00014-4
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

221

222 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

TABLE 14.1 Longevity Quotient (LQ) and
Encephalization Quotient (EQ) for Selected
Mammalian Orders

Group

Chiroptera (bats)

Monotremes (platypus and
echnidas)

Primates

Rodents

Artiodactyls (deer, gazelle,
antelope, etc.)

Marsupials (pouched
mammals)

EQ

0.94

0.83

2.54

1.03

0.84

LQ

3.52

2.68

2.28

0.99

0.85

Number of
Species

64

3

82

134

101

0.61

0.83

66

Data for EQ from Eisenberg, J.F., 1981. The Mammalian Radiations.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago. LQs calculated from data in
AnAge: The Animal Ageing and Longevity Database.

longest-lived mammalian order (Austad and Fischer, 1991).
Primates are the third longest-lived order after bats and
monotremes (Table 14.1). Interestingly, primates are the
only mammalian order which shows a positive relationship
between EQ and LQ, suggesting the hypothesis that relative
brain size has a unique role in primate longevity (Austad and
Fischer, 1992). Although this crude analysis ignores poten-
tially important differences of the relative size or synapse
density of speciﬁc brain regions, the existence of the EQe
LQ relationship and its apparent uniqueness among mam-
mals makes it worth exploring further.

PRIMATE PATTERNS

As stated previously, body mass is positively associated
with both longevity and age of sexual maturity (puberty)
in primates (Fig. 14.1) and across all mammals. In fact,
there is an excellent correlation between the time taken to
reach sexual maturity and the length of adult life both in
the primate data set analyzed here (r ¼ 0.76, p < 0.001)
as for mammals generally. We suggest
there are
shared molecular pacemaker(s) of growth and longevity,
which involve anabolic pathways including insulin-like
growth factors and mTOR (Wood et al., 2014; Johnson
et al., 2013).

that

So far, we have not invoked aging, the rate of physio-
logical decline with advancing age, but rather have focused
on longevity. Species longevity, in this case as in most
comparative studies, is deﬁned by the maximum longevity
record for a species. Although longevity data are available
for hundreds of species, this metric is not optimal from a
demographic or statistical standpoint, particularly when it is

FIGURE 14.1 Primate body size, longevity, and age of female sexual
maturity. Note that because all primate longevity records come from
relatively small sample sizes (a few dozen to a few thousand) whereas
there are millions of human longevity records, and because human envi-
ronments, food, and health maintenance are much more carefully moni-
tored than for captive primates, human longevity is set to 90 years rather
than the actual veriﬁed human longevity record of 122 years. Modern
human,
(A) Maximum longevity versus body mass
large triangle.
(r2 ¼ 0.49, p < 0.001). (B) Female sexual maturity versus body mass
(r2 ¼ 0.74, p << 0.001).

Correspondingly, the longevity quotient (LQ) is the ratio
of actual longevity to that expected for a mammal of that
size (Austad and Fischer, 1991). By these metrics, an
average mammal species by deﬁnition has an EQ or LQ of
1 (Table 14.1). Those with greater than average brains or
longevities have EQs or LQs greater than 1; those less
than average are less than 1.

According to the EQ, primates generally have the largest
brains of any mammalian order and humans have more than
a threefold larger brain than any primate (Eisenberg, 1981)
(Table 14.1; Fig. 14.2). Humans are not the longest-lived
mammals, however, in either absolute or relative terms. At
the least, ﬁn whale and bowhead whales appear to substan-
tially exceed human longevity (George et al., 1999), while at
the other extreme relative to body size, bats are by far the

Human Life History Evolution: New Perspectives on Body and Brain Growth Chapter | 14 223

FIGURE 14.2 The effect of phylogeny of longevity quotients (LQs) in primates. (A) General phylogeny of the great apes and other major primate
groups. (B) LQ among distinct primate clades. See text for explanation.

based on small samples (Promislow, 1993). The relation-
ship between aging and longevity is complex, particularly
when for species comparisons. Most, but not all, of our
longevity records come from captive populations in zoos or
research facilities. Animals in captive populations, of
course, reach states of advanced decrepitude that animals
facing the challenges of nature never reach, in which a
minority dies of senescence or deﬁned aging-related causes.
Thus captive longevity might seem a particularly valuable
measure of aging. While generally that is true, it is also true
that the quality of captive husbandry varies considerably
among species. Adequate diets, favorable psychosocial
environments, exposure to infectious diseases, and variable
criteria for euthanasia are all factors that affect species in
captivity in not particularly predictable ways. To illustrate
how these factors might affect primates, we note that a
comparison of zoo records as of the years 1982 and 1999
shows that
in one-third of primate genera, maximum
longevity increased by nearly half over this time interval,

and in 12% of genera, maximum longevity more than
doubled (Austad, 2006). For these reasons, we focus on the
actual data available (longevity) rather than speculate about
underlying physical decline (aging).

Are there phylogenetic trends among primates in either
age of sexual maturity or longevity? The higher order
outlines of primate phylogeny have been reasonably
settled for nearly a decade (Fig. 14.2A), although details
particularly within the prosimians (lemurs,
lorises, and
galagos, as used here) still need to be fully worked out
(Fabre et al., 2009; Perelman et al., 2011; Pozzi et al.,
2014). One can approach this issue by using a “quotient”
approach as shown earlier to account for differences in
body mass. Using a sexual maturity quotient
(SMQ)
derived only from primate body sizeesexual maturity
regression, it turns out that there is a pattern in the age of
sexual maturity with prosimians maturing earlier
than
average primates (SMQ ¼ 0.84), Old World monkeys
maturing at about an average primate age (SMQ ¼ 1.02),

224 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

and New World monkeys and great apes maturing later
than average (SMQ ¼ 1.26 and 1.37, respectively).

The LQs for primates (Fig. 14.2B) were calculated
relative to all mammals with the exceptions of the bats and
marsupials,
two groups which do not show clear and
consistent relationships between size and longevity (Austad
and Fischer, 1991). As is clear from the ﬁgure, all primates
are longer lived than expected for “average” mammals, that
is, all LQs are greater than 1. Surprisingly, the range of LQs
in the prosimians is virtually identical to that of the Old
World monkeys. In fact, two lemur species, Cheirogaleus
medius (fat-tailed dwarf
lemur) and Eulemur mongoz
(mongoose lemur) are longer lived for their body size than
any Old World monkey. Similarly surprising is that New
World monkeys have a broader spread of LQs than any
other group and, with the exception of modern humans, live
as long or longer than apes (Fig. 14.2B). In fact, the white-
headed capuchin (Cebus capucinus) is the only primate
besides humans that lives more than four times as long as
predicted by its body size. We note in passing that this
species also has an exceptionally large brain for its size
even by primate standards (Eisenberg, 1981); likewise, the
white-handed gibbon (Hylobates lar),
the ape with the
second highest LQ after humans, has the second highest
ape EQ.

HUMANS

Humans diverged from a common ancestor with chim-
panzees roughly 6e8 million years ago. Since that impre-
cisely known time, humans and chimpanzees have also
diverged in body size, developmental rate, age at sexual
maturity,
interbirth interval, aging rate, and longevity
(Robson and Wood, 2008). What can we glean about the
pattern, pace, or mechanism(s) of divergence in these life
history traits from existing ape species or the hominid
paleontological record?

TABLE 14.2 Life History Variables of Female Great Apes

Comparisons among great apes are often presented in
the form of Table 14.2, with single species values for each
trait of interest. Major efforts have gone into producing
tables like this, which except for the longevity of nonhu-
mans, are compiled from years of detailed ﬁeld observa-
tions on natural primate populations. Longevity in this table
is the longest-lived captive individual of the species. Hu-
man data in Table 14.2 come from modern hunter-gatherer
and foraging populations. Still, collapsing these variables
into a single number for each species disguises sufﬁcient
variation due to genetic and environmental heterogeneity,
nutrient availability, energy balance, social and environ-
mental stresses, etc., and many of these species differences
may be considerably less clear than the raw averages sug-
gest. For instance, among six populations of chimpanzees,
median interbirth interval (IBI) spanned from 5.25 to
6.58 years (25% difference); the youngest female to give
birth in a population ranged from 9.5 to 14.1 years (48%);
and the oldest to give birth ranged from 40.6 to 55 years
(35%) (Thompson et al., 2007). Human and chimpanzee
populations also vary widely within each species for ages
of sexual maturation (Table 14.2 footnotes a,b,c).

Given this variation,

the great apes are surprisingly
similar in their life histories with long IBIs from extended
weaning periods. Chimpanzees reach menarche a bit earlier
than humans and have their ﬁrst
live birth sooner
(Table 14.2). The interval between menarche and ﬁrst live
birth is referred to as adolescent sterility or subfertility
(Ashley Montague, 1939; Alberts et al., 2013) and is likely
to be an overestimate of physical capability in humans
because of cultural variations in the time of marital
consummation (Mukherjee et al., 1996; Michael Gurven,
personal communication). Additionally, humans continue
to grow after menarche with a slower pelvic maturation
(Abitbol, 1996; Berge, 1998; Bogin, 1999), which makes
early age childbirth more difﬁcult for humans than great

Species

Orangutan (Pongo sp.)

Gorilla (sp.)

Bonobo (Pan paniscus)

Chimpanzee (Pan
troglodytes)a

Modern human (Homo
sapiens)b,c

Body
Mass (kg)

37.8

95.2

33.4

35.4

45.5

7.5

19.5

EQ

1.7

1.6

2.3

2.3

15.4

10.0

14.2

13.3

Sexual
Maturity (y)

First
Birth (y)

Gestation
(d)

Weaning
(y)

7.0

6.5

9.0

11.3

14.0

260

255

244

225

270

7.0

4.1

4.5

4.5

2.8

IBI
(y)

8.1

4.4

6.3

5.7

Longevity
(y)

59

55

55

59

3.7

85

EQ, Encephalization quotient; IBI, interbirth interval.
aPusey (1990), Adams Hillard (2014), and Wallis (1997).
bGurven et al. (2012).
cHawkes and Smith (2010) and Atsalis and Videan (2009).
Adapted and updated from Robson, S.L., Wood, B., 2008. Hominin life history: reconstruction and evolution. Journal of Anatomy 212, 394e425;
EmeryeThompson et al. (2007), AnAge: Animal Aging Database.

Human Life History Evolution: New Perspectives on Body and Brain Growth Chapter | 14 225

apes. The human pelvis has complex growth trajectories
differing from chimpanzees, which Berge (1998) describes
as “heterochronic,” ie, differences in timing relative to our
ancestor that
include a late growth phase synchronized
with the adolescent growth spurt. Other examples of
heterochrony relative to the chimpanzee include the skull
morphology and patterns of gene expression in the brain, as
discussed later in this chapter. Reconstruction of australo-
pithecine pelves suggested human-like obstetrical me-
chanics (Berge, 1998; Berge and Goularas, 2010). Humans
have more prolonged and dangerous labor than chimpan-
zees, with intense social support unique to our species. We
wonder if novel social support for mothers and children had
begun before genus Homo.

Longevity appears similar among great apes except
humans who live substantially longer than any other species.
Moreover, humans have a unique postmenopausal life phase
(Alberts et al., 2013). Notably, the general mammalian trend
of longer life, later maturity, and slower reproductive rate
with increasing size vanishes among the great apes. The
largest species with the smallest relative brain size (gorillas)
has the earliest age at maturity, the second largest with the
biggest brain (humans) has the fastest reproductive rate, and
the species (again, humans) with the fastest reproductive rate
lives the longest. Thus it is not tenable to make predictions
about life history traits in the great apes from body size
alone.

Yet body size is one of the few indications we have of
the pace and pattern of evolution since our divergence from
chimpanzees as all other human species are extinct. For
extinct human species, evidence is limited to that available
from skeletons and associated artifacts such as coprolites.
We now have complete genome sequences from both
Neandertal and Denisovan humans (Paabo, 2015); while
these remarkable data have not yet yielded much on
comparative life history traits,
they give convincing
evidence of past interbreeding among these three species.
Skeletal remains can yield some information on age-at-
death which might indicate the relative longevities of past
human populations. Most analyses of age distribution by
skeletal analysis paleodemography concluded that ancestral
humans were considerably shorter lived than modern hunter-
gatherer and foraging societies (Lovejoy et al., 1977;
Bocquet-Appel and Masset, 1996). For instance, from 1300
well-preserved skeletons of a largely foraging population of
Americans from 1000 years ago, life expectancy at birth was
w20 years and at age 15 years was w19 years, with <3% of
individuals surviving to age 50 years (Lovejoy et al., 1977).
For comparison, modern hunter-gatherer and foraging
groups have a life expectancy at birth of w30 years and at
age 15 years of w20e40 years (Gurven and Kaplan, 2007).
While ages up through 20e30 years are considered reliable,
later ages are less certain (Konigsberg and Hermann, 2006;
Hoppa and Vaupel, 2002). Another problem is the uneven

preservation of remains, particularly of infants. These wide
variations make it difﬁcult to assess life expectancy, even in
the ancient Roman world, which is well documented for so
many other aspects of life (Parkin, 2003). There are similar
problems in demographic studies of modern preliterate
hunter-gatherers and foragers, which are relict populations
living in marginal habitats. Still, the extensive and consistent
data from living populations can give some idea of the
longevity of preagricultural modern humans.

to young (sexually immature)

We face a far greater challenge in understanding the
demography of earlier human species, however. One
approach to approximately relative longevity among pop-
ulations in the distant past is to estimate the OY ratio, that is
the ratio of old (ie, sexually mature, not old in the sense of
senescence)
individuals,
although this can be confounded by differences in repro-
ductive rate (Caspari and Lee, 2004). On this admittedly
rough evidence, Australopithecines appear shorter lived,
that is, have a higher ratio of preadult to adult skeletons,
than early Homo. According to the same criterion, early
Homo appears shorter lived than Neandertals, and Nean-
dertals appear shorter lived than modern humans in the past
50,000 years. Based on the present types of evidence, we
do not expect soon, if ever, to know when and how the
differences between chimpanzee and human reproductive
rates arose.

The history of adult human body size is complex and of
interest on its own, speciﬁcally because of what it may
indicate about ecological role, nutritional stress, and in-
fectious diseases (Ruff, 2002). Prior to the appearance of
our genus around 2 million years ago, early hominins were
about the size of chimpanzees, although with different body
proportions likely due to differences in locomotor habit.
Even the early members of the genus Homo were not much
smaller than modern humans. About 500,000 years ago,
humans increased in size, growing to roughly w10% larger
in body mass than today. However, about 50,000 years ago,
size began declining (Ruff et al., 1997), accelerating in
many but not all populations with the development of
agriculture in the past 10,000 years. In the past 150 years,
with more reliable and nutritionally complete food avail-
able, body size has again begun to increase. The questions
to be answered therefore are why the genus Homo grew
larger than its ancestral genera, what was responsible for
the further increase in size beginning 500,000 years ago,
and what caused the decrease in size in the Upper Paleo-
lithic. Changes over this time scale undoubtedly reﬂect
genetic changes due to ecological variables such as climate,
predators, prey density, and so forthda topic which would
be excessively speculative and beyond our scope.

Patterns of sexual size dimorphism among extinct hom-
inins and has not been extensively explored and is poten-
tially of considerable interest in understanding the ecology
and/or mating systems. Australopithecines exhibited sexual

226 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

size dimorphism even greater than chimpanzees but without
the same dimorphism in canine tooth size (Ruff, 2002).
Increased body size and canine tooth dimorphism are
generally considered reliable signs of increased sexual se-
lection via maleemale competition. The pattern of size
dimorphism without dentition dimorphism is therefore puz-
zling and one wonders whether it might signal that teeth had
ceased to be the major weapon of combat in Australopithe-
cines. By the emergence of Homo, mean body size had
the same time that size dimorphism had
increased at
there had been a considerably
decreased,
bigger increase in female compared to male size. It
is
tempting to speculate that a relatively larger increase in size
in females might have had something to do with changes in
reproductive patterns. Perhaps bigger mothers were better
able to care for multiple dependent children as the IBI
was reduced? We do not know when the sex difference
in brain size evolved, which is minimal in chimpanzees
(Leigh, 2004).

implying that

Body size reduction began after 50,000 years ago,
reaching the present size in association with the develop-
ment of agriculture w10,000 years ago (Ruff et al., 1997;
Formicola, 2003). This trend has been traditionally attrib-
uted to a variety of factors, including less nutritionally
complete diets, periodic famine, higher density populations,
greater socioeconomic stratiﬁcation, and increases in in-
fectious diseases during development. While this is a
compelling scenario with abundant evidence for poste
Medieval Europe (Fogel, 2004), there was also a simulta-
neous reduction in body size in Australia where the
indigenous population never developed agriculture or a
truly urban life. Therefore, the appearance of agriculture
and its sequelae cannot be a complete explanation of this
pattern (Walker et al., 2006).

The increase in body size since 1800 is a component of
what Robert Fogel calls the “technophysio” evolution of
the 20th century also has its interest (Fogel and Costa,
1997). The height increase began more than a century ago
in conjunction with the diminishing mortality from in-
fections,
long before antibiotics (Crimmins and Finch,
2006). With a diminishing load of childhood infections,
adult height increased correspondingly, as seen in several
European populations during the later 19th century
(Crimmins and Finch, 2006). In earlier days, even those
who survived childhood disease still incurred energy drains
that impaired growth. For example, in some developing
countries, adult height varies inversely with the frequency
of childhood diarrhea (Finch, 2007, pp. 267e268). Growth
is stunted because of energy deﬁcits from impaired diges-
tion and nutrient absorption (Lutter et al., 1989). Fever,
which is also common in highly infected areas is energet-
ically costly, and can increase basal metabolism 25%e50%
the height-
(Finch, 2007, p. 56). In the 21st century,
mortality-longevity
show
intriguing

relationships

complexity. On one hand, cardiovascular disease varies
inversely with adult height in several large populations
(Batty et al., 2009; Nüesch et al., 2015). On the other hand,
longevity showed the opposite trend of “shorter
live
longer” in several other populations (Samaras, 2013; He
et al., 2014). This is also true for domestic dog breeds
(Patronek et al., 1997; Creevy et al., 2016). Our era of
minimal
infectious burden with high levels of insulin
resistance may comprise a pathophysiology of development
and aging new to human biology. We have much to learn!
Interesting differences in height have emerged within
modern nations.
In the mid-19th century, Caucasian
Americans were taller than the Australians, Canadians, and
any of the countries of Europe (Komlos and Lauderdale,
2007). For instance, Americans were more than 9 cm taller
than the Dutch at this time. Body size is less variable across
national boundaries as food has remained superabundant in
North America and Western Europe since the mid-20th
century, public health measures have improved with more
hygienic food and water, antibiotics and vaccines have
been developed to work against numerous childhood dis-
eases, and medical treatment has become more sophisti-
cated. But there have been some strange reversals. By the
end of the 20th century, Americans were no longer close to
the tallest people. The Dutch now are about 5 cm taller than
Americans, and are now the tallest people among devel-
oped countries. The exact reasons for the Dutch height
surge are not clear; we wonder which direction will
longevity proceed. Americans have also become relatively
shorter lived compared to Western Europe since the middle
of the 20th century.

BRAIN EVOLUTION

The human brain is unique among primates for its large size
relative to body mass (Table 14.2; Bienvenu et al., 2011;
Hanson et al., 2014), but also for its risk of Alzheimer’s
disease (AD) (Finch and Austad, 2015). Human brain-
aging changes at
later ages, with or without AD, are
more severe than in chimps and other primates at advanced
ages beyond the mean lifespan in captivity (Finch and
Austad, 2014). Many primates show qualitatively similar,
progressive deposition of amyloid b-peptide aggregates as
diffuse extracellular deposits and as cerebrovascular amy-
loid angiopathy. Hyperphosphorylated tau also shows in-
crease in neurons of aging monkeys. However, no aging
primate has shown the human clinical AD level of severe
neurodegeneration in the pathways for declarative memory
that depend on reciprocal connections of
the frontal
neocortex to the hippocampus. While more exacting
microscopic analysis is needed, we provisionally conclude
that AD is unique to the human brain.

Further insight comes from brain evolutionary changes
inferred from brain imaging by computed tomography (CT)

Human Life History Evolution: New Perspectives on Body and Brain Growth Chapter | 14 227

TABLE 14.3 Human Versus Chimpanzee Brain Ontogeny and Female Reproduction

Cortical Synapse
Density Maximuma

Chimpanzee

Human

1

5

Puberty,
Early
Stageb

8

8

First
Live
Birthb

13

18

White Matter
Myelin Maturationc

15

30

Caloric
Production
Valued

6

30

Menopausee,f

50

50

aLiu et al. (2012).
bPusey (1990), Adams Hillard (2014), and Wallis (1997).
cBartzokis et al. (2003) and Miller et al. (2012).
dGurven et al. (2012).
eHawkes and Smith (2010) and Atsalis and Videan (2009).
fHerndon et al. (2012).

and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of humans and
great apes; from gene expression proﬁles of humans and
great ape brain; from DNA of great apes and fossils of
human ancestor; and from cranial fossils. The richest in-
sights are from modern genomes which show major
changes in the developmental schedule of gene expression.
We start with ﬁndings on brain morphology. This frag-
mentary evidence does not yet inform how or why humans
uniquely evolved AD.

Besides our threefold larger brains, we differ from
chimpanzees in the relative size of particular regions of
cortical and subcortical regions (Bienvenu et al., 2011;
Semendeferi et al., 2011). The olfactory bulb and cribri-
form plate are disproportionately larger (Bastir et al., 2011)
and cortical gyri are deeper and more complex (Chen et al.,
2013; Rilling, 2014). MRI scans of a large sample of
chimpanzee brains adjusted for size showed relative
enlargement of frontal cortex regions and amygdala, but
relative shrinkage of the visual cortex (Aldridge, 2011).
Structural MRI with diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) iden-
tiﬁed human cortical neuron tracts that differ from chim-
panzees; of particular interest are tract differences in the
speech areas of humans (Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas)
(Zhang et al., 2013). At the cellular level, neuronal columns
in the B10 region of the prefrontal cortex are narrower in
humans than in great apes and with more space between
columns (Semendeferi et al., 2001, 2011). These structural
ﬁndings suggest region-speciﬁc changes in function.

Developmental heterochrony is notable, with much later
maturation of adult synapse density and maximum size
(Table 14.3). Correspondingly, myelination of white matter
tracts continues to increase in frontal lobes long after sexual
maturity, peaking as late as age 40 years. In contrast,
chimpanzee brain myelination is complete by age 10e15
years. These differences match the much slower social
maturation of humans than chimpanzees. Human male
hunter-gatherers and others living in preindustrial societies
typically do not achieve maximum skills until after age 25
years; maximum food production measured as calories is

reached even later (Schniter et al., 2015; Gurven et al.,
2007). We may ask if there is any relationship of prolonged
brain maturation to later life neurodegeneration.

GENE EXPRESSION

Benchmark studies from the Max Planck Institute for
Evolutionary Anthropology in Leipzig have identiﬁed gene
expression patterns with major quantitative differences in
human and chimp brain during postnatal development. Sets
of genes show heterochronic expression for mRNA levels
relative to sexual maturation (Somel et al., 2009; Liu et al.,
2012). One set of synaptic genes showed remarkable region-
speciﬁc differences in timing in human, chimpanzee, and
macaque; these heterochronic genes are implicated in the
delayed maturation of pyramidal neuron synapse density in
prefrontal cortex of humans versus chimpanzees. A subset of
these genes is regulated by the MEF2A promoter, which
mediates neuron-speciﬁc expression.
the
MEF2A promoter has an excess of single nucleotide poly-
morphisms (SNPs) relative to chimpanzee and Neandertal,
suggesting that genes in this heterochronic module have
evolved in the last 300,000 years. This report did not clarify if
these changes resulted in multiple alleles. As discussed later
in this chapter, the APOE gene, which inﬂuences pyramidal
cortical neuron synapses and risk of AD, evolved novel al-
leles within this time frame.

Intriguingly,

The little we know about internal brain structures of
early humans suggests changes in taste and smell percep-
tion. Endocrania showing the base of the brain surface
indicate the sizes of olfactory bulbs and the temporal lobes,
while the size of the cribriform plate through which the
olfactory nerves pass into the bulbs gives a measure of
these tracts (Bastir et al., 2010, 2011). Endocranial geom-
etry had nonoverlapping principal components for archaic
Homo versus Neandertal and modern humans, with 12%
increase in the cribriform plate and olfactory bulbs. DNA
analysis also indicates changes in olfaction. Relative to
chimps, humans have lost 36 functional olfactory genes

228 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

through premature stop codons. Denisovan and Neandertal
DNA show further gene loss (Hughes et al., 2014), which
may be consistent with the smaller olfactory bulbs of Ne-
andertals (Bastir et al., 2011). The receptor for bitter taste
TAS2R38 evolved three alleles in humans which are absent
from Denisovans, WHO had the ancestral chimpanzee
nucleotide in positions of the modern alleles (Perry et al.,
2015). The loss of taste and smell sensitivity in AD has not
been associated with any of these alleles.

Denisovans, ancestral by about 600,000 years, have
other genes relevant to brain evolution that differ in coding
from humans. Meyer et al. (2012) identiﬁed coding dif-
ferences from modern humans in KATNA1 and SLITRK1,
for neurite outgrowth; ARHGAP32 and HTR2B, synaptic
transmission; ASDL and CNTNAP2, associated with
autism. Further, Zhou et al. (2015) analyzed genomes of
different ethnicities from the 1000 Genomes Project with
new information on neolithic specimens. Genes related to
brain cells showed changes that were dated to two periods:
400,000 ybp archaic Homo (AUTS2, SLTM, associated with
autism; RFN180 which regulates MAO-B, a key enzyme of
monoamine metabolism) and ca. 50e150,000 ybp in early
Homo sapiens (SPON1, MAPT, SORL1, ELAVL4, SNCA,
neuronal genes). These authors speculated on the relation of
these genes to AD with a model of gene cross-talk with
hubs at the amyloid precursor protein (APP) and MAPT
which codes for tau, a protein hyperphosphorylated in AD.
We are cautious about such models because these genes are
expressed brain wide and with no speciﬁcity for
the
regional speciﬁcity of AD neurodegeneration. Nonetheless,
the evolutionary timing of these genes remains relevant to
the subtle regional differences that deﬁne the human brain.
A set of noncoding regions (ncHAR) characterized by
accelerated changes
in humans have developmental
enhanced activity in embryonic mouse brains. The ﬁrst such
identiﬁed is expressed in Cajal-Retzius neurons during hu-
man cortex development and has excess A/T and G/C con-
versions suggestive of GC-biased gene conversion (Pollard

et al., 2006). Of great interest, about 8% of mutations in
ncHARs arose within 1 million years (Burbano et al., 2012).
Besides these candidates in human brain evolution, we
would include APOE, which has allelic variants that in-
ﬂuence the risk of AD as well as altering the development
of brain regions affected during AD.

APOE ALLELES

Humans are unique among primates in having multiple
APOE alleles in which APOE3 is the most prevalent
(55e90%), followed by E4 (5e35%), and E2 (<10%). The
risk of AD progressively declines
in the order of
E4>E3>E2 (Liu et al., 2013; Cacciottolo et al., 2016;
Table 14.4). Nonetheless, 50% of AD patients do not carry
APOE4, while 30% of APOE4 carriers do not develop AD.
For AD risk, APOE4 can be considered “semi-dominant”.
The APOE3 allele is estimated to have spread in
ancestral humans about 225,000 ybp, approximating the
earliest anatomically modern H. sapiens, while APOE2 is
more recent, perhaps just before the ﬁrst northward
migration from Africa (Fullerton et al., 2000). Chimpan-
zees and mice have a single APOE isoform with the human
pathogenic APOE4 signature of two arginines (R) and
positions 112 and 158. The different lipid binding afﬁnity
of APOE4 is associated with higher blood levels of
cholesterol (Mahley et al., 2009). The shared presence of
R61 in Denisovans and human APOE4 implies that APOE4
is the ancestral isoform. However, chimpanzees and mice
differ from humans by threonine at position 61, which was
shown by genetic engineering to convert lipid binding to
APOE3-like (Raffai et al., 2001). Of relevance to AD,
APOE isoforms bind to human APP with allele-speciﬁc
that modulate Ab production (Theendakara
afﬁnities
et al., 2013).

APOE also has unusual features in DNA methylation.
The exon specifying the APOE isoforms has an unusual
“CpG island” rare in coding regions that is shared with

TABLE 14.4 Apolipoprotein E Residues for Human Alleles and Ancestors

Position 61

Position 112

Position 158

# CpGs in Allele Specifying Site

Human E2

Human E3

Human E4

Denisovan

Chimpanzee

Mouse

R

R

R

R

T

T

C

C

R

R

R

R

C

R

R

R

R

R

2

3

4

4

4

4

C, Cysteine; R, arginine; T, threonine (McIntosh et al., 2012). Note also that this order also represents a linear series in the number of total cysteines at
112 and 158 (Leuthold et al., 2013; Peterson et al., 2015). Thus, there are four cysteines per mole in E2/E2, three in E2/E3, two in E3/E3, one E3/E4, and
zero in E4/E4; and reciprocally for arginine.

Human Life History Evolution: New Perspectives on Body and Brain Growth Chapter | 14 229

the chimpanzee (Yu et al., 2013). Intriguingly, at each
step in APOE evolution, one CpG was lost during the
coding changes; coincidentally, these transitions are rep-
resented in the abbreviation: APOE4 with four CpGs;
APOE3 with three CpGs; and APOE2 with two CpGs
(Table 14.3). The methylation of APOE varies by brain
region and cell type, and can inﬂuence transcription in
transfection studies (Yu et al., 2013). However, the levels
of APOE methylation did not correlate with APOE
mRNA in human frontal cortex (Yu et al., 2013; Foraker
et al., 2015). Individual cell-type data may be more
informative because whole brain-region RNA cannot
resolve cell-speciﬁc expression.

We may anticipate information on APOE methylation
for Denisovans and other human ancestors. Because cyto-
sine spontaneously deaminates postmortem to thymine, the
C:T ratio can be calibrated to estimate for archaic DNA
premortem methylation (Gokhman et al., 2014). APOE
merits further inquiry because the differentially methylated
regions of modern humans include genes associated with
brain diseaseerelated genes shared with Denisovans and
Neandertals. Intriguingly, 184 genes with identical protein
sequences in humans and chimpanzees have major differ-
ences in promoter methylation; APOE was not mentioned
(Hernando-Herraez et al., 2015).

Not only does the ancestral APOE4 allele increase
vulnerability to AD, as the most prevalent risk factor,
APOE4 also modulates brain development, resistance to
mental stress, and vulnerability to traumatic brain injury.
Of major relevance to brain development, human APOE3
is more neurotrophic than E4 and has more efﬁcient lipid
delivery (Bellosta et al., 1995; Pitas et al., 1998). An MRI
observational study of normal children showed that the
entorhinal cortex was consistently thinner into adoles-
cence in APOE4 versus APOE3 carriers (Shaw et al.,
2007). A thinner temporal cortex was also found in
neonatal APOE4 carriers (Knickmeyer et al., 2014) and in
Vietnam veterans (VETSA) aged 51e59 years (Kremen
et al., 2013). Because of selective neurodegeneration in
this brain region during early stages of AD, the thinner
entorhinal cortex implies a smaller neuronal reserve in
APOE4 carriers. These APOE allele effects are regionally
speciﬁc. For example, the hippocampus which receives
projections from the entorhinal cortex and also damaged
during AD, did not show any size differences by APOE
allele in two studies (Kremen et al., 2013; Khan et al.,
2014). Two MRI studies show ﬁne structure differences of
APOE4 in healthy adults with regional speciﬁcity,
in
white matter diffusivity (Westlye et al., 2012) and in
resting fMRI (Trachtenberg et al., 2012). Brain synchro-
nous neural interaction during magnetoencephalography,
a measure of
functional connectivity, also varied in
healthy adults with the APOE4 allele dose, or number of
APOE cysteine residues (Table 14.2 footnote) (Leuthold

et al., 2013). Synapse-level effects are shown in transgenic
mice: APOE4 mice have pyramidal neurons with fewer
dendritic spines (Wang et al., 2005) and altered excitatory
synaptic transmission (Klein et al., 2014), relative to
APOE3 mice. Information on APOE2 in neuronal function
will be forthcoming.

Resistance to stress is also decreased by APOE4.
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in association with
combat stress was up to twofold more prevalent in US
veterans of the Vietnam and Iraq conﬂicts with APOE4
dose effects (Lyons et al., 2013; Peterson et al., 2015).
While the contribution of direct head injury was not deﬁned
in PSTD outcome, traumatic brain injury has worse out-
comes in APOE4 carriers, eg, with greater cognitive im-
pairments and brain amyloid load (Li et al., 2015). Given
evidence for head injury in the Paleolithic fossil record
(Coqueugniot et al., 2014; Wu et al., 2011), the ancestral
APOE4 would appear maladaptive to young adults. How-
ever, APOE4 may be adaptive for infections as hypothe-
sized by Martin (1999). For Brazilian slum children with
diarrhea, APOE4 carriers had better cognitive responses to
micronutrient supplementation than the APOE3 carriers
(Oriá et al., 2010; Mitter et al., 2012). Thus, under condi-
tions of infection that differ from modern healthier pop-
ulations, APOE4 could be
for brain
development. This association is also shown in the resis-
tance of malnourished mice to cryptosporidial infections, a
common cause of diarrhea, in which the APOE4 mice grew
best (Azevedo et al., 2014). Other examples are described
by Finch and Martin (2016). Thus, emergence of APOE3
about 225,000 years ago represented selection for its ad-
vantages to brain development and survival to neurotrauma.
APOE2, the newest allele, may have been adaptive to later-
life brain health by further reducing AD risk. The persis-
tence of APOE4 as a minor allele in all modern populations
could represent balancing selection for
resistance to
infection.

advantageous

Returning to the prior discussion of evolving brain
genes, we suggest that the APOE alleles may be a partner at
the protein level by its modulation of neurite outgrowth. To
explore these ideas further, the Finch lab made a mouse
with targeted replacement of the chimpanzee APOE gene.
Preliminary data show that chimpanzee APOE resembles
human APOE4 more than APOE3 in support of neurite
outgrowth (Cacciottollo et al., 2013). These experiments
conﬁrmed the Mahley group ﬁndings that human APOE3 is
more neurotrophic than E4, cited previously. Thus, we
must consider other differences between human and
chimpanzee APOE. Notably, of the eight residues that
show evidence of positive selection in human APOE, half
(4) of these residues are in their lipid-binding C-terminus
(Vamathevan et al., 2008). The undeﬁned inﬂuence of
these other amino acid differences in lipid binding could
also inﬂuence lipophilic steps in host defense.

230 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

Analyses of Caucasian humans have identiﬁed a second
genetic locus, translocase of mitochondrial membrane 40
(TOMM40), closely linked to APOE, in which alleles with
an expanded region of poly T repeats is associated with
increased predictability of age of onset of AD and also has
been linked to Parkinson’s disease (Gottschalk et al., 2014).
Whether TOMM40 also has alleles with this repeat
in
chimpanzees will be fascinating to discover. Thus far,
sufﬁcient chimpanzee genomes to assess this possibility
have not been sequenced.

PROSPECTUS

Human evolutionary biology has entered a new era in three
major domains: the availability of DNA sequence data from
fossil DNA, including gene variants; species comparisons
in patterns of gene expression during development; and
deeper knowledge of preindustrial life history for human
forager-farmers. The present survey of
these domains
shows a great potential redeﬁning of what it means to be
human. We anticipate neurobiological ﬁndings on the brain
systems that enable our unique multigenerational and
multigender cooperativity; on the genes that enable our
unique postreproductive life phase; and on the genes that
promote neurodegenerative processes that are absent from
other great apes.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors are grateful for support from the NIH (Caleb Finch:
AG05142, AG-040683, and AG026572; Steve Austad: AG037962
and R24 OD010933). They appreciate encouragement by the Center
for Academic Research and Training in Anthropogeny (CARTA).

REFERENCES

Abitbol, M.M., 1996. The shapes of the female pelvis: contributing factors.

The Journal of Reproductive Medicine 41, 242e250.

Adams Hillard, P.J., 2014. Menstruation in adolescents: what do we
know? and what do we do with the information? Journal of Pediatric
and Adolescent Gynecology 27, 309e319.

Alberts, S.C., Altmann, J., Brockman, D.K., Cords, M., Fedigan, L.M.,
Pusey, A., Stoinski, T.S., Strier, K.B., Morris, W.F., Bronikowski, A.M.,
2013. Reproductive aging patterns in primates reveal that humans are
distinct. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 110, 13440e13445.

Aldridge, K., 2011. Patterns of differences in brain morphology in humans
as compared to extant apes. Journal of Human Evolution 60, 94e105.
AnAge: The Animal Ageing and Longevity Database. http://genomics.

senescence.info/species/.

Ashley-Montague, M.F., 1939. Adolescent sterility. The Quarterly Review

of Biology 14, 13e34.

Atsalis, S., Videan, E., 2009. Reproductive aging in captive and wild
follicular

common chimpanzees:
factors inﬂuencing the rate of
depletion. American Journal of Primatology 71, 271e282.

Austad, S.N., 2006. Patterns in mammalian aging: demography and evo-
lution. In: Robine, J.-M., Crimmins, E., Horiuchi, S., Yi, Z. (Eds.),
Longevity, Individual Life Duration, and the Growth of the Oldest-
Old Population. Springer, Dordrecht, Netherlands, pp. 43e55.

Austad, S.N., Fischer, K.E., 1991. Mammalian aging, metabolism, and
ecology: evidence from the bats and marsupials. The Journal of
Gerontology 46, B47eB53.

Austad, S.N., Fischer, K.E., 1992. Primate longevity: its place in the
mammalian scheme. American Journal of Primatology 28, 251e261.
Azevedo, O.G., Bolick, D.T., Roche, J.K., Pinkerton, R.F., Lima, A.A.,
Vitek, M.P., Warren, C.A., Oriá, R.B., Guerrant, R.L., 2014. Apoli-
poprotein E plays a key role against cryptosporidial
infection in
transgenic undernourished mice. PLoS One 9, e89562.

Bartzokis, G., Cummings,

J.L., Sultzer, D., Henderson, V.W.,
Nuechterlein, K.H., Mintz, J., 2003. White matter structural integrity
in healthy aging adults and patients with Alzheimer disease: a mag-
netic resonance imaging study. Archives of Neurology 60, 393e398.
Bastir, M., Rosas, A., Gunz, P., Peña-Melian, A., Manzi, G., Harvati, K.,
Kruszynski, R., Stringer, C., Hublin, J.J., 2011. Evolution of the base
of the brain in highly encephalized human species. Nature Commu-
nications 2, 588.

Bastir, M., Rosas, A., Stringer, C., Cuétara, J.M., Kruszynski, R.,
Weber, G.W., Ross, C.F., Ravosa, M.J., 2010. Effects of brain and
facial size on basicranial form in human and primate evolution.
Journal of Human Evolution 58, 424e431.

Batty, G.D., Shipley, M.J., Gunnell, D., Huxley, R., Kivimaki, M.,
Woodward, M., Lee, C.M., Smith, G.D., 2009. Height, wealth, and
health: an overview with new data from three longitudinal studies.
Economics and Human Biology 7, 137e152.

Bellosta, S., Nathan, B.P., Orth, M., Dong, L.M., Mahley, R.W., Pitas, R.E.,
1995. Stable expression and secretion of apolipoproteins E3 and E4
in mouse neuroblastoma cells produces differential effects on neurite
outgrowth. The Journal of Biological Chemistry 270, 27063e27071.

Berge, C., 1998. Heterochronic processes in human evolution: an onto-
genetic analysis of the hominid pelvis. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology 105, 441e459.

Berge, C., Goularas, D., 2010. A new reconstruction of Sts 14 pelvis
(Australopithecus africanus) from computed tomography and three-
dimensional modeling techniques. Journal of Human Evolution 58,
262e272.

Bienvenu, T., Guy, F., Coudyzer, W., Gilissen, E., Roualdès, G.,
Vignaud, P., Brunet, M., 2011. Assessing endocranial variations in
great apes and humans using 3D data from virtual endocasts. Amer-
ican Journal of Physical Anthropology 145, 231e246.

Bocquet-Appel, J.P., Masset, C., 1996. Paleodemography: expectancy and
false hope. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 99, 571e583.
Bogin, B., 1999. Evolutionary perspective on human growth. Annual

Review of Anthropology 28, 109e153.

Burbano, H.A., Green, R.E., Maricic, T., Lalueza-Fox, C., de la
Rasilla, M., Rosas, A., Kelso, J., Pollard, K.S., Lachmann, M.,
Paabo, S., 2012. Analysis of human accelerated DNA regions using
archaic hominin genomes. PLoS One 7 (3), e32877.

Cacciottolo, M., Christensen, A., Moser, A., Liu, J., Pike, C.J., Smith, C.,
LaDu, M.J., Sullivan, P.M., Morgan, T.E., Dolzhenko, E.,
Charidimou, A., Wahlund, L.O., Wiberg, M.K., Shams, S., Chiang, G.C.,
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, Finch, C.E., 2016. The
APOE4 allele shows opposite sex bias in microbleeds and Alzheimer’s
disease of humans and mice. Neurobiology of Aging 37, 47e57.

Human Life History Evolution: New Perspectives on Body and Brain Growth Chapter | 14 231

Cacciottollo, M.S.P., Morgan, T.E., Finch, C.E., June 3e4, 2013.
Chimpanzee apolipoprotein E comparison with human apoE3 and -E4
for effect on neuronal outgrowth. In: 4th Annual Symposium: “ApoE,
ApoE Receptors, and Neurodegeneration”. Georgetown University,
Washington, DC.

Calder, W.A.I., 1986. Size, Function, and Life History. Mineola, New

York, Dover.

Caspari, R., Lee, S.H., 2004. Older age becomes common late in human
evolution. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 101, 10895e10900.

Chen, X., Errangi, B., Li, L., Glasser, M.F., Westlye, L.T., Fjell, A.M.,
Walhovd, K.B., Hu, X., Herndon, J.G., Preuss, T.M., Rilling, J.K.,
2013. Brain aging in humans, chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes), and
rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta): magnetic resonance imaging
studies of macro- and microstructural changes. Neurobiology of Aging
34 (10), 2248e2260.

Coqueugniot, H., Dutour, O., Arensburg, B., Duday, H.,
Vandermeersch, B., Tillier, A.M., 2014. Earliest cranio-encephalic
trauma from the Levantine Middle Palaeolithic: 3D reappraisal of the
Qafzeh 11 skull, consequences of pediatric brain damage on indi-
vidual life condition and social care. PLoS One 9, e102822.

Creevy, K.E., Austad,

S.N., Hoffman,

J.M., O’Neill, D.G.,
Promislow, D.E., 2016. The Companion Dog as a Model for the
Longevity Dividend. Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Medicine
6 (1). pii: a026633.

Crimmins, E.M., Finch, C.E., 2006. Infection, inﬂammation, height, and
longevity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 103, 498e503.

Eisenberg, J.F., 1981. The Mammalian Radiations. University of Chicago

Press, Chicago.

Fabre, P.H., Rodrigues, A., Douzery, E.J., 2009. Patterns of macroevo-
lution among Primates inferred from a supermatrix of mitochondrial
and nuclear DNA. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 53,
808e825.

Finch, C.E., 2007. The Biology of Human Aging. Inﬂammation, Nutrition,
and Aging in the Evolution of Lifespans. Academic Press, San Diego.
Finch, C.E., Austad, C.E., 2014. Evolution of human brain aging and
neurological diseases. Annual Review of Gerontology and Geriatrics
159e170 (Chapter 5).

Finch, C.E., Austad, C.E., 2015. Commentary:

is Alzheimer disease

uniquely human? Neurobiology of Aging 36, 553e555.

Finch, C.E., Martin, G.M., 2016. Dementias of the Alzheimer type: views
through the lens of evolutionary biology suggest amyloid-driven brain
aging is a trade-off with host defence. In: Alvergne, A. (Ed.),
Evolutionary Thinking in Medicine: From Research to Policy and
Practice. Springer (in press).

Fogel, R.W., Costa, D.L., 1997. A theory of technophysio evolution, with
some implications for forecasting population, health care costs, and
pension costs. Demography 34, 49e66.

J.H., Salomaa, V., Vartiainen, E.,

Fullerton, S.M., Clark, A.G., Weiss, K.M., Nickerson, D.A., Taylor, S.L.,
Stengârd,
Perola, M.,
Boerwinkle, E., Sing, C.F., 2000. Apolipoprotein E variation at the
sequence haplotype level: implications for the origin and maintenance
of a major human polymorphism. American Journal of Human
Genetics 67, 881e900.

George, J.C., Bada, J., Zeh, J., Scott, L., Brown, S.E., O’Hara, T.,
Suydam, R., 1999. Age and growth estimates of bowhead whales
(Balaena mysticetus) via aspartic acid racemization. Canadian Journal
of Zoology 77, 571e580.

Gokhman, D., Lavi, E., Prüfer, K., Fraga, M.F., Riancho, J.A., Kelso, J.,
Pääbo, S., Meshorer, E., Carmel, L., 2014. Reconstructing the DNA
methylation maps of the Neandertal and the Denisovan. Science 344,
523e527.

Gottschalk, W.K., Lutz, M.W., He, Y.T., Saunders, A.M., Burns, D.K.,
Roses, A.D., Chiba-Falek, O., 2014. The broad impact of TOM40 on
neurodegenerative diseases in aging. Journal of Parkinson’s Disease
and Alzheimer’s Disease 1. pii:12.

Gurven, M., Kaplan, H., 2007. Longevity among hunter-gatherers: a cross-
cultural examination. Population and Development Review 33,
321e365.

Gurven, M., Kaplan, H., Supa, A.Z., 2007. Mortality experience of Tsi-
mane Amerindians of Bolivia: regional variation and temporal trends.
American Journal of Human Biology 19, 376e398.

Gurven, M., Stieglitz, J., Hooper, P.L., Gomes, C., Kaplan, H., 2012. From
the womb to the tomb: the role of transfers in shaping the evolved
human life history. Experimental Gerontology 47, 807e813.

Hanson, K.L., Hrvoj-Mihic, B., Semendeferi, K., 2014. A dual compara-
tive approach: integrating lines of evidence from human evolutionary
neuroanatomy and neurodevelopmental disorders. Brain, Behavior
and Evolution 84, 135e155.

Hawkes, K., Smith, K.R., 2010. Do women stop early? Similarities in
fertility decline in humans and chimpanzees. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences 204, 43e53.

He, Q., Morris, B.J., Grove, J.S., Petrovitch, H., Ross, W., Masaki, K.H.,
Rodriguez, B., Chen, R., Donlon, T.A., Willcox, D.C., Willcox, B.J.,
2014. Shorter men live longer: association of height with longevity
and FOXO3 genotype in American men of Japanese ancestry. PLoS
One 9, e94385.

Hernando-Herraez, I., Garcia-Perez, R., Sharp, A.J., Marques-Bonet, T.,
2015. DNA Methylation: Insights into Human Evolution. PLOS Ge-
netics 11 (12), e1005661.

Herndon, J.G., Paredes, J., Wilson, M.E., Bloomsmith, M.A., 2012.
Menopause occurs late in life in the captive chimpanzee (Pan trog-
lodytes). Age 34, 1145e1156.

Hoppa, R.D., Vaupel, J.W., 2002. The Rostock Manifesto for Paleo-
demography. In: Hoppa, R.D., Vaupel, J.W. (Eds.), Paleodemography.
Age Distributions from Skeletal Samples. Cambridge University Press.
Hughes, G.M., Teeling, E.C., Higgins, D.G., 2014. Loss of olfactory

Fogel, R.W., 2004. The Escape from Hunger and Premature Death,

receptor function in hominin evolution. PLoS One 9, e84714.

1700e2100. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Jerison, H.J., 1973. Evolution of the Brain and Intelligence. Academic

Foraker, J., Millard, S.P., Leong, L., Thomson, Z., Chen, S., Keene, C.D.,
Bekris, L.M., Yu, C.E., 2015. The APOE gene is differentially
methylated in Alzheimer’s disease. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease
48 (3), 745e755.

Formicola, V., 2003. More is not always better: Trotter and Gleser’s
equations and stature estimates of Upper Paleolithic European sam-
ples. Journal of Human Evolution 45, 239e243.

Press, New York.

Johnson, S.C., Rabinovitch, P.S., Kaeberlein, M., 2013. mTOR is a key
modulator of ageing and age-related disease. Nature 493, 338e345.
Khan, W., Giampietro, V., Ginestet, C., Dell’Acqua, F., Bouls, D.,
Newhouse, S., Dobson, R., Banaschewski, T., Barker, G.J.,
Bokde, A.L., Büchel, C., Conrod, P., Flor, H., Frouin, V.,
Garavan, H., Gowland, P., Heinz, A., Ittermann, B., Lemaître, H.,

232 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

Nees, F., Paus, T., Pausova, Z., Rietschel, M., Smolka, M.N.,
Ströhle, A., Gallinat, J., Westman, E., Schumann, G., Lovestone, S.,
Simmons, A., IMAGEN consortium, 2014. No differences in hippo-
campal volume between carriers and non-carriers of the ApoE ε4 and
ε2 alleles in young healthy adolescents. Journal of Alzheimer’s Dis-
ease 40, 37e43.

Klein, R.C., Acheson, S.K., Mace, B.E., Sullivan, P.M., Moore, S.D.,
2014. Altered neurotransmission in the lateral amygdala in aged hu-
man apoE4 targeted replacement mice. Neurobiology of Aging 35,
2046e2052.

Knickmeyer, R.C., Wang,

J., Zhu, H., Geng, X., Woolson, S.,
Hamer, R.M., Konneker, T., Lin, W., Styner, M., Gilmore, J.H., 2014.
Common variants in psychiatric risk genes predict brain structure at
birth. Cerebral Cortex 24, 1230e1246.

Komlos, J., Lauderdale, B.E., 2007. The mysterious trend in American
heights in the 20th century. Annals of Human Biology 34, 206e215.
Konigsberg, L.W., Hermann, N.P., 2006. The osteological evidence for
human longevity in the recent past. In: Hawkes, K., Paine, R.R. (Eds.),
The Evolution of the Human Life History. Sante Fe, NM, pp. 267e306.
Kremen, W.S., Fennema-Notestine, C., Eyler, L.T., Panizzon, M.S.,
Chen, C.H., Franz, C.E., Lyons, M.J., Thompson, W.K., Dale, A.M.,
2013. Genetics of brain structure: contributions from the Vietnam era
twin study of aging. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part B:
Neuropsychiatric Genetics 162B, 751e761.

Leigh, S.R., 2004. Brain growth, life history, and cognition in primate and

human evolution. American Journal of Primatology 62, 139e164.

Leuthold, A.C., Mahan, M.Y., Stanwyck,

J.J., Georgopoulos, A.,
Georgopoulos, A.P., 2013. The number of cysteine residues per mole
in apolipoprotein E affects systematically synchronous neural
in-
teractions in women’s healthy brains. Experimental Brain Research
226, 525e536.

Li, L., Bao, Y., He, S., Wang, G., Guan, Y., Ma, D., Wu, R., Wang, P.,
Huang, X., Tao, S., Liu, Q., Wang, Y., Yang, J., 2015. The association
between apolipoprotein E and functional outcome after traumatic brain
injury: a meta-analysis. Medicine (Baltimore) 94 (46), e2028.

Liu, C.C., Kanekiyo, T., Xu, H., Bu, G., 2013. Apolipoprotein E and
Alzheimer disease: risk, mechanisms and therapy. Nature Reviews
Neurology 9, 106e118.

Liu, X., Somel, M., Tang, L., Yan, Z., Jiang, X., Guo, S., Yuan, Y., He, L.,
Oleksiak, A., Zhang, Y., Li, N., Hu, Y., Chen, W., Qiu, Z., Pääbo, S.,
Khaitovich, P., 2012. Extension of cortical synaptic development
distinguishes humans from chimpanzees and macaques. Genome
Research 22, 611e622.

Lovejoy, C.O., Meindl, R.S., Pryzbeck, T.R., Barton, T.S., Heiple, K.G.,
Kotting, D., 1977. Paleodemography of the Libben site, Ottawa
Oounty, Ohio. Science 198, 291e293.

Lutter, C.K., Mora, J.O., Habicht, J.P., Rasmussen, K.M., Robson, D.S.,
Sellers, S.G., Super, C.M., Herrera, M.G., 1989. Nutritional supple-
mentation: effects on child stunting because of diarrhea. American
Journal of Clinical Nutrition 50, 1e8.

Lyons, M.J., Genderson, M., Grant, M.D., Logue, M., Zink, T.,
McKenzie, R., Franz, C.E., Panizzon, M., Lohr, J.B., Jerskey, B.,
Kremen, W.S., 2013. Gene-environment interaction of ApoE geno-
type and combat exposure on PTSD. American Journal of Medical
Genetics Part B: Neuropsychiatric Genetics 162B, 762e769.

Mahley, R.W., Weisgraber, K.H., Huang, Y., 2009. Apolipoprotein E:
structure determines function, from atherosclerosis to Alzheimer’s
disease to AIDS. Journal of Lipid Research 50 (Suppl.), S183eS188.

Mallouk, R.S., 1975. Longevity in vertebrates is proportional to relative

brain weight. Federation Proceedings 34, 2102e2103.

Martin, G.M., 1999. APOE alleles and lipophylic pathogens. Neurobi-

ology of Aging 20, 441e443.

McIntosh, A.M., Bennett, C., Dickson, D., Anestis, S.F., Watts, D.P.,
Webster, T.H., Fontenot, M.B., Bradley, B.J., 2012. The apolipopro-
tein E (APOE) gene appears functionally monomorphic in chimpan-
zees (Pan troglodytes). PLoS One 7 (10), e47760.

Meyer, M., Kircher, M., Gansauge, M.T., Li, H., Racimo, F., Mallick, S.,
Schraiber, J.G., Jay, F., Prüfer, K., de Filippo, C., Sudmant, P.H.,
Alkan, C., Fu, Q., Do, R., Rohland, N., Tandon, A., Siebauer, M.,
Green, R.E., Bryc, K., Briggs, A.W., Stenzel, U., Dabney, J.,
Shendure,
J., Hammer, M.F., Shunkov, M.V.,
Derevianko, A.P., Patterson, N., Andrés, A.M., Eichler, E.E.,
Slatkin, M., Reich, D., Kelso, J., Pääbo, S., 2012. A high-coverage
genome sequence from an archaic Denisovan individual. Science 338
(6104), 222e226.

J., Kitzman,

Miller, D.J., Duka, T., Stimpson, C.D., Schapiro, S.J., Baze, W.B.,
McArthur, M.J., Fobbs, A.J., Sousa, A.M., Sestan, N., Wildman, D.E.,
Lipovich, L., Kuzawa, C.W., Hof, P.R., Sherwood, C.C., 2012. Pro-
longed myelination in human neocortical evolution. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
109, 16480e16485.

Mitter, S.S., Oriá, R.B., Kvalsund, M.P., Pamplona, P., Joventino, E.S.,
Mota, R.M., Gonçalves, D.C., Patrick, P.D., Guerrant, R.L.,
Lima, A.A., 2012. Apolipoprotein E4 inﬂuences growth and cognitive
responses to micronutrient supplementation in shantytown children
from northeast Brazil. Clinics (Sao Paulo) 67, 11e18.

Mukherjee, S., Bhattacharya, B.N., Singh, K.K., 1996. Distribution of
time of ﬁrst birth in presence of social customs regulating phys-
ical separation and coital
frequency. Mathematical Biosciences
131, 1e21.

J.F., Bolton,

Nüesch, E., Dale, C., Palmer, T.M., White, J., Keating, B.J., van
Iperen, E.P., Goel, A., Padmanabhan, S., Asselbergs, F.W.,
EPIC-Netherland Investigators, Verschuren, W.M., Wijmenga, C.,
Van der Schouw, Y.T., Onland-Moret, N.C., Lange, L.A.,
Hovingh, G.K., Sivapalaratnam, S., Morris, R.W., Whincup, P.H.,
Wannamethe, G.S., Gaunt, T.R., Ebrahim, S., Steel, L., Nair, N.,
Reiner, A.P., Kooperberg, C., Wilson,
J.L.,
McLachlan, S., Price, J.F., Strachan, M.W., Robertson, C.M.,
Kleber, M.E., Delgado, G., März, W., Melander, O.,
Dominiczak, A.F., Farrall, M., Watkins, H., Leusink, M., Maitland-
van der Zee, A.H., de Groot, M.C., Dudbridge, F., Hingorani, A., Ben-
Shlomo, Y., Lawlor, D.A., UCLEB Investigators, Amuzu, A.,
Cauﬁeld, M., Cavadino, A., Cooper, J., Davies, T.L., IN Day,
Drenos, F., Engmann, J., Finan, C., Giambartolomei, C., Hardy, R.,
Humphries, S.E., Hypponen, E., Kivimaki, M., Kuh, D., Kumari, M.,
Ong, K., Plagnol, V., Power, C., Richards, M., Shah, S., Shah, T.,
Sofat, R., Talmud, P.J., Wareham, N., Warren, H., Whittaker, J.C.,
Wong, A., Zabaneh, D., Davey Smith, G., Wells, J.C., Leon, D.A.,
Holmes, M.V., Casas, J.P., 2015. Adult height, coronary heart disease
and stroke: a multi-locus Mendelian randomization meta-analysis.
International Journal of Epidemiology. pii: dyv074.

Oriá, R.B., Patrick, P.D., Oriá, M.O., Lorntz, B., Thompson, M.R.,
Azevedo, O.G., Lobo, R.N., Pinkerton, R.F., Guerrant, R.L.,
Lima, A.A., 2010. ApoE polymorphisms and diarrheal outcomes in
Brazilian shanty town children. Brazilian Journal of Medical and
Biological Research 43, 249e256.

Human Life History Evolution: New Perspectives on Body and Brain Growth Chapter | 14 233

Paabo, S., 2015. The diverse origins of the human gene pool. Nature

Reviews Genetics 16, 313e314.

Parkin, T.G., 2003. Old Age in the Roman World. Baltimore, MD.
Patronek, G.J., Waters, D.J., Glickman, L.T., 1997. Comparative longevity
implications for gerontology research.
of pet dogs and humans:
Journals of Gerontology Series A: Biological Sciences and Medical
Sciences 52, B171eB178.

Perelman, P., Johnson, W.E., Roos, C., Seuanez, H.N., Horvath, J.E.,
Moreira, M.A., Kessing, B., Pontius, J., Roelke, M., Rumpler, Y.,
Schneider, M.P., Silva, A., O’Brien, S.J., Pecon-Slattery, J., 2011.
A molecular phylogeny of living primates. PLoS Genetics 7, e1001342.
Perry, G.H., Kistler, L., Kelaita, M.A., Sams, A.J., 2015. Insights into
hominin phenotypic and dietary evolution from ancient DNA
sequence data. Journal of Human Evolution 79, 55e63.

Peterson, C.K.,

James, L.M., Anders,

S.L., Engdahl, B.E.,
Georgopoulos, A.P., 2015. The number of cysteine residues per
mole in apolipoprotein E is associated with the severity of PTSD
re-experiencing symptoms. Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical
Neurosciences 27, 157e161.

Pitas, R.E., Ji, Z.S., Weisgraber, K.H., Mahley, R.W., 1998. Role of
apolipoprotein E in modulating neurite outgrowth: potential effect of
intracellular apolipoprotein E. Biochemical Society Transactions 26,
257e262.

Pollard, K.S., Salama, S.R., Lambert, N., Lambot, M.A., Coppens, S.,
Pedersen, J.S., Katzman, S., King, B., Onodera, C., Siepel, A.,
Kern, A.D., Dehay, C., Igel, H., Ares Jr., M., Vanderhaeghen, P.,
Haussler, D., 2006. An RNA gene expressed during cortical devel-
opment evolved rapidly in humans. Nature 443, 167e172.

Pozzi, L., Hodgson, J.A., Burrell, A.S., Sterner, K.N., Raaum, R.L.,
Disotell, T.R., 2014. Primate phylogenetic relationships and diver-
gence dates inferred from complete mitochondrial genomes. Molec-
ular Phylogenetics and Evolution 75, 165e183.

Promislow, D.E., 1993. On size and survival: progress and pitfalls
in the allometry of life span. The Journal of Gerontology 48,
B115eB123.

Promislow, D.E.L., Harvey, P.H., 1990. Living fast and dying young: a
comparative analysis of life history variation among mammals. Jour-
nal of Zoology 220, 417e437.

Pusey, A.E., 1990. Behavioural changes at adolescence in chimpanzees.

Behavior 115, 203e246.

Raffai, R.L., Dong, L.M., Farese Jr., R.V., Weisgraber, K.H., 2001.
Introduction of human apolipoprotein E4 “domain interaction” into
mouse apolipoprotein E. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 98, 11587e11591.

Rilling, J.K., 2014. Comparative primate neuroimaging: insights into hu-

man brain evolution. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 18, 46e55.

Robson, S.L., Wood, B., 2008. Hominin life history: reconstruction and

evolution. Journal of Anatomy 212, 394e425.

Ruff, C., 2002. Variation in human body size and shape. Annual Review

of Anthropology 31, 211e232.

Ruff, C.B., Trinkaus, E., Holliday, T.W., 1997. Body mass and enceph-

alization in Pleistocene Homo. Nature 387, 173e176.

Sacher, G.A., 1959. Relation of life span to brain weight and body weight
in mammals. In: Wolstenholme, G.E.W., O’Connor, M. (Eds.), CIBA
Foundation Colloquia on Ageing, vol. 5, pp. 115e133. London,
Churchill.

Samaras, T.T., 2013. Shorter height is related to lower cardiovascular

disease risk e a narrative review. Indian Heart Journal 65, 66e71.

Schniter, E., Gurven, M., Kaplan, H.S., Wilcox, N.T., Hooper, P.L., 2015.
Skill ontogeny among Tsimane forager-horticulturalists. American
Journal of Physical Anthropology 158, 3e18.

Semendeferi, K., Armstrong, E., Schleicher, A., Zilles, K., Van
Hoesen, G.W., 2001. Prefrontal cortex in humans and apes: a
comparative study of area 10. American Journal of Physical Anthro-
pology 114, 224e241.

Semendeferi, K., Teffer, K., Buxhoeveden, D.P., Park, M.S., Bludau, S.,
Amunts, K., Travis, K., Buckwalter, J., 2011. Spatial organization of
neurons in the frontal pole sets humans apart from great apes. Cerebral
Cortex 21, 1485e1497.

Shaw, P., Lerch, J.P., Pruessner, J.C., Taylor, K.N., Rose, A.B.,
Greenstein, D., Clasen, L., Evans, A., Rapoport, J.L., Giedd, J.N.,
2007. Cortical morphology in children and adolescents with different
apolipoprotein E gene polymorphisms: an observational study. Lancet
Neurology 6, 494e500.

Somel, M., Franz, H., Yan, Z., Lorenc, A., Guo, S., Giger, T., Kelso, J.,
Nickel, B., Dannemann, M., Bahn, S., Webster, M.J., Weickert, C.S.,
Lachmann, M., Pääbo, S., Khaitovich, P., 2009. Transcriptional
neoteny in the human brain. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 106, 5743e5748.

Speakman, J.R., 2005. Body size, energy metabolism and lifespan. Journal

of Experimental Biology 208 (Pt 9), 1717e1730.

Theendakara, V., Patent, A., Peters Libeu, C.A., Philpot, B., Flores, S.,
Descamps, O., Poksay, K.S., Zhang, Q., Cailing, G., Hart, M.,
John, V., Rao, R.V., Bredesen, D.E., 2013. Neuroprotective sirtuin
ratio reversed by ApoE4. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 110, 18303e18308.

Thompson, M.E.,

Jones,

J.H., Pusey, A.E., Brewer-Marsden, S.,
Goodall, J., Marsden, D., Matsuzawa, T., Nishida, T., Reynolds, V.,
Sugiyama, Y., Wrangham, R.W., 2007. Aging and fertility patterns in
wild chimpanzees provide insights into the evolution of menopause.
Current Biology 17, 2150e2156.

Trachtenberg, A.J., Filippini, N., Ebmeier, K.P., Smith, S.M., Karpe, F.,
Mackay, C.E., 2012. The effects of APOE on the functional archi-
tecture of the resting brain. Neuroimage 59, 565e572.

Vamathevan,

J.J., Hasan, S., Emes, R.D., Amrine-Madsen, H.,
Rajagopalan, D., Topp, S.D., Kumar, V., Word, M., Simmons, M.D.,
Foord, S.M., Sanseau, P., Yang, Z., Holbrook, J.D., 2008. The role of
positive selection in determining the molecular cause of species dif-
ferences in disease. BMC Evolutionary Biology 8, 273.

Walker, R., Gurven, M., Hill, K., Migliano, A., Chagnon, N., De Souza, R.,
Djurovic, et al., 2006. Growth rates and life histories in twenty-two
small-scale societies. American Journal of Human Biology 18, 295e311.
Wallis, J., 1997. A survey of reproductive parameters in the free-ranging
chimpanzees of Gombe National Park. Journal of Reproduction and
Fertility 109, 297e307.

Wang, C., Wilson, W.A., Moore, S.D., Mace, B.E., Maeda, N.,
Schmechel, D.E., Sullivan, P.M., 2005. Human apoE4-targeted
replacement mice display synaptic deﬁcits in the absence of neuro-
pathology. Neurobiology of Disease 18, 390e398.

Westlye, L.T., Reinvang, I., Rootwelt, H., Espeseth, T., 2012. Effects of
APOE on brain white matter microstructure in healthy adults.
Neurology 79, 1961e1969.

Wood, A.R., Esko, T., Yang, J., Vedantam, S., Pers, T.H., Gustafsson, S.,
et al., 2014. Deﬁning the role of common variation in the genomic and
biological architecture of adult human height. Nature Genetics 46,
1173e1186.

234 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

Wu, X.J., Schepartz, L.A., Liu, W., Trinkaus, E., 2011. Antemortem
trauma and survival in the late Middle Pleistocene human cranium
from Maba, South China. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 108, 19558e19562.

Yu, C.E., Cudaback, E., Foraker, J., Thomson, Z., Leong, L., Lutz, F.,
Gill, J.A., Saxton, A., Kraemer, B., Navas, P., Keene, C.D., Montine, T.,
Bekris, L.M., 2013. Epigenetic signature and enhancer activity of the
human APOE gene. Human Molecular Genetics 22, 5036e5047.

Zhang, D., Guo, L., Zhu, D., Li, K., Li, L., Chen, H., Zhao, Q.,
Hu, X., Liu, T., 2013. Diffusion tensor imaging reveals evolution
of primate brain architectures. Brain Structure and Function 218,
1429e1450.

Zhou, H., Matveev, R., Yu, Q., Khaitovich, P., Jin, L., Lachman, M.,
Stoneking, M., Fu, Q., Tang, K., 2015. A chronological atlas of nat-
ural selection in the human genome during the past half-million years.
BioRxiv. http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/018929.

Chapter 15

Gorillas in Our Midst? Human Sexual
Dimorphism and Contest Competition
in Men

A.K. Hill1, D.H. Bailey2 and D.A. Puts3
1University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States; 2University of California, Irvine, CA, United States; 3The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, PA, United States

INTRODUCTION
the Carthaginian explorer Hanno the
Around 500 BCE,
Navigator sailed south with a ﬂeet of 60 ships along
the northwest coast of Africa, encountering an island people
he reported were comprised mostly of women. The men
managed to escape, but Hanno’s expedition captured three
women who fought back so violently that
they were
executed by their abductors, their skins carried back to
Carthage. Apparently oblivious to the hypocrisy, Hanno
referred to these people as savages. His interpreters called
them Gorillai, “tribe of hairy women” (Hanno, 1832). Over
two millennia later, in 1847, Americans Thomas Savage and
Jeffries Wyman borrowed this term when ﬁrst describing the
western gorilla (Conniff, 2009). Savage, Wyman, and the
actions of Hanno’s expedition were products of their times
and easily strike the 21st century reader as racist and vile.
We will revisit the human tendencies to classify others as
in-group versus out-group, potentially regard out-group
members as subhuman, and aggress against them, in our
discussion of coalitional aggression in a later section.

Returning for the moment

to gorillas, we note that
research on these intelligent, elusive apes has revealed a
wealth of information about their ecology and behavior.
One of the most conspicuous aspects of gorilla social
structure is that males aggressively defend groups of
females from other males using their massive size, long
canine teeth, and threat displays (Fossey, 1983; Maple and
Hoff, 1982). Such traits are central
to the behavioral
repertoire of male gorillas, who experience what Charles
Darwin termed sexual selection, a type of natural selection
engendered by competition over mates (Andersson, 1994).

Since the publication of Darwin’s The Descent of Man
in 1871, a vast literature has accumulated demonstrating the
salience of sexual selection in shaping the phenotypes of
sexually reproducing organisms,
including gorillas and
humans. Sometimes referred to as “Darwin’s other idea,”
sexual selection favors traits helpful in winning mating
opportunities and is effectuated to varying degrees across
species by a handful of mechanisms (Andersson, 1994).
These mechanisms include mate choice, which favors traits
desired by the opposite sex; sexual coercion, the use of
force or threat against mates; sperm competition, the post-
copulatory struggle for fertilization of ova that favors traits
such as increased sperm production and motility; and
contest competition, favoring traits that help win mates
through same-sex physical contests and/or
threatening
displays directed at rivals.

Much research has focused on mate choice,

though
recent years have seen a reevaluation of sexual selection in
humans with an increase in attention to contest competition,
whose inﬂuence now seems to have been underestimated
(eg, Carrier and Morgan, 2015; Hill et al., 2013; Puts, 2010,
2016; Puts et al., 2015; Scott et al., 2012). In this chapter, we
consider data bearing on the inﬂuence of contest competition
on men’s phenotypes, but ﬁrst we evaluate evidence for the
overall intensity of sexual selection among ancestral men.

STRENGTH OF SEXUAL SELECTION IN
MEN
A fundamental reality of reproduction in many sexually
reproducing
parental

asymmetry

an

species

is

in

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00015-6
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

235

236 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

investment: one sex, usually females, invests more in pro-
ducing and caring for offspring (Trivers, 1972). Women,
for example,
require approximately nine months for
gestation, followed by a long period of lactation and
childrearing, while a contrastingly small parental effort is
required for men to reproduce (Eibl-Eibesfeldt, 1989;
Geary, 2000). As a result, men have a higher potential
reproductive rate (Clutton-Brock and Vincent, 1991), and
in natural fertility populations, there are at all times more
men available to mate than there are reproductively viable
women (Trivers, 1972). This skews the operational sex
ratio (OSR),
the number of sexually active males per
fecund female, in a way that tends across species to force
males into competition for the relatively few available
females (Clutton-Brock and Vincent, 1991; Emlen and
Oring, 1977).

The physiological OSR, which includes all individuals
capable of reproducing, can be distinguished from the
behavioral OSR, which includes only those engaged in
mating (Marlowe and Berbesque, 2012). This may be an
important distinction because the amount of
time in-
dividuals are typically eligible as mating partners may exert
a greater effect on sexual selection than does the amount of
time individuals are physiologically capable of reproducing
(Kokko and Jennions, 2008; Kokko et al., 2012). The hu-
man behavioral OSR has been estimated to be 8.6, and the
physiological OSR has been estimated to be 11.7 (Marlowe
and Berbesque, 2012). Regardless of which measure is
used, however, the human OSR falls below orangutans
(OSR ¼ 55.0) and gorillas (OSR ¼ 83.8), which display
the highest degrees of sexual dimorphism in the primate
order, and above promiscuously mating chimpanzees
(OSR ¼ 4.5), which also exhibit substantial individual and
coalitional contest competition, as well as a high degree of
sperm competition (Mitani et al., 1996). Hence the human
OSR indicates the opportunity for moderately strong sexual
selection in men.

The intensity of sexual selection is also inﬂuenced by
the spatial distribution of males and females, which affects
whether mates can be monopolized. Across species, female
reproduction is typically limited by access to food, whereas
male reproduction is limited by access to mates. Hence,
females generally distribute themselves according to
resource availability, as well as predation risk, and males
then distribute themselves according to the distribution of
females (Lindenfors et al., 2004). If females are social or
otherwise spatially clustered,
then one or a few males
may be capable of monopolizing multiple females, and
competition to be one of the few breeding males will tend
to be intense (Emlen and Oring, 1977). However, if female
group sizes are large, then it may be infeasible for a smaller
number of males to defend them from other males, and
larger multimale/multifemale groups will emerge. Male
mating competition is often intense in such species,
frequently taking the form of male dominance hierarchies

in which dominant males gain more mating opportunities,
especially with estrous females. However,
in primates,
canine size dimorphism and body size dimorphism tend to
be less extreme in multimale/multifemale species than in
species with single-male polygyny (Clutton-Brock and
Harvey, 1984), probably in part reﬂecting less intense
sexual selection.

Although humans form large multimale/multifemale
groups, the human mating system is not typical of such
primates, as concealed ovulation prohibits males from
attempting to monopolize estrous females (Gangestad and
Thornhill, 2008; Puts et al., 2013). Perhaps as a conse-
quence, within these larger groups are embedded smaller
groups of individual males mated in relatively stable and
exclusive relationships to one or more females. These
mateships exhibit moderate polygyny. For example, on
average, 21% of married women are married polygynously
across forager societies, although the degree of polygyny
varies substantially across cultures and ecological contexts
(Marlowe and Berbesque, 2012). As in hamadryas baboons
(Schreier and Swedell, 2009), males’ proprietariness over
their mates helps maintain these embedded “harems” (Daly
and Wilson, 1988).

Males’ ability to monopolize females may also be
contingent on the dimensionality of the mating environ-
ment (Puts, 2010). Males may more effectively monopolize
females in environments that are one-dimensional (eg,
burrows or tunnels) or two-dimensional (eg, land or ﬂoors
of bodies of water), as opposed to three-dimensional
environments, such as air, open water, or trees, where the
region that must be defended is larger, and there are many
in-routes for sexually interloping males. As a result,
compared to three-dimensional mating environments,
terrestrial
environments may favor greater physical
competition for mates, as in terrestrially breeding seals
(Stirling, 1975) and turtles (Berry and Shine, 1980) relative
to aquatically breeding species. Hominins have evolved in
a
the
emergence of habitual bipedalism in Australopithecus
anamensis roughly four million years ago (Harcourt-Smith,
2007). This shift in the human paleoenvironment likely
played an inﬂuential role in shaping mating behavior in our
lineage. In particular, the new terrestrial environment may
have enabled ancestral males to restrict sexual access to
mates to a degree that was infeasible in their more arboreal
ancestors.

two-dimensional

environment

at

least

since

Male mating competition also tends to increase with
reproductive variance among males compared to females
(Bateman, 1948). In humans, male reproductive variance
exceeds that of females but this difference is highly variable
across populations (Brown et al., 2009). For example,
reproductive maxima have been reported as 8 and 14 for
women and 23 and 43 for men among two populations of
lowland South American Indians (Chagnon, 1992; Salzano
et al., 1967), an approximately three-fold increase among

Gorillas in Our Midst? Human Sexual Dimorphism and Contest Competition in Men Chapter | 15 237

males. However, the concentrations of wealth and power
afforded by state-level societies have produced staggering
reproductive variances. According to the Guinness Book of
World Records, the largest number of children known to
have been produced by a single woman is 69, while that for
a man exceeds 1000 (Glenday, 2013). Men who are able to
compete successfully for mates have the potential to pro-
duce a large number of offspring, whereas others may not
reproduce at all. Women, by contrast, accrue less additional
reproductive success from acquiring multiple matesdat
most, they can reproduce approximately once per year, but
interbirth intervals span several years in traditional societies
(Blurton Jones, 1987).

It is thus unsurprising that societies allowing polygy-
nous marriage are far more common in the ethnographic
record than are those with only monogamous marriages
(Murdock, 1967). Yet, even in societies with exclusively
monogamous marriage, the mating system may neverthe-
less tend toward polygyny; men remarry (Buckle et al.,
1996) and reproduce (Jokela et al., 2010) after divorce at
higher rates than women (though see Borgerhoff Mulder,
2009), with reproductive variances comparable to those
seen in societies with polygynous marriage (Brown et al.,
2009). This pattern is not restricted to the West,
the
industrialized world, or the Global Northdmen exhibit
greater reproductive variance than do women among some
serially monogamous hunter-gatherers, as well (Hill and
Hurtado, 1996).

investment

The previously mentioned evidence suggests a robust
potential for sexual selection in shaping men’s anatomy and
reproductive behavior. Women provide greater levels of
parental
through producing and rearing
offspring, removing themselves from the mating pool for
longer periods of time with each reproductive event. The
consequent
imbalance in the OSR predicts increased
competition among males for mating opportunities. Men’s
potential to monopolize mates is reduced by women’s ag-
gregation into large groups but promoted by their terres-
triality, which enables some men to defend multiple mates.
As a result, men display greater reproductive variance than
do women. These lines of evidence are consistent with a
strong potential for sexual selection to shape men’s phe-
notypes. However,
requires
nonrandom mating among men, such that men’s pheno-
types affect their mating opportunities. As we will now
discuss, ancestral men appear
to have won mates
by developing traits that contributed to success in contest
competition.

selection

sexual

also

SELECTION FOR MALE CONTESTS
When evaluating the inﬂuence of past sexual selection on a
trait,
types of evidence
(Table 15.1). First, high levels of sexual dimorphism
suggest past sexual selection (Andersson, 1994; Darwin,

to consider several

is useful

it

TABLE 15.1 Evidence of Past Sexual Selection on a
Trait

Sexually dimorphic

l
l Develops or increases in expression at sexual maturity
l Affects success in one or more mechanisms of sexual

selection

l Affects mating success

1871; Lande, 1980). Second, traits that function in mating
competition are often costly to produce and maintain, and
so often develop or increase in their expression at sexual
maturity when they can begin to compensate for these
costs. Third,
if a trait affects success in one or more
mechanisms of sexual selection (eg, by attracting mates or
winning ﬁghts with same-sex competitors),
then this
suggests that the trait did so over its evolution. This may be
demonstrated experimentally (eg, Andersson, 1982), or by
providing correlational evidence that the trait inﬂuences
success
selection
(eg, Schwagmeyer and Woontner, 1986). Fourth, if a trait
affects mating success, then this indicates that it did so over
its evolution. Again, experimental manipulations provide
stronger evidence of causation (eg, Andersson, 1982), but
correlational data can also provide evidence of a trait’s
inﬂuence on mating success and may have the advantage of
increased ecological validity.

a mechanism of

sexual

under

None of these lines of evidence is sufﬁcient by itself.
For example, different ecological selection pressures such
as niche partitioning can produce sexual dimorphisms,
although this appears to be relatively rare (Andersson,
1994), and sexual selection may sometimes act similarly in
the two sexes producing low sexual dimorphism (Hooper
and Miller, 2008). In addition, if relevant aspects of the
environment have changed,
then a trait may currently
inﬂuence mating success differently than it did ancestrally.
However, in combination, these lines can provide strong
evidence for past sexual selection. If a trait develops at
sexual maturity,
is sexually dimorphic, and appears to
inﬂuence mating success through one or more mechanisms
of sexual selection, then it is likely that the trait was shaped
by sexual selection through these mechanisms.

Research exploring the inﬂuence of sexual selection on
men’s traits often emphasizes the role of female mate
choice, but
this emphasis may be based partly on
misperceptions regarding the freedom with which women
chose mates ancestrally (see, eg, Puts, 2010). Given the
latitude with which women seem to choose mates in
contemporary Western societies,
it may surprise some
readers that ancestral women probably experienced far less
autonomy. For example, more than two-thirds of extant
hunter-gatherer groups in a large sample had parentally
arranged marriages (Apostolou, 2007), and while women
may sometimes circumvent kin limitations on partner

238 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

that

suggest

analyses

choice (eg, via “mock bride theft”; Ayres, 1974),
phylogenetic
family members
inﬂuenced mating among the earliest members of our
species (Walker et al., 2011). Moreover, constraints on
female choice are imposed not only by kin but also by
unrelated men via sexual coercion (Puts, 2016; Puts et al.,
2015a), and especially by men’s exclusion of male rivals by
force or threat (eg, Hill et al., 2013).

Indeed,

the weight of evidence suggests that many
aspects of the human male phenotype are best explained by
an evolutionary history of contest competition. Contests
tend to produce several types of traits that aid in excluding
same-sex competitors by force or
including
behaviors such as same-sex aggression and threat displays,
and anatomical traits such as large body size and anatom-
ical weapons (Table 15.2). If any of these traits is present,
then it is a good candidate to examine for evidence of
having been shaped by sexual selection via contests. As we
will see, men tend to exhibit all of the hallmarks of a
species that has experienced an evolutionary history of
male contest competition.

threat,

including both subsistence

Same-Sex Aggression
Across cultures, men and boys are more physically
aggressive than are girls and women (Archer, 2004; Ellis
et al., 2008), and men’s aggression peaks at the age of
greatest mating competition (Archer, 2009). Murder in
particular is overwhelmingly a male phenomenon. Men
greatly outnumber women in both killing and being killed
everywhere that homicide has been studied (Daly and
Wilson, 1988),
societies
(Beckerman et al., 2009; Chagnon, 1988; Walker and
Bailey, 2013) as well as industrialized Western nations
(Daly and Wilson, 1990). For example, in the Yanomamo,
horticulturalists living in parts of Brazil and Venezuela,
Chagnon (1988) estimated violence to account for nearly
one-third of male deaths, while Walker and Bailey (2013)
found the mean percentage of violent deaths among 11
traditional lowland South American societies to be 30%.
Males, moreover, accounted for 69% of all such deaths,
with comparable ﬁgures seen across the societies in the
sample. From a wide array of human populations, Daly and
Wilson (1988) report 95% of same-sex killings to be
perpetrated by men, even when war-related homicides are
excluded from analysis. This sex difference holds across

TABLE 15.2 Traits Favored by Contest Competition

l

l

l

Physical aggression
Large body size
Strength

l Weapons
l Behavioral displays of formidability
l Anatomical threat displays

populations even as the number of homicides changes
dramatically from one to another (Daly and Wilson, 1990).
As Wright (1995, p. 72) has noted, “From an evolutionary
point of view, the leading cause of violence is maleness.”
Of course, a male bias in physical aggression and
violence, especially a bias in male-on-male aggression and
violence, is predicted from the hypothesis that ancestral
men competed for mates via contest competition. Physical
aggression may have helped men obtain or defend mates
directly, for example, by killing or injuring a competitor
attempting to win the same mate (Marlowe, 2004), or
attempting to steal one’s mate (Chagnon, 1992), but these
may have more frequently been accomplished indirectly
through the threat of physical harm (see later in this
chapter).

Another possible set of behavioral adaptations that may
allow males to remain physically aggressive during contests
relates to pain thresholds and tolerance. Physical pain sig-
nals actual or potential tissue damage and can motivate
withdrawal from a damaging situation and protection of a
damaged body part (Lynn, 1984). However, withdrawing
from injurious behavior imposes costs if the behavior is
potentially ﬁtness enhancing. In such situations, organisms
face a tradeoff between avoiding tissue damage and
missing opportunities to increase ﬁtness. The relative
weights of the associated costs and beneﬁts will vary be-
tween individuals and across contexts. Given stronger
sexual selection and greater reproductive variance among
men compared to women, men are generally expected to
engage in costlier, more injurious behaviors in contexts that
can augment mating success, such as contest competition.
Ancestral men who disengaged from or avoided contests
may have suffered fewer injuries but left fewer offspring.
The experience of less pain for a given stimulus may
represent a proximate mechanism shaped by sexual selec-
tion to facilitate continued engagement in contests despite
injury. If so, then men would be expected to exhibit less
pain sensitivity and greater pain tolerance, perhaps espe-
cially in competitive contexts.

These predictions have been borne out. Relative to
women, men can undergo more intense stimulation such as
physical pressure on the body for longer periods of time
before experiencing pain, they are able to tolerate more
pain, and these effect sizes are moderate to large (Fillingim
et al., 2009; Riley et al., 1998). Moreover, in one study,
men experienced analgesia after competition against a
same-sex competitor
regardless of exercise, whereas
women experienced analgesia only after exercise (Sternberg
et al., 2001).

Anatomical Adaptations for Male Contests
While observational studies of aggression among primates
provide the most direct evidence of contest competition,
another relevant line of evidence concerns body size sexual

Gorillas in Our Midst? Human Sexual Dimorphism and Contest Competition in Men Chapter | 15 239

dimorphism. In a sample of 18 species of anthropoids
representing 12 genera, Mitani et al. (1996) conﬁrmed the
relationship between body size dimorphism and OSR ex-
pected from sexual selection theory. In the human lineage,
sexual size dimorphism exhibits great antiquity revealed
through a large, albeit fragmentary, hominin fossil record
dating back millions of years (Plavcan, 2012). Yet, research
on levels of sexual dimorphism in earlier hominins is
equivocal. For example, the best-represented fossil homi-
nin, Australopithecus afarensis, which lived roughly 3e
4 million years ago, has been alleged by some researchers
(Gordon et al., 2008; Lockwood et al., 1996; McHenry,
1991), but not others (Reno and Lovejoy, 2015; Reno et al.,
2010; Reno et al., 2003), to have exhibited a level of sexual
dimorphism commensurate with that of extant gorillas and
orangutans.

humans,

2003). Among modern

By the time of Homo erectus, whose existence covers
most of the last 2 million years, sexual dimorphism had
reached the approximate levels of modern Homo sapiens
(Antón,
skeletal
dimorphism is consistent with a primate species in which
males are 45%e50% larger
(Gordon et al., 2008).
Compared to women, men possess 31%e43% more
fat-free body mass (Lassek and Gaulin, 2009; Wells, 2012),
61% more muscle mass overall, and 75% more upper-body
muscle mass (Abe et al., 2003; Lassek and Gaulin, 2009).
As a result, the average man is stronger than 99.9% of
women (Lassek and Gaulin, 2009).

Men with a masculine, muscular body shape have
more sex partners (Frederick and Haselton, 2007; Hill et al.,
2013; Lassek and Gaulin, 2009), particularly in short-term
relationships (Rhodes et al., 2005), and begin having sex
at an earlier age (Hughes and Gallup, 2003) than do less
masculine men. Larger men, both in terms of height
(Frederick and Jenkins, 2015; Mueller and Mazur, 2001)
and body mass (Frederick and Jenkins, 2015), also report
more
sex partners. Although mating success does
not necessarily translate into reproductive success among
natural fertility populations, positive relationships have
been observed between men’s reproductive success and
both height (Mueller and Mazur, 2001; Pawlowski et al.,
2000) and physical prowess (Chagnon, 1988; Smith
et al., 2003).

Men also appear designed to weather bodily insults,
particularly to the head, which is disproportionately
targeted (Shepherd et al., 1988) and injured (Carrier and
Morgan, 2015) in ﬁghts. Brink et al. (1998) examined 2432
bodily injuries in 1156 men and 325 women in Denmark
for a one-year period in the mid-1990s, reporting 69% to
have been craniofacial, with injuries in both sexes tending
to be produced by blunt force at close range. Indeed, sexual
dimorphism in cranial robusticity may partly be attributable
to physical violence among men, as features such as more
robust mandibles and brow ridges may protect against
catastrophic facial fractures (Carrier and Morgan, 2015;

Puts, 2010). Women generally do not
experience
commensurate levels of physical aggression (Campbell,
2013; Daly and Wilson, 1988) and display less cranial
robusticity and fewer cranial injuries (Carrier and Morgan,
2015; Shepherd et al., 1988).

the

competition often favors

Weapons Use
Contest
evolution of
anatomical weapons, such as antlers, horns, and, in pri-
mates, large canine teeth. Yet, compared with our closest
living relatives, both men and women possess relatively
small canines, and we lack substantial canine-size sexual
dimorphism (Wood et al., 1991). Diminution in canine size
and a departure from the CP3 honing complex, a typical ape
feature, begins with one of the earliest hominin candidates
(7 to 6 Ma), Sahelanthropus tchadensis (Brunet et al.,
2002), and continues through the Pliocene genera Ardipi-
thecus (Suwa et al., 2009) and Australopithecus (White
et al., 2000) to Homo after 2.5 Ma (Suwa et al., 2009).

One hypothesis for reduction in canines and other
skeletal features related to biting is that canine weaponry
was supplanted by handheld weapons and forelimbs freed
by bipedal
locomotion (Carrier, 2011; Darwin, 1871;
McHenry, 1991). Clubs, spears, and hurled stones may
have obviated biting by keeping enemies at a distance in the
way that antlers appear to have replaced large maxillary
canines in several deer species (Barrette, 1977). In addition,
our
to habitual bipedalism and its associated
orthograde posture enhanced the injuriousness of physical
blows (Carrier, 2011).

shift

Male chimpanzees make and use tools, including using
branches in dominance displays (but not as offensive
weapons; van Lawick-Goodall, 1968), suggesting that tools
have been used since the last common ancestor of Pan and
Homo. While the earliest evidence of a weapon-inﬂicted
wound has been dated to roughly 100,000 years ago
(Pickering et al., 2000), the emergence of manufactured
stone tools by at least 3.4 million years ago (Harmand et al.,
2015; McPherron et al., 2010) suggests that handheld
weapons were used far earlier. Indeed, it is difﬁcult to
imagine an ancestral species with the mental capacity to
shape stones for use as cutting tools, and with males
ﬁghting over mates, in which males would not also utilize
branches, bones, antlers, and other materials in their
environment as weapons.

The use of projectile weapons such as hurled rocks and
spears may have contributed to the very large male advan-
tage in throwing velocity (3.5 standard deviations by age 12
years; Thomas and French, 1985), as well as men’s 1.5
standard deviation advantage in targeting and avoiding
projectiles (Watson and Kimura, 1991). This targeting dif-
ference remains large after controlling for experience
(Watson and Kimura, 1991) and appears
to depend
developmentally on early androgen exposure (Hines et al.,

240 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

2003). Across societies, the manufacture and use of weapons
against same-sex rivals is ubiquitous among men and rare
among women (Archer, 2004; Ellis et al., 2008; Smith and
Smith, 1995; Warner et al., 2005).

The development of handheld weapons represented a
watershed moment in hominin evolution, imbuing physical
contests among men with a previously unknown degree of
lethality. Moreover, for the ﬁrst time in primate evolution,
individuals were able to aggress from a distance, reducing
the advantage of anatomical weaponry and possibly
spurring the diminution of sexual dimorphism in body, and
especially canine, size. This inference has important
implications: if the use of handheld weapons is responsible
for reduction in the typical trappings of primate intrasexual
selection, then an examination of body size dimorphism
and canine size dimorphism may lead us to underestimate
the intensity of contest competition over the evolution of
our species.

Dominance Displays
Traits
aggression, pain tolerance,
such as physical
size, strength, facial robusticity, and weapons use may have
served to make men more competitive in physical
contests. However, physical violence is costly energetically
and in terms of risk of injury or death, as well as risk of
retribution (eg, Beckerman et al., 2009; Daly and Wilson,
1988). Across species, male contests frequently involve
displays and mutual assessment of formidability, often
ending when one rival submits before either is injured (see
Smith and Parker, 1976 for a discussion of asymmetric
contests). While the costs of submission in terms of reduced
social status and mating opportunities may be high, the
costs of defeat may be higher. As a result, ancestral
men capable of accurately assessing rivals’ physical
formidability likely obtained a selective advantage (Sell
et al., 2009, 2010; Wolff and Puts, 2010). Because
maleemale aggression is culturally ubiquitous (Daly and
Wilson, 1988) and characterizes all extant apes (Puts,
2010), we can be conﬁdent that there was selective pressure
for such acuity ancestrally.

Men are therefore expected to attend closely to
the formidability and volatility of their same-sex competi-
tors, to exercise caution accordingly, and to use nonviolent
means such as threats and negotiation to obtain status
and valued resources. Men appear to utilize cues such
as facial appearance (Carrier and Morgan, 2015; Sell et al.,
2014; Sell et al., 2009; Zilioli et al., 2014), muscularity
(Hill et al., 2013), and height (Stulp et al., 2015) to
assess one another’s formidability. However, some traits
that
inﬂuence dominance perceptions may have been
shaped by selection speciﬁcally to signal formidability, as
we now discuss.

Behavioral Displays of Formidability

Men may avoid potentially deadly conﬂict by displaying
their formidability to rivals in diverse ways,
including
risk-taking behavior when peers are present
greater
(Ginsburg and Miller, 1982; Morrongiello and Dawber,
2004) and when those peers are male (Ermer et al., 2008).
research has associated dangerous
In support of
risk-taking with perceptions of physical
formidability
(Fessler et al., 2014), suggesting that risk-taking and acuity
to risk-taking may have evolved for success in contests.

this,

Among the Yanomamo, contests often involve “shout-
ing matches, chest pounding duels, side slapping duels,
club ﬁghts, ﬁghts with axes and machetes, and shooting
with bows and arrows with the intent to kill” (Chagnon,
1988, p. 986). Among the Meriam of Australia, the hunting
of large sea turtles is physically demanding, potentially
injurious, and may function to signal formidability to other
men (Bliege Bird et al., 2001; Smith et al., 2003). Optimal
foraging and reciprocal altruism are unlikely to explain
turtle hunting behavior. Turtle hunting is inefﬁcient as a
means of procuring food, hunters typically give away the
meat at feasts, and this altruism tends not to be recipro-
cated. In addition, women do not report greater attraction to
turtle hunters, so turtle hunting does not appear to function
in mate attraction either (Smith et al., 2003). However,
turtle hunting is respected by men, and turtle hunters report
earlier onset of sexual behavior and larger numbers of sex
partners than nonhunters, as well as 2.4 times greater life-
time reproductive success, with an even larger difference
for hunt leaders (Smith et al., 2003).

competition,

Men’s greater average interest in playing and observing
sports, both in the contemporary United States (Deaner
et al., 2012) and across traditional societies (Deaner and
Smith, 2013), may also reﬂect selection for displays of
formidabilitydas well as for physical aggression, interest
in
engage
in activities that build strength and hone skills useful in
contests. The male bias in sports participation is striking:
in a sample of 50 societies taken from the Human Relations
Area Files, males participated in 95% of all sports, females
in only 20%, with men predominating especially in
combat-related sports (Deaner and Smith, 2013).

predisposition

and

the

to

Anatomical Threat Displays

Humans are among the most visually sexually dimorphic
primates (Dixson et al., 2005), and recent research suggests
that at
least some conspicuous traits may function to
increase men’s appearance of formidability. For example,
beards and eyebrow hair grow at puberty in males and may
signal formidability through associations with physical
maturity and testosterone levels and by increasing the
apparent size of
the jaw and brow (Guthrie, 1970;

Gorillas in Our Midst? Human Sexual Dimorphism and Contest Competition in Men Chapter | 15 241

Muscarella and Cunningham, 1996; Neave and Shields,
2008). Male faces with beards are rated as more dominant
but not more attractive than the same faces clean-shaven
(Dixson and Vasey, 2012; Muscarella and Cunningham,
1996; Neave and Shields, 2008).

Likewise, both correlational (Hodges-Simeon et al.,
2010) and experimental (Feinberg et al., 2005; Puts et al.,
2006, 2007; Wolff and Puts, 2010) research shows positive
relationships between vocal masculinity, such as low pitch
and vocal timbre, and perceptions of men’s dominance.
Men’s vocal tracts are 15% longer, and their vocal folds
60% longer,
than women’s (Fant, 1960; Titze, 2000),
several times the 7%e8% expected from the sex difference
in stature (Gaulin and Boster, 1985). Elevated testosterone
levels at puberty cause males’ vocal folds to grow longer
and thicker than those of females, both absolutely and
relative to overall body growth (Harries et al., 1997;
Hollien et al., 1994). Men’s larger vocal folds consequently
vibrate at a fundamental frequency approximately half that
of females during phonation, which we perceive as a lower
pitch. Similarly, males’ larynges descend a full vertebra
lower than females’ at puberty (Fitch and Giedd, 1999),
producing a longer vocal tract and resulting in lower, more
closely spaced formant frequencies and a deeper, richer-
sounding timbre.

In a cross-cultural sample of voice recordings, men
accurately assessed physical strength from the voice even
when listening to unfamiliar languages (Sell et al., 2010).
Although pitch and timbre track body size within-sex only
modestly (González, 2004; Lass and Brown, 1978; Pisanski
et al., 2014; Rendall et al., 2005), masculine voices have
also been associated with physical aggressiveness, testos-
terone levels, and peer evaluations of ﬁghting ability (Hill
et al., 2013; Puts et al., 2012a). It may be the case that
masculine voices are reliable signals of dominance even
while masculine voices are only modestly associated with
any particular correlate of dominance.

Dominance, Mating, and Reproductive
Success

Displays of formidability, whether behavioral or anatom-
ical, may have contributed to mating success among
ancestral men by increasing dominance (coerced social
status) and prestige (freely conferred deference; Henrich
and Gil-White, 2001). Displays of formidability may in-
ﬂuence prestige because dominant men can make strong
leaders and powerful allies and may also possess skills
worthy of emulation. Indeed, experimental evidence sug-
gests that social status is conferred upon dominant men in
proportion to their being viewed as likely to generate
beneﬁts for the group via within-group enforcement and
between-group representation (Lukaszewski et al., 2015).

Both dominance and prestige can thus aid in social
competition over all contested resources, including food
and territory, as well as mates (West-Eberhard, 1983).
Indeed, success in competition with other males has been
shown to increase men’s preferences for feminine female
mates (Welling et al., 2013), suggesting that success in
maleemale competition increases access to desirable sex
partners.

In non-Western samples, both dominance and prestige
have been associated with increased mating and reproduc-
tive success in men (Chagnon, 1988; Smith et al., 2003;
von Rueden et al., 2011). However, this does not imply that
sexual selection has favored high levels of unrestrained
male belligerence. As noted previously, physical aggres-
sion is costly and should be dependent upon context,
including the likelihood of defeat and the threat of retri-
bution. For example, among the extremely bellicose
Waorani of Ecuador, men who participated in the most
raids of other villages did not have more wives or offspring
(Beckerman et al., 2009). Although failure to avenge ho-
micides may be perceived as a sign of weakness among the
Waorani,
immediate retribution
against the raider’s village. It is thus possible that a mod-
erate level of raiding represented the optimal balance be-
tween the costs of retribution and the costs of appearing
weak.

raiding also brought

Among Western undergraduate students, a component
of mating successdnumber of sex partners in the past
yeardwas positively related to self-rated ﬁghting ability in
two samples (Wolff and Puts, 2010), and male acquain-
tances’ ratings of ﬁghting ability, as well as size and
muscularity, in another sample (Hill et al., 2013). Displays
of physical competitive ability such as sports performance
(Faurie et al., 2004; Honekopp et al., 2007) and gang
membership (Palmer and Tilley, 1995) have also been
positively related to mating success.

In addition, traits that inﬂuence perceptions of domi-
nance predict mating and reproductive success. For
example, a masculine, dominant-sounding voice has been
associated with greater mating success in samples of US
undergraduates (Hill et al., 2013; Hodges-Simeon et al.,
2011; Puts, 2005), as well as with greater reproductive
success in a sample of Tanzanian foragers (Apicella et al.,
2007). Likewise, dominant facial appearance has been
found
and
reproductive success among military cadets (Mueller and
Mazur, 1997).

eventual military

rank

to

predict

Coalitional Aggression
Males are more likely than females to kill and be killed by
conspeciﬁcs among our closest living relatives, chimpan-
zees (Wrangham et al., 2006), who, like humans, engage in

242 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

coalitional aggression. Wrangham and Glowacki (2012,
p. 20) argue that humans generally conform to the pattern
seen in chimps: “consistent
intergroup hostility, safe
killing, and beneﬁts from intergroup dominance.” Thus,
aggressive behavior among allied groups of males, which
presents early via boyhood competition (Geary et al.,
2003), has likely not only long been a feature of human life
(eg, Bamforth, 1994; Frayer, 1997), but may also be a
more primitive feature of our primate heritage. There are,
however,
important distinctions that set humans apart.
Notably, hunter-gatherer groups display an ability for
peacemaking involving protracted periods of nonviolence
toward rival groups that is uncharacteristic of chimpanzees.
As Wrangham (1999, p. 18) writes, “Peace is the normal
human condition, in the sense that most human groups, for
most of the time, are not at war.”

similar

levels of

A further difference is that chimpanzees engage in far
more overt aggression overall, but human aggression is
more often lethal, so that chimps and humans living in
lethal
subsistence societies exhibit
aggression (Wrangham et al., 2006). For example,
the
Arnhem Land people of Australia are characterized by an
unusually high rate of physical aggression among human
populations (Wrangham et al., 2006) but nevertheless
display a rate of physical attack two orders of magnitude
below that of chimpanzees. In light of this, a comparison
with chimps seems apt only to a point
in informing
our understanding of the possible evolutionary history of
human violence. Perhaps the lethality of human weapons
elevates the importance of threats, deference, and peace-
making in relation to physical attacks when negotiating
intragroup dominance hierarchies and intergroup conﬂict.
In addition, the substantial death tolls attributable to
violence recorded among traditional human societies occur
at a level of social complexity greater than physical contests
between two males. Of importance is the presence of
“organized and sanctioned group violence that involves
armed conﬂict, including confrontations that combatants
recognize may result
in deliberate killing,” as Webster
(1998, pp. 313e314) has deﬁned warfare. Conﬂicts,
according to Webster, are perpetrated “with the intent of
maintaining the status quo or bringing about a shift of
relations, usually the latter.” This deﬁnition is
power
to understandings of coalitional violence in
similar
chimpanzees, which Wrangham’s
imbalance-
of-power hypothesis argues is contingent on (1) hostility
and (2) power asymmetries among groups. The psycho-
logical
traits that might be favored in the service of
coalitional aggression include, as Wrangham (1999, p. 23)
suggests, “a tendency to classify others as in-group or out-
group, to regard members of out-groups as potential prey,
to be alert to (or search for) power asymmetries between in-
group and out-group parties, and to be ruthless in attacking

(1999)

out-group parties when the perceived power asymmetry is
sufﬁciently great.”

territory, political control,

While there are no doubt myriad proximate motivations
for organized group violence in our species, such as a
desire for slaves,
revenge,
resolution of economic disagreements, and more fruitful
environments (eg, Keeley, 1996), selection ultimately
favors traits that contribute to reproduction. Hence, it is at
least parsimonious to hypothesize that reproduction lies at
the root of coalitional violence, as well. Even when a desire
for resources or political control is the immediate cause,
these desires may themselves have been forged in the ﬁres
of mating competition.

By way of raiding, men are able to forcibly procure
female mates through “bride theft,” which appears to be a
species-typical behavioral trait (Ayres, 1974). Across 10
traditional Amazonian societies, women were captured
during 26% of raids occurring within a language family and
54% of raids occurring across language families (Walker
and Bailey, 2013).
Intergroup aggression among both
chimpanzees (Mitani et al., 2010) and humans (Bollig,
1990; Mathew and Boyd, 2014) may additionally enable
males to obtain territory and resources that contribute to
their mating success. Among human subsistence societies,
men appear well aware of what
is in the reproductive
balance. As Chagnon (1988) reports of the Yanomamo, a
desire for women is the main impetus for engaging in
warfare, and, importantly, this is the top reason given by
Yanomamo, a ﬁnding not unique to that particular society.
While reasons for warfare and lesser forms of coalitional
violence are undoubtedly complex, the desire for mates is
acknowledged as a nearly ubiquitous motivation for
preindustrial warfare, even among scholars generally
unsympathetic to sociobiological
theories of behavioral
evolution (eg, Keeley, 1996).

regardless of

Male coalitional violence,

its most
immediate cause, has produced an archaeological record
riddled with evidence of violent, often lethal, physical
aggression among men stretching back beyond the advent
of agriculture (Lahr et al., 2016). In one North American
paleoindian burial site, roughly 16% of skeletal remains
indicate violent death, 5% showing evidence of having
been scalped, and 4% decapitated (Milner et al., 1991).
Moreover, males account for a higher percentage of victims
of violence among all individuals of known sex. This is far
from an aberrant ﬁnding, with other burial sites yielding
similar results. Andrushko et al. (2005) estimated from a
burial site of 59 males and 86 females that at least 20% of
males, but only 2% of females, experienced a violent death,
likely the result of warfare, as evinced by perimortem
amputation. The men, furthermore, tended to be young
adults, which is the age range of ﬁercest competition for
mates.

Gorillas in Our Midst? Human Sexual Dimorphism and Contest Competition in Men Chapter | 15 243

in a curvilinear

Of course, the relationship between male coalitional
violence and reproductive success is not always linear and
positive. As noted earlier, among the Waorani of Ecuador,
Beckerman et al. (2009) report poorer reproductive success
as well as exceptionally high mortality rates among the
most ardent warriors. Among humans everywhere, there are
great costs associated with aggression (Chagnon, 1988).
This may result
relationship between
aggression and reproductive success, with a maximum that
is likely contingent on numerous aspects of the social
environment. There would have thus been great beneﬁt
ancestrally associated with correctly assessing the potential
costs and likelihood of success in a raid, just as there would
have been great beneﬁt in correctly assessing the physical
formidability of a single male rival. Just as there would be
costs to stealing another man’s mate, there are costs to
participating in a raid to steal the mates of many men. The
costs and beneﬁts associated with intragroup aggression
may have selected for high levels of intragroup cooperation
speciﬁcally in the context of warfare. Indeed, experimental
research has shown males to exhibit greater group-level
contribution in the face of competition from other groups
(Van Vugt et al., 2007).

ALTERNATIVES TO MALE CONTESTS
We have reviewed evidence that men’s phenotypes are
partly products of ancestral contest competition for mates.
Men exhibit each of the traits typical of species with male
contests, and these traits appear to have been shaped by
sexual selection; they are sexually dimorphic and predict
men’s mating success as well as success in contest
competition. Many of these traits (eg, deep voices, beards,
muscularity) also emerge at sexual maturity. The excep-
tions are behaviors that require years of practice to hone
relevant skills: ﬁghting, weapons use, behavioral displays
of formidability, and coalition formation (eg, Pellis and
Pellis, 2007; Thomas and French, 1985)dall of which
exhibit prepubertal sex differences, although the sexes may
further diverge at puberty. However, we have not yet
considered alternative hypotheses: whether some of the
previously mentioned traits were shaped by other selective
pressures, or arose as byproducts of selection on develop-
mentally correlated traits.

For example, some human sexual dimorphisms may
partly be products of a sexual division of labor that is
essentially ubiquitous across forager societies: men spend
more time hunting, especially larger game, and women
spend more time gathering or hunting smaller game
(Murdock, 1967). Thus, ecological selection may have
contributed to men’s greater size, strength, and weapons
proﬁciency to the extent that these contributed to hunting
success ancestrally (Kaplan et al., 2000). However, other of
men’s traits, such as beards, deep voices, more robust faces,

and high levels of same-sex aggression, are not easily
understood as adaptations for hunting. In addition, given
that male contests and sexual size dimorphism probably
characterized the common ancestor of the great apes,
contest competition likely predates specialized hunting and
the human sexual division of labor by several million years.
Hence, it is more likely that the sexual division of labor is
partly a consequence rather than the initial cause of these
anatomical dimorphisms, although hunting likely imposed
additional selection pressures on these male traits.

Some aspects of men’s phenotypes may also have been
produced via female choice, or through a combination of
contests and female choice. Because traits that evolve in
contest competition are often costly to produce and main-
tain and are constantly tested by competitors, such traits
may represent honest indicators of heritable ﬁtness, and
females may consequently evolve preferences for them
(Berglund et al., 1996). On the one hand, masculine bodies,
faces, and voices in men have indeed been found to
increase attractiveness to women (Frederick and Haselton,
2007; Puts et al., 2012b). On the other hand, the inﬂuence
of facial and vocal masculinity on ratings of dominance
is considerably larger and more consistently positive than
the effects on attractiveness (Puts et al., 2012b). Recent
work suggests that male facial masculinity may not be
universally preferred by women across human societies,
whereas it much more consistently conveys the impression
of aggressiveness (Scott et al., 2014). Likewise, beards
reliably increase perceptions of age, aggression, dominance,
and social status across societies, but generally decrease
attractiveness
to women (Dixson and Vasey, 2012;
Muscarella and Cunningham, 1996; Neave and Shields,
2008). Furthermore,
in samples spanning Western (Hill
et al., 2013), traditional agricultural (Llaurens et al., 2009),
and preindustrial (Smith et al., 2003) societies, men’s mating
success has been found to relate more strongly to dominance
among men and the traits that contribute to dominance than
to attractiveness to women. Across the suite of male
secondary sexual characteristics, then, selection for success
in physical contests may have been either attenuated or
augmented by selection for attractiveness to females. In
general, however, men’s traits function far more effectively
in the context of male contests than in mate attraction, and
thus they do not appear to have evolved primarily as sexual
ornaments to attract women.
Another possibility is

traits
represent developmental byproducts of male body size or
testosterone levels. Strength increases with body mass and
height (Balogun et al., 1991), for example, although other
male traits are not known to relate to body size (eg, beards)
or relate only weakly (eg, voice pitch; Pisanski et al., 2014).
However, even traits that are correlated with size are far
more sexually dimorphic than would be predicted from sex
differences in size alone (Puts et al., 2012b). Similarly,

that

some of men’s

244 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

androgens such as testosterone play important roles in the
development of male-typical traits, so one might conjecture
that these traits are merely developmental side-effects of
androgens. This viewpoint confuses proximate and ultimate
explanation,
leaving unresolved the question of why
humans have evolved to respond to testosterone by
growing facial hair and longer-thicker vocal folds, for
example. Why instead do we not respond to testosterone by
growing antlers, as in red deer (Suttie et al., 1995), or
canines, as in many other primates (Van Wagenen and
Hurme, 1950)? Why does testosterone not increase paternal
investment, as in the California mouse (Peromyscus
californicus)
than
having the opposite effect, as it does in many vertebrates,
apparently including humans (Kuzawa et al., 2009; Puts
et al., 2015b)? Clearly, different species, even closely
related ones, can evolve quite different responses to the
same hormones. An evolutionary history of male contests
parsimoniously explains why,
in humans, a particular
constellation of sexually dimorphic traits including large
size may be developmentally linked to testosterone and to
each other.

(Gleason and Marler, 2013),

rather

A ﬁnal alternative to contest competition in our
hominin ancestors is phylogenetic inertiadthe idea that
we have inherited our traits from ancestral species rather
than experiencing selection for these traits in our own
species. Fossil and comparative evidence indicate that we
did indeed inherit traits such as greater male size and
aggression from an ancient hominin ancestor. However,
for other traits such as deep voices (Puts et al., 2016),
beards, and the use of handheld weapons, this appears
not to have been the case. Even for traits such as greater
male size and aggression that were likely sexually
dimorphic in our common ancestor with chimpanzees, we
would expect considerable reduction in modern humans
if these traits were not functional over recent hominin
evolution, given their substantial costs. And yet, as dis-
cussed earlier, men’s physical aggression is equally lethal
to that of male chimpanzees, and we are more sexually
dimorphic than chimpanzees in both skeletal size and fat-
free mass.

Despite the comparatively strong overall evidence for
the importance of contest competition over men’s evolu-
tion, each of these alternative factors may have played a
role. These are not mutually exclusive alternatives; any
aspect of the phenotype can experience multiple selection
pressures, as well as responding to selection on other traits
with which it is developmentally correlated.

CONCLUSION
We have reviewed multiple converging lines of evidence
supporting a role for contest competition in shaping the
human male phenotype. Sex differences in parental in-
vestment, reproductive rates, and reproductive variance;

the OSR; and patterns of mating and marriagedall indicate
a history of moderately strong sexual selection among our
male ancestors.

facial

Contest competition in particular tends to favor size,
strength, aggression, weapons, and threat displays, and
men display all of these features. Traits that point to an
evolutionary past in which our male ancestors competed
for mates through force and threat include a proclivity
for same-sex violence including coalitional aggression,
higher pain threshold and tolerance compared to women,
increased body size and strength,
robusticity,
fashioning and use of weapons, beards, deep voices, and
behavioral displays of
formidability. This evidence is
taken from research across ﬁelds ranging from human
anatomy and physiology to psychology, ethnography,
paleoanthropology, animal behavior, and archaeology.
The alternative hypotheses that men’s traits were shaped
by selection for hunting ability, female mate choice, or
selection operating on developmentally correlated traitsd
or that men’s traits are consequences of phylogenetic
inertiadcan help account for some of the above aspects of
men’s phenotypes, but not others. The success of any
hypothesis is contingent on a parsimonious explanation of
the totality of evidence, and only contest competition
accomplishes this.
In some ways, we may be more
gorilla-like, or chimp-like, than we prefer to suppose.

It is important to bear in mind, however, that while
human nature includes a propensity for violence in both
individual and coalitional forms, we are also capable of
negotiation, compromise, and restraint. For a species
currently numbering in the billions that now possesses
weapons capable of bringing about its own annihilation, the
importance of understanding our capacity for violence is
more than academicdit can potentially illuminate and
suggest solutions to problems of pressing societal concern.

REFERENCES

Abe, T., Kearns, C., Fukunaga, T., 2003. Sex differences in whole body
skeletal muscle mass measured by magnetic resonance imaging and its
distribution in young Japanese adults. British Journal of Sports
Medicine 37 (5), 436e440.

Andersson, M., 1982. Female choice selects for extreme tail length in a

widowbird. Nature 299 (5886), 818e820.

Andersson, M.B., 1994. Sexual Selection. Princeton University Press.
Andrushko, V.A., Latham, K.A., Grady, D.L., Pastron, A.G., Walker, P.L.,
2005. Bioarchaeological evidence for trophy-taking in prehistoric
central California. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 127
(4), 375e384. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ajpa.20044.

Antón, S.C., 2003. Natural history of Homo erectus. American Journal of

Physical Anthropology 122 (S37), 126e170.

Apicella, C.L., Feinberg, D.R., Marlowe, F.W., 2007. Voice pitch predicts
reproductive success in male hunter-gatherers. Biology Letters 3 (6),
682e684. http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsbl.2007.0410.

Apostolou, M., 2007. Sexual selection under parental choice: the role of
parents in the evolution of human mating. Evolution and Human

Gorillas in Our Midst? Human Sexual Dimorphism and Contest Competition in Men Chapter | 15 245

Behavior
j.evolhumbehav.2007.05.007.

(6),

28

403e409.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/

Chagnon, N., 1992. Yanomamo, fourth ed. Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich,

Fort Worth, Texas.

Archer, J., 2004. Sex differences in aggression in real-world settings: a

meta-analytic review. Review of General Psychology 8 (4), 291.

Archer, J., 2009. Does sexual selection explain human sex differences in
aggression? Behavioral and Brain Sciences 32 (3e4), 249e266.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X09990951 discussion 266e311.
Ayres, B., 1974. Bride theft and raiding for wives in cross-cultural

perspective. Anthropological Quarterly 238e252.

Balogun, J.A., Akinloye, A.A., Adenlola, S.A., 1991. Grip strength as a
function of age, height, body weight and Quetelet index. Physio-
therapy Theory and Practice 7 (2), 111e119.

Bamforth, D.B., 1994. Indigenous people, indigenous violence: precontact

Clutton-Brock, T., Harvey, P.H., 1984. Comparative approaches to
investigating adaptation. Behavioural ecology. An Evolutionary
Approach 7e29.

Clutton-Brock, T.H., Vincent, A.C., 1991. Sexual selection and the po-
tential reproductive rates of males and females. Nature 351 (6321),
58e60.

Conniff, R., 2009. Discovering gorilla. Evolutionary Anthropology: Is-
sues, News, and Reviews 18 (2), 55e61. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
evan.20203.

Daly, M., Wilson, M., 1988. Homicide. Transaction Publishers.
Daly, M., Wilson, M., 1990. Killing the competition. Human Nature 1 (1),

warfare on the North American Great Plains. Man 95e115.

81e107.

Barrette, C., 1977. Fighting behavior of muntjac and the evolution of

Darwin, C., 1871. The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex.

antlers. Evolution 169e176.

Murray, London.

Bateman, A.J., 1948. Intra-sexual selection in Drosophila. Heredity 2 (Pt

3), 349e368.

Beckerman, S., Erickson, P.I., Yost, J., Regalado, J., Jaramillo, L., Sparks, C.,
Long, K., 2009. Life histories, blood revenge, and reproductive success
among the Waorani of Ecuador. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 106 (20), 8134e8139. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0901431106 pii:0901431106.

Berglund, A., Bisazza, A., Pilastro, A., 1996. Armaments and ornaments:
an evolutionary explanation of traits of dual utility. Biological Journal
of the Linnean Society 58 (4), 385e399.

Berry, J.F., Shine, R., 1980. Sexual size dimorphism and sexual selection

in turtles (Order Testudines). Oecologia 44 (2), 185e191.

Bliege Bird, R., Smith, E., Bird, D., 2001. The hunting handicap: costly
signaling in human foraging strategies. Behavioral Ecology and So-
ciobiology 50 (1), 9e19. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s002650100338.

Deaner, R.O., Smith, B.A., 2013. Sex differences in sports across 50 so-
cieties. Cross-Cultural Research 47 (3), 268e309. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1177/1069397112463687.

Deaner, R.O., Geary, D.C., Puts, D.A., Ham, S.A., Kruger, J., Fles, E.,
Grandis, T., 2012. A sex difference in the predisposition for physical
competition: males play sports much more than females even in the
contemporary U.S. PLoS One 7 (11), e49168. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0049168PONE-D-12-18846.

Dixson, B.J., Vasey, P.L., 2012. Beards augment perceptions of men’s age,
social status, and aggressiveness, but not attractiveness. Behavioral
Ecology 23 (3), 481e490. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/beheco/arr214.

Dixson, A., Dixson, B., Anderson, M., 2005. Sexual selection and the
evolution of visually conspicuous sexually dimorphic traits in male
monkeys, apes, and human beings. Annual Review of Sex Research
16 (1), 1e19.

Blurton Jones, N., 1987. Bushman birth spacing: direct tests of some

Eibl-Eibesfeldt, I., 1989. Human Ethology (Transl. by P. Wiessner-Larsen

simple predictions. Ethology and Sociobiology 8 (3), 183e203.

and A. Henneman). Aldine de Gruyter, New York.

Bollig, M., 1990. Ethnic conﬂicts in North-west Kenya: Pokot-Turkana

raiding 1969 1984. Zeitschrift für Ethnologie 73e90.

Borgerhoff Mulder, M., 2009. Serial monogamy as polygyny or poly-
andry?: marriage in the tanzanian pimbwe. Human Nature 20 (2),
130e150. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s12110-009-9060-x.

Brink, O., Vesterby, A., Jensen, J., 1998. Pattern of injuries due to inter-

personal violence. Injury 29 (9), 705e709.

Brown, G.R., Laland, K.N., Mulder, M.B., 2009. Bateman’s principles and
human sex roles. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 24 (6), 297e304.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2009.02.005.

Brunet, M., Guy, F., Pilbeam, D., Mackaye, H.T., Likius, A., Ahounta, D.,
Boisserie, J.-R., 2002. A new hominid from the upper Miocene of
Chad, Central Africa. Nature 418 (6894), 145e151.

Buckle, L., Gallup, G.G., Rodd, Z.A., 1996. Marriage as a reproductive
contract: patterns of marriage, divorce, and remarriage. Ethology and
Sociobiology 17 (6), 363e377.

Campbell, A., 2013. The evolutionary psychology of women’s aggression.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sci-
ences 368 (1631), 20130078.

Carrier, D.R., Morgan, M.H., 2015. Protective buttressing of the hominin
face. Biological Reviews of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 90
(1), 330e346. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/brv.12112.

Carrier, D.R., 2011. The advantage of standing up to ﬁght and the evo-
lution of habitual bipedalism in hominins. PLoS One 6 (5), e19630.
Chagnon, N.A., 1988. Life histories, blood revenge, and warfare in a tribal

population. Science 239 (4843), 985e992.

Ellis, L., Hershberger, S., Field, E., Wersinger, S., Pellis, S., Geary, D.,
Karadi, K., 2008. Sex Differerences: Summarizing More than a
Century of Scientiﬁc Research. Psychology Press, New York.

Emlen, S.T., Oring, L.W., 1977. Ecology, sexual selection, and the evo-

lution of mating systems. Science 197 (4300), 215e223.

Ermer, E., Cosmides, L., Tooby, J., 2008. Relative status regulates risky
decision making about resources in men: evidence for the co-evolution
of motivation and cognition. Evolution and Human Behavior 29 (2),
106e118.

Fant, G., 1960. Acoustic Theory of Speech Production. The Hague,

Mouton.

Faurie, C., Pontier, D., Raymond, M., 2004. Student athletes claim to have
more sexual partners than other students. Evolution and Human
Behavior 25 (1), 1e8.

Feinberg, D.R., Jones, B.C., Little, A.C., Burt, D.M., Perrett, D.I., 2005.
Manipulations of fundamental and formant frequencies inﬂuence the
attractiveness of human male voices. Animal Behaviour 69 (3),
561e568. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.anbehav.2004.06.012.

Fessler, D.M.T., Tiokhin, L.B., Holbrook, C., Gervais, M.M.,
Snyder, J.K., 2014. Foundations of the Crazy Bastard Hypothesis:
nonviolent physical risk-taking enhances conceptualized formida-
bility. Evolution and Human Behavior 35 (1), 26e33. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2013.09.003.

Fillingim, R.B., King, C.D., Ribeiro-Dasilva, M.C., Rahim-Williams, B.,
Riley, J.L., 2009. Sex, gender, and pain: a review of recent clinical and
experimental ﬁndings. The Journal of Pain 10 (5), 447e485.

246 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

Fitch, W.T., Giedd, J., 1999. Morphology and development of the human
vocal tract: a study using magnetic resonance imaging. The Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America 106 (3), 1511e1522.

Fossey, D., 1983. Gorillas in the Mist. Houghton Mifﬂin, Boston.
Frayer, D.W., 1997. Ofnet: evidence for a Mesolithic massacre. In: Trou-
bled Times: Violence and Warfare in the Past, vol. 3, pp. 181e216.
Frederick, D.A., Haselton, M.G., 2007. Why is muscularity sexy? Tests of
the ﬁtness indicator hypothesis. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin 33 (8), 1167e1183.

Frederick, D.A., Jenkins, B.N., 2015. Height and body mass on the mating
market associations with number of sex partners and extra-pair sex
among heterosexual men and women aged 18e65. Evolutionary
Psychology 13 (3), 1474704915604563.

Gangestad, S.W., Thornhill, R., 2008. Human oestrus. Proceedings of the
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 275 (1638), 991e1000. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2007.1425.

Gaulin, S., Boster, J., 1985. Cross-cultural differences in sexual dimor-
phism: is there any variance to be explained? Ethology and Socio-
biology 6 (4), 219e225.

Geary, D.C., Byrd-Craven, J., Hoard, M.K., Vigil, J., Numtee, C., 2003.
Evolution and development of boys’ social behavior. Developmental
Review 23 (4), 444e470.

Geary, D.C., 2000. Evolution and proximate expression of human paternal
investment. Psychological Bulletin 126 (1), 55e77. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1037//0033-2909.126.1.55.

Ginsburg, H.J., Miller, S.M., 1982. Sex differences in children’s risk-

taking behavior. Child Development 426e428.

Gleason, E.D., Marler, C.A., 2013. Non-genomic transmission of paternal
behaviour between fathers and sons in the monogamous and bipa-
rental California mouse. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London
B: Biological Sciences 280 (1763), 20130824.

Glenday, C., 2013. Guinness World Records 2013. Random House LLC.
González, J., 2004. Formant frequencies and body size of speaker: a weak
relationship in adult humans. Journal of Phonetics 32 (2), 277e287.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0095-4470(03)00049-4.

Gordon, A.D., Green, D.J., Richmond, B.G., 2008. Strong postcranial size
dimorphism in Australopithecus afarensis: results from two new
resampling methods for multivariate data sets with missing data.
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 135 (3), 311e328. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1002/ajpa.20745.

Guthrie, R., 1970. Evolution of human threat display organs. Evolutionary

Biology 4, 257e302.

Hanno, 1832. The Voyage of Hanno, commander of the Carthaginians,
round the parts of Lilxya beyond the Pillars of Hercules, which he
deposited in the temple of Saturn (Anonymus, Trans.).
In:
Heeren, A.H.L. (Ed.), Historical Researches into the Politics, Inter-
course and Trade of the Cathaginians, Ethiopians, and Egyptians. D.A.
Talboys, Oxford, pp. 492e501.

Harcourt-Smith, W.E., 2007. 5 The Origins of Bipedal Locomotion

Handbook of Paleoanthropology. Springer, pp. 1483e1518.

Harmand, S., Lewis, J.E., Feibel, C.S., Lepre, C.J., Prat, S., Lenoble, A.,
Roche, H., 2015. 3.3-million-year-old stone tools from Lomekwi 3,
West Turkana, Kenya. Nature 521 (7552), 310e315. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1038/nature14464.
http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v521/
n7552/abs/nature14464.html#supplementary-information.

Henrich, J., Gil-White, F.J., 2001. The evolution of prestige: freely
conferred deference as a mechanism for enhancing the beneﬁts of
cultural
transmission. Evolution and Human Behavior 22 (3),
165e196.

Hill, K.R., Hurtado, A.M., 1996. Ache Life History: The Ecology and

Demography of a Foraging People. Transaction Publishers.

Hill, A.K., Hunt, J., Welling, L.L.M., Cárdenas, R.A., Rotella, M.A.,
Wheatley, J.R., Puts, D.A., 2013. Quantifying the strength and form of
sexual selection on men’s traits. Evolution and Human Behavior 34
(5), 334e341. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2013.05.004.
Hines, M., Fane, B.A., Pasterski, V., Mathews, G., Conway, G., Brook, C.,
2003. Spatial abilities following prenatal androgen abnormality: tar-
geting and mental rotations performance in individuals with congen-
adrenal
ital
(8),
1010e1026.

Psychoneuroendocrinology

hyperplasia.

28

Hodges-Simeon, C.R., Gaulin, S.J., Puts, D.A., 2010. Different vocal
parameters predict perceptions of dominance and attractiveness. Hu-
man Nature 21 (4), 406e427. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s12110-010-
9101-5.

Hodges-Simeon, C.R., Gaulin, S.J., Puts, D.A., 2011. Voice correlates of
mating success in men: examining “contests” versus “mate choice”
modes of sexual selection. Archives of Sexual Behavior 40 (3),
551e557. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10508-010-9625-0.

Hollien, H., Green, R., Massey, K., 1994. Longitudinal research on
adolescent voice change in males. The Journal of the Acoustical So-
ciety of America 96 (5), 2646e2654.

Honekopp, J., Rudolph, U., Beier, L., Liebert, A., Muller, C., 2007.
Physical attractiveness of face and body as indicators of physical
ﬁtness in men. Evolution and Human Behavior 28 (2), 106e111.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2006.09.001.

Hooper, P.L., Miller, G.F., 2008. Mutual mate choice can drive costly
signaling even under perfect monogamy. Adaptive Behavior 16 (1),
53e70.

Hughes, S.M., Gallup, G.G., 2003. Sex differences in morphological
predictors of sexual behavior. Evolution and Human Behavior 24 (3),
173e178. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s1090-5138(02)00149-6.

Jokela, M., Rotkirch, A., Rickard, I.J., Pettay, J., Lummaa, V., 2010. Serial
monogamy increases reproductive success in men but not in women.
Behavioral Ecology 21 (5), 906e912. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
beheco/arq078.

Kaplan, H., Hill, K., Lancaster, J., Hurtado, A.M., 2000. A theory of
intelligence, and longevity.
Issues, News, and Reviews 9 (4),

human life history evolution: diet,
Evolutionary Anthropology:
156e185.

Keeley, L.H., 1996. War Before Civilization. Oxford University Press.
Kokko, H., Jennions, M.D., 2008. Parental investment, sexual selection
and sex ratios. Journal of Evolutionary Biology 21 (4), 919e948.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1420-9101.2008.01540.x.

Kokko, H., Klug, H., Jennions, M.D., 2012. Unifying cornerstones of
sexual selection: operational sex ratio, Bateman gradient and the scope
for competitive investment. Ecology Letters 15 (11), 1340e1351.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1461-0248.2012.01859.x.

Kuzawa, C.W., Gettler, L.T., Muller, M.N., McDade, T.W., Feranil, A.B.,
2009. Fatherhood, pairbonding and testosterone in the Philippines.
Hormones and Behavior 56 (4), 429e435.

Harries, M., Walker, J.M., Williams, D.M., Hawkins, S., Hughes, I., 1997.
Changes in the male voice at puberty. Archives of Disease in Child-
hood 77 (5), 445e447.

Lahr, M.M., Rivera, F., Power, R.K., Mounier, A., Copsey, B., Crivellaro, F.,
Foley, R.A., 2016. Inter-group violence among early Holocene hunter-
gatherers of West Turkana, Kenya. Nature 529 (7586), 394e398.

Gorillas in Our Midst? Human Sexual Dimorphism and Contest Competition in Men Chapter | 15 247

http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature16477.
journal/v529/n7586/abs/nature16477.html#supplementary-information.

http://www.nature.com/nature/

Lande, R., 1980. Sexual dimorphism, sexual selection, and adaptation in

polygenic characters. Evolution 292e305.

Lass, N.J., Brown, W.S., 1978. Correlational study of speakers’ heights,
weights, body surface areas, and speaking fundamental frequencies.
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 63 (4), 1218e1220.
Lassek, W.D., Gaulin, S.J.C., 2009. Costs and beneﬁts of fat-free muscle
mass in men: relationship to mating success, dietary requirements, and
native immunity. Evolution and Human Behavior 30 (5), 322e328.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2009.04.002.

Lindenfors, P., Fröberg, L., Nunn, C.L., 2004. Females drive primate
social evolution. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B:
Biological Sciences 271 (Suppl. 3), S101eS103.

Llaurens, V., Raymond, M., Faurie, C., 2009. Ritual ﬁghts and male
reproductive success in a human population. Journal of Evolutionary
Biology 22 (9), 1854e1859. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1420-9101.
2009.01793.x.

Mueller, U., Mazur, A., 2001. Evidence of unconstrained directional se-
lection for male tallness. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 50 (4),
302e311. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s002650100370.

Mueller, U., Mazur, A., 1997. Facial dominance in Homo sapiens as
honest signaling of male quality. Behavioral Ecology 8 (5), 569e579.

Murdock, G.P., 1967. Ethnographic Atlas.
Muscarella, F., Cunningham, M.R., 1996. The evolutionary signiﬁcance
and social perception of male pattern baldness and facial hair.
Ethology and Sociobiology 17 (2), 99e117.

Neave, N., Shields, K., 2008. The effects of facial hair manipulation on
female perceptions of attractiveness, masculinity, and dominance in
male faces. Personality and Individual Differences 45 (5), 373e377.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2008.05.007.

Palmer, C.T., Tilley, C.F., 1995. Sexual access to females as a motivation
for joining gangs: an evolutionary approach. The Journal of Sex
Research 32 (3), 213e217.

Pawlowski, B., Dunbar, R., Lipowicz, A., 2000. Evolutionary ﬁtness: tall

men have more reproductive success. Nature 403 (6766), 156.

Lockwood, C.A., Richmond, B.G., Jungers, W.L., Kimbel, W.H., 1996.
Randomization procedures and sexual dimorphism inAustralopithecus
afarensis. Journal of Human Evolution 31 (6), 537e548.

Pellis, S.M., Pellis, V.C., 2007. Rough-and-tumble play and the devel-
opment of the social brain. Current Directions in Psychological Sci-
ence 16 (2), 95e98.

Lukaszewski, A.W., Simmons, Z.L., Anderson, C., Roney, J.R., 2015. The
role of physical formidability in human social status allocation.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1037/pspi0000042.

Pickering, T.R., White, T.D., Toth, N., 2000. Brief communication:
cutmarks on a Plio-Pleistocene hominid from Sterkfontein, South
Africa. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 111 (4),
579e584.

Lynn, B., 1984. Cutaneous nociceptors. In: Holden, A.V., Winlow, W.
(Eds.), The Neurobiology of Pain. Manchester UP, Manchester,
pp. 97e107.

Pisanski, K., Fraccaro, P.J., Tigue, C.C., O’Connor, J.J., Röder, S.,
Andrews, P.W., Feinberg, D.R., 2014. Vocal indicators of body size in
men and women: a meta-analysis. Animal Behaviour 95, 89e99.

Maple, T.L., Hoff, M.P., 1982. Gorilla Behavior. Van Nostrand Reinhold

Company, New York.

Marlowe, F.W., Berbesque, J.C., 2012. The human operational sex ratio:
effects of marriage, concealed ovulation, and menopause on mate
competition. Journal of Human Evolution 63 (6), 834e842. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhevol.2012.09.004 pii:S0047-2484(12)00163-7.
Marlowe, F.W., 2004. Mate preferences among Hadza hunter-gatherers.

Human Nature 15 (4), 365e376.

Mathew, S., Boyd, R., 2014. The cost of cowardice: punitive sentiments
towards free riders in Turkana raids. Evolution and Human Behavior
35 (1), 58e64.

McHenry, H.M., 1991. Sexual dimorphism in Australopithecus afarensis.

Journal of Human Evolution 20 (1), 21e32.

McPherron, S.P., Alemseged, Z., Marean, C.W., Wynn, J.G., Reed, D.,
Geraads, D., Bearat, H.A., 2010. Evidence for stone-tool-assisted
consumption of animal tissues before 3.39 million years ago at Dikika,
Ethiopia. Nature 466 (7308), 857e860. http://www.nature.com/nature/
journal/v466/n7308/abs/nature09248.html#supplementary-information.
Milner, G.R., Anderson, E., Smith, V.G., 1991. Warfare in late prehistoric

west-central Illinois. American Antiquity 581e603.

Mitani, J.C., Gros-Louis, J., Richards, A.F., 1996. Sexual dimorphism, the
operational sex ratio, and the intensity of male competition in
polygynous primates. American Naturalist 966e980.

Mitani, J.C., Watts, D.P., Amsler, S.J., 2010. Lethal intergroup aggression
leads to territorial expansion in wild chimpanzees. Current Biology 20
(12),
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2010.04.021
pii:S0960-9822(10)00459-8.

R507eR508.

Plavcan, J.M., 2012. Sexual size dimorphism, canine dimorphism, and
male-male competition in primates: where do humans ﬁt in? Human
Nature 23 (1), 45e67. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s12110-012-9130-3.
Puts, D.A., Gaulin, S.J.C., Verdolini, K., 2006. Dominance and the evo-
lution of sexual dimorphism in human voice pitch. Evolution and
Human Behavior 27 (4), 283e296. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.evolhumbehav.2005.11.003.

Puts, D.A., Hodges, C.R., Cárdenas, R.A., Gaulin, S.J.C., 2007. Men’s
voices as dominance signals: vocal fundamental and formant fre-
quencies inﬂuence dominance attributions among men. Evolution and
Human Behavior 28 (5), 340e344. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.evolhumbehav.2007.05.002.

Puts, D.A., Apicella, C.L., Cardenas, R.A., 2012a. Masculine voices signal
men’s threat potential in forager and industrial societies. Proceedings
of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 279 (1728), 601e609.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2011.0829.

Puts, D.A., Jones, B.C., DeBruine, L.M., 2012b. Sexual selection on hu-
man faces and voices. The Journal of Sex Research 49 (2e3),
227e243. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00224499.2012.658924.

Puts, D.A., Bailey, D.H., Cárdenas, R.A., Burriss, R.P., Welling, L.L.,
Wheatley, J.R., Dawood, K., 2013. Women’s attractiveness changes
with estradiol and progesterone across the ovulatory cycle. Hormones
and
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.yhbeh.2012.11.007 pii:S0018-506X(12)00279-6.

Behavior

13e19.

63

(1),

Puts, D.A., Bailey, D.H., Reno, P.L., 2015a. Contest competition in men.
In: Buss, D.M. (Ed.), The Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology,
second ed., vol. 1. Wiley & Sons.

Morrongiello, B.A., Dawber, T., 2004. Identifying factors that relate to
children’s risk-taking decisions. Canadian Journal of Behavioural
Science 36 (4), 255.

Puts, D.A., Pope, L.E., Hill, A.K., Cardenas, R.A., Welling, L.L.,
Wheatley, J.R., Marc Breedlove, S., 2015b. Fulﬁlling desire: evidence
for negative feedback between men’s testosterone, sociosexual

248 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

psychology, and sexual partner number. Hormones and Behavior 70,
14e21.
pii:S0018-
506X(15)00014-8.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.yhbeh.2015.01.006

Puts, D.A., Hill, A.K., Bailey, D.H., Walker, R.S., Rendall, D.,
J.R., Welling, L.L.M., Dawood, K., Cárdenas, R.,
Wheatley,
Burriss, R.P.,
Jablonski, N.G., Shriver, M.D., Weiss, D.,
Lameira, A.R., Apicella, C.L., Owren, M.J., Barelli, C., Glenn, M.E.,
Ramos-Fernandez, G., 2016. Sexual selection on male vocal funda-
mental frequency in humans and other anthropoids. Proceedings of the
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 283 (1829), 20152830.

Puts, D.A., 2005. Mating context and menstrual phase affect women’s
preferences for male voice pitch. Evolution and Human Behavior 26
(5), 388e397. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2005.03.001.
Puts, D.A., 2010. Beauty and the beast: mechanisms of sexual selection in
humans. Evolution and Human Behavior 31 (3), 157e175. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2010.02.005.

Puts, D., 2016. Human sexual selection. Current Opinion in Psychology 7,

28e32.

Rendall, D., Kollias, S., Ney, C., Lloyd, P., 2005. Pitch (F0) and formant
proﬁles of human vowels and vowel-like baboon grunts: the role of
vocalizer body size and voice-acoustic allometry. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 117 (2), 944. http://dx.doi.org/10.1121/
1.1848011.

Reno, P.L., Lovejoy, C.O., 2015. From Lucy to Kadanuumuu: balanced
analyses of Australopithecus afarensis assemblages conﬁrm only
moderate skeletal dimorphism. PeerJ 3, e925. http://dx.doi.org/
10.7717/peerj.925.

Reno, P.L., Meindl, R.S., McCollum, M.A., Lovejoy, C.O., 2003. Sexual
dimorphism in Australopithecus afarensis was similar to that of
modern humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 100 (16), 9404e9409.

Reno, P.L., McCollum, M.A., Meindl, R.S., Lovejoy, C.O., 2010. An
enlarged postcranial sample conﬁrms Australopithecus afarensis
dimorphism was
to modern humans. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London B Biological Sci-
ences
http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/
rstb.2010.0086.

3355e3363.

(1556),

similar

365

Rhodes, G., Simmons, L.W., Peters, M., 2005. Attractiveness and sexual
behavior: does attractiveness enhance mating success? Evolution and
Human Behavior 26 (2), 186e201. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.evolhumbehav.2004.08.014.

Riley III, J.L., Robinson, M.E., Wise, E.A., Myers, C.D., Fillingim, R.B.,
1998. Sex differences in the perception of noxious experimental
stimuli: a meta-analysis. Pain 74 (2), 181e187.

Salzano, F.M., Neel, J.V., Maybury-Lewis, D., 1967. I. Demographic data
on two additional villages: genetic structure of the tribe. American
Journal of Human Genetics 19 (4), 463.

Schreier, A.L., Swedell, L., 2009. The fourth level of social structure in
a multi-level society: ecological and social functions of clans in
hamadryas baboons. American Journal of Primatology 71 (11),
948e955.

Schwagmeyer, P., Woontner, S., 1986. Scramble competition polygyny in
thirteen-lined ground squirrels:
the relative contributions of overt
conﬂict and competitive mate searching. Behavioral Ecology and
Sociobiology 19 (5), 359e364.

Scott, I.M., Clark, A.P., Boothroyd, L.G., Penton-Voak, I.S., 2012. Do
men’s faces really signal heritable immunocompetence? Behavioral
Ecology 24, 579e589 ars092.

Scott, I.M., Clark, A.P., Josephson, S.C., Boyette, A.H., Cuthill, I.C.,
Fried, R.L., Penton-Voak,
I.S., 2014. Human preferences for
sexually dimorphic faces may be evolutionarily novel. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America
http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1409643111 pii:1409643111.

14388e14393.

(40),

111

Sell, A., Cosmides, L., Tooby, J., Sznycer, D., von Rueden, C.,
Gurven, M., 2009. Human adaptations for the visual assessment of
strength and ﬁghting ability from the body and face. Proceedings of
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 276 (1656), 575e584. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2008.1177.

Sell, A., Bryant, G.A., Cosmides, L., Tooby, J., Sznycer, D., von
Rueden, C., Gurven, M., 2010. Adaptations in humans for assessing
physical strength from the voice. Proceedings of the Royal Society B:
Biological Sciences 277 (1699), 3509e3518. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1098/rspb.2010.0769.

Sell, A., Cosmides, L., Tooby, J., 2014. The human anger face evolved to
enhance cues of strength. Evolution and Human Behavior 35 (5),
425e429. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2014.05.008.

Shepherd, J.P., Gayford, J.J., Leslie, I.J., Scully, C., 1988. Female victims
Journal of Cranio-

of assault: a study of hospital attenders.
Maxillofacial Surgery 16, 233e237.

Smith, J.M., Parker, G.A., 1976. The logic of asymmetric contests. Animal

Behaviour 24 (1), 159e175.

Smith, T.W., Smith, R.J., 1995. Changes in ﬁrearms ownership among
women, 1980-1994. Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology 86, 133.
Smith, E.A., Bird, R.B., Bird, D.W., 2003. The beneﬁts of costly signaling:
Meriam turtle hunters. Behavioral Ecology 14 (1), 116e126. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1093/beheco/14.1.116.

Sternberg, W.F., Bokat, C., Kass, L., Alboyadjian, A., Gracely, R.H.,
2001. Sex-dependent components of the analgesia produced by ath-
letic competition. The Journal of Pain 2 (1), 65e74. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1054/jpai.2001.18236 pii:S1526-5900(01)42972-5.

Stirling, I., 1975. Factors affecting the evolution of social bahaviour in the
Pinnipedia. In: Paper presented at the Rapports et Proces-Verbaux des
Reunions (Denmark), vol. 169.

Stulp, G., Buunk, A.P., Verhulst, S., Pollet, T.V., 2015. Human height is
positively related to interpersonal dominance in dyadic interactions.
PLoS One 10 (2), e0117860.

Suttie, J., Fennessy, P., Lapwood, K., Corson, I., 1995. Role of steroids in
antler growth of red deer stags. Journal of Experimental Zoology 271
(2), 120e130.

Suwa, G., Kono, R.T., Simpson, S.W., Asfaw, B., Lovejoy, C.O.,
White, T.D., 2009. Paleobiological implications of the Ardipithecus
ramidus dentition. Science 326 (5949), 69e99. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1126/science.1175824.

Thomas, J.R., French, K.E., 1985. Gender differences across age in motor

performance: a meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin 98 (2), 260.

Titze, I.R., 2000. Principles of Voice Production: National Center for

Voice and Speech.

Trivers, R., 1972. Parental

In:
Campbell, B. (Ed.), Sexual Selection and the Descent of Man. Aldinc,
Chicago, pp. 136e179.

investment and sexual

selection.

van Lawick-Goodall, J., 1968. The behaviour of free-living chimpanzees in the
Gombe Stream Reserve. Animal Behaviour Monographs 1, 161. IN112.
Van Vugt, M., De Cremer, D., Janssen, D.P., 2007. Gender differences in
cooperation and competition the Male-Warrior hypothesis. Psycho-
logical Science 18 (1), 19e23.

Gorillas in Our Midst? Human Sexual Dimorphism and Contest Competition in Men Chapter | 15 249

Van Wagenen, G., Hurme, V.O., 1950. Effect of testosterone propionate
on permanent canine tooth eruption in the monkey (Macaca mulatta).
Experimental Biology and Medicine 73 (2), 296e297.

von Rueden, C., Gurven, M., Kaplan, H., 2011. Why do men seek status?
Fitness payoffs to dominance and prestige. Proceedings of the Royal
Society B: Biological Sciences 278 (1715), 2223e2232. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2010.2145.

Walker, R.S., Bailey, D.H., 2013. Body counts in lowland South American
violence. Evolution and Human Behavior 34 (1), 29e34. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2012.08.003.

Walker, R.S., Hill, K.R., Flinn, M.V., Ellsworth, R.M., 2011. Evolu-
tionary history of hunter-gatherer marriage practices. PLoS One 6
(4), e19066.

Warner, J., Graham, K., Adlaf, E., 2005. Women behaving badly: gender
and aggression in a military town, 1653e1781. Sex Roles 52 (5e6),
289e298. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11199-005-2673-6.

Watson, N.V., Kimura, D., 1991. Nontrivial sex differences in
throwing and intercepting: relation to psychometrically-deﬁned
spatial functions. Personality and Individual Differences 12 (5),
375e385.

Webster, D., 1998. Warfare and status rivalry: lowland Maya and Poly-
nesian comparisons. In: Archaic States. School of American Research
Press, Santa Fe, NM, pp. 464e470.

Welling, L.L.M., Persola, L., Wheatley, J.R., Cárdenas, R.A., Puts, D.A.,
2013. Competition and men’s face preferences. Personality and Indi-
vidual Differences 54 (3), 414e419. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.
2012.10.014.

Wells, J.C., 2012. Sexual dimorphism in body composition across human
populations: associations with climate and proxies for short- and long-
term energy supply. American Journal of Human Biology 24 (4),
411e419. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ajhb.22223.

West-Eberhard, M.J., 1983. Sexual selection, social competition, and

speciation. The Quarterly Review of Biology 58 (2), 155e183.

White, T.D., Suwa, G., Simpson, S., Asfaw, B., 2000. Jaws and teeth of
Australopithecus afarensis from Maka, Middle Awash, Ethiopia.
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 111 (1), 45e68.

Wolff, S.E., Puts, D.A., 2010. Vocal masculinity is a robust dominance
in men. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 64 (10),

signal
1673e1683. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00265-010-0981-5.

Wood, B., Li, Y., Willoughby, C., 1991. Intraspeciﬁc variation and
sexual dimorphism in cranial and dental variables among higher
primates and their bearing on the hominid fossil record. Journal of
Anatomy 174, 185.

Wrangham, R.W., Glowacki, L., 2012. Intergroup aggression in chim-
panzees and war in nomadic hunter-gatherers: evaluating the chim-
panzee model. Human Nature 23 (1), 5e29. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s12110-012-9132-1.

Wrangham, R.W., Wilson, M.L., Muller, M.N., 2006. Comparative rates
of violence in chimpanzees and humans. Primates 47 (1), 14e26.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10329-005-0140-1.

Wrangham, R.W., 1999. Evolution of coalitionary killing. American

Journal of Physical Anthropology 110 (s 29), 1e30.

Wright, R., 1995. The biology of violence. The New Yorker 71 (3), 68e77.
Zilioli, S., Sell, A.N., Stirrat, M., Jagore, J., Vickerman, W., Watson, N.V.,
2014. Face of a ﬁghter: Bizygomatic width as a cue of formidability.
Aggressive Behavior. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ab.21544.

Chapter 16

The Human Family: Evolutionary Origins
and Adaptive Signiﬁcance

M.V. Flinn
University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, United States

relatives. Beyond the

Humans are similar to most mammals in having intense
maternal care including breastfeeding of an altricial (help-
less) offspring, with some support from an assortment of
other
shared mammal/primate
commonality, however, humans exhibit a suite of highly
unusual
traits (Table 16.1). We are the only species
characterized by the combination of: stable breeding bonds,
extensive paternal effort
lengthy
childhood, extended bilateral and multigenerational kin
recognition, and controlled exchange of mates among kin
groups (Alexander, 1979; 1990b; Chapais, 2008). These
characteristics are important
for understanding family
relationships and the supporting cognitive, emotional, and
physiological mechanisms;
they also provide critical
insights into the puzzle of human evolution.

in a multimale group,

In this chapter, I ﬁrst review a general model for the
evolution of human mating, parenting, and kinship patterns
based on a process of runaway social selection (Alexander,
2006; Flinn and Alexander, 2007; Flinn et al., 2007). I then
brieﬂy evaluate
that
underpin these central aspects of our sociality. The objec-
tives include providing important information and ideas
from biological and cultural anthropology that contribute to
understanding the coevolution of the human family, life
history, and the brain.

the physiological mechanisms

BRAIN, CHILDHOOD, AND FAMILY

Evolution of Mind in the Cre`che of the
Extended Family
Information processing (intelligence) and social commu-
nication (language) are core human adaptations. By all
measures the human brain that enables these abilities is an

astonishing organ. Its cerebral cortex comprises about
16 billion neurons of more than 100 different types, each of
which are interlinked by about 1000 synapses, resulting
in >1015 connections working at rates of up to 1010
interactions per second (Edelman, 2006). Quantifying the
transduction of
these biophysical actions into speciﬁc
mental activitiesdie, thoughts and emotional feelingsdis
difﬁcult, but it is likely that humans have more information
processing capacity than any other species (Roth and
Dicke, 2005).

The human brain evolved at a rapid pace: hominin
cranial capacity tripled (from an average of about
450e1350 cc)
in less than 2 million years (Lee and
Wolpoff, 2003)droughly 100,000 neurons and supportive
cells per generation. Structural changes, such as increased
convolutions, thickly myelinated cortical neurons, lateral
asymmetries,
neurons,
expansion of the neocortex, and enhanced integration of
the cerebellum also were signiﬁcant (Fonseca-Azevedo
and Herculano-Houzel, 2012; Schoenemann, 2006). In
comparison with most other parts of the human genome,
selection on genes involved with brain development was
especially intense (Gilbert et al., 2005).

Economo

increased

von

The human brain has high metabolic costs: about 50%
of an infant’s and 20% of an adult’s energetic resources are
used to support neurological activity (Elia, 1992; Kuzawa
et al., 2009). Thoughts are not
the high levels
of glucose and other energetic nutrients required to fuel
human cognition involve signiﬁcant trade-offs (Campbell,
2010). Although the increase in energetic resources
allocated to the brain was accompanied by a corresponding
decrease in digestive tissue (Aiello and Wheeler, 1995), this
does not explain what the selective pressures for enhanced
information processing were, nor why the resources were

free;

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00016-8
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

251

252 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

TABLE 16.1 Attributes of Humans that May Provide Clues to Our Evolution

1. Unusual speciation and extinction pattern

a. No remaining ancestral species or side branches; apparent absence of adaptive radiation in Homo despite rapid evolutionary

change

2. Rapid reduction of sexual dimorphisms (SDs)

a. Canine SD reduced early (Australopithecus: Ward et al., 2001)
b. Body size SD reduced later (Homo erectus; archaic Homo sapiens)

3. Unusual dentition

a. Reduced canine size
b. Small incisors
c. Thick enamel on teeth
d. Overall dental reduction
e. Orthognathic face
f. Protruding nose

4. Dietary niche

a. Omnivorous catholic diet
b. Variable environments
c. Meat eating
d. Hunting
e. Extractive foraging of tubers, nuts, and other high-quality foods
f. An array of corresponding cognitive and brain specializations, including those that support tool use for foods, and the

development of folk biological knowledge (Atran, 1998)

g. Cooking (Wrangham, 2009)

5. Habitual bipedal locomotion

a. Lumbar curve, pelvis, bicondylar angle, knees
b. Foot, arch, no grasping big toe
c. Loss of climbing abilities

6. Unusual upper limbs

a. Shortened, modiﬁed
b. Accurate and powerful throwing of projectiles, and dodging, especially in males
c. Fine manipulation with hands, digit proportions, innervation

7. Extraordinary mental capabilities

a. Large brains, high metabolic cost (Fonseca-Azevedo and Herculano-Houzel, 2012)
b. Unique aspects of gene and protein expression, transcription in brain cells
c. Neuroanatomy; expanded neocortex, class of large and clustered spindle cells in anterior cingulate cortex, expansion of

language-related neocortical areas, expansion and reorganization of some regions of the prefrontal cortex, development of
Broca’s area, and increased lateralization and gyriﬁcation (Allman, 1999)

d. Consciousness and awareness of the self as a social being
e. Theory of mind, and a complimentary set of sociocognitive competencies (Adolphs, 2003; see Geary, 2005; Geary and

Huffman, 2002; for a taxonomy)

f. Foresight, planning, scenario building, ability to mentally time travel; related to functioning of areas of the prefrontal cortex

(Gallagher and Frith, 2003)

g. Complex psyche, integrated cognitive aptitudes, ﬂexible and relatively open learning
h. Social emotions, guilt, embarrassment, pride, restraint, and concealment
i. Humor (Alexander, 1987)
j. Complex deception and deception detection
k. Multiple order reasoning
l. Imagination, fantasy

m. Creativity
n. Senses (vision, hearing) similar to other hominoids, some olfactory reduction
o. Complex facial expressions
p. Speciﬁc psychopathologies, eg, autism

8. Language, speciﬁc linguistic abilities

a. Precocial language acquisition
b. Open syntax, inﬁnite combinations, and creativity

9. Culture

a. Traditions, cumulative information building (Coe, 2003)
b. Technology stemming from evolution of tool use and ecological dominance
c. Social learning, complex imitation, emulation, teaching. The working memory and attentional control systems that support
scenario building can also be used for the teaching and learning of culturally speciﬁc academic abilities, such as reading and
writing (Geary, 2005).

Evolution of the Human Family Chapter | 16 253

TABLE 16.1 Attributes of Humans that May Provide Clues to Our Evolutiondcont’d

10. Complex social groups

a. Male kin- and nonkin coalitions (eg, Boehm, 1999; Chagnon, 1968)
b. Complex systems of reciprocity (indirect and direct; eg, Alexander, 2006)
c. Friendships
d. Laws
e. Ethics and moral systems (Alexander, 1987)
f. Pervasive intra- and intergroup conﬂict, raiding, war (Bowles, 2009; Leblanc, 2003; Wrangham, 1999)
g. Complex social play, team sports (Wagner et al., 2002)
11. Unusual patterns of kinship, parenting, and grandparenting

a. Extensive kin networks
b. Variable male philopatry (Murdock, 1949)
c. Extensive parental care, including protection by males (Geary, 2010)
d. Complex bonding, attachment, grief
e. Long-term mating relationships, pair bonds
f. Variable mating systems
g. Parental and kin inﬂuence on mate choice
h. Age- and sex-based division of labor, activity differences

12. Unusual life history

a. Altricial young
b. Rapid early brain growth, but continued throughout childhood (Deacon, 1997)
c. Unusual patterning of growth and development, eg, pubertal growth spurt (Bogin, 1999)
d. Menopause
e. Precocial communication skills
f. Extended childhood (Bogin, 1999)
g. Adrenarche (Campbell, 2011)

13. Unusual sexual characteristics

a. Concealed ovulation (Alexander and Noonan, 1979; Strassmann, 1981)
b. Postreproductive sexual behavior
c. Frontal copulation, kissing, foreplay
d. Female orgasm
e. Permanently enlarged breasts
f. Large penis, lack of penis bone (baculum)
g. Moderate testes
h. Hymen

14. Other unusual physical characteristics

a. Variation in skin, hair, facial appearance
b. Melanin skin pigmentation
c. Pale sclera
d. Unusual importance of facial appearance for mate choice
e. General hairlessness, but with sex-speciﬁc patterning, ever-growing hair on head

15. Unusual demographic and population traits

a. Wide geographic distribution, large population size, rapid potential population growth

not reallocated to direct reproductive function. The ob-
stetric difﬁculties associated with birthing a large-headed
infant generate additional problems (Rosenberg and Tre-
vathan, 2002). The selective advantages of increased in-
telligence must have been high to overcome these costs.

The human brain, in short, is a big evolutionary puzzle.
It
is developmentally and metabolically expensive.
It
evolved rapidly and consistently. And it enables unusual
human cognitive abilities such as language, empathy,
foresight, consciousness, mental time-travel, creativity, and
theory of mind (ToM). Advantages of a larger brain may
include enhanced information processing capacities to
contend with ecological pressures that
involve sexually
dimorphic activities such as hunting and complex foraging

(Kaplan and Robson, 2002). There is little evidence,
however, of sufﬁcient domain-speciﬁc enlargement of
those parts of the brain associated with selective pressures
from the physical environment, including subsistence ac-
tivities (Adolphs, 2003; Geary and Huffman, 2002).
Indeed, human cognition has little to distinguish itself in the
way of specialized ecological talents. Our remarkable ap-
titudes for tool use and other technological behaviors
depend primarily on general aptitudes for social learning
and ﬂuid intelligence (Geary, 2005; Blurton-Jones and
Marlowe, 2002). A large brain may have been sexually
selected because intelligence was an attractive trait for mate
choice (Miller, 2000). However,
there is little sexual
dimorphism in encephalization quotient or intelligence

254 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

psychometrics (Geary, 2010), nor is there a clear reason
why brains would have been a target for sexual selection
driven by mate choice uniquely and consistently among
hominins (but not in other species).

The human brain did not evolve as an isolated trait.
Concomitant changes in other traits provide clues to what
selective pressures were important during hominin evolu-
tion. Changes in life history patterns accompanied the
evident increases in information processing and commu-
nication during the Pleistocene (Dean et al., 2001).
Gestation (pregnancy) was lengthened, but the resultant
infant was even more altricial (Rosenberg, 2004). Human
infants must be carried, fed, and protected for a long period
in comparison with those of other primates. And yet
humans have shorter interbirth intervals than other homi-
noids (Robson and Wood, 2008). Human childhood and
adolescence are also exceptionally lengthy (Del Giudice,
2009). This extension of the juvenile period appears costly
in evolutionary terms. The delay of reproduction past
15 years of age or older involves prolonged exposure to
extrinsic causes of mortality and longer generation in-
tervals. Parental and other kin investment continues for an
unusually long time, often well into adulthood and perhaps
even after the death of the parents. Like the big brain,
human life history is an evolutionary puzzle (Muehlenbein
and Flinn, 2011).

Of course the child must accumulate energetic
resources necessary for physical somatic growth. Whether
the lengthening of the human juvenile period was an
unavoidable response to an increasing shortage of calo-
ries, however, is uncertain. Other hominoids (chimpan-
zees, gorillas, orangutans) grow at similar overall rates,
but mature earlier (Leigh, 2004). Increased body fat is
associated with earlier puberty for girls, although psy-
chological and genetic factors are also important, and the
relation is not signiﬁcant for boys (Lee et al., 2010).
Moreover,
is associated with earlier
puberty in some conditions (Karaolis-Danckert et al.,
2009). The peculiarities of the human growth curve are
also difﬁcult to explain from a simple model of food
scarcitydthe general
timing of growth spurts do not
appear linked to a pattern of caloric surpluses. Hence
although it is clear that human female growth and repro-
ductive maturation are sensitive to fat accumulation
(Ellison, 2001; Sloboda et al., 2007), the lengthening of
the juvenile period during human evolution seems likely
to have involved more than simple energetic constraints
on physical growth.

low birth weight

Alternatively, the life history stage of human childhood
could be an adaptation enabling cognitive development,
including complex social skills and emotional regulation
(Alexander, 1990a; Bjorklund and Pelligrini, 2002; Del
Giudice, 2009; Flinn, 2004; Konner, 2010). The human
child is an extraordinarily social creature, motivated by and

highly sensitive to interpersonal relationships. Learning,
practice, play, and experience are imperative for social
success. The information processing capacity used for hu-
is considerable, and perhaps
man social
signiﬁcantly greater
involved with foraging,
locomotion,
tool-making, and other subsistence skills
(Schoenemann, 2006).

interactions

than that

to take on a

The child needs to master complex dynamic social
tasks
such as developing appropriate cognitive and
emotional responses during interactions with peers and
adults in the local community. The learning environments
that facilitate and channel these aspects of human mental
phenotypic plasticity appear
special
importance. Much of the data required for the social
behavior necessary to be successful as a human cannot
be “preprogrammed” into speciﬁc, detailed, ﬁxed re-
sponses. Social cleverness in a fast-paced, cumulative
cultural
dynamic,
constantly shifting strategies of friends and enemies, and
hence needs information from experiential social learning
and creative scenario-building (Flinn, 1997, 2006; Del
Giudice, 2009).

environment must

contend with

To summarize our argument

to this point, human
childhood may be viewed as a life history stage that is
necessary for acquiring the information and practice to
build and reﬁne the mental algorithms critical for negoti-
ating the social relationships that are key to success in our
species (Geary and Flinn, 2001; Muehlenbein and Flinn,
2011). Mastering the social environment presents special
challenges for the human child. Social competence is
difﬁcult because the targets (other children and adults) are
constantly changing and similarly equipped with theory of
mind and other cognitive abilities. Selection for ﬂexible
cognitive problem solving would also enhance comple-
mentary development of more sophisticated ecological
skills such as hunting and complex extractive foraging
(Kaplan et al., 2000).

Human social

relationships are especially complex
because they involve extensive coalitions. We are extraor-
dinarily cooperative, most exceptionally and importantly in
regard to competition with other groups (Alexander, 1990b,
2006; Bowles, 2009; Flinn et al., 2005, 2012a,b). Humans
are unique in being the only species that engages in group-
against-group play,
is
cross-culturally universal, emerges early in child develop-
ment, and often is the object of tremendous collective
effort.

including team sports. This trait

The family environment

is a primary source and
mediator of the ontogeny of information-processing abili-
ties, including social competencies and group cooperation.
Human biology has been profoundly affected by our
evolutionary
creatures,
immersed in networks of family, kin, and dynamic, inter-
community coalitions.

unusually

social

history

as

recognition of both bilateral

THE HUMAN FAMILY
All human societies recognize kinship as a key organiza-
tional principle (Brown, 1991). All
languages have
kinship terminologies and concomitant expectations of
obligations and reciprocity (Fortes, 1969; Murdock,
1949). Human kinship systems appear unique in the
universal
(maternal and
paternal) and multigenerational structure, with a general
trend for co-residence of male kin, but a dozen or more
major variants (Flinn and Low, 1986; Murdock, 1949).
These aspects of human kinship link families into broader
cooperative systems, and provide additional opportunities
for alloparental care during the long social childhood.
stand out as
Three species-distinctive characteristics
unusually important
(1)
fathering,
ie,
extensive and speciﬁc investment by males, (2) grand-
parenting, and (3) networks of kinship that extend among
communities and involve afﬁnal (ties by marriage) and
consanguineal (ties by blood) relationships (Walker et al.,
2011; Macfarlan et al., 2014).

in this regard:

Fathers
Mammals that live in groups with multiple malesdsuch as
chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes)dusually have little or no
paternal care, because the nonexclusivity of mating re-
lationships obscures paternity (Alexander, 1990b; Clutton-
Brock, 1991). In contrast, it is common for human fathers
to provide protection, information, food, and social status
for their children (Gray and Anderson, 2010). Paternal care
in humans appears to be facilitated by relatively stable pair
bonds, which not only involves cooperation between mates
that often endures over the lifespan, but which requires an
unusual type of cooperation among co-residing malesd
respect for each other’s mating relationships.

The relatively exclusive mating relationships that are
characteristic of most human societies (Flinn and Low,
1986) generate natural factions within the group. Mating
relationships also can create alliances in human groups,
linking two families or clans together (eg, Macfarlan et al.,
2014). By way of comparison, in chimpanzee communities
it is difﬁcult for even the most dominant male to monop-
olize an estrous female; usually most of the males in a
community mate with most of the females (Goodall, 1986;
Mitani et al., 2010). Chimpanzee males in effect “share” a
common interest
in the community’s females and their
offspring. Human groups, in contrast, are composed of
family units, each with distinct
reproductive interests.
Human males do not typically share mating access to all the
group’s females; consequently, there are usually reliable
cues identifying which children are their genetic offspring,
and which are those of other males (for exceptions see
Walker et al., 2010). Because humans live in multimale

Evolution of the Human Family Chapter | 16 255

groups, yet often maintain stable and exclusive mating
relationships, the potential for ﬁssion along family lines is
high. Still, human groups overcome this inherent conﬂict
between family units to form large, stable coalitionsda
“federation of families” (Chapais, 2013).

This unusual tolerance among co-residential males and
their families stands in contrast to the norm of polygamous
mate competition in group-living nonhuman primates.
Selection pressures favoring such tolerance are uncertain,
but likely involve the importance of both male parental
investment and male coalitions for intraspeciﬁc conﬂict
(Alexander, 1990b; Wrangham, 1999).

that

lives

The advantages of

intensive parenting,

including
paternal protection and other care, require a most unusual
pattern of mating relationships: moderately exclusive pair
bonding in multiple-male groups. No other primate (or
mammal)
in large, cooperative multiple-
reproductive-male groups has
such extensive male
parental care targeted at speciﬁc offspring. Competition for
females in multiple-male groups usually results in low
conﬁdence of paternity (eg, bonobos and chimpanzees).
Males forming exclusive pair bonds in multiple-male
groups would provide cues of nonpaternity to other
males, and hence place their offspring in great danger of
infanticide (Hrdy, 1999). Paternal care is most likely to be
favored by natural selection in conditions where males can
identify their offspring with sufﬁcient probability to offset
the costs of investment, although reciprocity with mates is
also likely to be involved (Geary and Flinn, 2001).
Humans exhibit a unique “nested family” social structure,
involving complex reciprocity among males and females to
restrict direct
among group
members.

competition for mates

It

is difﬁcult

to imagine how this system could be
maintained in the absence of another unusual human trait:
concealed or cryptic ovulation (Alexander and Noonan,
1979). Human groups tend to be male philopatric (males
tending to remain in their natal groups),
resulting in
extensive male kin alliances, useful for competing against
other groups of male kin (Leblanc, 2003; Wrangham and
Peterson, 1996). Females also have complex alliances, but
usually are not
involved directly in the overt physical
aggression characteristic of intergroup relations (Campbell,
2002; Geary and Flinn, 2002). Relationships among human
brothers and sisters are life-long even where residence is in
different communities,
in contrast with the absence of
signiﬁcant ties or apparent kin recognition after emigration
in other hominoids. Parents, grandparents, and other kin
may be especially important
the child’s mental
development of social and cultural maps because they can
be relied upon as landmarks who provide relatively
honest information. From this perspective, the evolutionary
signiﬁcance of the human family in regard to child devel-
opment is viewed more as a nest from which social skills

for

256 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

may be acquired than just as an economic unit centered on
the sexual division of labor (Flinn and Ward, 2005).

In summary, the care-providing roles of fathers are
unusually important
in humans, particularly in regard
to protection and social power, but are ﬂexible compo-
nents of the human family and are linked with the roles
of other relatives,
including grandparents. In addition
to the effects of direct parental care, paternity pro-
vides the basis for critical bilateral kinship links that
extend across communities and generations. The neuro-
endocrine mechanisms that underpin human paternal and
grandparental psychology are not well studied, but likely
involve the common mammalian afﬁliative hormones
oxytocin and arginine vasopressin, with additional
inﬂuence from the hypothalamicepituitaryegonadal and
hypothalamicepituitaryeadrenal
(Feldman,
2015, 2016; Gettler, 2014; Gray and Campbell, 2009;
Pereira and Ferreira, 2016).

systems

Grandparents
Grandparents and grandoffspring share 25% of their genes
identical by descent, a signiﬁcant opportunity for kin se-
lection. Few species, however, live in groups with multiple
overlapping generations of kin. Fewer still have signiﬁcant
social relationships among individuals two or more gener-
ations apart. Humans appear rather exceptional in this re-
gard. Grandparenting is cross-culturally ubiquitous and
pervasive (Murdock, 1967; Sear and Mace, 2005; Voland
et al., 2005). Our life histories allow for signiﬁcant gener-
ational overlaps,
including an apparent extended post-
reproductive stage facilitated by the unique human
physiological adaptation of menopause (Alexander, 1990b;
Hawkes, 2003).

The signiﬁcance of emotional bonding between grand-
parents and grandchildren is beyond doubt. The evolved
functions are uncertain, but likely involve the exceptional
importance of long-term extensive and intensive investment
for the human child. The emotional and cognitive processes
that guide grand-relationships must have evolved because
they enhanced survival and eventual reproductive success
of grandchildren. Leaving children with grandparents and
other alloparental care providers allows parents to pursue
productive activities that would otherwise be risky or
difﬁcult when encumbered with child care. In addition to
the physical basics of food, protection, and hygienic care,
psychological development of the human child is strongly
inﬂuenced by the dynamics of the social environment
(Konner, 2010). Grandparents may have knowledge and
experience that are important and useful
for helping
grandchildren and other relatives survive and succeed in
social competition (Coe, 2003; Hrdy, 2009). Humans are
unusual in the critical role of kin in alloparental care and
group coalitions.

Extended Kinship and Control of Mating
Relationships

The direct application of theory from evolutionary biology
to human marriage behavior and mating strategies is. not
possible until the theory is modiﬁed to take into consider-
ation the interdependency of individuals. and how their
interdependencydcoalition alliancesdstructures human
mating behavior.

Chagnon (1968, p. 88)

are

composed of

Human communities

its various guises (for

families
embedded in complex kin networks. The importance of
kinship in traditional societies is paramount; social power
is primarily contingent upon support
from relatives.
Complex kinship alliances are arguably the most dis-
tinguishing social behavioral characteristic of humans in
it
preindustrial cultures, and yet
is rarely discussed in
evolutionary economics.
evolutionary psychology or
Reciprocity in all
review, see
Alexander, 2006) is inextricably bound up with kinship in
traditional societies, perhaps most importantly in regard to
the control of mating in the institution of marriage. The
vast majority of nonindustrial cultures in the Ethnographic
Atlas
(Murdock, 1967) have rules and preferences
specifying what categories of relatives are appropriate for
mating/marriage; these rules and preferences involve issues
of resultant kin ties in addition to inbreeding avoidance. It
is worth emphasizing that humans are unique in the
regulation of mating relationships by kin groups. The
reason for controlling who mates with whom is that
humans are unique in the great importance of kinship ties
for alliances among groups (eg, Macfarlan et al., 2014).
Mates are usually obtained via strategic negotiation
between kin groups. No other species exhibits systematic
preferences and prohibitions for mating relationships
between speciﬁc types of cousins.

If human ancestors had intergroup relations similar to
that of chimpanzees (see Wilson et al., 2014; Wrangham,
1999; Wrangham and Peterson, 1996), it would have been
difﬁcult to make even the ﬁrst steps toward cooperative
alliances among males (and females) in different commu-
nities. An adult male attempting to establish a relationship
with another group likely would be killed as he entered
their
range. Somehow our ancestors overcame such
obstacles to the ﬁrst steps toward the core human adapta-
tion of intercommunity alliances. It is possible that our
ancestors did not have hostile intergroup relations; this
seems unlikely, however, on both empirical (Leblanc,
2003) and theoretical (Alexander, 1990b) grounds. The
most potent factor driving the evolution of the psycho-
logical, social, and cultural mechanisms enabling the
formation of increasingly large and complex coalitions was

competition with other such coalitions (Alexander, 1990b;
Bowles, 2009; Flinn et al., 2005).

Recognition of kinship among individuals residing in
different communities is key to intergroup cooperation.
Humans are different from other hominoids in the coevo-
lutionary development of (1) stable and moderately exclu-
sive breeding bonds, (2) bilateral kin recognition and
relationships, and (3) reciprocity and kin links among co-
resident and distant families (Alexander, 1990b; Chapais,
2013; Flinn et al., 2007). In short, the family was a critical
building block for the evolution of more complex com-
munities, with ﬂexible residence choice with kin in multiple
communities and apparent intentional cultivation of ties
with relatives in multiple locations.

Hard evidence for the evolutionary trajectory of human
family, kinship, and intergroup relations is scarce and in-
direct; neurobiology and physiology, however, provide
some important clues.

NEUROLOGICAL AND PHYSIOLOGICAL
MECHANISMS
Neuroendocrine systems may be viewed as complex sets of
mechanisms designed by natural selection to communicate
information among cells and tissues. Steroid and peptide
hormones, associated neurotransmitters, and other chemical
messengers guide behaviors of mammals in many impor-
tant ways (Ellison, 2009; Lee et al., 2009; Panksepp, 2009).
For example, analysis of patterns of hormone levels in
naturalistic contexts can provide important insights into the
evolutionary functions of the neuroendocrine mechanisms
that guide human behaviors (eg, Ponzi et al., 2014). Here I
focus on the neuroendocrine mechanisms that facilitate
human family relationships.

Hormonal Basis for Attachment and
Family Love
Some of the most precious human feelings are stimulated
by close social relationships: a mother holding her newborn
infant; brothers reunited after a long absence;
lovers
entangled in each other’s arms. Natural selection has
designed our neurobiological mechanisms, in concert with
our endocrine systems, to generate potent sensations in our
interactions with these most evolutionarily signiﬁcant
individuals. We share with our primate relatives the same
basic hormones and neurotransmitters that underlie these
mental gifts. But our unique evolutionary history has
modiﬁed us to respond to different circumstances and
situations; we are rewarded and punished for somewhat
different stimuli than our phylogenetic cousins. Chimpan-
share the delightdthe sensational
zees and humans
rewarddwhen biting into a ripe, juicy mango. But the

Evolution of the Human Family Chapter | 16 257

and

associated

neurological,

endocrine,
emotional
responses of a human father to the birth of his child (eg,
Storey et al., 2000) are likely to be quite different from
those of a chimpanzee male. Happiness for a human has
many unique designs, such as romantic love (Fisher et al.,
2006),
the neurological
receptors and processors of shared endogenous messengers
from our phylogenetic heritage.

involve modiﬁcation of

that

Attachments or bonding are central in the lives of the
social mammals. Basic to survival and reproduction, these
interdependent relationships are the fabric of the social
networks that permit individuals to maintain cooperative
relationships over time. Although attachments can provide
security and relief from stress, close relationships also exert
pressures on individuals to which they continuously
respond. It should not be surprising, therefore, that the
neuroendocrine mechanisms underlying attachment and
stress are intimately related to one another. And although
more is known about the stress response systems than the
afﬁliative systems, we are beginning to get some important
insights into the neuroendocrine mechanisms that underpin
human relationships (Feldman, 2015, 2016; Lee et al.,
2009; Pereira and Ferreira, 2016; Rilling, 2013).

The mother-offspring relationship is at

the core of
mammalian life, and it appears that some of the biochem-
istry at play in the regulation of this intimate bond was also
selected to serve in primary mechanisms regulating bonds
between mates, paternal care, the family group, and even
larger social networks. Although a number of hormones
and neurotransmitters are involved in attachment and other
components of relationships, the two peptide hormones,
oxytocin (OT) and arginine-vasopressin (AVP), appear to
be primary (Heinrichs et al., 2009; Lee et al., 2009; Seltzer
et al., 2010), with dopamine, cortisol, and other hormones
and neurotransmitters having mediating effects.

Experience affects the neuroendocrine systems involved
in the expression of parental care. The HPA system of
offspring during development is inﬂuenced by variation in
maternal care, which then inﬂuences
their maternal
behavior as adults. Such changes involve the production
of, and receptor density for, stress hormones and OT
(Champagne and Meaney, 2001; Fleming et al., 1999).
HPA-modulated hormones and maternal behavior are
related in humans during the postpartum period (Fleming
et al., 1997). During this time, cortisol appears to have an
arousal effect,
focusing attention on infant bonding.
Mothers with higher cortisol levels were found to be more
affectionate, more attracted to their infant’s odor, and better
at recognizing their infant’s cry during the postpartum
period.

fMRI studies of brain activity involved in maternal
attachment in humans indicate that the activated regions
are part of the reward system and contain a high density
of receptors for OT and AVP (Bartels and Zeki, 2004;

258 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

social

activities,

and management of

Fisher et al., 2006; Swain et al., 2014). These studies also
demonstrate that the neural regions involved in attachment
activated in humans are similar
to those activated in
nonhuman animals. Among humans, however, neural
regions associated with social judgment and assessment of
the intentions and emotions of others exhibited some
deactivation during attachment
suggesting
possible links between psychological mechanisms for
attachment
relationships.
Falling in love with a mate and affective bonds with
offspring may involve temporary deactivation of psycho-
logical mechanisms for maintaining an individual’s social
“guard” in the complex reciprocity of human social
networks. Dopamine levels are likely to be important for
both types of relationship but may involve some distinct
neural sites. It will be interesting to see what fMRI studies
of attachment
is
where the most substantial differences from other mammals
would be expected. Similarly, fMRI studies of attachment
to mothers, fathers, and alloparental care providers in
human children may provide important insights into the
other side of parenteoffspring bonding (Swain, 2011;
Swain et al., 2014).

in human males indicate because that

Androgens including testosterone also appear to be
involved in the regulation of paternal behavior. For
example, human fathers tend to have lower testosterone
levels when they are involved in childcare activities (Berg
and Wynne-Edwards, 2002; Fleming et al., 2002; Gray and
Campbell, 2009; Kuzawa et al., 2009), although the relation
with the key paternal
role of offspring protection is
uncertain. Human males stand out as very different from
our closest
relatives the chimpanzees in the areas of
paternal attachment and investment in offspring. Investi-
gation of the neuroendocrine mechanisms that underpin
male parental behavior may provide important insights into
these critical evolutionary changes.

The receptor density for OT and AVP in speciﬁc
brain regions might provide the basis for mechanisms
underlying other social behaviors. Other neurotransmitters,
hormones, and social cues also are likely to be involved,
but slight changes in gene expression for receptor density,
such as those found between the meadow and prairie voles
in the ventral palladium (located near
the nucleus
accumbens, an important component of the brain’s reward
system), might demonstrate how such mechanisms could
be modiﬁed by selection (Lim et al., 2004). The dopamine
D2 receptors in the nucleus accumbens appear to link the
afﬁliative OT and AVP pair-bonding mechanisms with
positive rewarding mental states (Aragona et al., 2006;
Curtis and Wang, 2003). The combination results in the
powerful addiction that parents have for their offspring
(Love, 2014; Pereira and Ferreira, 2016).

Given the adaptive value of extensive biparental care
and prolonged attachment found in the mating pair and

it

larger family network,
is not surprising that similar
neurohormonal mechanisms active in the maternale
offspring bond would also be selected to underlie these
other attachments. Though there is some variation among
species and between males and females,
the same
general neurohormonal systems active in pair-bonding in
other species are found in the human (Wynne-Edwards,
2003; Panksepp, 2004; Lee et al., 2009; Ziegler, 2000).
Androgen response to pair-bonding appears complex
(eg, van der Meij et al., 2008), but similar to parente
offspring attachment in that pair-bonded males tend to have
lower
testosterone levels in nonchallenging conditions
(Alvergne et al., 2009; Gray and Campbell, 2009).
Moreover, males
caretaking
behavior appear to have temporarily diminished testos-
terone levels and neurobiological changes (eg, Abraham
et al., 2014).

involved

actively

in

Hormonal mechanisms for another key human adapta-
tion, bonding among adult males forming coalitionsdie,
“band of brothers”dis less well studied. Social effects such
as victories against outsiders produce elevations in testos-
terone, but defeating friends does not (Flinn et al., 2012b).
Changes in oxytocin are also contingent on relationships
(De Dreu, 2012). Human males, moreover, may differen-
tially respond to females contingent on whether the females
are in a stable breeding bond with a close friend; males
have lower T after interacting with wives of their relatives
and friends (Flinn et al., 2012b). Involvement of the
afﬁliative neuropeptides (OT and AVP) in relationships
among adult males is unknown, and should be a key target
for research efforts.

The challenge before human evolutionary biologists
and psychologists is to understand how these general
neuroendocrine systems have been modiﬁed and linked
with other special human cognitive systems to produce the
unique suite of human family behaviors. Analysis of
hormonal responses to social stimuli may provide impor-
tant insights into the selective pressures that guided the
evolution of these key aspects of the human mind.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUDING
REMARKS
Human childhood is a life history stage that appears
necessary and useful for acquiring the information and
practice to build and reﬁne the mental algorithms critical
for negotiating the social coalitions that are key to success
in our species. Mastering the social environment presents
special challenges for the human child. Social competence
is difﬁcult because the target is constantly changing and
similarly equipped with theory of mind and other cognitive
abilities. Family environment, including care from fathers
and grandparents, is a primary source and mediator of the
ontogeny of social competencies.

Social competence is developmentally expensive in
time, instruction, and parental care. Costs are not equally
justiﬁed for all expected adult environments. The human
family may help children adjust development in response
to environmental exigencies for appropriate trades-offs
in life history strategies. An evolutionary developmental
perspective of the family can be useful in these efforts to
understand this critical aspect of a child’s world by inte-
grating knowledge of physiological causes with the logic
of adaptive design by natural selection. Human biology
has been profoundly affected by our evolutionary history
as unusually social creatures, including, perhaps, a special
reliance upon cooperative fathers, grandparents, and kin
residing in other groups. Indeed, the mind of the human
child may have design features that enable its develop-
ment as a group project, guided by the multitudinous
informational
and
codescendants.

contributions

ancestors

its

of

Understanding the coevolution of the core human ad-
aptations of stable breeding bonds, biparental care, altricial
infancy, prolonged childhood, complex social intelligence,
extended kinship networks, and intergroup alliances
presents difﬁcult challenges for the social sciences. The
inclusion of ideas and methods from anthropology and
the life sciences may prove helpful, and hopefully make
the task merrier.

REFERENCES

Abraham, E., Hendler, T., Shapira-Lichter,

I., Kanat-Maymon, Y.,
Zagoory-Sharon, O., Feldman, R., 2014. Father’s brain is sensitive to
childcare experiences. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 111 (27), 9792e9797.

Adolphs, R., 2003. Cognitive neuroscience of human social behavior.

Nature Reviews, Neuroscience 4 (3), 165e178.

Aiello, L.C., Wheeler, P., 1995. The expensive-tissue hypothesis: the brain
and the digestive system in human and primate evolution. Current
Anthropology 36, 199e221.

Alexander, R.D., 1979. Darwinism and Human Affairs. University of

Washington Press, Seattle.

Evolution of the Human Family Chapter | 16 259

Alvergne, A., Faurie, C., Raymond, M., 2009. Variation in testosterone
levels and male reproductive effort: insight from a polygynous human
population. Hormones and Behavior 56 (5), 491e497.

Aragona, B.J., Liu, Y., Yu, Y.J., Curtis, J.T., Detwiler, J.M., Insel, T.R.,
et al., 2006. Nucleus accumbens dopamine differentially mediates the
formation and maintenance of monogamous pair bonds. Nature
Neuroscience 9, 133e139.

Atran, S., 1998. Folk biology and the anthropology of science: cognitive
universals and cultural particulars. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 21,
547e609.

Bartels, A., Zeki, S., 2004. The neural correlates of maternal and romantic

love. NeuroImage 21, 1155e1166.

Berg, S.J., Wynne-Edwards, K.E., 2001. Changes in testosterone, cortisol,
in men becoming fathers. Mayo Clinic

and estradiol
Proceedings 76, 582e592.

levels

Bjorklund, D.F., Pellegrini, A.D., 2002. The Origins of Human Nature:
Evolutionary Developmental Psychology. APA Press, Washington,
DC.

Blurton-Jones, N.G., Marlowe, F.W., 2002. Selection for delayed maturity:
does it take 20 years to learn to hunt and gather? Human Nature 13,
199e238.

Boehm, C., 1999. Hierarchy in the Forest: The Evolution of Egalitarian

Behavior. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Bogin, B., 1999. Evolutionary perspective on human growth. Annual

Review of Anthropology 28, 109e153.

Bowles, S., 2009. Did warfare among ancestral hunter-gatherers affect the

evolution of human social behaviors? Science 324, 1293e1298.

Brown, D.E., 1991. Human Universals. Temple University Press,

Philadelphia.

Campbell, A., 2002. A Mind of Her Own: The Evolutionary Psychology of

Women. Oxford University Press, London.

Campbell, B.C.,

the

2010. Energetics

In:
Muhlenbein, M. (Ed.), Human Evolutionary Biology. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, pp. 425e438.

human

brain.

and

Campbell, B.C., 2011. Adrenarche and middle childhood. Human Nature

22, 327e349.

Chagnon, N.A., 1968. Yanomamö: The Fierce People. Holt, Rinehart, &

Winston, New York.

Champagne, F.A., Meaney, M.J., 2001. Like mother,

like daughter:
evidence for non-genomic transmission of parental behavior and stress
responsivity. Progress in Brain Research 133, 287e302.

Chapais, B., 2008. Primeval Kinship: How Pair-bonding Gave Birth to

Alexander, R.D., 1987. The Biology of Moral Systems. Aldine Press,

Human Society. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Hawthorne, NY.

Alexander, R.D., 1990a. Epigenetic rules and Darwinian algorithms: the
learning and development. Ethology and

adaptive
Sociobiology 11, 1e63.

study of

Alexander, R.D., 1990b. How Humans Evolved: Reﬂections on the
Uniquely Unique Species. Museum of Zoology (Special Publication
No. 1). The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Alexander, R.D., 2006. The challenge of human social behavior.

Evolutionary Psychology 4, 1e32.

Alexander, R.D., Noonan, K.M., 1979. Concealment of ovulation, parental
care, and human social evolution. In: Chagnon, N., Irons, W. (Eds.),
Evolutionary Biology and Human Social Behavior. Duxbury Press,
North Scituate.

Allman, J., 1999. Evolving Brains. Scientiﬁc American Library, New

York.

Chapais, B., 2013. Monogamy, strongly bonded groups, and the evolution

of human social structure. Evolutionary Anthropology 22, 52e65.

Clutton-Brock, T.H., 1991. The Evolution of Parental Care. Princeton U.

Press, Princeton, NJ.

Coe, K., 2003. The Ancestress Hypothesis: Visual Art as Adaptation.

Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick.

Curtis, T.J., Wang, Z., 2003. The neurochemistry of pair bonding. Current

Directions in Psychological Science 12 (2), 49e53.

De Dreu, C.K.W., 2012. Oxytocin modulates cooperation within and
competition between groups: an integrative review and research
agenda. Hormones and Behavior 61 (3), 419e428.

Deacon, T.W., 1997. The Symbolic Species: The Co-evolution of Lan-

guage and the Brain. Norton, New York.

Dean, C., Leakey, M.G., Reid, D., Schrenk, F., Schwartz, G.T.,
Stringer, C., Walker, A., 2001. Growth processes in teeth distinguish

260 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

modern humans from Homo erectus and earlier hominins. Nature 414,
628e631.

Del Giudice, M., 2009. Sex, attachment, and the development of

reproductive strategies. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 32, 1e21.

Edelman, G.M., 2006. Second Nature: Brain Science and Human

Knowledge. Yale University Press, New Haven.

Elia, M., 1992. Organ and tissue contribution to metabolic rate. In:
Kinner, J.M., Tucker, H.N.
(Eds.), Energy Metabolism: Tissue
Determinants and Cellular Corollaries. Raven Press, New York,
pp. 61e79.

Ellison, P.T., 2001. On Fertile Ground, a Natural History of Human

Reproduction. Harvard, Cambridge, MA.

Ellison, P.T., 2009. Social relationships and reproductive ecology. In:
Ellison, P.T., Gray, P. (Eds.), Endocrinology of Social Relationships.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 54e73.

Feldman, R., 2015. The adaptive human parental brain: implications for
children’s social development. Trends in Neuroscience 38 (6),
387e399. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2015.04.004.

Feldman, R., 2016. The neurobiology of mammalian parenting and the
biosocial context of human caregiving. Hormones and Behavior.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.yhbeh.2015.10.001.

Fisher, H., Aron, A., Brown, L.L., 2006. Romantic love: a mammalian
system for mate choice. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society B 361, 2173e2186.

Fleming, A.S., Steiner, M., Corter, C., 1997. Cortisol, hedonics, and
maternal responsiveness in human mothers. Hormones and Behavior
32, 85e98.

Fleming, A.S., O’Day, D.H., Kraemer, G.W., 1999. Neurobiology of
mother-infant
interactions: experience and central nervous system
plasticity across development and generations. Neuroscience and
Biobehavioral Reviews 23, 673e685.

Fleming, A.S., Corter, C., Stallings, J., Steiner, M., 2002. Testosterone and
prolactin are associated with emotional responses to infant cries in
new fathers. Hormones and Behavior 42, 399e413.

Flinn, M.V., 2004. Culture and developmental plasticity: Evolution of the
social brain. In: MacDonald, K., Burgess, R.L. (Eds.), Evolutionary
perspectives on child development (Chapter 3). Sage, Thousand Oaks,
CA, pp. 73e98.

Flinn, M.V., Alexander, R.D., 2007. Runaway social selection.

In:
Gangestad, S.W., Simpson, J.A. (Eds.), The Evolution of Mind.
Guilford press, New York, pp. 249e255.

Flinn, M.V., Low, B.S., 1986. Resource distribution, social competition,
In: Rubenstein, D.,
(Eds.), Ecological Aspects of Social Evolution.

and mating patterns
Wrangham, R.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, pp. 217e243.

in human societies.

Flinn, M.V., Ward, C.V., 2005. Evolution of the social child. In: Ellis, B.,
Bjorklund, D. (Eds.), Origins of the Social Mind: Evolutionary
Psychology and Child Development. Guilford Press, London,
pp. 19e44 (Chapter 2).

Flinn, M.V., Geary, D.C., Ward, C.V., 2005. Ecological dominance, social
competition, and coalitionary arms races: why humans evolved
extraordinary intelligence. Evolution and Human Behavior 26 (1),
10e46.

Flinn, M.V., Quinlan, R.J., Ward, C.V., Coe, M.K., 2007. Evolution of the
long social childhoods, smart
human family: cooperative males,
mothers, and extended kin networks. In: Salmon, C., Shackelford, T.
(Eds.), Family Relationships. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
pp. 16e38 (Chapter 2).

Flinn, M.V., Duncan, C., Quinlan, R.L., Leone, D.V., Decker, S.A.,
Ponzi, D., 2012a. Hormones in the wild: monitoring the endocri-
nology of family relationships. Parenting: Science and Practice 12 (2),
124e133.

Flinn, M.V., Ponzi, D., Muehlenbein, M.P., 2012b. Hormonal mechanisms
for regulation of aggression in human coalitions. Human Nature
22 (1), 68e88.

Flinn, M.V., 1997. Culture and the evolution of social learning. Evolution

and Human Behavior 18 (1), 23e67.

Flinn, M.V., 2006. Evolution and ontogeny of stress response to social
challenge in the human child. Developmental Review 26, 138e174.
Fonseca-Azevedo, K., Herculano-Houzel, S., 2012. Metabolic constraint
imposes tradeoff between body size and number of brain neurons in
human evolution. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America 109 (45), 18,571e18,576.

Fortes, M., 1969. Kinship and the Social Order. Aldine, Chicago, IL.
Gallagher, H.L., Frith, C.D., 2003. Functional imaging of ‘theory of mind’.

Trends in Cognitive Sciences 7, 77e83.

Geary, D.C., Flinn, M.V., 2001. Evolution of human parental behavior and

the human family. Parenting: Science and Practice 1, 5e61.

Geary, D.C., Flinn, M.V., 2002. Sex differences in behavioral and hor-
threat. Psychological Review 109 (4),

monal response to social
745e750.

Geary, D.C., Huffman, K.J., 2002. Brain and cognitive evolution: forms of
modularity and functions of mind. Psychological Bulletin 128 (5),
667e698.

Geary, D.C., 2005. The Origin of Mind: Evolution of Brain, Cognition,
Intelligence. American Psychological Association,

and General
Washington, DC.

Geary, D.C., 2010. Male, Female: The Evolution of Human Sex
second ed. American Psychological Association,

Differences,
Washington, DC.

Gettler, L.T., 2014. Applying socioendocrinology to evolutionary
models: fatherhood and physiology. Evolutionary Anthropology 23,
146e160.

Gilbert, S.L., Dobyns, W.B., Lahn, B.T., 2005. Genetic links between
brain development and brain evolution. Nature Reviews Genetics
6 (7), 581e590.

Goodall, J., 1986. The Chimpanzees of Gombe: Patterns of Behavior.

Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Gray, P.B., Anderson, K.G., 2010. Fatherhood: Evolution and Human

Paternal Behavior. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Gray, P.B., Campbell, B.C., 2009. Human male testosterone, pair bonding
and fatherhood. In: Ellison, P.T., Gray, P.B. (Eds.), Endocrinology of
Social Relationships. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.

Hawkes, K., 2003. Grandmothers and the evolution of human longevity.

American Journal of Human Biology 15, 380e400.

Heinrichs, M., Dawans, B.V., Domes, G., 2009. Oxytocin, vasopressin,
and human social behavior. Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology 30 (4),
548e557.

Hrdy, S.B., 1999. Mother Nature: A History of Mothers, Infants, and

Natural Selection. Pantheon, New York.

Hrdy, S.B., 2009. Mothers and Others: The Evolutionary Origins of

Mutual Understanding. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.

Kaplan, H.S., Robson, A.J., 2002. The emergence of humans:

the
coevolution of
intelligence and longevity with intergenerational
transfers. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 99 (15), 10221e10226.

Evolution of the Human Family Chapter | 16 261

Kaplan, H., Hill, K., Lancaster, J., Hurtado, A.M., 2000. A theory of
human life history evolution: diet, intelligence and longevity. Evolu-
tionary Anthropology 9, 156e183.

Karaolis-Danckert, N., Buyken, A.E., Sonntag, A., Kroke, A., 2009. Birth
and early life inﬂuences on the timing of puberty onset: results from
the DONALD (DOrtmund Nutritional and Anthropometric Longitu-
dinally Designed) Study. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition
90 (6), 1559e1565.

Konner, M., 2010. The Evolution of Childhood: Relationships, Emotion,

Mind. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Kuzawa, C.W., Gettler, L.T., Muller, M.N., McDade, T.W., Feranil, A.B.,
2009. Fatherhood, pairbonding and testosterone in the Philippines.
Hormones and Behavior 56 (4), 429e435.

Leblanc, S.A., 2003. Constant Battles: The Myth of the Peaceful, Noble

Savage. St. Martin’s Press, New York.

Ponzi, D., Muehlenbein, M.P., Sgoifo, A., Geary, D.C., Flinn, M.V., 2014.
Day-to-day variation of salivary cortisol and dehydroepiandrosterone
(DHEA) in children from a rural Dominican community. Adaptive
Human Behavior and Physiology 1, 12e24.

Rilling, J.K., 2013. The neural and hormonal bases of human parental care.

Neuropsychologia 51 (4), 731e747.

Robson, S.L., Wood, B., 2008. Hominin life history: reconstruction and

evolution. Journal of Anatomy 212 (4), 394e425.

Rosenberg, K., Trevathan, W., 2002. Birth, obstetrics and human evolu-
tion. BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology
109 (11), 1199e1206.

Rosenberg, K., 2004. Living longer: information revolution, population
expansion, and modern human origins. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 101 (30),
10847e10848.

Lee, S.H., Wolpoff, M.H., 2003. The pattern of evolution in Pleistocene

Roth, G., Dicke, U., 2005. Evolution of the brain and intelligence. Trends

human brain size. Paleobiology 29, 186e196.

in Cognitive Sciences 9 (5), 250e257.

Lee, H.-J., Macbeth, A.H., Pagani, J., Young 3rd, W.S., 2009. Oxytocin: the

Schoenemann, P.T., 2006. Evolution of the size and functional areas of

great facilitator of life. Progress in Neurobiology 88 (2), 127e151.

the human brain. Annual Review of Anthropology 35, 379e406.

Lee, J.M., Kaciroti, N., Appugliese, D., Corwyn, R.F., Bradley, R.H.,
Lumeng, J.C., 2010. Body mass index and timing of pubertal initiation
in boys. Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine 164 (2),
116e123.

Leigh, S.R., 2004. Brain growth, cognition, and life history in primate and

human evolution. American Journal of Primatology 62, 139e164.

Lim, M.M., Wang, Z., Olazábal, D.E., Ren, X., Terwilliger, E.F.,
Young, L.J., 2004. Enhanced partner preference in a promiscuous
species by manipulating the expression of a single gene. Nature
429 (6993), 754e757.

Love, T.M., 2014. Oxytocin, motivation and the role of dopamine.

Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior 119, 49e60.

Macfarlan, S.J., Walker, R.S., Flinn, M.V., Chagnon, N.A., 2014. Lethal
coalitionary aggression and long-term alliances among Yanomamö
men. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 111 (52), 16662e16669.

Miller, G.E., 2000. The Mating Mind: How Sexual Choice Shaped the

Evolution of Human Nature. Doubleday, New York.

Mitani, J.C., Watts, D.P., Amsler, S.J., 2010. Lethal intergroup aggression
leads to territorial expansion in wild chimpanzees. Current Biology
20 (12), R507eR508.

Muehlenbein, M., Flinn, M.V., 2011. Pattern and process of human life
history evolution. In: Flatt, T., Heyland, A. (Eds.), Oxford Handbook
of Life History. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 153e168
(Chapter 23).

Murdock, G.P., 1949. Social Structure. Macmillan, New York.
Murdock, G.P., 1967. Ethnographic Atlas. University of Pittsburgh Press,

Pittsburgh, PA.

Panksepp, J., 2004. Affective Neuroscience: The Foundations of Human

and Animal Emotions. Oxford University Press, New York.

Panksepp, J., 2009. Primary Process Affects and Brain Oxytocin. Bio-
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/

725e727.

65,

Psychiatry

logical
j.biopsych.2009.02.004.

Pereira, M., Ferreira, A., 2016. Neuroanatomical and neurochemical basis
of parenting: dynamic coordination of motivational, affective and
cognitive processes. Hormones and Behavior. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.yhbeh.2015.08.005.

Sear, R., Mace, R., 2008. Who keeps children alive? A review of the ef-
fects of kin on child survival. Evolution and Human Behavior 29 (1),
1e18.

Seltzer, L.J., Ziegler, T.E., Pollak, S.D., 2010. Social vocalizations can
release oxytocin in humans. Proceedings of the Royal Society B.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2010.0567.

Sloboda, D.M., Hart, R., Doherty, D.A., Pennell, C.E., Hickey, M., 2007.
Age at menarche: inﬂuences of prenatal and postnatal growth. Journal
of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 92, 46e50.

Storey, A.E., Walsh, C.J., Quinton, R.L., Wynne-Edwards, K.E., 2000.
Hormonal correlates of paternal responsiveness in new and expectant
fathers. Evolution and Human Behavior 21, 79e95.

Strassmann, B.I., 1981. Sexual selection, paternal care, and concealed

ovulation in humans. Ethology and Sociobiology 2, 31e40.

Swain, J.E., Kim, P., Spicer, J., Ho, S.S., Dayton, C.J., Elmadih, A.,
Abel, K.M., 2014. Approaching the biology of human parental
attachment: brain imaging, oxytocin and coordinated assessments of
mothers and fathers. Brain Research 1580, 78e101. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.brainres.2014.03.007.

Swain, J.E., 2011. The human parental brain:

in vivo neuroimaging.
Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry 35,
1242e1254.

van der Meij, L., Buunk, A.P., van de Sande, J.P., Salvador, A., 2008. The
presence of a woman increases testosterone in aggressive dominant
men. Hormones and Behavior 54, 640e644.

Voland, E., Chasiotis, A., Schiefenhövel, W., 2005. Grandmotherhood:
The Evolutionary Signiﬁcance of the Second Half of Female Life.
Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick, NJ.

Wagner, J.D., Flinn, M.V., England, B.G., 2002. Hormonal response to
competition among male coalitions. Evolution and Human Behavior
23 (6), 437e442.

Walker, R.S., Flinn, M.V., Hill, K., 2010. The evolutionary history of
partible paternity in lowland South America. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
107 (45), 19195e19200.

Walker, R.S., Hill, K., Flinn, M.V., Ellsworth, R., 2011. Evolutionary
history of hunter-gatherer marriage practices. PLoS One 6 (4), e19066.

262 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

Ward, C.V., Leakey, M., Walker, A., 2001. Morphology of Austral-
opithecus anamensis from Kanapoi and Allia Bay, Kenya. Journal of
Human Evolution 41, 255e368.

Wilson, M.L., Boesch, C., Fruth, B., Furuichi, T., Gilby,

I.C.,
Hashimoto, C., Hobaiter, C.L., Hohmann, G., Itoh, N., Koops, K.,
Lloyd, J.N., Matsuzawa, T., Mitani, J.C., Mjungu, D.C., Morgan, D.,
Muller, M.N., Mundry, R., Nakamura, M., Pruetz, J., Pusey, A.E.,
Riedel, J., Sanz, C., Schel, A.M., Simmons, N., Waller, M.,
Watts, D.P., White,
F., Wittig, R.M., Zuberbühler, K.,
Wrangham, R.W., September 18, 2014. Lethal aggression in Pan is
better explained by adaptive strategies than human impacts. Nature
513 (7518), 414e417. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature13727.

Flinn, M.V., Leone, D.V., 2009. Alloparental care and the ontogeny of
glucocorticoid stress response among stepchildren. In: Bentley, G.,
Mace, R. (Eds.), Substitute Parents, Biosocial Society Symposium
Series. Berghahn Books, Oxford, pp. 212e231.

Flinn, M.V., Ward, C.V., 2015. Hormones and the evolution of human
sociality. In: Buss, D. (Ed.), Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology,
second ed. Wiley, New York (Chapter 24).

Flinn, M.V., Nepomnaschy, P., Muehlenbein, M.P., Ponzi, D., 2011.
Evolutionary functions of early social modulation of hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenal axis development
in humans. Neuroscience and
Biobehavioral Reviews 35 (7), 1611e1629.

Geary, D.C., Bjorklund, D.F., 2000. Evolutionary developmental psy-

Wrangham, R.W., Peterson, D., 1996. Demonic Males. Houghton Mifﬂin

chology. Child Development 71 (1), 57e65.

Company, New York.

Wrangham, R.W., 1999. Evolution of coalitionary killing. Yearbook of

Physical Anthropology 42, 1e30.

Heinrichs, M., Domes, G., 2008. Neuropeptides and social behaviour:
effects of oxytocin and vasopressin in humans. Progress in Brain
Research 170, 337e350.

Wrangham, R.W., 2009. Catching Fire: How Cooking Made Us Human.

Hill, K., Hurtado, A., 1996. Ache Life History: The Ecology and Demog-

Basic Books, New York.

Wynne-Edwards, K.E., 2003. From dwarf hamster to daddy: the inter-
section of ecology, evolution, and physiology that produces paternal
behavior.
J.S., Snowden, C.T.,
Roper, T.J. (Eds.), Advances in the Study of Behavior, 32. Academic
Press, San Diego, CA, pp. 207e261.

In: Slater, P.J.B., Rosenblatt,

Ziegler, T.C., 2000. Hormones associated with non-maternal infant care: a
review of mammalian and avian studies. Folia Primatologica
71 (1e2), 6e21.

FURTHER READING

Bissonnette, A., Perry, S., Barrett, L., Mitani, J., Flinn, M.V., Gavrilets, S.,
De Waal, F.B., 2015. Coalitions in theory and reality: a review of
pertinent variables and processes. Behaviour 152 (1), 1e56.

Feldman, R., Gordon, I., Zagoory-Sharon, O., 2011. Maternal and paternal
plasma, salivary, and urinary oxytocin and parent-infant synchrony:
considering stress and afﬁliation components of human bonding.
Developmental Science 14 (4), 752e761.

Feldman, R., Zagoory-Sharon, O., Weisman, O., Schneiderman,

I.,
Gordon, I., Maoz, R., Shalev, I., Ebstein, R.P., 2012. Sensitive
parenting is associated with plasma oxytocin and polymorphisms
in the OXTR and CD38 genes. Biological Psychiatry 72, 175e181.

Fernandez-Duque, E., Valeggia, C.R., Mendoza, S.P., 2009. The biology
of paternal care in human and nonhuman primates. Annual Review of
Anthropology 38, 115e130.

Flinn, M.V., Leone, D.V., 2006. Early trauma and the ontogeny of
glucocorticoid stress response: grandmother as a secure base. Journal
of Developmental Processes 1 (1), 31e68.

raphy of a Foraging People. Aldine de Gruyter, Hawthorne, NY.

Isler, K., van Schaik, C.P., 2009. The expensive brain: a framework for
explaining evolutionary changes in brain size. Journal of Human
Evolution 57, 392e400.

Joffe, T.H., 1997. Social pressures have selected for an extended juvenile

period in primates. Journal of Human Evolution 32, 593e605.

Konner, M., 1991. Childhood. Little, Brown, Boston, MA.
Nepomnaschy, P., Flinn, M.V., 2008. Early life inﬂuences on the ontogeny
of neuroendocrine stress response in the human child. In: Ellison, P.,
Gray, P. (Eds.), The Endocrinology of Social Relationships. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 364e382 (Chapter 16).

Shonkoff, J.P., Boyce, W.T., McEwen, B.S., 2009. Neuroscience, mo-
lecular biology, and the childhood roots of health disparities: building
a new framework for health promotion and disease prevention. JAMA
301 (21), 2252e2259.

Uvnas-Moberg, K., 1998. Oxytocin may mediate the beneﬁts of positive
interaction and emotions. Psychoneuroendocrinology 23,

social
819e835.

Walker, R.S., Beckerman, S., Flinn, M.V., Gurven, M., von
Reuden, C.R., Kramer, K.L., Greaves, R.D., Córdoba, L.,
Hagen, E.H., Koster, J.M., Sugiyama, L., Hunter, T.E., Hill, K.R.,
2013. Living with kin in lowland horticultural societies. Current
Anthropology 54 (1), 96e103.

Walvoord, E.C., 2010. The timing of puberty: is it changing? Does it

matter? Journal of Adolescent Health 47 (5), 433e439.

Young, L., Wang, Z.,

In: Cacioppo,

Insel, T.R., 2002. Neuroendocrine bases of
monogamy.
J.T., Berntson, G.G., Adolphs, R.,
Carter, C.S., Davidson, R.J., McClintock, M.K., et al. (Eds.), Foun-
dations
in Social Neuroscience. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
pp. 809e816.

Chapter 17

Biological Future of Humankind:
Ongoing Evolution and the Impact
of Recognition of Human Biological
Variation

F. Ru¨ hli1 and M. Henneberg2
1Institute of Evolutionary Medicine, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland; 2The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia

BASIC PRINCIPLES OF HUMAN
ADAPTATION

Humans are biological systems (Strzałko et al., 1980). To
understand their future, one has to consider how they were
shaped by the past evolutionary events, and how forces of
evolution inﬂuence them now. Biological variation is a
necessary phenomenon for evolution both as its substrate
and its result. Biological variation occurs every generation
due to gene recombination, de novo mutations, epigenetic
effects, and adaptive responses of phenotypes. Since envi-
ronmental conditions vary from generation to generation,
too, there is a constant change in the distribution of bio-
logical characteristics of people in populations. Evolution is
a common phenomenon, not just a creator of new species. It
is a dynamic process because of reproduction. Old in-
dividuals die and then their phenotypic characters vanish.
The only way that these phenotypes can persist over time is
to recreate them every generation from genetic information
unraveling through epigenetic mechanisms during indi-
vidual ontogeny. Therefore, no “old” characteristics persist
in populations. All characteristics of a new generation are
“new,” but some resemble characteristics of previous gen-
erations by the virtue of still being useful in new environ-
mental conditions.

Multicellular organisms are complex systems and their
particular characteristics must be attuned to working
together so as to ensure reproductive success of their
bearers. Thus,
if any character changes, others must

change, too. Change, or variability, is the core property of
life.

For practical reasons, inﬁnitely variable individuals are
allocated to categories. Therefore, categories contain ob-
jects that are not precisely identical. Yet the categories are
often used as units of scientiﬁc analyses.

The general principles mentioned earlier are pertinent to
human biology and its applications in medical practice.
Human bodies are a product of organic evolution. There-
fore, biochemical and physiological processes that create
and maintain their structures and functions are products of
adaptations to conditions experienced by ancestral genera-
tions. They are, however, continuously modiﬁed by
epigenetic processes using inherited information in newly
occurring environmental conditions and by random errors
in copying genetic information passed on from parents to
offspring. Many of these errors are biologically neutrald
changes of single nucleotides in DNA sequencesdbut
some may be detrimental if they alter actively transcribed
code for a biochemically active molecule so that it cannot
be used in processes sustaining life of an individual or may
affect its ability to produce offspring. Such errors will not
be passed on to next generations because an individual
affected will not have progeny. This differentiation of
reproductive success of individuals with different genes
does not need to be categorical. Genes that lower the ability
to survive only to a certain extent and genes that affect
fertility only somewhat may be passed to next generations,
but at a rate lower than genes that do not affect survival or

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00017-X
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

263

264 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

fertility. The process of differential contribution of genes to
new generations is called natural selection. It operates
continuously, most of its actions being a simple cleaning of
detrimental mutations. It may produce phenotypic changes
when, rarely, a mutation occurs that enhances reproductive
success or when living conditions alter so that effects of
particular genes acquire a different relation with the envi-
ronment producing phenotypic changes that affect chances
of their reproduction.

Since evolution is now well recognized by life sciences
as a real phenomenon, approaches to human health need
to take it into account. This is done by the recently estab-
lished discipline of evolutionary medicine. At its outset it
has been deﬁned as the “enterprise of trying to ﬁnd
evolutionary explanations for vulnerabilities to disease”
(https://sites.google.com/site/evolutionarymedicine/, accessed
15.10.15.).

Evolutionary approaches to medical problems use the
understanding of past adaptations to indicate their mis-
matches with the present-day living conditions and to
suggest remediation of such mismatches. The understand-
ing of how current changes to the genetic endowment affect
human life and health requires further attention, and we
propose to expand evolutionary medicine attention in this
direction. This chapter attempts to show very recent
changes in human variation using already published
evidence.

RECENT CHANGE OF HUMAN ECOLOGY

The exact date of the appearance of humans on Earth,
whose bodies were essentially the same as the bodies of a
recent people,
is still debated by paleoanthropologists
(Henneberg, 2001a; Collard and Wood, 2015). It is widely
accepted that since the advent of food production (agri-
culture and animal husbandry) humans and their pop-
ulations were actors in the history that led to our existence.
Since people were increasingly controlling their environ-
ment over the past 10,000 years or so, it can be expected
that they were not so much adapting to their living condi-
tions as adapting conditions to themselves; ie, managing
their environment. This management, however, has not
been fully conscious and thus produced new pressures on
biological characteristics of human bodies. During this
period, we were
adapting to a human-transformed
environment.

In general terms, we were protecting our bodies against
climatic
conditions by building shelters, producing
clothing, and using ﬁre; we changed profoundly our diets,
moving them away from protein-rich but unreliable sup-
plies obtained through gathering and hunting toward
carbohydrate-rich and regular meals, which were usually
reliable but subject to periodical shortages. Reliance on
agricultural products required the preparation of ﬁelds,

storage, and processing of plant materials harvested in
substantial quantities, while animal husbandry required
processing of meat and dairy products for future use. All
those requirements could only be met by large amounts of
labor, requiring high levels of skills but not much of
physical strength. Endurance rather than explosive power
became important. Finally, by allowing large sedentary
populations to exist, we have created a reservoir of infec-
tious diseases and doubled fertility rates. In terms of
physical structure, adaptive pressures favoring large strong
bodies were replaced by pressures toward energetically
more
situation brieﬂy
described earlier in this chapter led to the generalized trend
toward reductions in structures of the human body and
changes in its immune responses. It has been suggested as
early as the 1960s (Brace, 1964) that the most probable
effects of random mutations are losses of structure or
function.

efﬁcient gracile bodies. The

STRUCTURAL REDUCTION OF HUMAN
MORPHOLOGY

structures,

in anatomical

Among reductions
the best
described are gracilization, microcranialization, and dental
reductions. Gracilization (Debetz, 1960, 1964; Schwidetzky,
1962) means loss of robusticity of the skeleton and is evi-
denced by decreasing stature, reduced width of long bones
in relation to their length, and less relief on sites of muscle
attachment to bones (entheses). It cannot be excluded that
omnipresence of
infectious diseases, especially chronic
infections such as tuberculosis (Holloway et al., 2011) and
malaria is partly responsible for poor child growth leading to
reduced stature and less muscle mass. The process of gra-
cilization has only been reversed in developed economies
in the last
few generations when improved sanitation
and nutrition removed impediments to growth (Henneberg
and van den Berg, 1990; Henneberg, 2001b). Micro-
cranialization (Table 17.1), a decrease of
the brain
size during the time of the development of major civiliza-
tions, is not as counterintuitive as it appears at the ﬁrst
glance when it is considered that control of skeletal muscle
activities is one of the major functions of the brain. With
gracilization, decreased skeletal muscle mass has been
reﬂected in smaller size of the brain (Henneberg, 1988,
1998).

One of the well-known short-term trends in human
anatomy has been brachycephalization. Braincases in
certain regions of the world, most notably the Central
Europe, changed the ratio of their maximum width to
maximum length in the time span of some 800 years. In
Europe, including also Mediterranean parts of Africa and
Asia, the ratio (called the Cranial Index) changed from 76%
in the early Middle Ages to 81% in the 20th century AD
(Henneberg, 1988). A change of 5 percentage units is very

Biological Future of Humankind Chapter | 17 265

TABLE 17.1 Rates of Change of Human Cranial Characters Measured in Darwins: (lnX
2

LlnX

1)/T

Trait
Cranial Capacity

Australopithecus africanuseHomo sapiens

H. sapiens in Europe
Cranial Index

Au. africanuseH. sapiens

H. sapiens in Europe

Initial Value

Final Value

Period (Ma)

Rate (Darwins)

450 mL

1456 mL

1350 mL

1350 mL

3.40

0.007

70.0%

73.0%

75.0%

80.5%

2.50

0.0015

þ0.32
 10.80

þ0.03
þ65.20

X
1, initial state of character X; X
Data from Henneberg, M., 2006. The rate of human morphological microevolution and taxonomic diversity of hominids (Essays
in memory of Andrzej Wiercinski). Studies in Historical Anthropology 4, 49e59.

2, ﬁnal state of character X; T-time in years.

signiﬁcant considering that the standard deviation of this
ratio is only about 3%. A number of hypothetical expla-
nations of this process have been offered (Hennebrg, 1976);
none, however, has been conclusively tested to be true. A
correlation has been found between the value of the Cranial
Index and susceptibility to measles (Henneberg et al.,
1984). A rather curious result from the biological point of
view, though fully statistically sound and signiﬁcant. A
possible explanation is that organisms with different rates
of growth of skeletal length (including skull base length)
through interchondral ossiﬁcation and braincase width
through intermembranous ossiﬁcation have somewhat
different physiologies related to greater or lower immunity
to a common disease. Between the early Middle Ages and
modern times, population density and population mobility
changes as well as sanitation and medical care may have
inﬂuenced the epidemiology of measles to the extent of the
higher
individuals with
different head shapes. The ﬁnal explanation of the process
of brachycephalization is still not available.

reproductive performance of

Dental reductions are manifest in both the agenesis of
certain teeth becoming more common through timedthis
is especially true with regard to third molars (wisdom
teeth), but also lateral incisors and premolarsdand the
reduction of tooth size (Brace et al., 1987). Dental re-
ductions can be attributed to improvements in preparation
of foods making chewing an easy task. This is abundantly
evidenced by decreasing through time the degree of tooth
attrition. This decrease progressed to such an extent that at
present some dentists consider tooth wear to be a patho-
logical sign. Dental
reductions were accompanied by
increases in oral diseases, especially dental caries and
periodontal disease (Scott and Irish, 2013). This testiﬁes to
the signiﬁcant change in the microﬂora of the oral cavity
and its interaction with physiological processes producing
dental ﬁlm, an organic layer protecting tooth enamel
against decay (Kaidonis and Townsend, 2016). We are
beginning to understand the evolution of
the oral

microﬂora based on data from ancient calculus (Warinner
et al., 2014). The whole microbiome of the human body is
changing. These changes and their impact are discussed in
the next section. Periodontal disease is related to cardio-
vascular diseases (Lockhart et al., 2012) thus showing that
changes in the oral cavity are indicative of changes in other
body systems.

CHANGES IN BODY HEIGHT

especially nutrition and sanitation.

In the past 100 years, or so, increases in body size were
abundantly reported. Reports from Europe and North
America indicate increases at rates 100e150 mm per cen-
tury (Van Wieringen, 1986). These were
typically
attributed to improvements in living conditions (Komlos,
1994),
In those
countries of the Southern Hemisphere where speciﬁc pop-
ulations had living conditions, and their changes, similar to
those in EuropedEuropean South Africans and European
Australiansdstature increases were of a much smaller
magnitude and happened at a much slower rate: about
50 mm per century (Henneberg and van den Berg, 1990;
Henneberg, 2001b). Finally, lacks of increases in some
states or countries went unreported due to the “publication
bias” (if we found no change we have nothing to report).
Since extremely differing living conditions produce only
about one
in stature
(w60e70 mm) among people of the same population
(Bielicki and Welon, 1982; Henneberg and Louw, 1998;
Henneberg and LaVelle, 1999), it is difﬁcult to interpret
changes by as much as 150 mm, or more, as just a simple
effect of improving living conditions. Improving at a
similar rate living conditions of European Australians or
“White” South Africans are consistent with about one
standard deviation difference between the poorest and the
richest people of the same population, the remainder of
changes reported from the Northern Hemisphere requires
additional
the

explanation. A likely explanation is

standard deviation difference

266 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

appearance during the growth of these people of some
changed interaction between growth hormone and its
receptors in growth plates of long bones (Henneberg,
2001b). Whether this phenomenon resulted from external
administration of additional doses of growth hormones
(Moizheson-Blank, 1991) or
from some alteration of
genetic endowment over the life of three to four generations
is still to be found. It is known that use of antibiotics
increases body size of domestic animals (Meek et al.,
2015). It may be that at least a part of body size increases
resulted from the use of antibiotics for humans. Due to
climatic differences between the areas of the Northern and
the Southern Hemisphere inhabited by people of European
origin, it may be that prevalence of infectious diseases
being treated with antibiotics was greater in the North than
in the South. Thus the exposure of children to antibiotics
was greater in the North. Results of this signiﬁcant increase
of body size in populations of some developed countries
may have gone beyond “bigger is better” and are verging
on the phenomenon of hypermorphosis (Bogin et al., 1992;
Shea, 1989) that is such an extensive increase in body size
that
it changes its proportions and may start posing
biomechanical and circulatory problems. Blood pressure is
positively correlated with body height
(Ulijaszek and
Henneberg, 2012) since the heart must produce greater
pressure to deliver blood to the brain located higher above
the ground (or rather above the heart itself). In the ﬁrst
decade of the 21st century, increases in body height ceased
in many countries (Staub and Rühli, 2013).

CHANGES OF ANATOMICAL
STRUCTURES

Changes occurring at the scale of decades or centuries are
not limited to overall body size. They also occur in speciﬁc
anatomical details. One of the simplest ones is the disap-
pearance of the thyroidea ima artery, a small branch of the
aorta (Bhatia et al., 2005). The other structural loss is the
lack of closure of the sacral canal known as the spina biﬁda
occulta. The prevalence of the open sacral canal at the S1
level doubled since the times of
the Roman Empire
(Henneberg and Henneberg, 1999) and even within the
20th century the prevalence continued to increase (Lee
et al., 2011; Solomon et al., 2009). Contrary to the
disappearance of certain structures, some are appearing
more frequently. The best-documented example is the
persistence of the median artery of the forearm into adult-
hood. Its prevalence more than doubled during the 20th
century (Henneberg and George, 1995). It seems that this
trend is a result of changes in the embryonic development
that allow embryonic conditions to persist into postnatal
life. Another example of such phenomenon is increasing
prevalence of tarsal coalitions (Solomon et al., 2003).
Changing frequencies of multiple renal arteries and veins

(Satyapal et al., 2000; Satyapal, 2003) may be a result of
altered level of the ascent of kidneys in an embryo. It is
possible that many other anatomical variants change their
prevalence in time spans of decades; such changes need to
be documented.

Together, described changes in anatomical structures
suggest alterations of the embryonic development, as some
of them are retentions of embryonic structures and others
represent incomplete development. At present it is difﬁcult
to ascertain whether
is
simpliﬁed or accelerated. More emphasis needs to be put by
anatomists,
and biologists on observing
anatomical variations, as they may be indicative of general
trends in human development.

the embryonic development

clinicians,

CHANGES IN NATURAL SELECTION

Natural selection operates through differential reproduction
of different alleles. Altered opportunity of an allele to be
passed to the next generation may happen at
the time
genetic material is halved in the meiosis and packaged into
gametes. Gametes may have different viability or motility
depending on the hereditary material they carry (Imsland
et al., 2012; Jumeau et al., 2015). They may also have
differential ability to fertilize or become fertilized. The
development of the embryo and then the fetus is strongly
controlled by genetic program that interacts with maternal
physiology and the intrauterine environment. Any errors in
the inherited developmental program may terminate the life
of an embryo or a fetus. This happens quite often (McNair
and Altman, 2012; Betts and King, 2001) and clearly does
not allow the genes of that fetus to be passed on to the next
generation. Postnatal ontogeny is still controlled by genetic
programs interacting with more complex extrauterine
environment that exposes infants and children to a host of
pathogens and potentially traumatic situations. A death at
this stage of ontogeny, if in any form related to the genetic
endowment, will prevent passing of those genes to the next
generation. Finally, adults may differ in their fecundity and
fertility due to genetic reasons that will differentiate
reproduction of relevant alleles. It is difﬁcult to measure
amounts of selection acting against speciﬁc alleles or
favoring other alleles but the total opportunity for selection
is easy to assess since it is a result of the variance in
reproductive performance of individuals (Crow, 1958). It is
practical
the variance in
mortality and in fertility.
is obvious that only the
heritable portion of reproductive variance can have selec-
tive effects:

to measure it as a sum of

It

I ¼ Vh2;

where I is the total intensity of selection, V is the variance
of reproductive performance, and h2 is the heritability of
reproductive events.

Heritability is about 0.25 for mortality (Cavalli-Sforza
and Bodmer, 1971) and about 0.10 for fertility (Henneberg,
1980). It seems that besides obvious pathologies affecting
fertility, there is very little genetic variance in childbearing.
Thus most of the selection occurs through differential
mortality.

It

is difﬁcult

to assess early intrauterine mortality
because miscarriages in the ﬁrst couple of weeks of preg-
nancies often are unnoticed or unreported. It can be esti-
mated, however, that only about one in two conceptions
will end up as a developed fetus (McNair and Altman,
2012). The rates of reported miscarriages (spontaneous
abortions) reach about 30% (McNair and Altman, 2012;

Biological Future of Humankind Chapter | 17 267

Wilcox et al., 1988; Goldstein, 1994). Therefore, there is a
lot of room for any genetic faults that affect early devel-
opment to be eliminated.

Postnatally, rates of newborn and infant mortality vary a
lot; about 150 years ago they could be as high as 20%.
Now, in developed countries, they have been reduced to a
fraction of a percent (http://www.who.int/gho/en/, accessed
15.10.15.). Mortality rates decline with age until early
adulthood when they start rising slowly reaching larger
values in senility (Fig. 17.1). Up until about the mid-19th
century, only about half of neonates reached age 15 years,
formally taken as the beginning of the reproductive life
span. Mortality during the reproductive years was still

Ibs
0.3

0

0.1

0.2

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Ibs

Japan
Italy
Denmark
Greece
Belgium
United Kingdom
Hungary
Serbia
United Arab Emirates
Latvia
Bulgaria
Barbados
Uruguay
Mauritius
Mexico
Turkey
Colombia
Belize
Peru
Viet Nam
Mongolia
Ecuador
Jamaica
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan
Guatemala
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bangladesh
Lao People's Democratic Republic
Cambodia
Pakistan
Togo
Benin
Liberia
Congo
Niger
Nigeria
Zambia
Guinea-Bissau
Burkina Faso

FIGURE 17.1 Values of the biological state index (Ibs) in all selected countries of the world in the 21st century. Own calculations based on UN and
World Health Organization (WHO) data. The red line indicates index value characteristic for most of human history prior to the 19th century.

268 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

signiﬁcant, so that only about 1/3 of those who survived
to the beginning of the reproductive life span reached
age 60. Such mortality provided ample opportunity for
natural selection both in the prereproductive and repro-
ductive life span. The overall opportunity for natural
selection acting during postnatal lifespan can be measured
using the biological state index that is a combination of
amounts of age-speciﬁc mortality (dx variable of a life
table) and a degree of reproductive loss (sx) of a person
dying before completion of the reproductive life span
(Henneberg, 1976; Stephan and Henneberg, 2001; Saniotis
and Henneberg, 2011) (Fig. 17.1):

Ibs ¼ 1   Sdxsx
loss

is

calculated

Age-speciﬁc

reproductive

by
expressing accumulated to a given age (x) annual age-
speciﬁc fertility rates ( fx) as a fraction of the total fertility
rate (TFR):

sx ¼ 1   ðSfxÞ=TFR

Values of sx for subadults are obviously equal to 1, and
for elderly they are zero, while within the reproductive age
range they are fractions. For instance, an sx value for a
person of age 30 years can be 0.2 in a population where
women delay their fertility or 0.6 where women start
having children early in their lives.

Biological state index is the probability with which an
individual born into a population will be able to fully

participate in the reproduction of the next generation, that
is, will be able to realize her fertility (Fig. 17.1). The lower
this probability,
the greater the opportunity for natural
selection. The index does not take into account heritable
variation in fertility. Considering that this variation is very
low (Henneberg, 1980) the bias of the index in assessing
overall opportunity for selection is small. The variance in
Darwinian ﬁtness (w) is proportional
to a ratio of in-
dividuals who are reproductively unsuccessful (1 Ibs) to
those who are successful (Ibs). High values of Ibs indicate a
lack of opportunity for natural selection through differential
mortality. Figs. 17.2 and 17.3 illustrate the difference
between mortality in the premodern era and at present and
the difference this produced in the opportunity for selection
in various portions of human life. As can be seen in
Fig. 17.2, opportunities for selection differ in various
periods of individual life being the highest in early intra-
uterine life and early postnatal life. Changes of mortality
during the last two centuries produced the greatest differ-
ences between earlier and recent
selective pressures
in those periods of life. Therefore, it can be expected that,
in terms of body structures, mutations causing alterations in
organogenesis and in differential growth of body parts can
accumulate the most.

However small, heritable variation in fertility has been
reduced in the last century in its possible selective impact
by birth control. The negative birth control obviously does
not allow natural fecundity differences to be expressed in

FIGURE 17.2 Postnatal mortality expressed as a probability of dying within a year (logarithmic scale) at various stages of the human biological history.
Data for Australopithecine, mountain sheep (an average mammal), and humans form Pompeii (from Saniotis, A., Henneberg, M., 2011. Medicine could be
constructing human bodies in the future. Medical Hypotheses 77 (4), 560e564.), and others (from World Health Organization (WHO) life tables.).

Biological Future of Humankind Chapter | 17 269

FIGURE 17.3 Survivorship from conception to a given age in the 1st century CE and in the current century. Estimations based on data from the
literature on miscarriages and postnatal mortality.

different total fertility rates, while the positive birth control
now allows people with limited or absent
fecundity
to produce offspring. Therefore, practically no genetic
differences in fecundity can be reﬂected in differences in
the number of offspring produced by parents.

Although the new situation of limited opportunity for
natural selection cannot be precisely translated into actual
amounts of selection acting on particular genes, it certainly
lowers rates at which detrimental mutations (as per prob-
able mutation effect) are eliminated. This in the ﬁrst
instance leads to increasing variation of human biological
characters, but in time may lead to general deterioration of
structure and function. Frequencies of alleles existing in the
gene pool are subject to drift when selection is not acting.
Although most populations in the modern world are large,
thus limiting action of drift, drift effects will eventually
become noticeable. In general, gene pools of humanity will
change in the future.

GENE FLOW INCREASING VARIATION IN
POPULATIONS

The gene pool of Homo sapiens remained linked across
the entire world for at least 150,000 years to the extent
that individuals from any speciﬁc population could have
fertile offspring with individuals from any other population,
no matter how distant. This situation has been maintained
mostly by the neighborly gene exchange in which people
from populations only a few kilometers apart exchange
genes. Such neighbor exchanges could produce chains

transporting genes over thousands of kilometers without
anyone moving further than some 10e20 km during their
lifetime (Brace, 2005; Henneberg, 2001a). This, although
sufﬁcient to maintain cohesion of gene pools across the
world, also allowed for some differentiation through ad-
aptations to local conditions because gene ﬂow was slow
and small. This differentiation is morphologically still
visible in skin color, body form, hair form, and facial fea-
tures of geographical populations. It also differentiated
heritable physiological adaptations, like lactose intolerance,
hemoglobinopathies related to malaria (thalassemia, sickle
cell anemia), and ABO blood group frequencies.

With the development of technologies supporting long-
distance travel that started, eg, in Europe in Classical An-
tiquity, gene ﬂow over a few thousand kilometers could
happen in the lifetime of one generationdsufﬁce it
to
mention annual trade expeditions of the Romans to the
Malabar Coast of India and to Nigeria. About 1000 years
ago Vikings, after settling Greenland, established settle-
ments in North America. Arabs were at that time trading
with Southern Africa, their trade penetrating along rivers
far inland, eg, to Mapungubwe on the Limpopo River and
slightly later to the Great Zimbabwe. From the time of
long-distance expeditions of Portuguese and Spanish
sailors in the 15th century, genes could ﬂow across the
Atlantic and from Western Europe to the Far East.

The ﬂow of genes across the world, due to interconti-
nental travel, has been signiﬁcantly enhanced by better
travel technologies as they developed from steamboats of
the 19th century to the fast jets of the 21st century. Any

270 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

gene present in any population (as well as any infectious
disease) can theoretically ﬁnd its way to any other
population in a matter of hours. The longest nonstop
take only 16e18 h.
intercontinental ﬂights nowadays
And yet we can still see phenotypic differences between
people whose ancestors lived on various continents, even
when themselves they reside in a new place. This is
because cultural, religious, and linguistic barriers limit gene
ﬂow to surrounding indigenous populations. Such barriers,
however, become slowly broken allowing mixing of the
genes from different continents. Eventually, due to long-
distance migrations, the human gene pool will become
more homogenous, and individual variation will become
the overwhelming portion of the total human variability.
Genetic diseases, therefore, will become similarly prevalent
in various countries requiring medical systems of particular
countries to adapt to new patterns of diseases. For instance,
heritable hemoglobinopathies may become rather common
in countries not exposed to malarial infections.

COEVOLUTION OF HUMANS AND
PATHOGENS

The human body can be considered to be a complex
microbiome (Blaser, 2014). In a body of a healthy person
there live multiple kilograms of a whole variety of
organisms that cause no harm since they have adapted to
the life inside the human organism, while our organism has
adapted to their presence. These coadaptations probably
required a period of Darwinian evolution of both the
macroorganism and the microorganism. Not all microor-
ganisms invading human body are, however, coadapted.
Some, probably of newer historical association with
humans, produce disturbances in normal operation of
human tissues. They might become coadapted in the future,
but currently these are considered to be infectious
pathogens. The immune system of the human body tries to
defend the organism against the infection, but does not
always succeed. Those humans who, by the virtue of
genetic variation, have greater immunity against such new
microorganism causing pathologies have greater chance to
pass their genes to the next generation. Invading pathogens
adapt to survive body defenses so that in time a balance
between virulence of pathogens and the immune system’s
ability to control infection is established. For example, it
appears that during the last several 1000 years since
Mycobacterium tuberculosis infected humans, such uneasy
balance has been established. Through time skeletal
signs of tuberculosis became less severe (Holloway et al.,
2011), increasing body immunity through good diet, rest,
and general health care allowed up to 80% of active cases
to be healed (Holloway et al., 2014) so that now only about
10% of
infected individuals develop active disease
with pathological signs. For a long time tuberculosis has

countries

(Holloway

been known as the “disease of poverty.” This is so
because in situations of poverty the immune system is
compromised by inadequate nutrition and bad living con-
ditions. Since the introduction of antibiotics in the late
1940s, tuberculosis prevalence declined at different rates in
various
2014) while
tuberculosis underwent evolution in which drug-
M.
resistant strains started to proliferate. This is partly a
result of inadequate treatment due to poor patient compli-
ance. Complete cure requires many months of steady
dosing with chemotherapeutics.
In poorer populations
many patients fail
to comply with lengthy treatment
allowing more drug-resistant bacteria to survive, prolifer-
ate, and infect other patients.

et

al.,

Even without poor compliance, evolution of pathogen
would occur because antibiotics, by their nature of acting
within live organisms, act by only minor alterations of
biochemical processes in cells, so that some alterations of
those processes by mutations are sufﬁcient to obviate the
action of the antibiotic. Since mutations are frequent and
bacteria reproduce profusely and fast, the probability of the
drug-insensitive mutation occurring at random is high
enough to be nearly certain. Appearance of drug-resistant
strains of Treponema pallidum causing syphilis is another
example of such evolutionary change.

Use of antibiotics also has consequences for ecosystems
of microbes well adapted to the life within human bodies.
Such microbial communities like gut microbiota become
disrupted and destabilized by the use of antibiotics to the
extent of altering food digestion and absorption (Million
et al., 2013). This has been used for over 50 years to
increase size of domesticated animals, but also has an
effect on humans.

Human microbiota, well adapted to our organisms,
are subject to changes not only from the use of antibiotics,
but also general alterations of the lifestyle (Tito et al.,
2012). Since microbiota and human organisms are
coadapted, any changes in the composition of microbiota
may impact on adaptations of our bodies. Although such
adaptations are likely to be primarily of immunological
and physiological nature, it may be suggested that some of
their effects will be reﬂected in bodily structures. The
described trends of body size may reﬂect in part changing
coadaptations to microorganisms living in our bodies.

ADAPTATIONS AT THE END OF LIFE

Switzerland is most famous for its liberal legislation for
assisted suicide of adult patients. The organization called
“Exit” (http://www.exit.ch/startseite/, accessed 21.07.15.)
allows peopledunder certain restrictions such as being a
moribund patientdto actively kill themselves, eg, in the
presence of relatives. This legal framework results in a
notable assisted-suicide-tourism showing the apparent

Independent of

desire for such an option.
individual
religious and other opinions this option acts on human
survivorship and shows the degree to which human medical
technology and social acceptance can interfere with
human survivorship, life expectancy, and so forth. More
importantly it shows to what degree medical knowledge
and social perception at this end of life are inﬂuencing our
perspective on survivorship and life at a particular stage
being worth living.

For the ﬁrst time in history, human life is not considered
the value to be protected at all costs. It indicates that the
main aim of the medical profession is to make human life
comfortable, not just prolong it. With the understanding of
the evolutionary context of human biological existence it
will be possible to formulate better criteria of comfortable
life and apply them in practice. In terms of the mechanisms
of evolution, medically assisted end of life is important
only insofar as it inﬂuences reproductive performance of
individuals concerned. In most cases, patients are of post-
reproductive age. In those situations when the end of life
comes early, it is now possible to preserve gametes for the
future use in assisted reproduction procedures and thus give
a patient a chance of reproducing her/his genes.

MISCARRIAGE RATE AND MATERNAL
AGE AS INFLUENCING FACTORS

At the other end of human lifespan intrauterine develop-
ment might be inﬂuenced by intentional and nonintentional
measures. The rate of miscarriages depends on gestational
agedmostly occurring before the ﬁrst 7e8 weeksdas well
as on mother’s age. Mother’s average age in industrialized
countries increased enormously in the last few years. The
positive effect of increased education in females in general
as well as general changes in human society in the last few
decades led to an increased age at ﬁrst pregnancy. This
again results in higher risk of miscarriage and chromosomal
defects (Romero et al., 2015). Miscarriages are correlated
with previous cases of miscarriages, thus in future, older
women will be more likely to have repetitive miscarriages.
To what extent these “natural abortions”dbesides inten-
tional termination of embryonic and fetal lifedwill affect
remains uncertain. Whether age alone
the gene pool
inﬂuences the type of
individual being miscarried is
unclear. Human intervention, however, even indirectly as a
side effect,
the
beginning of human life. This comes on top of the fact that
elder women (as well as older men to a certain extent)
show decreased fertilitydpossibly related to decreased
coital
frequency (Henneberg, 1977) again inﬂuencing
demographics in general. Comparison of birth intervals
between dates of wedding and of the birth of the ﬁrst child
after the wedding for young women marrying the ﬁrst time
and for widows who remarried at a much older age

inﬂuences this rate of survivorship at

Biological Future of Humankind Chapter | 17 271

TABLE 17.2 Length of the Intervals Between the Day
of Wedding and the Day the First Child (all data in
years) of the Couple Was Born (Protogenetic
Intervals) by Women Marrying for the First Time and
for the Second Time in Rural 19th Century Poland

First Marriage

(N [ 192)

Second Marriage

(N [ 42)

Birth Interval

Mean

Stdev

1.9

1.3

Age

23.0

4.4

Birth Interval

1.6

1.1

Age

36.6

13.0

Note the difference in the age at marriage; all data in years.
Data from Henneberg, M., 1977. Biological dynamics of a Polish rural
community in the 19th century. II System of mating and fertility. Przeglad
Antropologiczny 43, 245e247, recalculated.

indicates that it was duration of marriage rather than age
that determined birth spacing (Table 17.2). In addition, the
precise timing of conception seems to inﬂuence miscarriage
rates in women with a miscarriage history (Gray et al.,
1995). Taking this into account, social changes in human
behavior as seen in older age of ﬁrst pregnancies act
indirectly onto a high degree of “selection” inﬂuencing
human morphology and genetics.

INFLUENCE BY IN VITRO FERTILIZATION

Evolution of technological possibilities allowing various
degrees of “nonnatural” reproductive practices can inﬂu-
ence human health and disease in the future. It is already
possible to freeze gametes (both male and female) for a
long time (even after the death of one partner). Major
companies even support
this (http://www.nbcnews.com/
news/us-news/perk-facebook-apple-now-pay-women-freeze-
eggs-n225011, accessed 15.10.15.)
to allow especially
females to better decide at which part of their lives they
want
to reproduce, mostly independently of natural re-
strictions. There will be thus in future an increased
discrepancy between biological age of parents (which
inﬂuences their behavior and physical ﬁtness) and age of
the gametes, and eventually offspring. This may have
positive and negative effects; certain diseases such as
autism (Sandin et al., 2016) are more frequent when parents
are older, whereas other studies show that children of old
couples are of different
intelligence (Malsaspina et al.,
again, ongoing evolution of medical
2005). Thus
technologies and social perception of what
is being
“normal” will directly affect human disease and health in
the future;
in vitro
itself means a higher
fertilization (IVF)
risk of birth
defects and other
risk to the offspring as discussed
extensively and contradictorily. With IVF technologies it

the fact whether

independent of

272 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

is possible for individuals, or couples, who were previously
infertile, to have offspring. If these individuals had genetic
defects causing infecundity, these defects can be passed to
their IVF-produced offspring.

INFLUENCES OF CHANGES IN FAMILY
STRUCTURE

Surrogate motherhood is becoming a common phenome-
non. Embryonic and fetal development is determined by an
interaction between genetic regulation of growth and the
effects of maternal intrauterine environment that inﬂuences
epigenetic phenomena. Obviously, implanting an embryo
produced by the union of two gametes of speciﬁc in-
dividuals in the uterus of a third person will lead to the
development of a fetus different
from the one that
would have developed in the womb of its genetic mother.
A phenotype of a child will be altered. These alterations
may be for the better; the fact, however, remains that three
persons, rather than two, will have an input.

Collective parenting, which was an important factor in
the past, is increasingly disappearing in modern Western
societies. Various factors such as migration of relatives,
separation, and increased workload, lead to less related
people being responsible for someone’s parenting. Due to
changes in the social role of marriages, greater divorce
rates, gender equity, and professionalism of women, single
motherhood (and also to a certain extent increasingly single
fatherhood) is a common recent phenomenon. Although
this is unlikely to have direct genetic consequences, it may
alter the ontogeny and social maturation of children that
will have behavioral consequences for future mating prac-
tices. With these phenomena the number of adults a child
has closer relations with is very limited, and advice to
mothers regarding the needs of a growing child may be
limited to what is generally available from health author-
ities with less personalized input of older relatives. With
increasing mobility of individuals, when children grow up
there is a greater chance they will ﬁnd partners outside of
their own cultural groups. Besides increasing gene ﬂow, it
may lead to differences in the views on child rearing in the
next generation that can inﬂuence their physical develop-
ment. One simple example is diet; vegetarians have less of
a chance to develop obesity (Grantham et al., 2014).

CHANGES IN HEALTH AND DISEASE
DEFINITION AS A CONSEQUENCE

All the alterations of human body morphology and genetics
listed earlier as well as the environment, including social
perception, lead to a change in human health and disease
deﬁnitions.

Categorization of human disease is fundamental

medicine. Common ways doing so are, eg,

in
the World

Health Organization (WHO) international categorization of
disease (http://www.who.int/classiﬁcations/icd/en/, accessed
15.10.15.). This system is used to categorize and explain
the main etiology of a disease or a syndrome, and for
statistical and billing purposes. It
is a well-established
system of categorization. However, with changes in
understanding disease processes (including new genetic
information) and with improved evolutionary explanations,
one should consider a novel way to classify disease. This
has been proposed by Stearns and Medzithov (2016) who
suggested a very elaborate framework of novel disease
classiﬁcation, which would use more fundamental causes
as criteria.

Disease etiology (underlying factors) is changing as
well as deﬁnitions of disease or health itself. Deﬁning
disease is actually different from deﬁning health. Using
WHO deﬁnition of healthd“Health is a state of complete
physical, mental and social well-being and not merely the
absence of disease or inﬁrmity” (Preamble of the WHO,
1946)done can address the following.

Taking the processes of ongoing evolution discussed in
this chapter into account, one can assume that particular
mental and social well-being as a proxy for health is even
more ﬂuctuating/ﬂexible than disease itself. One such
example would be smoking. Widely regarded as socially
acceptable in the mid-20th century even for pregnant
women, nowadaysdfor obvious, good medical reasonsd
smoking is heavily banned, and thus a heavy smoker may
not feel social well-being and will not be healthy based on
the WHO deﬁnition, independent of whether or not the
smoker’s habit makes him or her physically sick, such as
from lung carcinoma or chronic coughing. Homosexuality
in the past had been regarded as a disease; now, in most
Western countries it has been completely legalized and is
regarded as a normal variation of sexual orientation. Other
examples include personal use of cannabis and other drugs
used in indigenous populations but not allowed in certain
Western societies. The global outreach and broad
deﬁnition of
the WHO health approach and medical
disease classiﬁcation thus can serve as an indicator of
how frameworks on health and disease in general, both in
social and medical environment, depend on zeitgeist rather
than only on strict disease classiﬁcation. Some classiﬁca-
tions of disease may, due to ongoing evolution, disappear
in the future mostly or completely. Preimplantation di-
agnostics (eg, just recently approved by Swiss voters in
2015) may eradicate completely those major genetic dis-
eases that are diagnosable and congenital malformations.
On the other hand, with improvements of medical di-
agnostics, a couple deciding to carry out a baby with major
genetic defects will be regarded by the society as abnormal
because they do not use the possibility of abortion in such a
case, and thus it will not feel healthy because of social
stigmatization,
they are

independent of

the fact

that

physically healthy. The introduction of iodized salt
in
Switzerland (Papageorgopoulou et al., 2012), a classic
example of a public health measure, lead to the nearly
complete disappearance of cretinism in these regions. Other
major impact diseases such as smallpox or HIVdby human
intervention or behaviordappear and disappear in short
periods.

A new framework of disease classiﬁcation that takes
evolutionary rather than pure single-factored, mechanistic
criteria into account would be more up to date and take the
issues raised earlier into account. In the future human
disease deﬁnitions will be even more ﬂuctuating and thus
more complex; by adding an evolutionary perspective at
least part of this challenge could be overcome.

To summarize, disease (and health) classiﬁcations and
relevance will be adjusted, eg, due to the ongoing changes
in medical intervention (leading to the eradication of a
particular condition), body morphology and genetics,
evolution of pathogens, or changes in social perception.
Thus evolutionary medicine, by addressing ongoing
evolution of intrinsic and extrinsic factors inﬂuencing hu-
man health, can contribute to a differentiated perspective
for the understanding of human nature, its major medical
challenges, and future.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors would like to acknowledge the Mäxi Foundation.

REFERENCES

Betts, D.H., King, W.A., 2001. Genetic regulation of embryo death and

senescence. Theriogenology 55, 171e191.

Bhatia, K., Ghabriel, M.N., Henneberg, M., 2005. Anatomical varia-
tions in the branches of the human aortic arch: a recent study of a
South Australian population. Folia Morphologica (Warsz) 64 (3),
217e223.

Bielicki, T., Welon, Z., 1982. Growth data as indicators of social in-
equalities: the case of Poland. American Journal of Physical Anthro-
pology 25, 153e167.

Blaser, M.J., 2014. The microbiome revolution. Journal of Clinical

Investigation 124, 4162e4165.

Bogin, B., Wall, M., MacVean, R.B., 1992. Longitudinal analysis of
adolescent growth of ladino and Mayan school children in Guatemala:
effects of environment and sex. American Journal of Physical An-
thropology 89 (4), 447e457.

Brace, C.L., 1964. The probable mutation effect. The American Naturalist

98, 453e455.

Brace, C.L., 2005. Race Is a Four Letter Word. Oxford University Press,

New York.

Brace, C.L., Rosenberg, K.R., Hunt, K.D., 1987. Gradual change in human
tooth size in the late pleistocene and post-pleistocene. Evolution
705e720.

Cavalli-Sforza, L.L., Bodmer, W.F., 1971. The Genetics of Human

Populations. W. H. Freeman, San Francisco.

Biological Future of Humankind Chapter | 17 273

Collard, M., Wood, B., 2015. Deﬁning the genus Homo. In: Henke, W.,
Tattersall, I. (Eds.), Handbook of Paleoanthropology. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin Heidelberg.

Crow, J.F., 1958. Some possibilities for measuring selection intensities in

man. Human Biology 30, 1e13.

Debetz, G.F., 1960. Certains aspects des transformations somatiques
de l’Homo sapiens. In: Communiques de la Delegation Sovietique au Ve
Congres International des Sciences Anthropologiques, Moscow, p. 25.

Debetz, G.F., 1964. Essai de determination du poids des hommes vivants
d’apres les dimensions des os longs. In: VIIe Congr. Internat. Sci.
Anthrop. Ethnol., vol. 11, pp. 243e250.

Goldstein, S.R., 1994. Embryonic death in early pregnancy: a new look at

the ﬁrst trimester. Obstetrics & Gynecology 84, 294e297.

Grantham, J.P., Staub, K., Rühli, F.J., Henneberg, M., 2014. Modern diet
and metabolic varianceda recipe for disaster? Nutrition Journal 6,
13e15.

Gray, R.H., Simpson, J.L., Kambic, R.T., Queenan, J.T., Mena, P.,
Perez, A., Barbato, M., 1995. Timing of conception and the risk of
spontaneous abortion among pregnancies occurring during the use of
natural family planning. American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecol-
ogy 172, 1567e1572.

Henneberg, M., 1976. Reproductive possibilities and estimations of the
biological dynamics of earlier human populations. Journal of Human
Evolution 5, 41e48.

Henneberg, M., 1977. Biological dynamics of a Polish rural community in
the 19th century. II System of mating and fertility. Przeglad Antro-
pologiczny 43, 245e247.

Henneberg, M., 1980. Natural selection through differential fertility in
human populations: quantitative evaluation of selection intensity.
Przeglad Antropologiczny 46, 21e60.

Henneberg, M., 1988. Decrease of human skull size in the Holocene.

Human Biology 395e405.

Henneberg, M., 1998. Evolution of the human brain: is bigger better?
Clinical and Experimental Pharmacology and Physiology 25,
1640e1681.

Henneberg, R.J., Henneberg, M., 1999. Variation in the closure of the
in the skeletal sample from Pompeii, Italy 79 AD.

sacral canal
Perspectives in Human Biology 4, 177e188.

Henneberg, M., 2001a. The gradual eurytopic evolution of humans: not
from Africa alone. In: Indriati, E. (Ed.), Man: Past, Present, and
Future. Bigraf Publishing, Yogyakarta, Indonesia, pp. 42e52.

Henneberg, M., 2001b. Secular trends in body height e indicator of
general improvement in living conditions or of a change in speciﬁc
factors? In: Dasgupta, P., Hauspie, R. (Eds.), Perspectives in Human
Growth, Development and Maturation. Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Boston, pp. 159e168.

Henneberg, M., 2006. The rate of human morphological microevolution
and taxonomic diversity of hominids (Essays in memory of Andrzej
Wiercinski). Studies in Historical Anthropology 4, 49e59.

Henneberg, M., Budnik, A., Pezacka, M., Puch, A.E., 1984. The
mechanism of brachycephalization: differential susceptibility to in-
fectious diseases during childhood. Przeglad Antropologiczny 50,
325e333.

Henneberg, M., George, B.J., 1995. Possible secular trend in the incidence
of an anatomical variant: median artery of the forearm. American
Journal of Physical Anthropology 96 (4), 329e334.

Henneberg, M., Louw, G.J., 1998. Cross-sectional survey of growth
of urban and rural “cape coloured” schoolchildren: anthropometry

274 PART | I Biological Basis of Human Diversity

and functional
73e85.

tests. American Journal of Human Biology 10,

Henneberg, M., van den Berg, E.R., 1990. Test of socioeconomic causa-
tion of secular trend: stature changes among favored and oppressed
South Africans are parallel. American Journal of Physical Anthro-
pology 83, 459e465.

Meek, R.W., Hrushi, V., Piddock, L.J.V., 2015. Nonmedical uses of an-
tibiotics: time to restrict their use? PLoS Biology 13 (10), e1002266.
Million, M., Thuny, F., Angelakis, E., Casalta, J.P., Giorgi, R., Habib, G.,
Raoult, D., 2013. Lactobacillus reuteri and Escherichia coli in the
human gut microbiota may predict weight gain associated with van-
comycin treatment. Nutrition & Diabetes 9 (3), e87.

Henneberg, M., LaVelle, M., 1999. Varying effects of socioeconomic
categories on the growth of urban and rural South African ‘Cape
Coloured’ boys. Perspectives in Human Biology 4, 41e49.

Moishezon-Blank, N., 1991. Commentary oft he possible effect of
hormones in food on human growth. Medical Hypotheses 38,
273e277.

Holloway, K.L., Henneberg, R.J., de Barros Lopes, M., Henneberg, M.,
2011. Evolution of human tuberculosis: a systematic review and meta-
analysis of paleopathological evidence. Homo 62, 402e458.

Holloway, K.L., Staub, K., Rühli, F., Henneberg, M., 2014. Lessons from
history of socioeconomic improvements: a new approach to treating
multi-drug-resistant tuberculosis. Journal of Biosocial Science 46 (5),
600e620.

Imsland, F., Feng, C., Boije, H., Bed’hom, B., Fillon, V., Dorshorst, B.,
Rubin, C.J., Liu, R., Gao, Y., Gu, X., Wang, Y., Gurichon, D.,
Zody, M.C., Zecchin, W., Vieaud, A., Tixier-Boichard, M., Hu, X.,
Hallbook, F., Li, N., Andersson, L., 2012. The Rose-comb mutation
in chickens constitutes a structural
rearrangement causing both
altered comb morphology and defective sperm motility. PLoS
Genetics 8 (6).

Jumea, F., Com, E., Lane, L., Duek, P., Lagarrigue, M., Lavigne, R.,
Guillot, L., Rondel, K., Gateau, A., Melaine, N., Guével, B.,
Sergeant, N., Mitchell, V., Pineau, C., 2015. Human spermatozoa as a
model
the
chromosome-centric human proteome project. Journal of Proteome
Research 14, 3606e3620.

for detecting missing proteins

in the context of

Kaidonis, J., Townsend, G., 2016. The ‘sialoemicrobialedental complex’
in oral health and disease. Annals of Anatomy e Anatomischer
Anzeiger (in press).

Papageorgopoulou, C., Rühli, F., Staub, K., 2012. Hypothyreoidism in
Switzerland. In: Harbeck, M., von Heyking, K., Schwarzberg, H.
(Eds.), Sickness, Hunger, War, and Religion in: Multidisciplinary
Perspectives (vol. 1, p. 3). RCC Perspect.

Preamble to the Constitution of the World Health Organization as Adopted
by the International Health Conference, New York, 19e22 June, 1946
signed on 22 July 1946 by the representatives of 61 States (Ofﬁcial
Records of the World Health Organization, no. 2, p. 100) and entered
into force on 7 April 1948.

Romero,

S.T., Geiersbach, K.B.,

Paxton, C.N., Rose, N.C.,
Schisterman, E.F., Branch, D.W., Silver, R.M., 2015. Differentiation
of genetic abnormalities in early pregnancy loss. Ultrasound in Ob-
stetrics & Gynecology 45 (1), 89e94.

Sandin, S., Schendel, D., Magnusson, P., Hultman, C., Surén, P.,
Susser, E., Grønborg, T., Gissler, M., Gunnes, N., Gross, R.,
Henning, M., Bresnahan, M., Sourander, A., Hornig, M., Carter, K.,
Francis, R., Parner, E., Leonard, H., Rosanoff, M., Stoltenberg, C.,
Reichenberg, A., 2016. Autism risk associated with parental age and
with increasing difference in age between the parents. Molecular
Psychiatry (in press).

Saniotis, A., Henneberg, M., 2011. Medicine could be constructing human

bodies in the future. Medical Hypotheses 77 (4), 560e564.

Satyapal, K.S., 2003. The renal veins: a review. European Journal of

Komlos, J. (Ed.), 1994. Stature, Living Standards, and Economic Devel-

Anatomy Suppl. 1, 43e52.

opment. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Lee, Y.C., Solomon, L.B., Rühli, F.J., Schiess, R., Öhrström, L.,
Sullivan, T., Alkadhi, H., Henneberg, M., 2011. Conﬁrmation of
microevolutionary increase in spina biﬁda occulta among Swiss birth
cohorts. European Spine Journal 20 (5), 776e780.

Lockhart, P.B., Bolger, A.F., Papapanou, P.N., Osinbowale, O.,
Trevisan, M., Levison, M.E., Taubert, K.A., Newburger, J.W.,
Gornik, H.L., Gewitz, M.H., Wilson, W.R., Smith Jr., S.C.,
Baddour, L.M., American Heart Association Rheumatic Fever,
Endocarditis, and Kawasaki Disease Committee of the Council on
Cardiovascular Disease in the Young, Council on Epidemiology and
Prevention, Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease, Council on
Clinical Cardiology, 2012. Periodontal disease and atherosclerotic
vascular disease: does the evidence support an independent associa-
tion? Circulation 125, 2520e2544.

Malaspina, D., Reichenberg, A., Weiser, M., Fenning, S., Davidosn, M.,
Hartap, S., Wolitzky, R., Rabinowitz, J., Susser, E., Knoberl, H.Y.,
2005. Paternal age and intelligence:
implications for age-related
genomic changes in male germ cells. Psychiatric Genetics 16,
117e125.

McNair, T., Altman, K., 2012. Miscarriage and recurrent pregnancy loss.
In: Joseph Hurt, K., Guile, M.W., Bienstock, J.L., Fox, H.E.,
Wallach, E.E. (Eds.), The Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics. Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.

Satyapal, K.S., Haffejee, A.A., Singh, B., Ramsaroop, L., Robbs, J.V.,
incidence and

Kalideen, J.M., 2000. Additional
morphometry. Surgical and Radiologic Anatomy 23, 33e38.

renal arteries:

Scott, G.R., Irish, J.D., 2013. Anthropological Perspectives on Tooth
Morphology: Genetics, Evolution, Variation. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.

Schwidetzky,
188e195.

I., 1962. Das grazilisierungs problem. Homo 13 (3),

Shea, B.T., 1989. Heterochrony in human evolution:

the case for
neoteny reconsidered. Yearbook of Physical Anthropology 32,
69e101.

Solomon, L.B., Rühli, F.J., Taylor, J., Ferris, L., Pope, R., Henneberg, M.,
2003. A dissection and computer tomograph study of tarsal coalitions
in 100 cadaver
feet. Journal of Orthopaedic Research 21 (2),
352e358.

Solomon, B., Rühli, F.J., Lee, Y.C., Henneberg, M., 2009. Secular trend in
the opening of the sacral canal: an Australian study. Spine 34 (3),
244e248.

Staub, K., Rühli, F.J., 2013. From growth in height to growth in breadth:
the changing body shape of Swiss conscripts since the late 19th
century and possible endocrine explanations. General and Compara-
tive Endocrinology 1 (188), 9e15.

Stearns, S., Medzhitov, R., 2016. Evolutionary Medicine. Sinauer.
Stephan, C.N., Henneberg, M., 2001. Medicine may be reducing the hu-

man capacity to survive. Medical Hypotheses 57 (5), 633e637.

Biological Future of Humankind Chapter | 17 275

Strzałko, J., Henneberg, M., Piontek, J., 1980. In: Human Populations as

Biological Systems, a Monograph. Polish Scientiﬁc, Warsaw.

Tito, R.Y., Knights, D., Metcalf, J., Obregon-Tito, A.J., Cleeland, L.,
Najar, F., Roe, B., Reinhard, K., Sobolik, K., Belknap, S.,
Foster, M., Spicer, P., Knight, R., Lewis Jr., C.M., 2012. Insights
from characterizing extinct human gut microbiomes. PLoS One 7
(12), e51146.

Ulijaszek, S.J., Henneberg, M., 2012. Results of epidemiological studies of
blood pressure are biased by continuous variation in arm size related
to body mass. Human Biology, 437e444.

Van Wierigen, J.C., 1986. Secular growth changes. In: Falkner, F.,
Tanner, J.M. (Eds.), Human Growth. A Comprehensive Treatise.

Methodology, Ecological, Genetic and Nutritional Effects on Growth.
Plenum, New York, pp. 307e331.

Warinner, C., Hendy, J., Speller, C., Cappellini, E., Fischer, R.,
Trachsel, C., Arneborg, J., Lynnerup, N., Craig, O.E., Swallow, D.M.,
Fotakis, A., Christensen, R.J., Olsen, J., Liebert, A., Montalva, N.,
Fiddyment, S., Mackie, M., Bouwman, A., Rühli, F., Gilbert, M.T.P.,
Collins, M.J., 2014. Direct evidence of milk consumption from
ancient human dental calculus. Scientiﬁc Reports 27 (4), 7104.

Wilcox, A.J., Weinberg, C.R., O’Connor,

J.F., Baird, D.D.,
Schlatterer, J.P., Canﬁeld, R.E., Armstrong, E.G., Nisula, B.C., 1988.
Incidence of early loss of pregnancy. The New England Journal of
Medicine 319, 189e194.

Chapter 18

Gene-Culture Models for the Evolution
of Altruistic Teaching

K. Aoki1, J.Y. Wakano1 and M.W. Feldman2
1Meiji University, Tokyo, Japan; 2Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States

Universities are places of learning rather than teaching.

Murray Gell-Mann, at the Santa Fe Institute, 1985

INTRODUCTION

Models with Genetic and Cultural
Transmission
In classical quantitative genetics,
the phenotype of an
offspring is regarded as the sum of components due to the
offspring’s genotype,
the offspring’s environment, and
possible interactions between these. The offspring’s geno-
type is, of course, a function of its parents’ genotypes. Its
environment, however, could be interpreted as random and/
or peculiar to that offspring or as some properties of its
parents, and transmission of
these properties involves
teaching, learning, and some combination of these.

In the ﬁrst model of dual cultural and genetic inheri-
tance, Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman (1973) expressed the
phenotype of an offspring of genotype g whose parent had
mean phenotype fm as fgm, where

fgm ¼ ag þ 2bgfm þ ε;

(18.1)

where ε is a random variable, ag is a contribution to the
offspring’s phenotype by its genotype g, and bg measures
the contribution to the phenotype of an offspring of geno-
type g due to its parents’ phenotypes. Thus fgm can be
termed the “phenogenotype” of this offspring.1 The varia-
tion in this framework was regarded as continuous. The

1. To the authors’ knowledge, the ﬁrst use of the term “phenogenotype,”
signaling dual inheritance, is in Uyenoyama et al. (1979).

model speciﬁed by Eq. (18.1) allows allele frequencies to
remain constant, and these frequencies contribute to the dy-
namics of phenotypic variation; at phenotypic equilibrium,
correlations between relatives can be computed and depend
on these allele frequencies. Note that since g is a property
of the offspring here, parental genotypes do not directly
inﬂuence the transmission of their phenotypes.

For discrete valued traits, the earliest models of cultural
transmission and evolution (Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman,
1981) posited a dichotomous trait with types 1 and 2. Under
purely vertical transmission, each of the four biparental
pairs is associated with a probability that their offspring is
of type 1. These probabilities, b3, b2, b1, b0, for parental
pairs (1,1),
respectively, deﬁne the
vertical cultural transmission and determine the evolution
of the frequency of type 1 in the population. The trans-
mission rates bi confound teaching by parents and learning
by their offspring and do not
involve any biological
contribution to the transmission process.

(1,2),

(2,1),

(2,2),

Besides vertical transmission described by the bi, the
probability that an individual acquires type 1 might depend
on that individual contacting peers or nonparental members
of the parental generation. In these cases, horizontal and
oblique transmission, respectively, transmission of type 1
depends on its frequency in the respective generations
(Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman, 1981) and can be regarded
as a consequence of social
interactions. Again, genetic
properties of the participants are not included in the rules of
transmission.

A simple and direct way to introduce genetics into the
transmission of a dichotomous cultural trait was proposed
by Feldman and Cavalli-Sforza (1976). They considered
phenogenotypes to be a combination of a dichotomous trait
with phenotypes 1 and 2 and genotypes at single biallelic

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00018-1
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

279

280 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

locus: AA1, AA2, Aa1, Aa2, aa1, aa2. (Phenotype here is
equivalent to the corresponding variant of the dichotomous
trait.) There are then 36 possible parental couples, and one
member of the couple is designated as “the teacher.” If the
teaching parent has phenotype 1, then the probabilities that
offspring of genotypes AA, Aa, and aa are also of
phenotype 1 can be written b1, b2, b3, respectively, while if
the teaching parent is of type 2 these probabilities are c1, c2,
c3, respectively. This phenogenotypic transmission scheme
the offspring’s genotype and the
explicitly posits that
teaching parent’s phenotype determine
rate of
transmission. Again,
the “teacher’s” genotype does not
appear. Feldman and Cavalli-Sforza went on to explore the
interaction between these phenogenotypic transmission
rates and direct selection on the phenotypic dichotomy of
the offspring. A different version of
this framework,
without the speciﬁc introduction of the teacher’s phenotype
and ignoring ﬁtness differentials among phenotypes, but
with contributions from the offspring’s genotype and the
parental couples’ phenotypes, was analyzed in Feldman
et al.
(2013), where the focus once again was on
correlations between relatives.

the

Social Learning and Altruistic Teaching
All of the models described above involve some form of
social learning, whether the social derives from parents,
peers, or other subgroups in the population. Social learning
is a generic term for the acquisition of knowledge or a
behavior or a skill from another individual, eg, by local
enhancement, imitation, etc. It is usually contrasted with
individual learning, which occurs without input from other
individual(s); that is without social interaction, eg, by trial
and error. Teaching is a special case of social learning in
which the other individual(s) actively participate(s) in the
information transfer. The transmission models described
above do not include any costs to offspring of the cognitive
machinery that allows them to learn or of the machinery
that allows parents to teach.

There is a vigorous debate on how to deﬁne and identify
teaching in nonhuman animals, and indeed also in humans
(eg, Caro and Hauser, 1992; Hoppitt et al., 2008; Byrne and
Rapaport, 2011; Hewlett et al., 2011). Using an operational
deﬁnition (see later in this chapter), Caro and Hauser (1992;
see also Hoppitt et al., 2008) review the possible examples
of teaching in nonhuman animals. In these putative cases,
which occur among diverse taxonomic orders and often
involve parents teaching their offspring,
the teacher(s)
could be one parent, usually the mother, or both parents.
Interestingly,
teaching is at best extremely rare in our
closest biological relative, the chimpanzee.

In its barest essentials,

the operational deﬁnition of
teaching from Caro and Hauser (1992; see also Fogarty

et al., 2011) entails that a knowledgeable individual (the
“teacher”) alters its behavior in the presence of a naïve
individual (the “pupil”), incurring a cost to do so, and
thereby promotes social learning by that naïve individual.
The cognitive processes that support teaching, given that it
occurs, are likely to differ across the taxonomic orders
(Hoppitt et al., 2008). Hence, the comparative approach,
based on this operational deﬁnition, may not be “helpful in
understanding the evolution of the distinctively human at-
tributes” of teaching (Byrne and Rapaport, 2011). Never-
theless,
this operational deﬁnition provides a useful
framework for modeling the evolution of teaching, because
mathematical models addressing the evolution of a
behavior are usually formulated in terms of who does what
to whom with what costs and beneﬁts, rather than in terms
of intentions and motivations. If teaching entails a ﬁtness
cost to the teacher and a ﬁtness beneﬁt to the pupil, then it
can be regarded as an altruistic act (Aoki and Feldman,
1987; Hoppitt et al., 2008).

Competition Between Teachers
and Nonteachers
Fogarty et al. (2011) modeled the competition between two
genetically determined types, teacher and nonteacher, in a
species where social learning is already in place (Wakano
et al., 2004; Aoki et al., 2005; Wakano and Aoki, 2006).
They assume that a naïve individual is more likely to ac-
quire beneﬁcial information by social learning when its
exemplar is a teacher than a nonteacher. Moreover, they
introduce two costs, a ﬁxed cognitive cost that is incurred
by all teachers and is associated with the neural substrate
for teaching, and a behavioral cost due to the act of
teaching that affects only teachers carrying the beneﬁcial
information. Their model permits arbitrary degrees of
relatedness between the teacher and the pupil, which entails
an approximation. The inclusive ﬁtness beneﬁt that results
from the relatives of a teacher being more likely than the
relatives of a nonteacher to acquire the beneﬁcial infor-
mation is found to be a crucial factor governing the evo-
lution of teaching.

More speciﬁcally, Fogarty et al. (2011) deﬁne the

ﬁtness of teachers as

Wt ¼ PðljtÞw0wict þ ð1   PðljtÞÞw0   cc;

(18.2)
where PðljtÞ is the probability that a teacher acquires the
beneﬁcial information, w0 is the baseline ﬁtness, wi is rela-
tive viability of an individual with the beneﬁcial informa-
tion, cc is the cognitive cost to teachers, and ct represents
the cost of the teaching act. Similarly, the ﬁtness of non-
teachers is deﬁned as

Wnt ¼ PðljntÞw0wi þ ð1   PðljntÞÞw0;

(18.3)

Gene-Culture Models for the Evolution of Altruistic Teaching Chapter | 18 281

where PðljntÞ is the probability that a nonteacher acquires
the beneﬁcial information. Then, a two-timescale approach
is apparently used to derive the one-dimensional dynamical
equation

t0 ¼

tWt

tWt þ ð1   tÞWnt

(18.4)

describing the change in the frequency of teachers, t, per
generation. Eqs. (18.2)e(18.4) correspond to Eqs. (2a),
(2b), and (6), respectively, of their paper. Fogarty et al.
(2011) conclude that there are no internal equilibria of
Eq. (18.3). That is, teachers and nonteachers cannot coexist
at equilibrium, and teachers will replace nonteachers if they
are able to invade.

Background for the New Model
In this chapter, we adopt many of the assumptions made by
Fogarty et al. (2011), but we focus on one particular but
important type of kin relationship, namely parentechild,
and formulate coevolutionary dynamical models in the
frequencies of the four phenogenotypes, namely, teacher
and nonteacher with and without the beneﬁcial information.
Empirical surveys of
teaching in nonhuman animals
mentioned earlier suggest that in a signiﬁcant fraction of the
possible examples parents teach their offspring. This is
understandable in the light of inclusive ﬁtness theory
(Hamilton, 1964), since parents are closely related to their
offspring, and the beneﬁt accruing to the offspring is ex-
pected to be large relative to the cost suffered by the par-
ent(s). Hence, the parentechild relationship is arguably the
most important setting in which the evolution of teaching
would occur. Our analyses of the stability of ﬁxation states
suggest that internal equilibria, stable and unstable, may be
the rule rather than the exception. Such dynamics are
usually not captured by the standard inclusive ﬁtness ar-
guments such as have been employed by Fogarty et al.
(2011;
and Feldman, 1978 and
Uyenoyama and Feldman, 1981).

see Cavalli-Sforza

We are particularly interested in the balance of selective
forces that resulted in the emergence of teaching in hominids.
There is evidence suggesting that teaching of stone-tool
production skills occurred during the Upper Paleolithic.
Archaeological studies of reﬁtted lithic materials from sites
in Europe and Japan suggest that expert knappers may have
taught such skills to novices. For example, good blades were
apparently produced not for immediate use but so that
novices could observe the operational sequence (Takakura,
2013 and references therein).

If teaching evolved in hominids after the separation
from the chimpanzee lineage, then it would have been in
the context of a hunter-gatherer life history. Anthropolog-
ical
research on present-day hunter-gatherers (Hewlett

et al., 2011; Hewlett, 2013) suggests a developmental
change in social
learning from a reliance on vertical
transmission (learning from parents) to oblique (learning
from other members of the parental generation) and/or
horizontal
transmission (learning from members of the
same generation). Hence, we also consider the effects of
incorporating oblique or horizontal transmission, which can
occur between nonkin and might be expected to disfavor
the evolution of teaching. In addition, temporal environ-
mental variability should not be neglected, as theoretical
work has repeatedly demonstrated its important role in the
evolution of learning in general (eg, Boyd and Richerson,
1985; Rogers, 1988; Feldman et al., 1996).

BASIC HAPLOID MODEL WITH ASEXUAL
REPRODUCTION AND UNIPARENTAL
TRANSMISSION (ARUT)
We now introduce a minimal model for the evolution of
teaching that incorporates the basic factors in their simplest
form. These factors include two different costs to teaching
(Fogarty et al., 2011), vertical (parentechild) transmission
of an adaptive phenotype (Creanza et al., 2013), and
environmental change. The explicit results derived from a
full analysis of this model provide a baseline against which
the effects of introducing more realistic assumptionsd
sexual reproduction with biparental transmission, oblique/
horizontal transmissiondcan be compared.

Model Description
The model to be described here posits asexual reproduction
and uniparental transmission (ARUT).

Assume an inﬁnite population of haploid individuals
that have discrete generations, reproduce asexually, and are
capable of social learning. A genetic locus with two alleles,
A and a, determines whether an individual is a teacher or a
nonteacher, respectively. Each individual
is also distin-
guished by its dichotomous phenotype, which, instead of
type 1 and 2 used earlier, we represent as bar and not-bar.
Bar is the phenotype that is expressed when the individual
acquires beneﬁcial information by cultural transmission.
(phenotypeegenotype
There are four phenogenotypes
combinations): bar teachers, not-bar teachers, bar non-
teachers, and not-bar nonteachers. We write x, x, y, and y,
respectively, for the frequencies of A, A, a, a among
reproductive adults, where x þ x þ y þ y ¼ 1.

In the ARUT model, a newborn can only acquire the
bar phenotype from its only parent. All individuals can
learn socially, but having a teacher as the parent increases
the efﬁciency of social learning. Let the vertical trans-
mission rates from bar teachers and bar nonteachers be
a and b, respectively, where 0 < b < a < 1. Offspring

282 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

of a not-bar parent are necessarily not-bar. Both trans-
mission parameters include the effect of
information
decay. That is, each is smaller than the transmission ﬁ-
delity that could be achieved in a constant environment,
because beneﬁcial information may become obsolete due
to environmental change (eg, Kendal et al., 2009; Leh-
mann and Feldman, 2009). This is one of several ways of
modeling the effect of environmental change on social
learning (Aoki and Feldman, 2014). In addition, there is a
cost to the teaching act, such that bar teachers
have
lower relative fertility, 1   d, where d > 0 (Creanza el al.,
2013). Not-bar teachers (A) do not teach and hence do not
suffer this cost.

 



A

From these assumptions, it follows that the frequencies
of the four phenogenotypes among the newborns of the
next generation after vertical transmission, xv; xv; yv; yv,
satisfy

Wx0 ¼ ð1   gÞð1 þ sÞxv

Wx0 ¼ ð1   gÞxv
Wy0 ¼ ð1 þ sÞyv

Wy0 ¼ yv

(18.10)

(18.11)

(18.12)

(18.13)

where

W ¼ ð1   gÞð1 þ sÞxv þ ð1   gÞxv þ ð1 þ sÞyv þ yv.

(18.14)

Here and elsewhere, a prime indicates that the variable

is evaluated in the next generation.

Global Properties of ARUT Model
On substituting Eqs. (18.5)e(18.9) into Eqs. (18.10)e(18.14),
we obtain

0
0

(18.5)

(18.6)

(18.7)

(18.8)

(18.9)

1
CCCA ¼ ðWVÞ 1

0
BBB@

0
BBB@ x0

x0
y0
y0

ð1   gÞð1   dÞð1 þ sÞa
ð1   gÞð1   dÞð1   aÞ

0

1   g

1
CCCA

0
BBB@ x

1
CCCA.

x
y
y

0
0

0
0
ð1 þ sÞb 0
1   b
1

0
0

(18.15)

Vxv ¼ ð1   dÞxa

Vxv ¼ ð1   dÞxð1   aÞ þ x

Vyv ¼ yb

Vyv ¼ yð1   bÞ þ y

where

V ¼ 1   dx.

For example, the ﬁrst term on the right-hand side of Eq.
(18.6) gives the offspring of A that are unable to acquire the bar
phenotype from their parents, which occurs with probability
1   a. The frequency of these offspring is further reduced by a
factor 1   d, because of the fertility cost incurred by their
parents associated with teaching. Similarly, the second term
gives the offspring of A, who will necessarily be not-bar.

After vertical

transmission, selection occurs during
maturation such that teachers have lower relative viability,
1   g, due to the developmental cost of the neural substrate
for teaching (g > 0), whereas the bar phenotype confers a
higher relative viability, 1 þ s, because the transmitted in-
formation is beneﬁcial (s > 0). Hence, assuming multipli-
cative viability effects,
the four
phenogenotypes among the reproductive adults of the next
generation are

the frequencies of

Eq. (18.15) is linear in the four variables, x, x, y, and y,
except for the scalar normalizing factor (WV) 1, which is the
inverse of the mean ﬁtness. Inspection of Eq. (18.15) reveals
that it has four kinds of equilibria. One of these, ﬁxation on
A, teaching-not-bar, cannot be stable because g > 0. Further
analysis of the recursion system is given in Appendix 1 and
can be summarized as follows. Teaching evolves if

ð1 þ sÞb < 1 and

ð1   gÞð1   dÞð1 þ sÞa > 1;

(18.16)

or
ð1 þ sÞb > 1 and ð1   gÞð1   dÞð1 þ sÞa > ð1 þ sÞb.
(18.17)

As shown in Appendix 1, the following are the equi-
libria and their stability conditions. Carets denote equilib-
rium values.

Fixation of Nonteachers with Nonadaptive
Phenotype
Here

 bx;bx;by;by


¼ ð0; 0; 0; 1Þ;

(18.18)

and only a is present. This equilibrium always exists and is
stable if (1 þ s)b < 1.

Gene-Culture Models for the Evolution of Altruistic Teaching Chapter | 18 283

Fixation of Nonteachers, Polymorphism of
Adaptive and Nonadaptive Phenotypes
Here, only a and a are present:


 bx;bx;by;by

¼


0; 0;ð1 þ sÞb   1



; 1   b
sb

sb

(18.19)
This equilibrium exists if and only if (1 þ s)b > 1. When it
exists it is stable if (1   g)(1   d)(1 þ s)a < (1 þ s)b. This
condition ensures that teachers cannot invade and replace
nonteachers.

.

Fixation of Teachers, Polymorphism of
Adaptive and Nonadaptive Phenotypes

Here, only A and A are present:
ð1   dÞð1 þ sÞa   1
;
ð1   dÞð1 þ saÞ   1

 bx;bx;by;by


ð1   dÞð1   aÞ

ð1   dÞð1 þ saÞ   1

¼



; 0; 0

;

(18.20)
which exists if and only if (1   d)(1 þ s)a > 1. When it
exists it is stable if

ð1   gÞð1   dÞð1 þ sÞa > max½1;ð1 þ sÞb;

which ensures that nonteachers cannot invade this ﬁxation
of teachers.

Remarks
Whereas the eigenvectors in Appendix 1 deﬁne the equi-
libria of Eq. (18.15), the corresponding eigenvalues are

equal to the mean ﬁtnesses, bWbV , at each of these equilibria.

Our analysis shows that the globally stable equilibrium is
associated with the highest mean ﬁtness.

Fig. 18.1 (see also Fig. 18.2 lower panels) illustrates the
regions in the parameter space of the two vertical trans-
mission parameters, a and b, where each of the three
equilibria given by Eqs. (18.18), (18.19), or (18.20) exist
and are globally stable. Several properties of the ARUT
model can be explained with reference to this (b,a) 
parameter space. First, we note that evolution of teaching is
more readily achieveddthe teacher equilibrium given by
Eq. (18.20) is more likely to be globally stabledwhen the
increase in the efﬁciency of vertical transmission effected
by teaching is large, ie, a is large relative to b. More
speciﬁcally, we ﬁnd that teaching can more easily evolve
when the
cannot be
maintained in the population by social
learning alone,
ie, without teaching. Thus, in the left part of the ﬁgure
deﬁned by (1 þ s)b < 1, where the equilibrium Eq. (18.19)
does not exist, the condition is (1   g)(1   d)(1 þ s)a > 1.
By contrast, in the right part of the ﬁgure deﬁned by (1 þ s)
b > 1, where the equilibrium Eq. (18.19) does exist, the
condition
stringent
(1   g)(1   d)(1 þ s)a > (1 þ s)b.

advantageous bar phenotype

becomes

more

the

1(

)(1

)

1

1

1(

1)(

1)(

s+
)

0

1

s+1

1

FIGURE 18.1 Depicts the mutually exclusive regions in the (b,a) 
parameter space where the three edge/corner equilibria of the asexual
reproduction and uniparental transmission (ARUT) model exist and are
globally stable; a and b are the vertical transmission rates of the adaptive
bar phenotype from teacher and nonteacher parents, respectively. Region I:
corner equilibrium deﬁned by Eq. (18.18) where nonteachers are ﬁxed
and the bar phenotype is absent. Region II: edge equilibrium deﬁned by
Eq. (18.19) where nonteachers are ﬁxed and the bar phenotype is poly-
morphic. Region III: edge equilibrium deﬁned by Eq. (18.20) where
teachers are ﬁxed and the bar phenotype is polymorphic. The open and
closed circles on the broken line passing through the origin illustrate the
effect of information decay due to environmental change. Information that
is beneﬁcial in the parental generation will, with a certain probability, be
rendered useless in the offspring generation, with the result
the
realized transmission rates of the bar phenotype (closed circle) are reduced
from what they might be in a stable environment (open circle). Other
parameters are: s, the viability advantage from having the bar phenotype;
g, the developmental viability cost of the neural substrate for teaching; d,
the fertility cost of the teaching act.

that

Second, it is not obvious whether the equilibrium fre-
quency of the adaptive bar phenotype will be higher when
the
phenotypically polymorphic equilibrium without teaching

teaching has evolved (bx in Eq.
(by in Eq. (18.19)). Nevertheless, this is always true. In fact,

(18.20))

than at

sb

to

for

evolve

teaching

condition

> ð1þsÞb 1

is
necessary
a
ð1 dÞð1þsÞa 1
(the frequency of the favored bar
ð1 dÞð1þsaÞ 1
phenotype is greater when teaching is ﬁxed than when
nonteaching is ﬁxed), which simpliﬁes to a b
> dð1 dÞs. This
1 b
result again shows that a must be sufﬁciently larger than b
for teaching to evolve. That is, vertical transmission of the
advantageous trait by teachers must be sufﬁciently more
reliable than from nonteachers for teaching to evolve.
Third, we consider the effect of information decay
resulting from environmental change. Let a and b be the
vertical transmission rates in a constant environment. Then,
if ε is the rate of information decay per generation, we can
write a ¼ a(1   ε) and b ¼ b(1   ε) for the realized
transmission rates (Aoki and Feldman, 2014). Now suppose
the point (b,a) lies in region III of Fig. 18.1 (open circle)
where the equilibrium given by Eq. (18.20) is globally
stable. Clearly, the point (b,a) lies on the straight line

284 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

FIGURE 18.2 Comprises eight pairs of panels, Cases A to H, that differ in the values assumed for the parameters g, d and s. The upper panel of each
pair reports the results for the SRBT model with additive vertical transmission parameters, showing the regions in the (bd,ad)  parameter space where the
monomorphism of nonteachers without the bar phenotypedthe NT_NB equilibrium, for shortdexists and is locally stable (purple, left bottom); the
genetic monomorphism of nonteachers with phenotypic polymorphism of the bar phenotypedthe NT_B/NB equilibrium, for shortdexists and is locally
stable (blue, right bottom); and the genetic monomorphism of teachers with phenotypic polymorphism of the bar phenotypedthe T_B/NB equilibrium, for
shortdexists and is locally stable (light green, left top). The lower panel uses the same colors to show the corresponding regions in the (b,a)  parameter
space for the ARUT model. In the white-colored regions, which appear only in some of the upper panels, none of the three boundary equilibria is stable,
implying genetic polymorphism. Some regions in the upper panels allow bistability of two (of the three) boundary equilibria. These overlapping regions
are colored with a blend of the two colors: purple þ light green ¼ gray, and blue þ light green ¼ dark green.
(A) When both costs of teaching are small (g ¼ 0.001, d ¼ 0.001), the results of the sexual reproduction and biparental transmission (SRBT) and ARUT
models are most similar among the eight cases considered. Nevertheless, there is still a signiﬁcant difference. In the SRBT model, a region of
bistability (gray) can be seen in which the NT_NB equilibrium, Eq. (18.36), and the T_B/NB equilibrium, Eq. (18.43), are simultaneously stable.
Here s ¼ 2.
(B) When the behavioral cost of the teaching act is increased (g ¼ 0.001, d ¼ 0.1), the region of existence and local stability of the T_B/NB equilibrium
(light green) shrinks in both the SRBT and ARUT models as expected. This region is smaller for the former than for the latter model. In addition, a
narrow region (white) appears in the SRBT model, where none of the boundary equilibria is locally stable. Here s ¼ 2.

Gene-Culture Models for the Evolution of Altruistic Teaching Chapter | 18 285

connecting the origin and (b,a). Hence, as ε increases, the
point (b,a) will leave region III and enter the region where
equilibrium Eq. (18.18) is stable, namely region I (closed
circle). We conclude that
temporal environmental vari-
ability does not favor the evolution of teaching, or, more
generally speaking, an evolutionary increase in the efﬁ-
ciency of vertical transmission.

HAPLOID MODEL WITH SEXUAL
REPRODUCTION AND BIPARENTAL
TRANSMISSION (SRBT)
We now ask how the ﬁndings of section “Basic Haploid
Model With Asexual Reproduction and Uniparental Trans-
mission (ARUT)” are affected when sexual reproduction is
assumed together with biparental transmission. We refer to
this as the sexual reproduction and biparental transmission
(SRBT) model. Among the numerous theoretical complica-
tions arising from the introduction of SRBT is that an indi-
vidual may inherit the nonteaching gene a from one parent
and culturally acquire the adaptive bar phenotype from the
other parent. Here, we analyze a haploid model. We expect a
similar result for a diploid model, because the relatedness
between parent and child is the samedthe fraction of genes
identical by descent is one-halfdin both models (Aoki and
Feldman, 1997).

TABLE 18.1 Offspring Distribution From the 10
Mating Types of the Haploid Model With Sexual
Reproduction and Biparental Transmission (SRBT)

A

a

a

1
2bs

1

1

1

1
2

ad

as

1
2bs

1

2ð1   bsÞ

1

2ð1   mÞ
2ð1   asÞ

1

1
2 m
1
2as

1
2 m
1
2as

A
1   ad
1   as
2ð1   mÞ
2ð1   asÞ
1
2ð1   bsÞ

Mating
A  A
A  A
A  a
A  a
A  A
A  a
A  a
a  a
a  a
a  a
Phenogenotypes are: A ¼ teacher with bar; A ¼ teacher without bar;
a ¼ nonteacher with bar; and a ¼ nonteacher without bar. Trans-
mission parameters are: ad ¼ probability offspring acquires bar when
both parents are teachers with bar; as ¼ probability offspring acquires
bar when one parent is a teacher with bar and the other parent does
not have bar; m ¼ probability offspring acquires bar when one parent
is a teacher with bar and the other parent is a nonteacher with bar;
bd ¼ probability offspring acquires bar when both parents are non-
teachers with bar; bs ¼ probability offspring acquires bar when one
parent is a nonteacher with bar and the other parent does not have
bar. Inequalities: bs < as < m <ad < 1 and bs < bd < m < ad < 1.

1   bd
1   bs

bd

bs

1
2

1

Model Description
Table 18.1 lists the 10 possible mating types among the
four phenogenotypes and gives the offspring distributions
from these mating types in terms of ﬁve transmission pa-
rameters. The meanings of these transmission parameters
are explained in the table legend.

We assume that the fertility cost associated with the
teaching act is multiplicative. Thus, the relative fertility of a

mating between two bar teachers is (1   d)2, whereas it is
1   d when only one partner is a bar teacher. Finally, we
assume random mating among the four phenogenotypes.
Then, the frequencies of the four phenogenotypes among
the newborns after vertical transmission are

Vxv ¼ð1   dÞx½ð1   dÞxad þ ðx þ yÞas þ ym

þ x½ð1   dÞxas þ ybs

(18.21)

=

(C) When the ﬁxed cognitive cost of teaching is increased (g ¼ 0.1, d ¼ 0.001), a small region (dark green) appears in the SRBT model where
equilibrium NT_B/NB, given by Eq. (18.19), and equilibrium T_B/NB, given by Eq. (18.20), are both locally stable. This region of bistability also
exists in the upper panels of Cases A and B, but is even smaller and hence not clearly visible. In addition, there is a region of bistability of equilibria
NT_NB and T_B/NB (gray). Here s ¼ 2.
(D) When both costs of teaching are increased relative to Case A, but keeping their sum roughly equal to Cases B and C (g ¼ 0.05, d ¼ 0.05), the result
resembles the average of the two cases. Here s ¼ 2.
(E) When the selective advantage associated with the bar phenotype is greatly increased from s ¼ 2 in Case D to s ¼ 10, the regions of local stability of
the nonteacher equilibria, NT_NB (purple) and NT_B/NB (blue), shrink. The qualitative results remain the same as in Case D for both the SRBT and
ARUT models. Here g ¼ 0.05, d ¼ 0.05.
(F) When both costs of teaching are increased relative to Case E (g ¼ 0.2, d ¼ 0.1), the region where none of the boundary equilibria is locally stable
(white) in the SRBT model increases in size. Accordingly, the region of bistability of equilibria NT_B/NB and T_B/NB (dark green) disappears.
Here s ¼ 10.

(G) When all effects are large, the region where none of the boundary equilibria is locally stable (white) is large and the region of local stability of the
T_B/NB equilibrium (light green) disappears in the SRBT model. This implies that coexistence of teachers and nonteachers is more likely to occur
(in the SRBT model) when the beneﬁt of the socially learned information and the two costs of teaching are large (strong selection). Here g ¼ 0.3,
d ¼ 0.3, s ¼ 20.

(H) When the beneﬁt of information and the two costs of teaching are small (weak selection), the region of local stability of the T_B/NB equilibrium in
the SRBT model mostly overlaps with the region of local stability of equilibrium NT_NB. A tiny region where the T_B/NB equilibrium is the unique
locally stable equilibrium exists in the upper right hand corner of the upper panel where the vertical transmission efﬁciencies from nonteachers and
teachers, bd and ad respectively, are both high. This suggests that it is quite difﬁcult for teachers to invade the resident nonteacher population when
selection is weak. Here g ¼ 0.001, d ¼ 0.001, s ¼ 0.1.

286 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

ﬃﬃﬃﬃ

p
Vxv ¼ ½ð1   dÞx þ x

  ð1   dÞx½ð1   dÞxad
þ ðx þ yÞas þ ym   x½ð1   dÞxas þ ybs

V

(18.22)

(18.23)

Vyv ¼ y½ð1   dÞxm þ ðx þ yÞbs þ ybd

þ y½ð1   dÞxas þ ybs
ﬃﬃﬃﬃ
p
V

  y½ð1   dÞxas þ ybs;

Vyv ¼ðy þ yÞ

  y½ð1   dÞxm þ ðx þ yÞbs þ ybd

where

V ¼ ð1   dxÞ2.

(18.24)

(18.25)

Next, incorporating viability selection on the newborns

yields

where

Wx0 ¼ ð1   gÞð1 þ sÞxv

Wx0 ¼ ð1   gÞxv
Wy0 ¼ ð1 þ sÞyv

Wy0 ¼ yv;

(18.26)

(18.27)

(18.28)

(18.29)

W ¼ ð1   gÞð1 þ sÞxv þ ð1   gÞxv þ ð1 þ sÞyv þ yv.

(18.30)

We have made the same assumptions on viability
selection as in the ARUT model. Hence, Eqs. (18.26)e(18.30)
are identical to Eqs. (18.10)e(18.14).

On

substituting Eqs.

into Eqs.
(18.26)e(18.30), we obtain the recursions over one generation:
WVx0 ¼ð1   gÞð1 þ sÞfð1   dÞx½ð1   dÞxad þ ðx þ yÞ

(18.21)e(18.25)

 as þ ym þ x½ð1   dÞxas þ ybsg

ﬃﬃﬃﬃ

V

p

n
½ð1   dÞx þ x

ﬃﬃﬃﬃ
p
V

WVx0 ¼ð1   gÞ

  ð1   dÞx½ð1   dÞ
 xad þ ðx þ yÞas þ ym   x½ð1   dÞxas þ ybs
(18.32)

WVy0 ¼ð1 þ sÞfy½ð1   dÞxm þ ðx þ yÞbs þ ybd

þ y½ð1   dÞxas þ ybsg

(18.31)

o

(18.33)

WVy0 ¼ ðy þ yÞ

  y½ð1   dÞxm þ ðx þ yÞbs þ ybd

  y½ð1   dÞxas þ ybs.

(18.34)
Although the system (18.31)e(18.34) is much more
the
complicated than the ARUT model, analysis of
boundary equilibria analogous to those in the ARUT model
is still possible.

A

 



Identifying the Equilibria
The variable space for Eqs. (18.31)e(18.34) is a tetrahedron
with four faces and six edges. The four faces are deﬁned by
x ¼ 0; x ¼ 0; y ¼ 0, or y ¼ 0, respectively; and the six
edges by x þ x ¼ 0, x þ y ¼ 0, x þ y ¼ 0, x þ y ¼ 0,
x þ y ¼ 0, or y þ y ¼ 0. Of these, all four faces and four of
the six edges cannot support equilibria (except perhaps in
the corners). These properties are shared by the ARUT and
SRBT models. Consider, for example, the edge deﬁned by
x þ y ¼ 0. At an equilibrium on this edge, only the two
and bar nonteacher ðaÞ,
phenogenotypes, bar teacher
can be present. However, from the offspring distributions in
Table 18.1, we see that the three possible matings involving
A and a generate the other two phenogenotypes, which says
that x þ y ¼ 0 cannot be a legitimate edge. On the edge
deﬁned by x þ y ¼ 0, we can use Eqs. (18.32) and (18.34)
with x ¼ 0 and y ¼ 0 to show that not-bar teachers (A)
will be selected out because g > 0.
Thus, the only possible boundary equilibria are located
on the two edges x þ x ¼ 0 and y þ y ¼ 0, which corre-
spond to genetic monomorphisms of nonteachers and
teachers, respectively. The stability properties of these ge-
netic ﬁxations tell us whether teaching will evolve or be
lost. We investigate these equilibria in the following two
subsections. The considerations of this subsection do not
rule out fully polymorphic equilibria, and in fact numerical
work to be described later suggests that they may exist.



.

(18.35)

nonteacher-not-bar point

Genetically Monomorphic Equilibria
of Nonteachers

Set x ¼ x0 ¼ bx ¼ 0, x ¼ x0 ¼ bx ¼ 0, y ¼ y0 ¼ by, and
y ¼ y0 ¼ by in Eqs. (18.31)e(18.34). Adding Eqs. (18.33)

and (18.34) gives the mean ﬁtness at this equilibrium

From Eq. (18.33) it is clear that the ﬁxation on the


bWbV ¼ 1 þ sby
2bs þbyðbd   2bsÞ
bx ¼ bx ¼ by ¼ 0;by ¼ 1
always exists, and can readily be shown to be stable in the
 

nonteacher subspace if 2(1 þ s)bs < 1.
0; 0;by;by
 

0 <by < 1; bx ¼ bx ¼ 0
to exist, by must satisfy



2bsþbyðbd   2bsÞ
2bsþbyðbd   2bsÞ
1 þ sby
That is, by > 0 is the valid solution of the quadratic
equation
fðzÞ h sðbd   2bsÞz2 þ ½2sbs   ð1 þ sÞðbd   2bsÞz þ 1

the
, where allele a is
polymorphic,

equilibrium of the form
ﬁxed,
is

but which

Similarly, we see from Eq.

¼ ð1 þ sÞ

phenotypically

(18.33)

(18.36)

that

for



.

  2ð1 þ sÞbs ¼ 0:

(18.37)

Gene-Culture Models for the Evolution of Altruistic Teaching Chapter | 18 287

unique positive equilibriumby > 0, where f 0ðbyÞ > 0, exists
Since f(0) ¼ 1   2(1 þ s)bs and f(1) ¼ 1   bd > 0, a
if 2(1 þ s)bs > 1. Moreover, when it exists this positive
equilibrium can also be shown to be stable to perturbations
in the nonteacher subspace. Note that these considerations
do not rule out other positive equilibria when 2(1 þ s)
bs < 1.

In Appendix 2a, the stability analysis of equilibria on
this edge where a and a coexist is recorded. The equilib-

rium with by ¼ 0 (only a present) is locally stable to in-

vasion by teachers if

ð1   gÞð1   dÞð1 þ sÞa < 1;

(18.38)

which is identical in form to the corresponding result for
the ARUT model. Stability properties of other equilibria
on this nonteaching edge are treated numerically in the
next section.

Genetically Monomorphic Equilibria
of Teachers

edge. Adding Eqs. (18.31) and (18.32) gives the mean
ﬁtness at equilibrium

Set x ¼ x0 ¼ bx, x ¼ x0 ¼ bx, y ¼ y0 ¼ by ¼ 0, and y ¼
y0 ¼ by ¼ 0 in Eqs. (18.31)e(18.34). This is the AeA
bWbV ¼ð1   gÞ
bx ¼ 0 ðbx ¼ 1; bby ¼ by ¼ 0Þ always exists, and can

 
1   dbx
bxad þ 2bxas

2 þ sð1   dÞbx


From Eq. (18.31) it is clear that the zero equilibrium

ð1   dÞ

(18.39)

	

.

must satisfy

Similarly, we see from Eq. (18.31) that a positive
equilibrium with both A and A present, and which is

readily be shown to be stable in the teacher subspace if
2(1   d)(1 þ s)as < 1.
phenotypically polymorphic, bx > 0

by ¼ 0
 
1   dbx
Hence, bx > 0 is the valid solution of the quadratic

 
0 <bx < 1; bby ¼

2þsð1   dÞbx

ð1   dÞbxad þ 2bxas


ð1   dÞbxad þ 2bxas
 ð1 þ sÞ

	
d2 þ sð1   dÞ½ð1   dÞad   2as
þ f 2d þ ð1   dÞ½2ð1 þ 2sÞas   ð1   dÞ
 ð1 þ sÞadgz þ 1   2ð1   dÞð1 þ sÞas.

¼ ð1   dÞ
.

fðzÞ ¼

z2

(18.40)
Since f(0) ¼ 1   2(1   d)(1 þ s)as and f(1) ¼ (1   d)2

(1   ad) > 0, a unique positive equilibriumbx > 0, where
f 0ðbxÞ > 0, exists if 2(1   d)(1 þ s)as > 1. Moreover, this

positive equilibrium can also be shown to be stable to
perturbations in the teacher subspace when it exists. These
considerations do not rule out other positive equilibria
when 2(1   d)(1 þ s)as < 1.

From Appendix 2b, the equilibrium bx ¼ 0 is always

unstable, which was also true in the ARUT model. Stability
properties of equilibria on this teaching edge are treated
numerically in the next section.

Special Case of Additive Vertical
Transmission Parameters
To proceed further with the analysis of the SRBT model,
and to compare it with the ARUT model, we make the
simplifying assumption that
the vertical
transmission
parameters are additive. Speciﬁcally, we set

ad ¼ 2as; bd ¼ 2bs;

and m ¼ as þ bs.

(18.41)

In words, a “double dose” of either bar teachers or bar
nonteachers entails twice the efﬁciency of each “single
dose,” and a “mixed dose” comprising a bar teacher and a
bar nonteacher has an efﬁciency equal to the sum of the two
respective single doses.
On substituting bd ¼ 2bs into Eq. (18.37), we ﬁnd that
there can be only one phenotypically polymorphic
equilibrium,
bx ¼ bx ¼ 0; by ¼ ð1 þ sÞbd   1

; by ¼ 1   bd

(18.42)

sbd

sbd

in the nonteacher subspace (genetically monomorphic for
nonteachers). Similarly, substitution of ad ¼ 2as into Eq.
(18.40) shows that there can be only one phenotypically
polymorphic equilibrium,
;by
bx ¼ ð1   dÞð1 þ sÞad   1
¼ by ¼ 0
ð1   dÞð1 þ sadÞ   1

;bx ¼ ð1   dÞð1   adÞ
ð1   dÞð1 þ sadÞ   1

(18.43)

in the teacher subspace (genetically monomorphic for
teachers). Eqs. (18.42) and (18.43) are identical to Eqs.
(18.19) and (18.20), respectively, of the ARUT model if
we equate ad to a and bd to b.

Using numerical examples we investigate the condi-
tions for the local stability of the three equilibria we have
identiﬁed so far, ie, those given by Eqs. (18.36), (18.42),
and (18.43). Fig. 18.2 comprises eight pairs of panels,
where the upper panel of each pair shows the color-coded
regions in the (bd,ad)  parameter space (ad and bd are the
vertical transmission rates of the beneﬁcial information
when both parents are teachers and nonteachers, respec-
tively) where these equilibria exist and are locally stable
in the SRBT model. The eight panels are distinguished by
differences in the values of the three other parameters: g
(the developmental cost of
the neural substrate for
teaching), d (the cost of the teaching act), and s (the se-
lective advantage gained from having the beneﬁcial
information).

288 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

sbd

sbd

ð1 dÞð1þsadÞ 1

;by ¼ by ¼ 0,

ð1 dÞð1þsadÞ 1

;bx ¼ ð1 dÞð1 adÞ
; by ¼ 1 bd

In the purple, blue, and light green regions of each
panel, only one of the equilibria given by Eqs. (18.36),
(18.42), and (18.43), respectively, exists and is locally
stable. In the gray region, equilibrium Eq. (18.36),
ie,

bx ¼ bx ¼ by ¼ 0;by ¼ 1, and equilibrium Eq. (18.43), ie,
bx ¼ ð1 dÞð1þsÞad 1
bx ¼ bx ¼ 0; by ¼ ð1þsÞbd 1

are
both locally stable (see, eg, Panel A upper graph). Simi-
larly, in the dark green region, equilibrium Eq. (18.42), ie,
, and equilibrium
Eq. (18.43) are both locally stable (see, eg, Panel C
upper graph). Hence, the SRBT model shows bistability, ie,
the evolutionary outcome depends on the initial frequencies
of the four phenogenotypes. Numerical iteration of the
recursion Eqs. (18.31)e(18.34) conﬁrmed that the system
converged to one of the two equilibria in these bistable
cases. Moreover, in the white region none of these three
boundary equilibria is locally stable, which suggests that a
stable fully polymorphic equilibrium with all four pheno-
genotypes present exists (see, eg, Panel F upper graph). We
observed convergence to such an internal equilibrium in
our numerical analysis. The area of the white region ap-
pears to increase as the selection coefﬁcients g, d, and s
increase (compare upper graphs of Panels D, F, and G),
although the dependence is not straightforward. Neither
bistability nor a fully polymorphic equilibrium was
observed in the ARUT model (lower graphs in Fig. 18.2).
invasion by
teachers is more stringent in the SRBT than in the ARUT
model, where stringency is measured as the minimum
value of ad or a, respectively, that is required for invasion
to succeed. Invasion by teachers cannot occur from equi-
librium Eq. (18.36) in the purple and gray regions of
Fig. 18.2, since this equilibrium is locally stable there.
Similarly, invasion of teachers cannot occur from equi-
librium Eq. (18.42) in the blue and dark green regions.
These combined regions have roughly the same location
and extent as the regions of global stability of the analo-
gous equilibria Eqs. (18.18) and (18.19), respectively, of
the ARUT model. However,
the upper bounds of the
former exceed the upper bounds of the latter, sometimes
substantially. In fact, if we equate ad of the SRBT model
to a of the ARUT model, comparison of inequality Eq.
(18.38) (with ad ¼ 2as) with inequality Eq. (18.16) shows
that the condition for invasion by teachers from equilib-
rium Eq. (18.36) is exactly twice as stringent as that from
the analogous equilibrium Eq. (18.18).

Generally speaking,

the condition for

Another interesting difference is as follows. Recall
from Subsection Remarks that
in the ARUT model
teaching can more easily invade (evolve) from equilibrium
Eq. (18.18) than from Eq. (18.19), ie,, if the bar phenotype
cannot be maintained without teaching. However, in the
SRBT model the condition for invasion by teachers from

equilibrium Eq. (18.42) may be less stringent than from
Eq. (18.36). In all panels except perhaps Panel G, we see
that the upper bound for local stability of equilibrium Eq.
(18.42) is lower when (1 þ s)bd z 1 than for equilibrium
Eq. (18.36).

Finally, we note from the panels of Fig. 18.2 that
environmental change disfavors the evolution of teaching.

ADDING OBLIQUE TRANSMISSION
In present-day hunter-gatherers, there is a developmental
change from a reliance on vertical
transmission to
transmission as children mature
oblique and horizontal
(Hewlett et al., 2011). Vertical cultural
transmission
occurs from parent(s) to offspring, who also share genes
identical by descent, but oblique transmission and hor-
izontal
transmission can occur between nonkin and is
expected to disfavor the evolution of teaching. Here, we
describe a model with oblique transmission from nonkin
occurring after vertical transmission. That is, we super-
pose random oblique transmission on ARUT. We will
refer
transmission then
to this model as the vertical
oblique transmission (VTOT) model.

Model Description
Postreproductive teachers with the bar phenotype may have
a lower relative viability, 1   s, due to the additional cost
of teaching members of the next generation other than their
offspring. Hence, we assume that the frequencies of the
four phenogenotypes among the surviving adults who serve
as exemplars for oblique transmission are
; y ¼

; x ¼

y

x

;

x ¼ ð1   sÞx
1   sx
y
y ¼
.
1   sx

1   sx

1   sx

(18.44)

Since the viability selection in Eq. (18.44) acts on
postreproductives, it affects only the phenotype frequencies
in the next generation.

Vertical

transmission ﬁrst occurs according to Eqs.
(18.5)e(18.9). Newborns who fail to obtain the beneﬁcial
information from their parents have a second chance, when
they encounter and acquire the bar phenotype from sur-
viving adult teachers and nonteachers with the bar pheno-
type at rates q and r, respectively (0  r < q < 1). We
make the same assumptions regarding viability selection
during maturation as in the ARUT and SRBT models.
Hence, the frequencies of the four phenogenotypes among
the reproductive adults of the next generation are

Wx0 ¼ ð1   gÞð1 þ sÞ½xv þ xvðqx þ ryÞ;

Wx0 ¼ ð1   gÞxv½1   ðqx þ ryÞ;

(18.45)

(18.46)

Wy0 ¼ ð1 þ sÞ



yv þ yvðqx þ ryÞ
Wy0 ¼ yv½1   ðqx þ ryÞ;


where
W ¼ð1   gÞð1 þ sÞ½xv þ xvðqx þ ryÞ þ ð1   gÞ


yv þ yvðqx þ ryÞ

 xv½1   ðqx þ ryÞ þ ð1 þ sÞ
þ yv½1   ðqx þ ryÞ.

(18.49)

For example, of the two terms in square brackets in Eq.
(18.45),
the ﬁrst and second give the frequencies of
previability-selection individuals with the teacher genotype
that acquired the bar phenotype by vertical and oblique
transmission, respectively. The recursions over one gener-
ation for the VTOT model are obtained by substituting
(18.5)e(18.9),
xv; xv; yv,
and
x; x; y, and y from Eq. (18.45) into Eq. (18.49).

from Eqs.

and

yv

a

At

genetically monomorphic

Conditions for Invasion by Teachers
A full analysis of the VTOT model, even numerically, has
proved difﬁcult because of the large number of parameters.
We restrict ourselves to obtaining the genetically mono-
morphic equilibria of nonteachers and the conditions for the
invasion of teachers from these equilibria. The invasion con-
ditions for the VTOT model can then be compared to those for
the ARUT model in which there is no oblique transmission.
equilibrium of


b þ r   brby

 
nonteachersbWbV ¼ 1 þ sby
sincebx ¼ bx ¼ bxv ¼ xv ¼ x ¼ x ¼ 0. The zero equi-
libriumby ¼ 0 always exists, and can be shown to be stable
A positive equilibrium by > 0 must satisfy
 
1 þ sby
Rearranging, we see that by > 0 is the valid solution of

in the nonteacher subspace if (1 þ s)(b þ r) < 1.


b þ r   brby


b þ r   brby

¼ ð1 þ sÞ

(18.50)

 

;

fðzÞ h sbrz2   ½sðb þ rÞ þ ð1 þ sÞbrz þ ð1 þ sÞðb þ rÞ

  1 ¼ 0;

(18.51)

r > 0.

which is a quadratic equation that is convex downward
when
and
f(1) ¼  (1   b)(1   r) < 0,
there is a unique positive
equilibrium if and only if (1 þ s)(b þ r) > 1. On the other
hand, we obtain

f(0) ¼ (1 þ s)(b þ r)   1

Since

by ¼ ð1 þ sÞb   1

(18.52)
if r ¼ 0, which is valid for (1 þ s)b > 1 and identical to
Eq. (18.19) of the ARUT model.

sb

Gene-Culture Models for the Evolution of Altruistic Teaching Chapter | 18 289

;

(18.47)

(18.48)

a

very

quadratic

complicated

Henceforth in this section, we consider only the

Linearization of the recursions for the VTOT model
around either the zero or the positive equilibrium yields a
reducible 3  3 coefﬁcient matrix. It can be shown that the
positive equilibrium is locally stable in the nonteacher
subspace when it exists. Local stability to invasion of
teachers is governed by a 2  2 positive submatrix, which
yields
characteristic
polynomial.

special case of rby ¼ 0. That is, we consider the local
rium, by ¼ 0, and of

stability to invasion by teachers of the zero equilib-
the phenotypically polymorphic
is given by Eq. (18.52) when r ¼ 0.
equilibrium that
Recall that r and q are the oblique transmission ratesdthe
products of encounter and acquisition ratesdfrom non-
teachers
respectively. Anthropological
research on hunter-gatherers suggests that adolescents
choose exemplars for oblique transmission based on the
prosocial characteristics of adults (Hewlett, 2013).
If
teachers are preferred as exemplars for oblique trans-
mission, then it is reasonable as a ﬁrst approximation to
set r ¼ 0 and q > 0.

When rby ¼ 0, we can show that the zero equilibrium,
by ¼ 0, is invadable by teachers if

and teachers,

ð1   gÞð1   dÞð1 þ sÞa > 1;

(18.53)

and the phenotypically polymorphic equilibrium, Eq.
(18.52), is invadable if

ð1   gÞð1   dÞð1 þ sÞa > ð1 þ sÞb.

(18.54)

Clearly, these invasion conditions are identical to those
for the ARUT model, which are given by Eqs. (18.16) and
(18.17), respectively. However, these conditions do not
ensure ﬁxation of teachers, as would be true of the ARUT
model. In fact, Fig. 18.3A illustrates a case suggesting the
existence of a stable fully polymorphic equilibrium when
Eq. (18.54) is satisﬁed.

ADDING HORIZONTAL TRANSMISSION
(VTHT)
In this section, we describe a model with horizontal trans-
mission from nonkin occurring after vertical transmission,
which we call
transmission then horizontal
transmission (VTHT) model. Then, we present a limited
analysis to obtain the genetically monomorphic equilibria
of nonteachers and the conditions for the invasion of
teachers from these equilibria.

the vertical

Model Description
Vertical
transmission ﬁrst occurs according to Eqs.
(18.5)e(18.9). Newborns who fail to obtain the beneﬁcial
information from their parents have a second chance,

290 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

FIGURE 18.3A Numerically obtained coevolutionary trajectories for
the VTOT model are shown by broken lines. The trajectories have been
projected on to the two-dimensional variable space where the horizontal
axis corresponds to the frequency of the bar phenotype ðx þ yÞ and the
vertical axis corresponds to the frequency of teachers ðx þ xÞ. Conver-

gence to the fully polymorphic equilibrium,bx ¼ 0:4786; bx ¼ 0:0408;
by ¼ 0:3268; by ¼ 0:1538, indicated by the ﬁlled circle is suggested.

Parameter values are a ¼ 0.9, b ¼ 0.6, g ¼ 0.1, d ¼ 0.1, s ¼ 1, s ¼ 0.1,
q ¼ 0.4, and r ¼ 0.

when they encounter and acquire the bar phenotype from
other newborns that have succeeded in doing so. The hor-
izontal transmission rates from bar teachers and bar non-
teachers of the same generation are q and r, respectively
(0  r < q < 1); we use the same symbols as for the VTOT
model, since they play analogous roles in the two models.
In addition, we assume that bar teachers incur a cost due to
the teaching act, proportional to the frequency of nonbar
individuals of the same generation (xv þ yv), where the
	
proportionality constant is h. Then

 

Wx0 ¼ ð1   gÞð1 þ sÞ


xv½1   hðxv þ yvÞ þ xv

 


 

qxv þ ryv
Wx0 ¼ ð1   gÞxv
1  


 
qxv þ ryv
yv þ yv
Wy0 ¼ ð1 þ sÞ
1  
qxv þ ryv
Wy0 ¼ yv

 
where

 

W ¼ð1   gÞð1 þ sÞ
xv½1   hðxv þ yvÞ þ xv
 


 

þ ð1   gÞxv
þ ð1 þ sÞ
1  
qxv þ ryv
qxv þ ryv
qxv þ ryv

þ yv
.

1  

;

qxv þ ryv

(18.55)

(18.56)

(18.57)

(18.58)

	


qxv þ ryv
yv þ yv

The recursions over one generation for this VTHT
model are obtained by substituting xv; xv; yv, and yv from
Eqs. (18.5)e(18.9) into Eqs. (18.55)e18.59).

(18.59)

Conditions for Invasion by Teachers
At a genetically monomorphic equilibrium of nonteachers

 
bWbV ¼ 1 þ sbby


1 þ r   brby

.

(18.60)

The zero equilibrium, by ¼ 0, always exists and is
stable in the nonteacher subspace if (1 þ s)b(1 þ r) < 1.
equilibrium, by > 0, must satisfy
a positive
 

1 þ r   brby
1 þ sbby
where we have used byv ¼ bby. Hence, by > 0 is the valid


1 þ r   brby

¼ ð1 þ sÞb

and (18.60)

(18.57)

entail

Eqs.

that

 

solution of

fðzÞ h sb2rz2   ½sð1 þ rÞ þ ð1 þ sÞbrbz þ ð1 þ sÞ

 bð1 þ rÞ   1 ¼ 0:

(18.61)
When r > 0, Eq. (18.61) is a quadratic that is convex
since f(0) ¼ (1 þ s)b(1 þ r)   1
downward. Moreover,
and f(1) ¼  (1   b)(1   br) < 0, there is a unique positive
equilibrium if and only if (1 þ s)b(1 þ r) > 1. On the other
hand, we obtain

by ¼ ð1 þ sÞb   1

(18.62)
if r ¼ 0, which is valid for (1 þ s)b > 1 and identical to
Eq. (18.19) of the ARUT model.

sb

Subsequently, we restrict our attention to the special

Linearization of the recursions for the VTHT model
around either the zero or the positive equilibrium yields a
reducible 3  3 coefﬁcient matrix. It can be shown that the
positive equilibrium is locally stable in the nonteacher
subspace when it exists. Local stability to invasion of
teachers is governed by a very complicated quadratic
characteristic polynomial.

case of rbyv ¼ rby ¼ 0. That is, we consider the local
by ¼ 0, and of the phenotypically polymorphic equilibrium

stability to invasion by teachers of the zero equilibrium,
that is given by Eq. (18.62) when r ¼ 0. As in the VTOT
model, our justiﬁcation for the latter is that teachers may be
preferred
transmission
(Hewlett, 2013), so it is reasonable to set r ¼ 0 and q > 0.
is

the zero equilibrium, by ¼ 0,

When rby ¼ 0,

exemplars

horizontal

for

as

invadable by teachers if

ð1   gÞð1   dÞð1 þ sÞað1   hÞ > 1;
polymorphic
the

and
phenotypically

Eq. (18.62), is invadable if
ð1   gÞð1   dÞð1 þ sÞa


1   hð1 þ sÞð1   bÞ

s

(18.63)

equilibrium,

> ð1 þ sÞb.

(18.64)

Gene-Culture Models for the Evolution of Altruistic Teaching Chapter | 18 291

child is 100%. Hence, a quantitatively valid inclusive
ﬁtness argument applicable to animals and humans cannot
be made based on this model. This deﬁciency is remedied
by the SRBT model, which assumes sexual reproduction
and biparental transmission. Here, the relatedness between
parent and child is one-half. (We note that considerations of
relatedness alone would suggest that more teaching should
occur among asexually reproducing organisms.)

In the putative cases of teaching in felids it is the mother
that teaches its cubs how to catch prey, whereas in raptors
both parents participate in teaching their ﬂedglings to hunt
(Caro and Hauser, 1992).
In human hunter-gatherers,
cultural traits are often transmitted in a sex-limited way
from mother to daughter or from father to son, but there
may also be some inﬂuence of the opposite-sex parent
(Hewlett and Cavalli-Sforza, 1986; Hewlett et al., 2011;
Hewlett, 2013). The SRBT model applies to raptors and to
human hunter-gatherers if we assume that,
in terms of
ﬁtness, both parents suffer the same costs and that offspring
of both sexes receive the same beneﬁt.

The predictions of the SRBT model are often consistent
with those of the ARUT model. Thus,
the panels of
Fig. 18.2 show that parental teaching is more likely to
evolve when the costs to the parents are small and the
beneﬁt to the offspring is large. Similarly, parental teaching
is favored when it signiﬁcantly improves the efﬁciency of
vertical transmission, and when the environment is stable.
There are however some notable differences, and where a
discrepancy exists, the predictions of the SRBT model are
likely to be more pertinent in nature.

One major difference is that the condition for teaching
to invade from the nonteacher ﬁxation equilibrium with the
adaptive phenotype absentdequilibrium Eq. (18.36) of the
SRBT model and equilibrium Eq. (18.18) of the ARUT
modeldis twice as stringent for the former then for the
latter model. This is because of the twofold difference in
the relatedness between parent and child in the two models.
As a result, the SRBT model predicts that invasion by
teachers is relatively more likely when the adaptive
phenotype can be maintained in the population without
teachingdie, from equilibrium Eq. (18.42)dwhen (1 þ s)
b is slightly greater than 1.

Another major difference between the ARUT and
SRBT models is that fully polymorphic equilibria, with all
four phenogenotypes present, may exist
in the SRBT
model. These equilibria can be unstable which entails
bistability, or globally stable as suggested by numerical
work. In the former case, whether or not teaching evolves
depends on the initial frequencies of the phenogenotypes.
In the latter case, the population evolves to a state in which
teachers and nonteachers coexist. That cultural diversity
(and genetic diversity at the teacher/nonteacher locus) can
be maintained under biparental transmission in the SBRT,
VTOT, and VTHT models suggests that having even more

FIGURE 18.3B Numerically obtained coevolutionary trajectories for the
VTHT model are shown by broken lines. The trajectories have
been projected on to the two-dimensional variable space where the
horizontal axis corresponds to the frequency of the bar phenotype ðx þ yÞ
teachers
and the vertical axis corresponds
ðx þ xÞ. Convergence
equilibrium,
by
the ﬁlled circle, is suggested. Parameter values are a ¼ 0.9, b ¼ 0.6,
g ¼ 0.1, d ¼ 0.1, s ¼ 1, h ¼ 0.1, q ¼ 0.4, and r ¼ 0.

bx ¼ 0:3100; bx ¼ 0:0365; by ¼ 0:3891; by ¼ 0:2644,

to the frequency of

fully

polymorphic

to

the

indicated

Clearly, both invasion conditions are more stringent
than the corresponding conditions for the VTOTdalso the
ARUTdmodel. We consider the reasons for the differing
predictions derived from the VTOT and VTHT models in
the Discussion section. Moreover, these conditions do not
ensure ﬁxation of teachers. In fact, Fig. 18.3B illustrates a
case suggesting the existence of a stable fully polymorphic
equilibrium when Eq. (18.64) is satisﬁed.

DISCUSSION
We investigated the theoretical conditions for the evolution
of parental teaching of an advantageous cultural trait. The
ARUT model posits asexual reproduction and uniparental
transmission. It can be analyzed completely and shows
how the efﬁciencies of vertical transmission of beneﬁcial
information, costs to the parent, and beneﬁt to the offspring
interact
to determine whether teaching can evolve (see
Fig. 18.1). The negative effect of environmental change,
namely making ﬁxation of teaching unstable and ﬁxation of
nonteaching stable, was also revealed. Many predictions of
the ARUT model carry over qualitatively to the SRBT
model,
the VTOT model, and the VTHT model. An
important difference is that a genetic polymorphism of
teachers and nonteachers may arise in the latter three
models, but is not possible in the ARUT model.

A major shortcoming of the ARUT model is that it
assumes asexual reproduction, which facilitates analysis
but entails that the genetic relatedness between parent and

292 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

exemplars available to a juvenile may make the mainte-
nance of genetic diversity even more likely (Fogarty et al.,
2015).

These considerations are reminiscent of the discussion
around the cost of sex in evolutionary genetics (eg,
Maynard Smith, 1978). Consider a haploid population with
alleles A/a at one locus and D/d at a second locus, with
ﬁtnesses w1, w2, w3, and w4 for the haplotypes AD, Ad, aD,
and ad, respectively. In the absence of recombination, the
haplotype with the largest wi will be ﬁxed. Now suppose
w1, w4 > w2, w3. Then, a bistable situation can arise in the
presence of recombination if 1   r < w1/w4 < (1   r) 1,
where r is the recombination rate. That
is, when this
inequality is satisﬁed, ﬁxations on AD and ad are both
locally stable. This interaction of
recombination with
genetic epistasis is analogous to the effect of the interaction
between the teaching locus and the bar/not-bar phenotype
in the SRBT model. A major qualitative difference,
however,
the SRBT model seems to allow full
polymorphism to be stable for some parameter values,
while this is not seen in the two-locus haploid genetic
model with sexual reproduction (Feldman, 1971).
In Table 18.1, if we set ad ¼ bd ¼ 1, as ¼ bs ¼ 1/2, and
m ¼ 1, the transmission system becomes identical to that of
the two-locus system with free recombination (r ¼ 1/2).
ﬁxation points bx ¼ 1 and by ¼ 1, respectively. With g, d,
In this case the analogs to ﬁxation on AD and aD are the

is that

and s all positive, both of these are locally stable, and their
domains of attraction are most likely separated by a surface
in the frequency simplex. In this extreme case, however,
it
is unlikely that any complete polymorphism can be
stable, which we have seen may occur in the more general
SRBT model.

interactions,

Let us now brieﬂy review the VTOT and VTHT
models, which add oblique and horizontal transmission,
respectively, between nonkin to the ARUT model. The
cost of the teaching act can be readily incorporated for
intragenerational
in particular horizontal
transmission (Fogarty et al., 2011). Thus,
is
to the frequency of not-bar individualsd
proportional
represented in Eq. (18.55) as h(xv þ yv)dand is incurred
“only in the presence of a naïve observer” (Caro and
Hauser, 1992). Similarly, if there are no fertility differences
other than those due to teaching, the cost of the teaching act
for vertical transmission can reasonably be incorporated as
a ﬁxed reduction of fertility, d (Creanza et al., 2013). On
the other hand,
there is apparently no natural way to
incorporate the cost of the teaching act for oblique trans-
mission, and Eq. (18.44) must be regarded in that light.

this cost

We have restricted our analyses of the VTOT and
VTHT models to obtaining the conditions for invasion by
teachers. Moreover, for invasion from the phenotypically
polymorphic equilibrium Eq. (18.52) or Eq. (18.62), we
assume that bar nonteachers are not sought as exemplars for

oblique or horizontal transmission, ie, we set r ¼ 0 in both
models. Under these simplifying assumptions, we ﬁnd that
the invasion conditions for the VTOT model are the same
as for the ARUT model. On the other hand, they are more
stringent for the VTHT model. That is, horizontal but not
oblique transmission between nonkin,
superposed on
vertical transmission, makes it more difﬁcult for teaching to
invade. This difference between the predicted effects of
oblique and horizontal transmission may be ascribed to our
assumption in Eq. (18.44) that the cost of the teaching act
for oblique transmission is incurred by postreproductives.
In addition, numerical work suggests that stable fully
polymorphic equilibria are possible in both the VTOT
(Fig. 18.3A) and VTHT (Fig. 18.3B) models.

The agent-based simulation model of Premo (2015)
incorporated a geographically distributed array of groups.
The cultural transmission to an individual from a given
group depended on the distance of
the transmitting
individuals’ groups from the residence group of the learner.
This model (see also Premo and Scholnick, 2011) did not
include ﬁtness differences between individuals with and
without the cultural variant. Nor did teaching individuals
have any character that distinguished them from randomly
chosen new teachers. Thus the focus was on the role of
population size and geographic radius in which learning
(and hence, teaching) could occur, both of which affected
ultimate cultural diversity.

An entirely different model was analyzed by Nakahashi
(2015) who assumed that
teaching behavior itself was
culturally transmitted. The focus of this study was the effect
of teaching on the number of traits acquired by social and
individual learning, respectively. The model was developed
in a context of an inﬁnite number of possible cultural traits,
some of which gave their carriers a selective advantage. An
ESS (evolutionarily stable strategy) argument was used to
ascertain conditions on the numbers of individually and
socially acquired traits,
trans-
mission, and amount by which teaching increased the
amount of transmission that would promote the increase of
teaching in a large population. Unlike our model, trans-
mission of the teaching trait and the trait being taught were
both cultural and at the same rate. Since teaching was a
socially transmitted trait in this model, its increase depen-
ded strongly on social learning.

the accuracy of cultural

To the best of our knowledge, Fogarty et al. (2011) was
the ﬁrst paper to explicitly investigate the conditions for the
evolution of teaching sensu Caro and Hauser (1992). In
addition to demonstrating the importance of inclusive ﬁtness
effects, they show that teaching is more likely to invade
when the sum of the efﬁciencies (probabilities) of acquisi-
tion of the beneﬁcial information by individual learning and
by social learning without teaching is neither too low nor
too high. We have ignored individual learning in our paper,
but the additive case of the SRBT model (see Subsection

Gene-Culture Models for the Evolution of Altruistic Teaching Chapter | 18 293

Special Case of Additive Vertical Transmission Parameters)
yields a result that is concordant with Fogarty et al. (2011).
Namely, it predicts that teaching is more likely to invade
when vertical transmission of beneﬁcial information from
nonteachers is of intermediate efﬁciency. Speciﬁcally, the
optimal transmission rate when both nonteacher parents
possess the beneﬁcial information is slightly greater than 1/
(1 þ s), where s is the selective advantage associated with
the beneﬁcial information (see Fig. 18.2). Interestingly, this
entails that the adaptive phenotype can be maintained in the
population without teaching.

Fogarty et al. (2011), among others, point out

that
cumulative culture, a characteristic of modern humans, is
likely made possible by the high-ﬁdelity social transmission
of information achieved by teaching. Let us consider two
contrasting aspects of this claim. First, a learning schedule is
deﬁned to be a broad developmental pattern over a single
individual’s lifetime in the differential use of individual
learning and social learning. Borenstein et al. (2008) and
Aoki (2010) deﬁne “social-learner-explorer” to be a learning
schedule in which a phenotype acquired by social learning is
subsequently modiﬁed by individual
learning. Such a
learning schedule is believed to underlie cumulative culture
(Tomasello, 1999). Aoki et al. (2012) argued that social-
learner-explorer
in a
constantdand
stabled
environment, only if the efﬁciency of social learning among
naïve newborns is high (relative to the efﬁciency of indi-
vidual learning). Hence, the evolution of teaching might
indeed facilitate the evolution of social-learner-explorer and
as a result pave the way for cumulative culture.

evolutionarily stable

can be
by

extension

a

relatively

Second, the ﬁdelity of social learning and the innova-
tion rate are both strongly and positively correlated with the
amount of cultural variation that can be maintained in a
population (Strimling et al., 2009; Lehmann et al., 2011;
Aoki et al., 2011). We have shown in this chapter that
temporal environmental stability favors the evolution of
parental
teaching or, more generally, an evolutionary
increase in the efﬁciency of vertical transmission. However,
environmental stability also has the effect of selecting for a
decreased reliance on individual
learning (eg, Feldman
et al., 1996; Wakano and Aoki, 2006), which entails that
innovativeness may be reduced. Hence, we suggest that
high-ﬁdelity social
learning and high innovative ability
may simultaneously evolve only within a limited range of
environmental stability, with the consequence that a
learning strategy supportive of complex culture will be an
evolutionary rarity.

As for cumulative culture, some previous theoretical
studies have found that the amount of cultural accumulation
will be limited when the cost of learning is modeled in
terms of decreased reproduction time during an individual’s
life history (Lehmann et al., 2013; Wakano and Miura,
2014; Kobayashi et al., 2015). In this chapter, we studied

the cost of teaching, instead of learning, and found that the
dynamics become complicated because learners do not
always carry the teaching allele. It would be interesting to
see whether cultural accumulation could be an evolutionary
outcome for models in which the cost of teaching is
explicitly a function of life history.

We note that continuous phenotypic variation, as
modeled by Eq. (18.1) for example, is more realistic than
dichotomous variation; genetic polymorphism would
translate into a continuous spectrum for the predilection
and aptitude for teaching. While there is an increasing
number of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of
children’s achievement in schools (eg, Domingue et al.,
2014; Rietveld et al., 2015), none of these studies have
directly addressed variation in teaching as a relevant co-
variate, although other covariates related to school envi-
ronments are sometimes discussed (Domingue et al.,
2015). One might ask whether
these GWAS studies
implicitly extend the relevance of Murray Gell-Mann’s
quote, at the beginning of this chapter, to elementary and
high schools as well.

APPENDICES

Appendix 1. Analysis of Asexual
Reproduction and Uniparental
Transmission (ARUT) Dynamics
in Eq. (18.15)
The eigenvalues and corresponding eigenvectors of the
coefﬁcient matrix in Eq. (18.15) are


ð1   dÞð1 þ sÞa   1
ð1   dÞð1 þ saÞ   1

1 ¼
vT

l1 ¼ ð1   gÞð1   dÞð1 þ sÞa

ð1   dÞð1   aÞ

ð1   dÞð1 þ saÞ   1

;



l2 ¼ 1   g
2 ¼ ð0; 1; 0; 0Þ
vT
l3 ¼ ð1 þ sÞb
0; 0;ð1 þ sÞb   1

sb
l4 ¼ 1



; 1   b
sb

4 ¼ ð0; 0; 0; 1Þ.
vT

3 ¼
vT

(A1a)



; 0; 0

(A1b)

(A1c)

(A1d)

(A1e)

(A1f)

(A1g)

(A1h)

Using the argument of Wakano et al. (2004), each
nonnegative eigenvector, normalized so that the elements
sum to unity, deﬁnes an equilibrium, and there is global
convergence to the eigenvector corresponding to the
maximal eigenvalue.

294 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

Equilibrium given by vector vT

4 always exists and is
globally stable if (1 þ s)b < 1 (l3 < l4) and (1   g)(1 þ s)
a < 1 (l1 < l4). Equilibrium given by vector vT
3 exists if
and only if (1 þ s)b > 1. It is stable to perturbations in the
nonteacher subspace when it exists (l3 > l4). When it ex-
ists it is stable if (1   g)(1   d)(1 þ s)a < (1 þ s)b (ie,
l1 < l3).
1 exists if and only if
(1   d)(1 þ s)a > 1. When it exists it is stable to pertur-
bations in the teacher subspace (l1 > l2) and it is globally
stable if (1   g)(1   d)(1 þ s)a > max[1, (1 þ s)b] (ie,
l1 > l3,l4).

Equilibrium given by vector vT

equilibrium by ¼ 0 is

condition. Speciﬁcally, for the SRBT model

the zero
locally stable to invasion by

teachers if

ð1   gÞð1   dÞð1 þ sÞas < 1:

(A2b)

b. For local stability of equilibria on the teaching edge

ðbx;bx; 0; 0Þ, we linearize Eqs. (18.31)e(18.34) around

either the zero or the/a positive equilibrium, which yields
a reducible 3  3 coefﬁcient matrix. Local stability to in-
vasion by nonteachers is governed by a 2  2 positive



4ðlÞ ¼

ð1 þ sÞ


1   dbx  


ð1   dÞmbx þ bsbx
bWbV
  l


ð1   dÞmbx þ bsbx
bWbV

bx
ð1 þ sÞð1   dÞas
bx

1   dbx   ð1   dÞas

bWbV
bWbV

  l

;

(A2c)

 


0; 0;by;by

Appendix 2. Stability in the Sexual
Reproduction and Biparental Transmission
(SRBT) Model
a. For local stability of equilibria on the nonteaching edge
, we linearize Eqs. (18.31)e(18.34) around
either the zero or the/a positive equilibrium, which
yields a reducible 3  3 coefﬁcient matrix. Local stabil-
ity to invasion by teachers is governed by a 2  2 pos-
itive
characteristic
polynomial (quadratic)

submatrix, which

yields

the

submatrix, which yields the characteristic (quadratic)
polynomial

where bWbV is the mean ﬁtness given by Eq. (18.39).
In particular, substitution of bx ¼ 0 into Eq. (A2c)
shows that the zero equilibrium bx ¼ 0 is always unstable,

which was also true of the ARUT model.

by

ð1   gÞð1 þ sÞbs

by

bWbV
 
bWbV
1   bs

ð1   gÞ

  l

;

(A2a)



fðlÞ ¼

ð1   gÞð1   dÞ

 

mby þ asby
bWbV
ð1   gÞð1   dÞð1 þ sÞ
  l
 

1   mby   asby
bWbV
where bWbV is the mean ﬁtness given by Eq. (18.35).
ﬁnd on substituting by ¼ 0 into Eq.
In particular, for the zero equilibrium Eq. (18.36), we
the
maximal eigenvalue is (1   g)(1   d)(1 þ s)as, which is
identical
in form to Eq. (18.16) (ie, l1 in the ARUT
model). However, for the SRBT model it is a local con-
dition, whereas in the ARUT model it provides a global

(18.38)

that

Foundation.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported in part by Monbukagakusho grant
22101004 to Kenichi Aoki and Joe Yuichiro Wakano and by NIH
grant GM28016 to Marcus W. Feldman. We thank Yutaka Kobayashi
for comments.

The authors would like to acknowledge the John Templeton

Gene-Culture Models for the Evolution of Altruistic Teaching Chapter | 18 295

REFERENCES

Aoki, K., 2010. Evolution of the social-learner-explorer strategy in an
environmentally heterogeneous two-island model. Evolution 64,
2575e2586.

Aoki, K., Feldman, M.W., 1987. Toward a theory for the evolution of
cultural communication: coevolution of signal
transmission and
reception. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 84, 7164e7168.

Aoki, K., Feldman, M.W., 1997. A gene-culture coevolutionary model for
brother-sister mating. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences of the United States of America 94, 13046e13050.

Aoki, K., Feldman, M.W., 2014. Evolution of learning strategies in
temporally and spatially variable environments: a review of theory.
Theoretical Population Biology 91, 3e19.

Aoki, K., Lehmann, L., Feldman, M.W., 2011. Rates of cultural change
and patterns of cultural accumulation in stochastic models of social
transmission. Theoretical Population Biology 79, 192e202.

Aoki, K., Wakano, J.Y., Feldman, M.W., 2005. The emergence of social
learning in a temporally changing environment: a theoretical model.
Current Anthropology 46, 334e340.

Aoki, K., Wakano, J.Y., Lehmann, L., 2012. Evolutionarily stable learning
schedules and cumulative culture in discrete generation models.
Theoretical Population Biology 81, 300e309.

Borenstein, E., Feldman, M.W., Aoki, K., 2008. Evolution of learning in
ﬂuctuating environments: when selection favors both social and
exploratory individual learning. Evolution 62, 586e602.

Boyd, R., Richerson, P.J., 1985. Culture and the Evolutionary Process.

Univ. Chicago Press, Chicago.

Byrne, R.W., Rapaport, L.G., 2011. What are we learning from teaching?

Animal Behaviour 82, 1207e1211.

Caro, T.M., Hauser, M.D., 1992. Is there teaching in nonhuman animals?

The Quarterly Review of Biology 67, 151e174.

Cavalli-Sforza, L.L., Feldman, M.W., 1973. Models for cultural inheri-
tance. I. Group mean and within group variation. Theoretical Popu-
lation Biology 4, 42e55.

Cavalli-Sforza, L.L., Feldman, M.W., 1978. Darwinian selection and

“altruism”. Theoretical Population Biology 14, 268e280.

Cavalli-Sforza, L.L., Feldman, M.W., 1981. Cultural Transmission and
Evolution: A Quantitative Approach. Princeton University Press,
Princeton, N.J.

Creanza, N., Fogarty, L., Feldman, M.W., 2013. Exploring cultural niche
construction from the Paleolithic to modern hunter-gatherers. In:
Akazawa, T., Nishiaki, Y., Aoki, K. (Eds.), Dynamics of Learning in
Neanderthals and Modern Humans, Cultural Perspectives, vol. 1.
Springer, Tokyo, pp. 211e228.

Domingue, B.W., Fletcher, J., Conley, D., Boardman, J.D., 2014. Genetic
and educational assortative mating among US adults. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
111, 7996e8000.

Domingue, B.W., Belsky, D.W., Conley, D., Harris, K.M.,
Boardman, J.D., 2015. Polygenic inﬂuence on educational attainment:
new evidence from the National Longitudinal study of adolescent to
adult health. AERA Open 1 (3), 1e13.

Feldman, M.W., 1971. Equilibrium studies of two locus haploid pop-
ulations with recombination. Theoretical Population Biology 2,
299e317.

Feldman, M.W., Cavalli-Sforza, L.L., 1976. Cultural and biological
evolutionary processes, selection for a trait under complex trans-
mission. Theoretical Population Biology 9, 239e259.

Feldman, M.W., Aoki, K., Kumm, J., 1996. Individual versus social
learning: evolutionary analysis in a ﬂuctuating environment. Anthro-
pological Science 104, 209e213.

Feldman, M.W., Christiansen, F.B., Otto, S.P., 2013. Gene-culture co-
learning, and correlations between relatives.

evolution:
Israel Journal of Ecology and Evolution 59, 72e91.

teaching,

Fogarty, L., Strimling, P., Laland, K.N., 2011. The evolution of teaching.

Evolution 65, 2760e2770.

Fogarty, L., Wakano, J.Y., Feldman, M.W., Aoki, K., 2015. Factors
limiting the number of independent cultural traits that can be main-
tained in a population. In: Mesoudi, A., Aoki, K. (Eds.), Learning
Strategies and Cultural Evolution during the Paleolithic. Springer,
Japan, pp. 9e21 (Chapter 2).

Hamilton, W.D., 1964. The genetical evolution of social behaviour. I.

Journal of Theoretical Biology 7, 1e16.

Hewlett, B., 2013. “Ekeloko” the spirit to createdinnovation and social
learning among Aka adolescents of the central African rainforest. In:
Akazawa, T., Nishiaki, Y., Aoki, K. (Eds.), Dynamics of Learning in
Neanderthals and Modern Humans, Cultural Perspectives, vol. 1.
Springer, Tokyo, pp. 187e195.

Hewlett, B.S., Cavalli-Sforza, L.L., 1986. Cultural transmission among

Aka pygmies. American Anthropologist 88, 922e934.

Hewlett, B.S., Fouts, H.N., Boyette, A.H., Hewlett, B.L., 2011. Social
learning among Congo Basin hunter-gatherers. Philosophical Trans-
actions of the Royal Society B 366, 1168e1178.

Hoppitt, W.J.E., Brown, G.R., Kendal, R., et al., 2008. Lessons from

animal teaching. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 23, 486e493.

Kendal, J., Giraldeau, L.-A., Laland, K., 2009. The evolution of social
learning rules: payoff-biased and frequency-dependent biased trans-
mission. Journal of Theoretical Biology 260, 210e219.

Kobayashi, Y., Wakano, J.Y., Ohtsuki, H., 2015. A paradox of cumulative

culture. Journal of Theoretical Biology 379, 79e88.

Lehmann, L., Aoki, K., Feldman, M.W., 2011. On the number of inde-
pendent cultural traits carried by individuals and populations. Philo-
sophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 366, 424e435.

Lehmann, L., Feldman, M.W., 2009. Coevolution of adaptive technology,
maladaptive culture, and population size in a producer-scrounger
game. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 276,
3853e3862.

Lehmann, L., Wakano, J.Y., Aoki, K., 2013. On optimal learning sched-
ules and the marginal value of cumulative cultural evolution. Evolu-
tion 67, 1435e1445.

Maynard Smith, J., 1978. The Evolution of Sex. Cambridge Univ. Press,

Cambridge UK.

Nakahashi, W., 2015. The evolution of culturally transmitted teaching
behavior. In: Mesoudi, A., Aoki, K. (Eds.), Learning Strategies and
Cultural Evolution during the Palaeolithic. Springer, Tokyo,
pp. 23e33.

Premo, L.S., 2015. Mobility and cultural diversity in central-place for-
agers: implications for the emergence of modern human behavior. In:
Mesoudi, A., Aoki, K. (Eds.), Learning Strategies and Cultural Evo-
lution during the Palaeolithic. Springer, Tokyo, pp. 45e65.

Premo, L.S., Scholnick, J.B., 2011. The spatial scale of social learning

affects cultural diversity. American Anthropologist 76, 163e176.

Rietveld, C.A., Conley, D., Eriksson, N., et al., 2015. Replicability and
robustness of genome-wide-association studies for behavioral traits.
Psychological Science 25, 1975e1986.

Rogers, A.R., 1988. Does biology constrain culture? American Anthro-

pologist 90, 819e831.

296 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

Strimling, P., Sjöstrand, J., Enquist, M., Eriksson, K., 2009. Accumulation
traits. Theoretical Population Biology 76,

of independent cultural
77e83.

Takakura, J., 2013. Using lithic reﬁtting to investigate the skill learning
process: lessons from Upper Paleolithic assemblages at the Shirataki
sites in Hokkaido, northern Japan. In: Akazawa, T., Nishiaki, Y.,
Aoki, K. (Eds.), Dynamics of Learning in Neanderthals and Modern
Humans, Cultural Perspectives, vol. 1. Springer, Tokyo, pp. 151e171.
Tomasello, M., 1999. The human adaptation for culture. Annual Review of

Anthropology 28, 509e529.

Uyenoyama, M., Feldman, M.W., 1981. On relatedness and adaptive
topography in kin selection. Theoretical Population Biology 19,
87e123.

Uyenoyama, M., Feldman, M.W., Cavalli-Sforza, L.L., 1979. Evolu-
tionary effects of contagious and familial transmission. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 76,
420e424.

Wakano, J.Y., Aoki, K., 2006. A mixed strategy model for the emergence
and intensiﬁcation of social learning in a periodically changing natural
environment. Theoretical Population Biology 70, 486e497.

Wakano, J.Y., Aoki, K., Feldman, M.W., 2004. Evolution of social
learning: a mathematical analysis. Theoretical Population Biology 66,
249e258.

Wakano, J.Y., Miura, C., 2014. Trade-off between learning and exploi-
tation:
the Pareto-optimal versus evolutionarily stable learning
schedule in cumulative cultural evolution. Theoretical Population
Biology 91, 37e43.

Chapter 19

Multiple Origins of Agriculture in
Eurasia and Africa

O. Bar-Yosef
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, United States

INTRODUCTION

The history of human technological evolution is dotted
with inventions and innovations. Some failed, others suc-
ceeded. The emergence of an agro-pastoral economy in a
few regions was successful, apparently being the most
inﬂuential revolutionary process in world history, a fact
that did not escape the attention of the people several
millennia ago. The Biblical story of the expulsion from the
Garden of Eden is a known example, but similar notions
were conveyed by early Egyptian, Greek, and Roman
mythologies. Interestingly, three goddesses were consid-
ered responsible for the change through the introduction of
cereals and fruit-tree farming. These were Isis in Egypt,
Demeter in Greece, and Ceres in Rome (Harlan, 1992).
Comparable tales were recorded in China and the
Americas, though sometimes they are male gods. How-
ever, as far as science is concerned, it was only during the
19th century that scholars began to directly address the
research issues that face us today. Alphonse de Candolle
(1884) in the introduction to his seminal volume on the
“The origins of cultivated plants” states that “in the
progress of civilization the beginnings are usually feeble,
obscure and limited . Between the custom of gathering
wild fruits, grain and roots and that of regular cultivation
of the plants which produce them, there are several steps”
(1884, p. 2, English translation). Being familiar with
ethnographic records concerning foragers’ behavior, he
mentions the example of the Australians and the Patago-
nians that if they do not consider vegetal resources “pro-
ductive and easy to rear, they do not entertain the idea of
cultivating them” (1884, p. 2, English translation). He then
considers the question of the transfer of cultivated plants
from one region to the other and indicates that adaptation

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00019-3
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

is faster on the continents rather than on the islands.
Having been one of four generations of Swiss botanists de
Candolle knew about the “Colombian” exchange and how
wheat, maize, millet, sweet potatoes, and other staples
were widely diffused across the continents even prior
to known historical records. In brief, de Candolle was
fully aware of the questions posed by investigators since
the early excavations of farming communities, known
as the Neolithic Age, concerning the when, how, and
why cultivation, horticulture, and animal domestication
evolved.

The answers to each of these queries posit a different
kind of challenge. The most difﬁcult is why it happened
after more than two or three million years of human evo-
lution. Current answers refer to two options, namely, the
“pull” and the “push” models (eg, Diamond, 1997;
Bellwood, 2005; Gept, 2014). The ﬁrst considers human
desire to improve the standard of living as the main trigger.
The second takes into consideration demographic pressure
due to the rising size of human population and the demand
for supplies as the causal reason. I will return to this issue in
the ﬁnal discussion after presenting the known evidence.

A little less complex topic is when it happened. This
aspect seems the easiest
to resolve. We can trace the
“domestication syndrome” of plants and animals, due to the
fast development of 14C radiocarbon dating technique.
Readings are given today as calibrated before present (cal
BP) calculated on the basis of dendrochronology and other
records of annual accumulations (eg, Brock et al., 2010;
Taylor and Bar-Yosef, 2014). The best samples for dating,
obtained through systematic excavations, are the short-
lived seeds of annual plants and animal bones. Human
skeletal remains come next while wood charcoal would be
the last due to the possible effects of “old wood,” the

297

298 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

remains of ﬁrewood collected by humans or of wooden
posts employed for building.

The issue of where the transition from foraging to
farming took place is debated due to the difﬁculty of
identifying the nature and the dates of early cultivation,
already practiced by hunter-gatherers during the Terminal
Pleistocene and Early Holocene. Only rarely did early ex-
periments result in the establishment of fully agricultural
societies. Domesticated animals and plants were transferred
from the original core areas of domestication to other
regions and were adopted therein by locals who sometimes
initiated cultivation of local plants that became domesti-
cated through time.

The pioneering studies to discover the origins of plant
domestications were conducted during the early 20th cen-
tury by N. Vavilov, a Russian botanist who identiﬁed nine
megacenters in Eurasia, Southeast Asia, New Guinea, and
Meso- and South America where he recognized the pres-
ence of wild species that
later became domesticated
(Vavilov, 1926). J. Harlan rejected the simple approach of
Vavilov and instead followed de Candolle’s idea that
current and past information on plants, uncovered through
archaeological investigations, should be taken into account
in tandem with human activities during the past millennia
(Harlan, 1971, 1992, 1995). On the basis of the available
information he
suggested to geographically identify
“centers” and “noncenters,” thus pointing to the Near East
(or the Fertile Crescent) as a center while Africa (across the

techniques, and oral

Sahel and in Ethiopia) was a noncenter; to North and South
China as centers but Korea, Japan, Southeast Asia, and the
Paciﬁc as noncenters. Mesoamerica was considered as a
center and South America as a noncenter. The noncenters
were in the receiving ends of the dispersals of humans and
staple food plants (Fig. 19.1). Later, north of South
America and the Andes were added to the list of centers
(eg, Diamond, 1997, 2012; Piperno and Pearsall, 1998;
Bellwood, 2005; Purugganan and Fuller, 2009; Zohary
et al., 2012; Gept, 2014). Once domestication of plants
and animals happened in these centers, all scholars agree
that people, products,
information
were transmitted to other places.
In the noncenters,
additional domestication took place (Fig. 19.1). On the
whole, during the last two decades the amount of data
concerning the domestication of plants and animals
increased rapidly and continues to do so. For brevity, this
review will relate only to the formative phases of agricul-
tural systems, at the time of the Terminal Pleistocene and
the ﬁrst half of the Holocene, approximately from 23,000 to
8000 years ago. To clarify matters, I will ﬁrst deal with the
current
conundrum followed by the
information concerning prehistoric social contexts within
which the onset of plant cultivation and animal domesti-
cation took place. This will lead us to animal domestication
that
to follow than the processes
involved in plant domestication. Finally, selected brief
regional surveys of Eurasia and Africa and a shorter one for

terminological

is a simpler subject

1,300

9/8,000

5/4,000

8,700

5,000

12/11,000

6/5,000

9,000

6,000

centers
non-centers
dispersal routes

0

0

2000

4000

6000

8000 10 000 Km

FIGURE 19.1 Centers and noncenters in the world with the approximate date for early cultivation of staple crops.

Multiple Origins of Agriculture in Eurasia and Africa Chapter | 19 299

the Americas will exemplify the various pathways by
which the initiation and early development of agricultural
systems occurred. The discussion will summarize current
hypotheses concerning the emergence of agro-pastoral
societies.

THE TERMINOLOGY CONUNDRUM

Before delving into presentations of data
and in-
terpretations, we should brieﬂy pay attention to the terms
used in this chapter as in numerous previous publications.
D. Harris (2007, p. 17) correctly noted that the academic
discourse employs terms, such as “agriculture,” “cultiva-
tion,” “domestication,” “horticulture,” and “pastoralism”
that have multiple meanings, without
further explicit
explanations. The most problematic term is agriculture. The
reasons for this are that the subject is of multidisciplinary
nature and directly relates to the notion of food production.
A great number of scholars interested in the origins of
agriculture are trained in different disciplines such as
archaeology, plant and animal sciences, economy, behav-
ioral sciences, and paleoclimatology, within which this
term implicitly bears different meanings. It seems that
archaeobotanical evidence and plant paleogenetics clearly
indicate that cultivation by hunter-gatherers occurred in
different environments at different times across the conti-
nents, but not everywhere. It resulted with the domestica-
tion of the current staple food only in the centers, and was
adopted in the noncenters (Harlan, 1971, 1992; Diamond,
1997, 2012; Gept, 2014).

Animal domestication took place in several geographic
environments but the most common suppliers of meat to be
domesticated, namely, wild goat, sheep, cattle, and pigs, are
to be found in Asia (eg, Zeder, 2012, 2015; Marshal and
Weissbrod, 2011; Marshall et al., 2014). Apparently, early
plant cultivation that
is in some areas referred to as
agriculture or plant management was practiced by semi-
sedentary or
fully sedentary societies and was not
necessarily accompanied by animal husbandry (eg,
Denham, 2011). The state of reduced mobility characterizes
foraging groups in particular
regions since the Late
Pleistocene and is indicated, for example, in the Levant by
the presence of commensals such as the dog, the house
mouse, spiny rat, and house sparrow (eg, Tchernov, 1991;
Auffrey et al., 1989; Wayne and vonHoldt, 2012; Larson
et al., 2012; Zeder, 2012). Should these groups be
called “afﬂuent foragers” or simply “complex societies of
hunter-gatherers”? Current
literature uses both terms
(eg, Crawford, 2011).

The cumulative results of

the evolution of plant
cultivation and eventual domestication became the socio-
economic tipping point in humankind’s history taking place
at different times across all continents, except for Australia.
What is referred to currently as the “agricultural revolution”

was almost a century ago labeled by V.G. Childe as the
“Neolithic revolution,” a periodic term borrowed from the
research of Stone Age archaeology (Lubbock, 1865).
Childe (1929, 1952) correctly considered the economic
changes that took place during the Early Holocene (the last
phase of the Quaternary) within the social context of
Southwestern Asia as a major evolutionary step. It later led
to the formation of the tern Neolithization as the overall
process for the emergence and adoption of plant framing
and animal husbandry by Old World societies.

Recently, given the cumulative environmental impacts
of agricultural and industrial societies during the last
11 millennia, geologists and climatologists adopted the
term Anthropocene as a replacement for the term Holo-
cene to stress the impact of humans on planet earth.
However, the historical reality is that cultivation began in
numerous areas long before the end of the Pleistocene
while in other regions several millennia after the onset of
the Holocene. Indeed, the intense impact of humans on the
planet began in certain regions earlier than in others.
We note that generalizations, common in our historical
interpretations, tend sometimes to obscure the detailed
regional evidence. Thus a senior geoarchaeologist
in-
dicates the caveat in employing this terminology by stat-
ing that the use of “Anthropocene . revolves around the
increasingly salient role of cultural agents that selectively
shape a multitude of small and large speciﬁc areas, so as to
favor divergences and disjunctures . and . the result is
a nonnormative dynamic of changing spatial conﬁguration
and temporal scales that was superimposed on noncultural
Holocene processes predominantly steered by ’natural’
forces” (Butzer, 2015, p. 1539). He argues that “ﬂexible,
time-transgressive concept, rather than a ﬁrm time-frame,
should stimulate identiﬁcation and investigation of centers
of early or unusual human disturbance” (Butzer, 2015,
p. 1539). Differences between geographic regions will be
given further attention in the following pages.

All scholars agree that the genetic changes in plants and
animals caused by active human intervention referred to as
the domestication syndrome, originally deﬁned by Hammer
(1984), occurred at different times. An approach that views
the process as gradual
identiﬁes three phases in plant
domestication: (1) gathering, when people collected wild
annual plants in the environment; (2) cultivation, when wild
plant genotypes were systematically sown in ﬁelds of
choice; and (3) domestication, when domesticated-type
mutant plants were grown annually (Weiss et al., 2006).
Several scholars prefer the primacy of the term domesti-
cation over agriculture, which is a bit vaguer but could be
used for the times when the process of animal and plant
domestication was reached and is evidenced through the
archaeological
remains of agro-pastoral economy, also
referred to as fully agrarian societies (eg, Zeder, 2012,
2015). The archaeology of the Fertile Crescent provides a

300 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

wealth of archaeobotanical and archaeozoological details
that suggest a general correlation in time between the
cultivation of fully domesticated plants and livestock.

Numerous scholars see the evidence of cultivation by
hunter-gatherers as falling under the categories of agricul-
ture or agronomy (eg, Yen, 1989). Documents describing
the activities of native Australians, Americans, and Afri-
cans demonstrate that to protect and enhance the production
of their vegetal sources they engaged in cultivation actions
(eg, Harlan, 1992). For example, Australians diverted water
to ﬂood forests in the dry season, constructed water-
spreading devices, and more. There are ethnographic re-
cords of the 19th century describing foragers’ activities,
which could have been the results of previous contacts with
fully agricultural societies such as the introduction of the
taro (Colocasia esculenta) into Arenham land in Northern
Australia (Jones and Meehan, 1989). When sedentary
lifeways evolved in California, acorns became the most
important staple food as shown by the increase of milling
stones (Stevens and McElreath, 2015).

In sum, in order not to be entangled by the ambiguities
of the general terms employed by various researchers I
herewith employ “cultivation” as a descriptive expression
when the archaeological evidence demonstrates repeated
annual sowing of seeds and collection of the ensuing har-
vests. Fields could be wetlands, cleared areas by ﬁre or
other techniques, subject to tillage, digging channels for
water, and more, while the plants were not necessarily fully
modiﬁed genetically. Acceptance of the evidence of plant
domestication is based on the documented archaeobotanical
evidence (eg, Zohary et al., 2012; Fuller, 2011; Fuller et al.,
2011 Crawford, 2011; Smith, 2011; Lee, 2011; Denham,
2011). However, whether the transition from cultivation of
wild species to ﬁelds with fully domesticated plants was a
short or a long process (a few centuries or more than a
millennium) is a controversial issue. It will be discussed
later in the section on the Levant (see section The Centers
for Plant Cultivation and Domestication).

THE SOCIAL CONTEXTS OF
CULTIVATION AND DOMESTICATION
EMERGENCE

The onset of cultivation and animal domestication that
changed the course of human evolution began in the social
context of semisedentary or sedentary hunter-gatherers. The
most intriguing issue is why foragers who were better off as
Paleolithic mobile groups became sedentary. The question
can be phrased also as “why cultivate?” (Barker and
Janowski, 2011).

Sedentism is a cyclical phenomenon that could have
taken place during different times in the course of the
Paleolithic period (Bar-Yosef, 2001). The choice to become
sedentary or return to a mobile way of life expresses the

regions of

through archaeological

nature of human ability to manipulate their environment
while being fully aware, probably not always, of changes
caused by their behavior. We notice these changes in
making variable decisions
in-
vestigations when most
the world became
inhabited after the Late Glacial Maximum (LGM, c. 24-19/
18 ka cal BP; eg, Cohen, 2011 and references therein).
Limitations on free movement, fear of disrupting their
mating systems, the developing sense of “territoriality” in
view of competition with other groups, and so forth,
enforced certain restrictions on annual movements among
lower and middle latitude foragers. Anticipated mobility
meant seasonal moves and the emergence of places that
were repeatedly occupied over the years. In some but not
necessarily all
localities, humans built huts and later
houses, and used storage facilities that were not always
recoverable in the excavations (eg, baskets). Seasonally
inhabited localities were the context where human garbage,
due to reduced mobility, resulted in the formation of rich
dumps that attracted the gray wolf, the ancestor of the dogs,
as well as other commensals. Good examples are the
Natuﬁan hamlets in the Levant (c. 14,500e11,700 cal BP)
that created the conditions for commensals such as the dog,
house mouse, spiny rats, and house sparrow (Tchernov,
1991; Tchernov and Valla, 1997; Zeder, 2012). Similar
sedentary and semisedentary villages are reported from
other parts of Asia (China, Korea, and Japan) and will be
discussed later in this chapter.

While sedentism or semisedentism, and anticipated
mobility between two habitats, provides advantages for
females and children due to the reduction of residential
moves, it also means the acceptance of territorial limita-
tions. Under such circumstances foremost is the need to
have a buffering strategy in case of a decrease in resources
caused by minor shifts of annual climate (eg, several years
of repeated droughts or very harsh winters). Experiments in
cultivation could have been done under improved climatic
conditions and supply the surplus needed for bad seasons or
bad years. Humans are known for their foresight (eg, Jempa
et al., 2012) and particular resilience in resolving complex
situations caused by abrupt climatic changes. It is therefore
surprising why they became cultivators when they could
only intensify their subsistence techniques or move to other
areas, a question posited by different scholars (eg, Dia-
mond, 1997, 2012; Bellwood, 2005, 2013; Barker and
Janowski, 2011; Zeder, 2015). In brief, one proposal is to
see cultivation and animal domestication as a response to
worsening climatic conditions in a situation of restricted
mobility incorporated, as mentioned earlier, in the push
models. The alternative view, labeled as the pull models,
suggests that the initiation of cultivation emerged from the
availability of stable wild food resources and human
innovation targeted to improve their exploitation. Without
deciding on which of the two hypotheses is presently

Multiple Origins of Agriculture in Eurasia and Africa Chapter | 19 301

testing the optimal

correct, examining the variability of past human in-
teractions with their immediate environments is required.
Information gathered for
foraging
models demonstrated that
they help understand the
observed variation in the diets of Paleolithic hunter-
gatherers (eg, Kelly, 2013). However, in the current data-
base there are speciﬁc exceptions such as taboos of hunting
or eating a particular organism, as well as symbolic
signaling in the hunting of large mammals (Speth, 2010).
There are similar examples concerning plants but only one
is mentioned here, the sacred relationship involving rituals
related to oak trees in California (Harlan, 1992) or forests in
the Himalaya (Negi, 2010).

Returning to the basic question of “why” cultivate,
frequently the answer is that intensiﬁcation of resource
exploitation was not sufﬁcient for foragers who established
permanent hamlets or anticipated seasonal moves between
locations across
the landscape. Temporary solutions
included experiments in growing plants. Apparently sys-
tematic cultivation of wild plants could be simply a matter
of personal choice. Inventions and innovations during hu-
man evolution either succeeded or failed. There is no
consensus on how those were accepted or rejected by past
societies. Models demonstrate that larger populations in-
crease the probability of adoption of innovations (eg,
Shennan, 2000). However, testing these models with ma-
terial culture of ethnographically recorded hunter-gatherers
produced mixed results (eg, Collard et al., 2013 and ref-
erences therein). Under annually unstable climatic condi-
tions the choice to cultivate falls within the efforts to
intensify food security in “good times” with the foresight of
expecting the “bad times.” Apparently, this is what took
place among mobile and later by sedentary hunter-gatherers
as indicated by the archaeological data, and exempliﬁed
later in this chapter.

World population growth could have never taken place
without the contribution of domesticated plants and animals
to human diet. It would be logical to start and discuss this
by ﬁrst presenting the information about plants, given the
dietary contributions of starch from cereals or roots and
protein from legumes. However, the accumulated knowl-
edge concerning animal domestication is better known and
the interpretations by archaeozoologists, palaeogeneticists,
and researchers of animal behavior are currently better
structured than the
concerning plant
domestication.

interpretations

ANIMAL DOMESTICATION

The reasons for better knowledge about animal remains are
undoubtedly due to the results of the archaeological exca-
vations where bones are generally better preserved than
seeds. This is why several decades ago the concept of “Man
the Hunter” got primacy over “Woman the Gatherer” (eg,

Lee and DeVore, 1968; Dahlberg, 1981). The analysis of
animal bone assemblages from Paleolithic excavations was
impacted by the ethnographic research of L. Binford who
questioned the earlier accepted interpretations concerning
hunting and meat consumption (Binford, 1981). Recent
discoveries indicate that the composition of human diet as
documented by ethnographic studies resembles that of the
past. In the semitropical to mid-latitudes of both hemi-
spheres vegetal sources constitute up to 50e70% of the diet
(eg, Kelley, 2013). The rate of meat consumption increases
considerably toward the higher
latitudes and ﬁsh and
shellﬁsh along ocean shores. Yet the better bone recovery
resulted in a better understanding of the multistage process
that led to the intensiﬁcation of humaneanimal relation-
ships and ended with a better understanding of animal
domestication (eg, Vigne et al., 2011; Vigne, 2011, 2015;
Zeder, 2011, 2012, 2015; Ottoni et al., 2013; Marshall
et al., 2014).

In brief, animal domestication is characterized by
including
diverse phenotypic and behavioral changes
is often
increased sociality, earlier
reproduction that
controlled by humans, genetic isolation from wild pro-
genitors, as well as modiﬁcations of the endocrine and
metabolic systems. We know today the end of the process,
as well as when animals became feral or were not fully
isolated from interbreeding with their wild relatives. The
various stages from the onset of the domestication process
the bone assemblages
are viewed through studies of
recovered
in
paleogenetic
investigations.

numerous

sites

and

The process of domestication of four animal species in
Southwestern Asia is based on the archaeological sequence
where goat, sheep, pig, and cattle became the sources of
meat, fur, hides, hair, wool, bones, horn cores, and later,
milk (Vigne et al., 2011; Vigne, 2015; Zeder, 2012;
Evershed et al., 2008). This evolutionary sequence began
with commensalism that triggered the control of wild an-
imals and their captivation,
leading to extensive and
intensive breeding, and the ﬁnal addition of pets, such as
cats. The continuous, geographically determined, gradual
domestication of those four animals is classiﬁed by Zeder
(2012, 2015) as the expression of three different pathways
although they were partially sequential. These are the
“commensalism,” “prey,” and “directed” pathways. In
each of them there is a role for transformations in the
nature of the domesticator and the domesticated, namely
interactions beyond the common mutualism in the natural
world (Zeder, 2012, p. 163). Marshall et al. (2014) hold a
similar view but stress the complicated relationships of
gene ﬂow between the managed and wild animals, and
indicate differences that stem from the cultural background
of diverse societies.

Each of the steps in the sequence of animal domesti-
cation occurred within a social context uncovered through

302 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

archaeological excavations. It was a coevolutionary process
during which animals adapted to a niche controlled by
humans who in accordance changed their behavior. The
evidence for the in-tandem changes are not always well
recorded although the retrieval of archaeozoological evi-
dence allows for the documentation of paleogenetics of the
domesticated species. In addition, structural arrangements
within the villages, animal dung, evidence of tuberculosis,
and infections by parasites, portray some of the results of
this coevolution process (Herskovitz et al., 2008; Baker
et al., 2015; Le Bailly et al., 2003, 2005).

It

ie,

involves dogs,

The example recognized by all authorities for an early
behavioral evolutionary process is the “commensalism,” a
compassionate type of animalehuman interaction which
predates later domestication.
the
domesticated gray wolf (Canis lupus), serving as partners
in hunting, guarding, and as pets, and in later millennia in
East Asia also as food (eg, Lindblad-Toh et al., 2005;
Larson et al., 2012). The attraction of the wolves to human
garbage is considered as the reason for the original asso-
ciation. Such a situation in Paleolithic times would occur
when foragers’ mobility considerably decreased, probably
to just two locations that portray their anticipated seasonal
movements. Stable semipermanent camps, whether of a
small or a larger group would create an ideal location for
commensalism. Frequently cited evidence are the fossil
dogs uncovered in Natuﬁan sites in the Levant (Davis and
Valla, 1978; Tchernov and Valla, 1997). However, the
debate concerning the timing and the original location(s) of
dog domestication is still ongoing (eg, Savolainen et al.,
2002; Galibert et al., 2011; Larson et al., 2012; Skoglund
et al., 2015). The earliest chronological estimate to when
dogs became partners of hunter-gatherers is generally seen
as the Late to Terminal Pleistocene (Skoglund et al., 2015).
In addition, the process itself involved human constant
intentional selection as the selection done by D.K. Belaev
and his followers while taming and domesticating the silver
wolf (Trut et al., 2009).

Many millennia elapsed between dog domestication and
the intense humaneanimal relationships that began during
the Early Holocene with the domestication of goat, sheep,
cattle, and pig in Southwestern Asia, and pig in East Asia.
Added later to the repertoire of domesticated animals were
reindeer (North Europe),
llama (South America), water
buffalo (South and East Asia), zebu (India), donkey
(Africa), and camelids and yak (Asia and South America).
All these were seen as legitimate prey targets by hunter-
gatherers but were suitable to become domesticated due
to their particular pattern of behavior.

Wild sheep (Ovis aries) and bezoar (wild goats, Capra
aegagrus) are herd animals and were hunted in the Levant
during many millennia. It was a change in the intentions of
hunters that instead of getting immediate returns by killing,
they encircled and controlled small groups of goats and

sheep ending up in management including culling young
males and keeping the females and the kids. Continuous
control in pens and involvement in breeding and selection
facilitated the growth of herds in the villages. Herding in
pastures away from the village enabled gene exchange
between the domesticated Capra hircus and the wild bezoar
(Naderi et al., 2008). The mtDNA data of domesticated
goats and bezoars indicate that the domestication could
have occurred in two locations:
the Northern Levant
(sometimes mistakenly referred to as Eastern Anatolia) and
the Zagros mountains. However, as the earliest Neolithic
villages were in the former region and other contempora-
neous settlements were within easy access through the
Tigris River and its Mesopotamian tributaries, the most
parsimonious explanation is that transmission and ensuing
imitation of innovative approaches between centers and
noncenters played here a decisive role (Zeder, 2012, p.
175).

Archaeological evidence retrieved from villages in
Southwestern Asia suggests that wild boars (Sus scrofa)
were attracted to and opportunistically exploited the dumps
around sedentary settlements of early farmers (eg, Ervynck
et al., 2001; Zeder, 2011). Within a context of a new kind
of commensalism keeping piglets was possibly the ﬁrst step
leading to domestication. In the same geographic area
sedentary foragers at Hallan Çemi, on the bank of a tribu-
tary of the Tigris River, may have tried the same approach
(Redding, 2005). The assemblage from the central activity
area of this site is dominated by female pigs indicating that
this was either a failed experiment in domestication or a
ritual slaughter, as the rest of the faunal assemblage re-
ﬂected a regular hunting proﬁle (Starkovich and Stiner,
2009).

Morphological comparisons between wild and domes-
ticated pigs are considered as the best example for the
resulting biological changes. Skulls of domesticated pigs
are reduced to one-third of that of their ancestors. Similar
brain reduction occurred among other mammalian species
as well as in birds and ﬁsh (Zeder, 2012 and references
therein). A comparable process of pig domestication
occurred in China in the context of Early Neolithic villages
(Larsen et al., 2010). Given the as yet limited information it
seems that the pioneering farmers were those who grew the
millet in the Yellow River basin from which pigs were
dispersed further south into the Huai River basin and the
Yangtze River basin, respectively (Yuan and Flad, 2002;
Fig. 19.5).

According to the zooarchaeological studies cattle was
domesticated in the same geographic area of the Northern
Levant. Given the size and strength of the wild progenitor
(Bos premigenius) it is not surprising that it became an
important element in rituals and symbolism, as evidenced
by the well-known presentations of bucrania (cattle skulls),
ﬁrst found in Early Neolithic villages in the Levant but best

Multiple Origins of Agriculture in Eurasia and Africa Chapter | 19 303

in

northern Europe ﬁrst

known from the houses of Çatalhöyük (Hodder, 2007). The
results of cattle domestication, similarly to those of other
species, caused size changes (eg, reduction in the sexual
dimorphism). Milk production is directly associated with
cattle breeding. The evidence is derived from d13C values
of the major fatty acids of milk fat recovered from a large
number of pottery vessels
(Evershed et al., 2008).
Archaeologically, the earliest use of milk was found in sites
that date to the ninth millennium cal BP in Western
Anatolia and the margins of Southeast Europe and was later
traced in pottery from the Levant. The dispersal of the goat,
sheep, and cattle from Southwestern Asia resulted in milk
consumption in Europe, North Africa, Egypt, Sudan,
Ethiopia, and across the Sahel. Lactose tolerance after
weaning is an exclusively epigenetic human trait made
possible by the continued production of the enzyme lactase
into adulthood. Genetic studies demonstrated lactase
persistence is also present
in India and is generally
distributed in a northwest to southeast trajectory of this
subcontinent (Gerbault et al., 2011; Gallego Romero et al.,
2011). Dairy products were produced later and evidence for
cheese
around
7400 cal BP (Salque et al., 2013).
During the second half of

the Holocene (after
8000 cal BP) other livestock were domesticated including
the wild water buffalo (Bubalus arnee) in Southeast Asia
and the wild yak (Bos mutus) in Tibet, for which the exact
age is yet unknown. Through the same process draft ani-
mals were domesticated after 6000 cal BP and even later as
reported from various regions of Asia. These included
horses (Equus caballus),
the double-humped Bactrian
camel (Camelus bactrianus), and ﬁnally the one-humped
Arabian camels (Camelus dromedarius). The exception is
the case of the donkey (Equus asinus) domestication that
occurred in Africa (Marshall et al., 2014). All these draft
animals were on the faunal lists of hunter-gatherers and
were even later hunted by farmers. Current hypotheses link
their domestication to the evolving trade networks between
the emerging Bronze Age civilizations in the different
geographic areas of Asia (Mesopotamia, Bactria, India, and
China). However, we cannot exclude the alternative
interpretation that
the horses and the Bactrian camels
already served as means of transportation between farming
centers and noncenters during the early sixth millennia
cal BP.

appeared

The more interesting case is that of the donkey whose
natural distribution was across the Sahara to the eastern
foothills of the Atlas mountains (Kimura et al., 2011;
Fig. 19.1). According to current research they were hunted
and later domesticated in the arid or semiarid habitats in
eastern Sahara, the Red Sea Hills, the Nile Valley, and
Somaliland, which is supported by the genetic analysis of
Nubian and Somaliland donkeys (Kimura et al., 2011;
Marshall et al., 2014). While according to the genetic

evidence they are mitochondrially distinct, chronologically
the Nubian donkeys were possibly domesticated in the
Eastern Sahara by 8900e8400 cal BP. Apparently, like in
the case of the plants (see later),
the domestication of
donkeys could have been done by foragers who adopted
farming from the “foreigners” who migrated from South-
west Asia into East Africa via Egypt. The current genetic
evidence indicating such migration of farmers suggests that
donkey domestication coincides with the introduction of
plants by migrants who arrived some 8000 years ago (eg,
Gallego Llorente et al., 2015). An additional suggestion for
a migration from Southwest Asia reaching the Horn of
Africa (Hodgson et al., 2014) is based on extant human
populations’ genetics. It suggests dating the migration to
the preagricultural time and ties it with Ethiopian-Somali
ancestry and the diversiﬁcation of
the Afro-Asiatic
languages.

PATHWAYS TO THE DOMESTICATION
OF PLANTS

The course of plant domestication may resemble the
course of animal domestication but human involvement in
exploitation of vegetal resources was different in its nature
and history. Plant food is consumed as a major source of
calories by primates and its exploitation was a daily ac-
tivity of hominins since the Early Plio-Pleistocene times
(Ungar, 2007; Collins and McGrew, 1988; Wrangham
et al., 1998). It is hard to trace human plant use in the
archaeological records whether as a food source or for
making tools, bedding, strings, baskets, constructing huts,
and more. Ethnographic recording among open-forest
dwellers in tropical and subtropical South America,
Northeast India, New Guinea, and other regions demon-
strated that vegetal substances make up a high percentage
of the diet (eg, Kelly, 2013). Indeed, foragers in Southeast
Asia and mainland China extensively used bamboo during
the Paleolithic period yet left behind only assemblages of
stone tools, ﬁreplaces (in well preserved sites), and large
collections of animal bones (Bar-Yosef et al., 2012). Still
Pleistocene-age
accidental
discoveries in depositional contexts where plants were
preserved. For example, edible plants retrieved through
ﬂoatation at Gesher Benot Ya’acov (Jordan Valley, Israel)
dated to some 780,000 years ago were associated with a
few stone tools that indicated food processing (Goren-
Inbar et al., 2002, 2014). It appears that waterlogged
sites and lignite deposits provide the best environments for
plant preservation (eg, the wooden spears from Schönin-
gen; Thieme, 1997; Schoch et al., 2015). Additional in-
formation is obtained from Middle Paleolithic sites such as
Kebara and Amud caves in Israel that exhibit the gathering
of vegetal sources. Grass panicles identiﬁed through
phytolith analysis in Amud (Madella et al., 2002) and a

provided

sources

limited

304 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

considerable amount of wild legumes in Kebara cave (Lev
et al., 2005). Evidence for exploitation of plants was
discovered also in Paleolithic human calculus (Mariotti
et al., 2015; Hardy et al., 2009; Henry et al., 2011).

With the expansion of archaeobotanical research in
various geographic regions the retrieval of carbonized plant
assemblages allows us to trace the ﬁrst endeavors in
cultivation. There is documentation of how foragers in
several habitats between the lower and mid latitudes
practiced wild plant cultivation. This change in human
interactions with their environments occurred during the
late Pleistocene and Early Holocene. In almost every region
of the world hunter-gatherers experimented in growing
edible plants and tending fruit trees (for details, see sections
The Centers for Plant Cultivation and Domestication, The
Spread of Agriculture to the “Noncenters” and Its Impacts,
and Brief Review of the Americas). Yet, it is only in a few
localities that cultivated plants became later the staple food
such as millet, rice, wheat, barley, rye, maize, legumes, and
the tropical tubers (Harlan, 1971, 1992; Diamond, 1997,
2012; Bellwood, 2005; Piperno and Pearsall, 1998). These
are the centers.

Given the available information concerning the history
of plant domestication I propose to identify several path-
ways by which foragers experimented with cultivation of
wild plants and in rare cases, the domestication of animals
(Eurasia and South America). The sequential activities that
took place in the centers and resulted in the demographic
growth that characterizes farming communities and emer-
gence of agro-pastoral economies led to the distribution of
languages (eg, Bellwood, 2013). Current archaeological
examples, in spite of incomplete information, will illustrate
the proposed classiﬁcation of the different pathways. One
characterizes the centers and three others the noncenters,
identiﬁed as follows (Fig. 19.1):

Centers: Paleolithic hunter-gatherers who relied on
predomesticated plants in providing a major portion of
their diet began systematically to sow designated ﬁelds
after clearing the natural vegetation,
tilling, and
harvesting every season. These activities took place in
a context of hamlets or villages with rounded dwellings
and private and public storage facilities. The pioneering
cereal cultivators interfered with the natural growth in
the ﬁelds by selecting plants with nonshattering rachis,
a variant that occurs (though rarely) in wild stands.
Dominance of the domesticated varieties, recorded in
the studied charred archaeobotanical assemblages was
achieved in about 1000 or 1500 years (Willcox, 2012;
Zohary et al., 2012). Hypothetically employing an
annual systematic selection of nonshattering ears could
have shortened the process of domestication to some
30e200 years
(Hillman and Davies, 1990; Abbo
et al., 2012). The emergence of the fully agricultural
package including domesticated animals occurred in

tef

species

the grass

(Eragrostis

the Fertile Crescent, North and South China (Cohen,
2011), Mesoamerica, and the Andes (Piperno, 2011).
Noncenters A: Foragers cultivated different wild plants
but the arrival of domesticated species from a center
enhanced the systematic growth of indigenous long-
known plants that resulted in their domestication (eg,
Diamond, 1997; Piperno, 2011). The introduction of
domesticated animals had a similar
impact. For
example, such were the cases of Ethiopia and Somali-
land where the domestication of ﬁnger millet (Eleusine
coracana),
tef),
sorghum (Sorghum bicolor), and others took place. In
the western Sahel pearl millet (Pennisetum glaucum)
was domesticated, an additional species in the foreste
savanna habitats.
Noncenters B: Hunter-gatherers who started cultivating
several plants and eventually domesticated a few,
reached in some areas high population densities before
one or several major staple food species arrived into
their area. The introduction of
these domesticates
motivated the domestication of local animals or plants,
ie, the pig in Europe or Azuki bean in Korea and Japan
(eg, Larson et al., 2007; Lee, 2012)
Noncenters C: Foragers who relied on gathering wild
plants adopted the newly introduced domesticated
species and became farmers. There is ample evidence
that gathering of local plants continued for centuries
during the adoption of staples brought in by newcomers
in Egypt, South Africa, and South America (eg,
Bellwood, 2005, 2013).

the entire or

referring to the centers of

Two models are currently advocated in the literature
concerning the dispersals of
the partial
agricultural package by migrating humans, as well as by
transmission of products and knowledge. One views the
territorial expansion of growing populations of farmers,
whether within a region or on a continental scale as the
cause of establishing cultivation in areas mostly occupied
by hunter-gatherers. The second hypothesis adopts the
position that cultivation may have started independently by
individuals in different regions at more or less the same
time,
the Fertile Crescent,
Mesoamerica,
the highlands and lowlands of South
America, and China (eg, Brown et al., 2008); some publi-
cations enumerate even more localities where cultivation
had emerged. The assumption is that hunter-gathers knew
the plants and at one point started cultivating them. Still no
farming developed in California where acorns were the
staple food (eg, Anderson and Wholgemuth, 2012; Stevens
and McElreath, 2015).
that
“agriculture was impossible during the Pleistocene but
mandatory during the Holocene” was based on paleocli-
matic sequence of events that was more dramatic in the
northern higher latitudes than in the middle, subtropical
latitudes (Richerson et al., 2001). In the latter region,

the proposal

In addition,

cultivation began before the onset of the Holocene while in
other regions it happened only during the Early and even
Late Holocene.

for

One of

the main reasons

the confusion of
what happened is caused by the overarching geographic
deﬁnition of the centers, as deﬁned by many scholars (eg,
Harlan, 1992; Diamond, 1997; Bellwood, 2005). The area
of these centers is too large in terms of square kilometers
and territories to be occupied by hunting and gathering
groups that form a tribe. In addition, the archaeological
records in the known centers and noncenters are not sufﬁ-
ciently detailed, lacking accurate archaeological data, and
therefore leads to caution in accepting the idea that all
presumably contemporary villages located in a given region
began cultivating within a century or two. We need to
recognize that it is only in limited areas where cultivation
and animal domestication was initiated. Several evolved to
become the centers where the domestication of the founder
crops (eg, wheat, barley, rice, maize, and others) caused
major economic and demographic changes. For example,
the Levant, one of
the best archaeologically, archae-
obotanically, and archaeozoologically investigated regions
in the world has an area of about 200,000 km2 of various
vegetation belts where cultivation could have started
(Figs. 19.2 and 19.3). When the hundreds of available
radiocarbon dates available for the different prehistoric
cultures are considered it becomes obvious that the changes
began in a restricted “core area” that encompasses only

      Dates
 calibrated BP

Cultural entities in the Levant

Multiple Origins of Agriculture in Eurasia and Africa Chapter | 19 305

about 10% of the total surface of the Levant (eg, Lev-
Yadun et al., 2000; Abbo et al., 2010, 2013; Bar-Yosef,
2014; Borrell et al., 2015). In addition, the current literature
presents opposing views concerning how long it took for
most plants in the ﬁelds to become domesticated,
ie,
exhibiting genetic traits such as nonshattering ears, lack of
dormancy, increase in grain size, and more. I will return to
this in the discussion (section The Centers for Plant
Cultivation and Domestication).

INTRA AND INTERREGIONAL
CONNECTIONS

local

Before delving into the case studies of centers and non-
centers in Eurasia and Africa, I will expand on the issue of
long-distance connections, which are generally assumed
but rarely discussed. In testing each of the hypotheses
concerning dispersals or
inventions we need to
examine the option of long-distance connections. A survey
of optional ways reveals how the dispersals of the entire or
the partial agricultural packages occurred across immense
geographic regions. The issue of how people migrated,
moved the products, replaced partially or entirely the local
population as regards the “transition from foraging to
farming” is better known from the European case. Even if
we attribute it all to human migrations or immigrations, we
still need to ﬁnd out how this process occurred on land, by
rivers, or by sea, as well as when did it happen, and how
long it took for a new subsistence package to pass from the
source areas, ie, the centers to the noncenters.

The best-known example is the move of farmers from
Southwestern Asia into Europe as a process combining
demic and cultural diffusion at the tempo, on average, of c.
1.3e0.7 km per year
(Ammerman and Cavalli-Sforza,
1984; Fort, 2012). This complex process is now fully
supported by paleo-genetics (eg, Pinhasi et al., 2005, 2012;
Balaresque et al., 2010). The dispersal was by sea, along
the Mediterranean coasts, by the Danube and the Rein
rivers and by land. The time it took people to get across this
continent, replace some local groups, and culturally impact
others, is estimated through the use of radiocarbon dates
(see section Europe and the Mediterranean Basin).

Ambiguities in radiocarbon dates due to the nature of
the analyzed samples or gaps in the available records are
sometimes taken to support the assumption that indepen-
dent cultivation occurred even if localities were only 100 or
300 km apart. Evidence for independent experiments in
cultivation is recorded among forages in many regions
(see sections The Centers for Plant Cultivation and
Domestication, The Spread
to the
“Noncenters” and Its Impacts, and Brief Review of the
Americas). The Levantine example provides a contradic-
tory conclusion when the sites are within the distance of
one month’s walk. The dispersal of cultivated plants such

of Agriculture

Farming villages
domisticated plant
& animals

PPNB

i

c
h

t
i
l

o
e
N

Mobile and
semi-sedentary
foragers

Villages

Mureybetian

Khiamian

PPNA

Sultanian

Seni-sedentary
      foragers
Harifian

Final Natufian

Late Natufian

Early Natufain

Sedentary 
hamlets

Foragers-
cultivators

Mobile and 
semi-sedentary
foragers

Geometric Kebaran

Mobile 
foragers

Ramonian

Mushabian

Foreigners

Geometric Kebaran

8,000

9,000

10,000

11,000

12,000

13,000

14,000

15,000

16,000

i

c
h
t
i
l

l

o
e
a
P
p
E

i

17,000

18,000

19,000

Kebaran

Nebekian

Mediterranean 

Steppe /Semi -arid

FIGURE 19.2 Time table of periods and cultures in the Levant
mentioned in the text. All dates are calibrated before present (BP).

306 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

mobile foragers

mobile foragers

mobile foragers

mobile foragers

FIGURE 19.3 The geographic distribution of contemporary of mobile, sedentary foragers, and farming communities in the Levant. Paucity of ﬁeld
research is indicated by the blank area between the Northern and Southern Levant. The sites are: 1. Hallan Çemi; 2. Demieköy; 3. Körtik Tepe; 4.
Hasankeyf höyük; 5. Gusir höyük; 6. Nemrik. 7. Mlefat; 8. Qermez Dereh; 9. Çayönü-round house; Göbekli Tepe culture(marked by parallel lines); 10.
Nevali Çori; 11. Göbekli Tepe; 12. Karahan Tepe; 13. Sefer Tepe; 14. Sanilurfa Yeni Mahalle and Hamzan Tepe; The Euphrates farming villages: 15.
Mureybet; 16. Jerf el-Ahmar; 17. Tel ’Abr 3; 18. Dka’ade, lower layer; 19. Tel Qaramel; Khiamina-Sultanian villages: 20. Nahal Oren; 21e23. Netiv
Hagdud, Salibiya IX, Gilgal; 24. Jericho; 25. Motza; 26. Faynan16.

as wheat, barley, chickpeas, broad bean, and more from the
Northern Levant to the southern region is indicated by the
available radiocarbon dates. This conclusion is also
supported by demonstrating that the transfer of animals
over a distance 500e600 km from the core area to the
Southern Levant was longer than for the plants and took
some 500e1000 years based on dated bones of domesti-
cated species in both regions (Martin and Edwards, 2013).
In addition, the overland traditional walking routes in the
Levant, such as “via maris” along the coastal plain and the
“Kings road” along the Transjordanian plateau, were
probably the routes that were used for importing Anatolian
obsidian to the Southern Levant.

By boating on rivers (eg, the Tigris and the Euphrates)
using simple vessels constructed of reeds and covered by
hides, people could transport within a short time (a month
or two) seeds, animals, technologies and information, from
the “core area” in the Northern Levant into Mesopotamia.
The Tigris River
(1850-km long) and its tributaries
were used as highways to reach the Zagros foothills and
the margins of Southern Mesopotamia. Similarly,
the
Euphrates River (2800-km long) served both as means of

transmission of

information and for

interregional
the
establishment of villages along a line of 80 km by members
of the same Neolithic tribe (Willcox and Stordeur, 2012).
The move of domesticated plants and animals from the
Levant into Central Anatolia and then to the shoreline of
the Bosphorus straits before crossing to Europe was done
along land routes as well as by baiting along the Mediter-
ranean shores westward (Özdogan, 2011; Arbuckle et al.,
2014).

Moving to Southeast and East Asia we should note that
the earliest seafaring across Sunda (the area of Southern
some 50,000e45,000 years ago, allowed
China Sea)
hunter-gatherers to colonize by boats Sahul (the Pleistocene
continent of New Guinea and Australia) and some of the
neighboring islands.

Archaeological excavations on the island and in the
Chinese mainland (Cohen, 2011) disclosed the colonization
of Taiwan by Neolithic rice farmers, at the time that paddy
ﬁelds were already developed, replacing the original pop-
ulation of hunter-gatherers. Later migrations by sea, known
as the Austronesian dispersals, brought rice farmers and
their languages to Southeast Asia, Melanesia, Micronesia,

Multiple Origins of Agriculture in Eurasia and Africa Chapter | 19 307

and Polynesia (Bellwood, 2013). Observations made by
archaeologists and linguists are supported by genetic evi-
dence (Lipson et al., 2014).

rice, and pottery.

The colonization wave by farmers from Southern
China, reached Taiwan at about 6000 cal BP and by c.
4200 cal BP spread with domestic animals (pigs and
chicken),
It continued through the
Philippines into Indonesia and the islands of the western
Paciﬁc. All
these islands were originally inhabited by
Paleolithic foragers and the new colonists either replaced or
interbred with the local population. By c. 3500 cal BP they
reached Guam and Western Polynesia (Tonga and Samoa),
and by about c. 900 cal BP, Eastern Polynesia (Bellwood,
2013).

In sum, rivers, in every continent, served through the
use of rafts, canoes, and boats, as prehistoric highways.
Terrestrial movements took longer but
the ability of
humans to walk over long distances in most of the conti-
nents, and along valleys or coasts, should not be neglected
in reconstructing dispersal routes. However, supportive
archaeological evidence is required. Later, draft animals
(eg, donkeys, horses, and camels) were also important
means of transportation, at least in Eurasia and Africa, in
particular during the second half of the Holocene.

THE CENTERS FOR PLANT CULTIVATION
AND DOMESTICATION

Introduction

The examples presented earlier are sufﬁcient to demon-
strate that foragers in all centers cultivated and even
domesticated plants and animals that in due course became
an essential part of the current staple foods. Also in the
noncenters, foragers cultivated plants and in several cases
domesticated a few plants, but mostly adopted the
incoming domesticated animals and founder staple crops.
I now turn to the summaries of the centers and noncenters
in Asia, Europe, Southeast Asia, and the islands as well as
Africa, with a very brief review of the Americas. This
choice is due to shortage of space.

the western portion of

Undoubtedly, among all the geographic regions, the
Levant,
the Fertile Crescent,
produced most of the relevant data due to numerous
investigations that lasted for more than a century by various
schools of archaeology (Gept, 2014). The richness of
documentation from this region concerning plant and
animal domestication led to the formation of more than one
model explaining the origins of agriculture and its
dispersal. In recent years, other regions yielded archae-
obotanical remains retrieved from sedentary and semi-
sedentary settlements of foragers and early farmers. There
are also recent reports on animal exploitation and domes-
tication in East Asia and the islands, Africa, Mesoamerica,

Eastern North America, and South America. New tech-
niques allow us to recognize shifts in human diets through
the study of stable carbon isotopes, starch analysis of tools
and grinding stones as well teeth calculus from prehistoric
humans. As the amount of available information varies, and
is scattered in many different journals and books, I will
concentrate on the area that can provide support or chal-
lenge to the interpretations presented herein.

The Fertile Crescent

The Levant, a region located on the edge of
the
Eastern Mediterranean basin, features diverse topography.
A 100-km cross-section in the southern subregion in-
corporates a coastal plain and a hilly area up to 1100-m
above sea level covered by Mediterranean vegetation.
A drop to 400-m below sea level characterizes the steppic
Jordan Valley, up to the Jordanian plateau (c. 800 m above
sea level) into a belt of Mediterranean vegetation and a
slope into the Arabian desert. A longer section (c. 300 km)
characterizes the Northern Levant that ends in the Northern
Mesopotamian plain. Climate features winter precipitation
and dry summers.

The LGM (25/24,000e19/18,000 cal BP) enjoyed in
general high precipitation according to the record of the
Dead Sea (Torfstein et al., 2013) but was interspersed by
short drier ﬂuctuations. Lower temperature, as demon-
strated for the later Younger Dryas (YD, c. 12,800e
11,700 cal BP), affected the Levantine biome and limited
the geographic distribution of plant resources to the belts
along the Mediterranean coast dominated by oak-pistachio
forests and open parklands. Not surprisingly, Late Paleo-
lithic mobile groups of hunter-gatherers, archaeologically
recognized as the Kebarans and Nebekians, avoided the
semiarid area (Fig. 19.2). Their occupations were found in
the open parkland belt and oases, represented by the Ohalo
II (and see later) and Kharaneh IV sites (Nadel et al., 2004;
Maher et al., 2012). Those were clusters of small huts with
ﬁreplaces, grinding stones, rich microlithic tool-kits, bone
tools, a few art items, and rare burials (Belfer-Cohen and
Goring-Morris, 2011; Goring-Morris and Belfer-Cohen,
2011).

After c. 19,000 cal BP temperature began to rise, rain-
fall increased, and marginal semiarid belt became habitable.
The mobile foragers, bearers of the Geometric Kebaran
tool-kit spread all over the Levant (about 1000 km from
north to south), whether through Mediterranean forests,
parklands, or semiarid steppe. Around 16,500 cal BP the
Mushabian and Ramonian hunter-gatherers, well trained in
the exploitation of semiarid landscapes,
invaded from
Northeast Africa the Sinai peninsula and further north (eg,
Bar-Yosef, 2011; Bar-Yosef et al., 2013; Garrard and Byrd,
2013). This period witnessed the contemporaneity of
different tribes of foragers, resulting in interactions and

308 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

competitions for resources. A new population realignment
possibly triggered by the short cold Heinrich 1 event led to
the emergence of the sedentary or semisedentary Natuﬁan
culture (c. 15/14,500 through 11,700 cal BP). It ﬂourished
during the warmer Bølling-Allerød, and lasted through the
YD that experienced changes in seasonal patterns, with
wetter spells but colder than during previous millennia
(Orland et al., 2012; Hartman et al., 2016).

A rare example of cultivation of wild cereals was
discovered in Ohalo II, a waterlogged site near Lake Kin-
neret (Jordan Valley, Israel) that dates to c. 23,000 years
ago. Several brush huts of foragers were exposed on an old
shoreline, with interior beddings, rich stone and animal
bone assemblages, a grinding stone, and a burial (Nadel
et al., 2004). Near-perfect preservation allowed for the
collection of over 150,000 plant remains. The cluster of the
huts reﬂects most probably a sedentary community as
indicated by the presence of commensals (house mouse and
rat) and evidence of a year-round occupation encompassing
seasonal plant gathering, hunting,
trapping, and some
ﬁshing. A study of the cereals remains disclosed evidence
for early cultivation of morphologically domestic-type
cereals (Snir et al., 2015). That the cereals were prepared
for consumption is supported by an analysis of starch
residue retrieved from a large grinding stone, indicating
processing of barley and oatmeal seeds (Piperno et al.,
2004). The regression of Lake Kinneret at the time of
occupation indicates a short dry climatic interval possibly
triggering an experiment in cultivation of wild cereals in the
local wetland. The prehistoric experiment resulted in the
evolution of protoewild weeds that generally grow in
agricultural ﬁelds, appearing later as dominant plants in
Early Neolithic sites from c. 11,700 through 10,300 cal BP
(Snir et al., 2015).

Domesticated cereals are generally identiﬁed by smooth
disarticulation scars on the rachises while the wild forms
bear rough disarticulation scars. The presence of more than
10% of the domestic type in a given archaeobotanical
assemblage is accepted as an indication for domestication.
At Ohalo II, 36% of a total of 320 barley rachises show
domestic-type scars, as well as 25% of the 148 wheat
rachises. When taken together with the appearance of the
proto-weeds the conclusion is that someone or the entire
band practiced cultivation (Snir et al., 2015).

Unfortunately, there are as yet no additional information
that would fall within the wider category of pre-
domestication cultivation from c. 20,000 through c.
13,000 cal BP. In this context it is worth noting the inter-
pretation of charred plant collections from Tell Abu
Hureyra, on the banks of the Euphrates River, dated mostly
to the time of the YD. The deposit-bearing Late Natuﬁan
material culture indicates predomestication cultivation of
wild cereals and large-seeded legumes (Hillman et al.,
2001). However, this claim has been refuted. The new

interpretation of the archaeobotanical assemblage is seen as
mirroring a change in gathering strategy that incorporated
edible arable weeds such as rye before and during the YD
(Colledge and Conolly, 2010). A different view, derived
from the study of a Late Natuﬁan plant assemblage from
Dederiyeh cave (Fig. 19.2) west of Abu Hureyra, claims
predomestication cultivation of emmer and einkorn wheat
(Tanno and Willcox, 2012; Tanno et al., 2013; Ozkan et al.,
2011).

These arguments reﬂect the importance ascribed to the
Natuﬁan culture and its role in various hypotheses con-
cerning the theoretical aspects of the origins of agriculture
(eg, Bellwood, 2005; Zeder, 2011, 2012; Asouti and Fuller,
2012; Fuller et al., 2012; Zohary et al., 2012; Abbo et al.,
2013). Given the large number of papers, edited volumes,
site reports, and book chapters dedicated to the role of the
Natuﬁan culture in the transition from foraging to farming
only a few are cited here (eg, Cauvin, 2000; Bar-Yosef and
Valla, 1991, 2013; Goring-Morris and Belfer-Cohen, 2011;
Belfer-Cohen and Goring-Morris, 2011). Unfortunately, in
spite of the use of ﬂoatation techniques in many Natuﬁan
open-air and cave sites only minimal
information con-
cerning the use of plants is available due to poor preser-
vation (eg, Weiss et al., 2004; Rosen, 2010).

The Natuﬁan hamlets, with rounded brush huts con-
structed on stone foundations are considered as sedentary
or semisedentary settlements due, among other,
to the
presence of commensals such as house mice and sparrows
(Auffrey et al., 1989).
the growth of
social complexity comprise public buildings that herald
the later Pre-Pottery Neolithic A (PPNA) “kiva”-type of
underground semisubterranean, circular buildings, exposed
in two sites in the Jordan Valley (Valla, 1988; Grosman
et al., 2016).

Indications for

Natuﬁan sites vary in size with the largest attaining
0.2 ha and contain rich material culture of stone artifacts,
bone tools, and ground-stone objects such as mortars,
pestles, and art objects. Evidence for the use of bows and
arrows is supported by edge damage on the common
microlithic lunates (Yaroshevich et al., 2010). The Natuﬁan
contexts contained several animal ﬁgurines shaped from
bone and limestone, and rare human images, as well as a
large series of incised slabs displaying various patterns (eg,
Belfer-Cohen and Bar-Yosef, 2010). Many of the dead
were buried on-site, in either supine or ﬂexed positions,
with a tendency toward collective burials in the earlier
period and an increase of single burials later (Belfer-Cohen,
1995). Some dead were interred with personal ornaments
made of Scapophods (tusk shells), bone beads, and
pendants, predominantly in the Early Natuﬁan.

Sickles with glossed blades were demonstrated to have
been used in harvesting cereals, straw, and reeds for
building purposes. In spite of the rarity of archaeobotanical
remains
current

and no evidence

the

for

storage,

Multiple Origins of Agriculture in Eurasia and Africa Chapter | 19 309

assumption is that the Natuﬁan subsistence relied heavily
on the procurement of plant resources as well as hunting
and ﬁshing. One may hypothesize that growth of pre-
domesticated cereals was practiced by the Natuﬁans (as
assumed for the earlier Ohalo II and in the following PPNA
period). Their vegetal diet included wild cereals, pulses,
other seeds, and various fruits (Hillman, 2000; Tanno et al.,
2013). Meat was obtained by hunting in the immediate
environment. The main prey were gazelle, equids, aurochs,
some fallow deer, wild boar, wild goat, and small game
such as fox, hare, tortoise, and numerous birds (eg, Bar-Oz,
2004; Munro, 2004; Gourichon and Helmar, 2008).

The YD had a major impact on the ﬁnal Natuﬁan so-
ciety in the Southern Levant. This period was dominated by
variable seasonality, and lower temperatures thus limiting
the biome production (Orland et al., 2012; Caracuta et al.,
2015; Hartman et al., 2016). Many sites were abandoned
but others along the Jordan Valley had survived (Grosman
et al., 2016). The Final Natuﬁan groups, who adopted a
more mobile settlement pattern, and increased their
consumption of low-ranked resources such as juvenile
gazelles, bone grease, and fast-moving small game like
hare, and slow-moving tortoises (Munro, 2004).

During the end of the YD and the ﬁrst millennium of the
Holocene (c. 11,700e10,300 cal BP) the socioeconomic
map of the Levant changed dramatically reﬂecting the
emergence of two related economies (Fig. 19.3). Villages
of sedentary foragers spread along the foothills of the
Taurus-Zagros mountains along the Tigris River Valley and
its tributaries. Farming societies were established in the
Euphrates River, its tributaries and further west and south
in the Jordan Valley (Bar-Yosef, 2014; Özdogan et al.,
2011).

Among the settlements of hunter-gatherers along the
Tigris River and its tributaries, two examples are mentioned
here. Hallan Çemi, on the bank of Batman River and that of
Körtik Tepe in the Tigris River Valley, with rounded pit-
houses and built stone walls, distinguished by the produc-
tion of numerous decorated soapstone vessels (Rosenberg
and Redding, 2000; Arbuckle et al., 2014; Benz et al.,
2015). Both sites produced a wealth of evidence for the
consumption of wild sheep and goat, red deer, wild cattle,
and pigs, and the exploitation of various small-seeded
plants (Willcox and Savard, 2011). Wild cereals were not
available in that area during the YD, and reached it only
toward the end of the ﬁrst millennium of the Holocene.

Farming communities in the Euphrates basin and
the Southern Levant archaeologists identiﬁed in the
the PPNA (c. 11,700e
earlier phase of the Neolithic,
10,500 cal BP),
three cultural entities known as the
Khiamian, the Mureybetian, and the Sultanian (Figs. 19.2
and 19.3; Fig. 5.1; Simmons, 2007). PPNA Villages vary
in size and reach up to 3 ha, indicating a rapid increase of
population, a major energy expenditure invested in

buildings (stone foundations, brick walls, and ﬂat roofs),
storage facilities (private and public), long-distance pro-
curement of Anatolian obsidian, and the construction of
central ceremonial centers (eg, Kuijt, 2009; Schmidt,
2005, 2011; Belfer-Cohen and Goring-Morris, 2011;
Goring-Morris
and Belfer-Cohen, 2011; Bar-Yosef,
2014). In the Euphrates Valley villages such as Jerf el-
Ahmar practiced an economy mostly based on cereal
cultivation as detailed later in this chapter, although the
the domesticated forms
increase in the frequency of
occurred later, at
the Early Pre-Pottery
Neolithic B (PPNB, c. 105,000e82,000 cal BP).

the time of

In addition,

communication by rivers’

transport,
described earlier, allowed information to reach Southern
Mesopotamia. Claims based on the archaeobotanical as-
semblages from Chogha Golan for independent initiation of
wild barley and wild emmer wheat cultivation (Riehl et al.,
2011, 2013) can be refuted. The reported cultivation could
be the outcome of information brought in by humans from
the “core area” while boating along the Tigris.

The Levantine archaeoobotanical assemblages dated to
the PPNA and Early PPNB would fall under the category of
predomestication cultivation (Colledge, 2002; Willcox,
2005; Weiss et al., 2006) as observed in the PPNA Netiv
Hagdud and Gilgal sites (Weiss et al., 2006). There is no
reason to reject the proposal of continued cultivation of the
wild species of wheat and barley during the PPNA. Most
authorities agree that by 10,500e10,000 cal BP a suite of
plants were already partially domesticated and the fre-
quencies of wild forms gradually diminished in the ﬁelds as
documented during the course of the PPNB period.

Here

I

studies

follow Willcox’s meticulous

in
describing the cultivation and harvesting activities based on
the archaeobotanical remains collected in three methodi-
cally excavated villages, namely, Jerf el-Ahmar, Tell ’Abr
3, and Dja’ade, on the banks of the Euphrates River
(Willcox, 2012; Willcox and Stordeur, 2012). Willcox
contends that (1) the assemblages of the recovered plant
remains are quantitatively dominated by the founder crops:
barley, emmer, einkorn, lentil, and pea, while gathered
small-seeded grains decreased;
the introduction of
founder crops began with barley to which single-grain
einkorn and emmer was added. Pulses were introduced a
bit
later as recorded in Dja’ade, an Early PPNB site,
including broad beans (Vicia faba) and chickpeas (Cicer
arietinum); (3) the number and varieties of weed taxa
increased, several of which characterize the tilled land
prepared for sowing the cereals; (4) grain size of the
founder crops in these sites increased and is considered as
evidence for cultivation; and (5) cultivation as an annual
activity resulted in the loss of seed dormancy among ce-
reals and legumes.

(2)

The process for the completion of the domestication
syndrome is reﬂected in the numerous genetics studies and

310 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

carbonized assemblages (eg, Peleg, 2011; Willcox, 2012;
Willcox and Stordeur, 2012). The conclusion of the various
investigations resembles the statement by Peleg et al.
(2011) concerning the cross between durum wheat and its
wild emmer progenitor, “the number of genes and muta-
tions required for a critical domestication transition has
been addressed in many studies. It has been suggested that
in many cases, a single gene played a pivotal role in
moving the population over
the trajectory of a key
domestication transition” (Peleg, 2011, p. 5059). However,
the length of time for the completion of the domestication
syndrome is highly debated.

One view suggests that the time range, well-dated by
several hundred radiocarbon dates, lasted from the end of
the Late Natuﬁan through the Middle PPNB (c.
11,700e9200/8800 cal BP) and labeled as a “protracted
process” (Fuller, 2007; Fuller et al., 2010; Purugganan and
Fuller, 2011). In addition, the long process witnessed un-
successful trials with wild oat, rambling vetch, rye, and
wild black lentil (eg, Weiss et al., 2006; Abbo et al., 2013).
A different opinion concerning the length of time it took
for the domestication syndrome to establish its genetic
changes among the founder crops in the Levant (eg, non-
shattering rachis, no dormancy of seeds, etc.) suggests just
a couple of centuries (Hillman and Davies, 1990, p. 73).
Recently it has been argued that humans were smart and
could differentiate between shattering and no-shattering
ears and therefore conducted a scheduled selection of
tough-rachised ears while harvesting every summer (Abbo
et al., 2008, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013). Moreover,
the
assumption is that early cultivators knew that the choice of
nonshattering ears is advantageous over what is generally
available in the wild stands and that they should take this
into account in their food preparation techniques. However,
if
the same food preparation techniques such as the
grinding of wild barley witnessed at Ohalo II (Piperno
et al., 2004) was employed at a later time, it means that the
strategy that every summer a selection of nonshattering ears
had to be done, was not practiced in a very long time. If
most of the ﬁelds were harvested before full maturation, the
differentiation between fully domesticated and still wild
plants was not an easy task (eg, Snir et al., 2015). Prepa-
ration of the wild cereals for making the desired dish was
feasible as shown by experimental harvesting and milling
(Eitam et al., 2015). It seems that without further infor-
mation derived from the carbonized plant assemblages, as
well as the different types of grinding stones, it will be
difﬁcult to resolve the issue of how and when food prep-
aration techniques changed.

In considering the role of the larger Levantine center,
statements that the dominance of the domesticated geno-
types in the cultivated plants could have only been achieved
outside the natural range of the wild progenitors (Jones and
Brown, 2007), have no supporting archaeobotanical

evidence (Abbo et al., 2012). The entire domestication
process occurred in the Levant, and the ensuing successful
subsistence system was distributed to and adapted by
neighboring groups.

The fully ﬂedged agro-pastoral economy was in place
by 9500/9000 cal BP. The map (Fig. 19.3) shows the dis-
tribution of the socioeconomic units of the time just before
the temporary collapse caused by the “8200 cal BP cold
event” (Weninger et al., 2009). The impact of this envi-
ronmental change was felt in the Southern Levant more
than in the northern areas. It is expressed by a gap in the
pollen record of the Dead Sea that indicates reductions of
rain over its entire basin (Litt et al., 2012). The fast de-
mographic growth in the Levant allowed during the PPNB
the formation of large villages known as “megasites,” of
12 ha in size and the complex social structure is evidenced
through the complex architecture which incorporates both
square and rectangular houses, communal endeavors, stor-
age facilities, and so forth (Simmons, 2007; Bouquet-Appel
and Bar-Yosef, 2008 and papers therein).

Assemblages of animal bones reveal that during the
Late PPNA, procurement by intensive hunting was com-
plimented by the corralling of goat, sheep, cattle, and pigs
that became domesticated toward the onset of the PPNB
(Vigne, 2011, 2015; Zeder, 2011, 2012). Keeping livestock
required a change of attitude among foragers, and probably
by hunters who we assume were the males (eg, Bird, 1999;
Waguespack, 2005). This was a more dramatic shift that
involved the treatment of plants, which was often a female
task. The techniques involved in keeping animals in
captivity and intentional breeding was different when the
four species are considered. The process of cattle domes-
tication, whether for religious reasons (the “bull-cult”;
Cauvin, 2000) or for economic ones, occurred mainly
during the PPNA (Vigne, 2011). Similar to other animals,
bulls were ceremonially sacriﬁced, during feasts, as indi-
cated by the faunal assemblage at Göbekli Tepe, a well-
known ceremonial center in the northern Levant, on a
hilly ridge overlooking the Balikh Valley (Schmidt, 2011).
Sacriﬁcing male animals became a common practice in the
Levant and Mesopotamia in later millennia (Albright,
1957). Cows were often spared, especially during late
Neolithic times when milk consumption became a daily
habit, while bulls were either sacriﬁced or kept in very
small numbers. These reversed ratios between bulls and
cows are exempliﬁed when comparing the femaleemale
ratio in Göbekli Tepe, as a place for rituals and in the
nearby PPNB village of Gürcütepe where most of the
slaughtered cattle were cows (Peters et al., 1999).

The process of adopting goat and sheep husbandry in
the Northern Levant evolved during the PPNA and later in
the course of the PPNB resulting,
together with plant
cultivation, in the full appearance of agro-pastoral societies
(Vigne, 2011; Zeder, 2011). Considering the intracenter

Multiple Origins of Agriculture in Eurasia and Africa Chapter | 19 311

relationships we should note that it took between 500 and
1000 years for goat and sheep to spread into the Southern
Levant (Martin and Edwards, 2013). The herding of these
animals could have been a part of
the long-distance
exchange of obsidian from central Anatolia or marine
shells from the Red Sea of some 1000e1500 km afar, such
as the shells found in Abu Hureyra (Ridout-Sharpe, 2015).
Pigs became a component of the agricultural package in
the core area of the Northern Levant after goat and sheep, at
the same time as the cattle (Vigne, 2011). The best records
for their domestication in the Northern Levant and the
dispersal through the Southern Levant are derived from the
Late PPNA and become more numerous in Middle PPNB
sites (9000e85,000 cal BP; Horwitz et al., 1999). They
reach the lowlands in the southern end of the Zagros by
6000 cal BP.

Local transmission in the Levant did not cease as shown
by the delayed adoption of chickpeas, faba bean, and
fenugreek. The ﬁrst two were brought into the Southern
Levant a few 100 years later (Tanno and Willcox, 2006;
Caracuta et al., 2015), while the fenugreek (Trigonella sp.)
is recorded for the ﬁrst time in Tell Halaf at c. 6000 cal BP
(Zohary et al., 2012).

At the same time, in general, farmers expanded into
Anatolia. Sites such as Asikli Höyük (at c. 10,200), and
Çatalhöyük (at c. 9100 cal BP) were founded on Levantine
farming economy including domesticated goat, sheep, cat-
tle, and pig (Arbuckle et al., 2014). The dispersion of the
farming package continued to expand and reached the
Bosphorus straights by c. 9500 cal BP and then farmers
began to migrate into Greece and the Balkans (eg, Özdo-
gan, 2011).

The eastern portion of the Fertile Crescent is not less
the Tauruse
important. The geographic continuity of
Zagros arc, their intermountain valleys as well as their
foothills along the Mesopotamian plain, saw the rapid
expansion of farming communities. The Tigris and the
Euphrates rivers assisted in the fast spread of domesticated
plants and animals, and among the better known early
farming communities are those situated in the Deh Luran
plain (Hole, 1987).

An important aspect for this review is the food prepa-
ration techniques. In Southwestern Asia, the kitchen was
based on making bread. Cereal grains were stored in bas-
kets, silos, and underground pits and by mid Holocene were
replaced by large ceramic containers. With bread as a basic
element there was no need for pots that began to appear at
about 9000 cal BP and increased in infrequency during the
eighth and seventh millennia BP when the production of
liquid food such as beer, wine, milk, and oil started. The
basics of the Southwestern Asian kitchen spread with the
founder crops to other geographic regions. It is a markedly
different trajectory compared to that from East Asia where
steaming was probably the reason for the emergence of

pottery during the Late Pleistocene (see later in this chapter;
Fuller and Rowlands, 2011) (Fig. 19.4).

During the Middle Holocene fruit trees became an in-
tegral part of the agricultural package as they were probably
in earlier times in the tropical belt of Meso-Central America
and Northern South America. Trees present a difﬁcult task
for archaeobotanists because, unlike the change in the
morphology or the disarticulation in domesticated cereals,
fruit stones, pips, pollen, or nutlets rarely demonstrate
diagnostic or morphological traits that separate the wild
from the domesticated varieties (Weiss, 2015).

Southwestern Asia contributed also to the domestication
of several trees. The ﬁrst was the ﬁg tree (Ficus carica)
since the Early Holocene (c. 11,700e10,500 cal BP) in the
Jordan Valley, later found in many other localities (Kislev
and Hartman, 2012). Olive trees were second, domesticated
in the Northern Levant around 7800 cal BP (Weiss, 2015).
Olive oil was identiﬁed in pottery dated to c. 6800 cal BP,
in the Early Chalcolithc period (Namdar et al., 2014). Wild
grapevine (Vitis silvestris) is recorded archaeobotanically in
archaeological contexts since c. 8200e6150 cal BP and is
known from Western and Northern Europe as well as the
Caucasus region. However, the evidence for the domesti-
cated species (Vitis vinifera), which is self-pollinated, dates
only from some 5500 years ago. Tartaric acid that
is
considered as the residue of wine was traced in pottery in
Iran and the Caucasus from contexts dated to the eighth
millennium cal BP and later (McGovern, 2003). The date
palm (Phoenix dactylifera), a semiarid tree, was domesti-
cated during the seventh millennium cal BP in Egypt and
Mesopotamia. In sum, except for the ﬁg, all other fruit trees
and their products appear since 8000 cal BP, in the second
part of the Holocene.

In sum, the archaeological data obtained in the Levant
was employed by different scholars to present hypotheses
that should explain why people began to cultivate (eg,
Bellwood, 2005). One approach sees the change in the
spatial arrangements of social units, motivated by climatic
ﬂuctuations and competition to start cultivating in an
environment rich in resources. The opposing view suggests
that this richness attracted the desire for creating surplus
that could be used for social gains I will return to this issue
in the ﬁnal discussion. However, there is no doubt that the
change from rounded houses to rectangular ones reﬂect
changes in the social structure with the full ﬂedge farming
(Flannery, 1969, 2002).

China

Two East Asian centers for the emergence of agriculture are
known from China. A North China center is characterized
by dry farming based on the growing of broomcorn
(Panicum miliaceum) and foxtail (Setaria italica) millets
and soybean. The second center,
in South China, was

312 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

FINAL PRE-POTTERY NEOLITHIC B PERIOD

Material
characteristics 

Grill-plan houses

Polished axes/adzes (celts)

'White ware"

Stelae/pillars with reliefs & sculptures

Chlorite bowls

Rectangular houses

Bifacial axes/adzes
Jericho points

Modelled skulls
Stone masks

Early 
  farmers

&
sedentary
   foragers

Rounded houses

Farmers-Herders

Mobile 
       Foragers

Farmers-Herders 

Farmers-
Herders 

Herders-hunters

Farmers-
        Herders

"Burin sites"

Herders-hunters

Mobile Foragers

Corridor houses
Stone bangles

Mobile foragers

Major economic expansion/diffusion

0

100

200

300

Km

O.B-Y

ca. 8400/8200 - 7900  cal. B.P.

FIGURE 19.4 A map of socioeconomic entities at the time when the Neolithic Revolution was completed and before the temporary collapse caused by a
short-term dry and cold event around 8200 cal BP.

characterized by rice cultivation with the development of
paddy ﬁelds. Archaeobotanical remains include assem-
blages obtained by ﬂotation and of starch grains retrieved
from grinding stones and other stone objects. The gathered
information, which is rather sparse given the size of this
country, indicates that before agriculture, the two millet
species were collected by hunter-gatherers and consumed
like other plant foods (eg, acorns) during a long period, c.
25,000e11,500 cal BP (Liu, 2015; Liu et al., 2013; Yang
et al., 2015). Starch grains and seeds of wild foxtail millet
and Echinochloa sp. were uncovered in Shizitan 9, dated to
13,800 to 11,600 cal BP; this locality is an ephemeral site
of foragers situated on the banks of a tributary of the
Yellow River (Liu et al., 2011; Bestel et al., 2014). Similar
information was obtained during the excavations of sites
located in the eastern lowland plains that border
the
Taihang and Yan mountain chains (Fig. 19.5). In three
sites here, Donghulin, Zhuanian, and Nanzuangtou, dated
to c. 11,000e9500 cal BP, there was evidence for the use
of millet (Bettinger et al., 2007; Cohen, 2011; Liu et al.,
2010; Zhao, 2010, 2011; Yang, 2012). In Donghulin, the

remains of a semisubterranean rounded house were un-
covered including a couple of burials and a wealth of ma-
terial culture comprising grinding stones, hafted bone
handles, microblades, pottery, and more,
indicating the
presence of a semisedentary hamlet. Hunting and gathering
formed the subsistence base. None of the available infor-
mation indicates as yet intentional growth of millet or other
plants, although most of the archaeobotanical evidence
(gained through starch analysis) from the three sites is
indicative of foragers practicing a certain level of cultiva-
tion (Zhao, 2011; Liu, 2015; Yang et al., 2015a).

Archaeobotanical information indicate the wide distri-
bution in Northern China of dry land farming of millets, but
the original center of domestication is yet unknown. Ge-
netic studies documenting the presence of broomcorn millet
in Eastern European assemblages at c. 7000 cal BP (Hunt
et al., 2011) raise the question whether the millet domes-
tication occurred in a single or multiple centers, with the
option for an additional center in Central Asia. The reso-
lution of this issue will depend on new archaeobotanical
material. The area in China that seems most suitable for

Multiple Origins of Agriculture in Eurasia and Africa Chapter | 19 313

95°  

100°  

105°  

110°

45°  

MONGOLIA

Shizitan sites

40°  

35°  

30°  

Dadiwan

Wei River

Jiahu

Peiligang

H u ai  Riv er 

CHINA  

Yujiagou

  Y ellow River 

NORTH
CHINA

Shizitan sites

  R i v e r
Y a n g z i
Shalonggang

Pengtoushan
Bashidang
MIDDLE 
YANGTZE

115°
120°  
NORTHEAST
CHINA

Xiliao River

Xinglongwa

Zhuanian

NanZhuangtou

Zhaojingshan
Yuezhuang
Cishan

Houli

125°  

130°  

40°  

NORTH
KOREA

SOUTH
KOREA

35°  

L.Taihu

LOWER 
YANGTZE

Tianluoshan
Kuahuqiao

Hemudu
Shangshan

Xianhrendong

Yuchanyan

TAIWAN

30°  

25°  

Tropic of
Cancer

20°  

n
e
e
w
a
S

l

INDIA  

25°  

Tropic of
Cancer

BURMA  

20°

M

e

k

o

n

g

Yu Jiang

Xincun

H

g

o

n

VIETNAM  

0  

500  

1000 Kilometers  

FIGURE 19.5 Late hunter-gatherers and Early Neolithic sites in China. Several sites are mentioned in the text and others can be found in the cited
sources. Modiﬁed from Cohen, D.J., 2011. The beginnings of agriculture in China: a multiregional view. Current Anthropology 52, S273eS293.

100°

105°

110°

115°

120°

millet domestication is the lower Yellow River basin (Lu,
1999; Shelach, 2000; Bar-Yosef, 2011; Cohen, 2011).

The earliest evidence for domesticated broomcorn and
foxtail millet in Northern China was uncovered at Xin-
glongwa (c. 8000e7500 cal BP), a site situated near the
Liao River along the Mongolian grasslands (Lee et al.,
2007; Zhao, 2011). This village comprises a cluster of over
50 rectangular houses with a central, larger house of the
local chief (Liu, 2007). The material components include
pottery, stone and bone tools, and the earliest-known jade
objects. The consumption of millet speciesda C4 plantd
was traced by stable isotopes in human bones (Barton et al.,
2007, 2009), although their domesticated status is not
clear. Direct evidence for an economy based on growing
what are deﬁnitely domesticated species of millet as well
as pigs is documented in Neolithic sites closer to the
Yellow River; by c. 8500e7500 cal BP, these sites of the

Peiligang-related cultures spread also into the Huai River
basin (Fig. 19.4; Zhang and Hung, 2012; 2013). Among the
famous Yellow River sites is Cishan, a ceremonial locality
dating c. 7500 cal BP with impressive evidence for the
scale of millet use, including 5 m deep storage pits con-
taining the remains of millet grains (Zhang and Hung,
2013). Unfortunately, a previously reported date for Cishan
of c. 10,000 cal BP (Lu et al., 2009) was erroneous, but is
still being repeated in numerous publications.

Assuming that millet cultivation evolved within a core
area in the large basin of the Yellow River, dispersals in
different directions would be expected;
these are seen
northward to Xinglongwa and westward through river
transport to Dadiwan (Fig. 19.4; Cohen, 2011). An over-
lapping of the two economies of millet and rice took place
in the area of the Huai River that lies between the Yellow
and the Yangtze rivers.

314 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

South of the Yellow River in the Huai River basin,
excavations at Jiahu exposed a village of 50 ha in size with
rounded houses in its lower layer dated to c. 8500 cal BP,
and square houses in the upper two layers. The rich ﬁnds
include the well-known bone ﬂutes, bone arrowheads, and
elaborate pottery assemblages (Zhang and Hung, 2013).
Fully domesticated pigs were identiﬁed both morphologi-
cally and genetically (Cucchi et al., 2011; Zhao, 2011).
Jiahu was also one of the ﬁrst sites where ﬂotation was
carried out, and the retrieved collection included a wealth
of charred plant remains, with such edible plants as tubers
(eg, lotus roots), acorns, water caltrop, chestnuts, rice, wild
soybean, and more (Zhao, 2010, 2011). The weedy grasses
included several taxa such as Digitaria sp. and Echinochloa
sp. that may have grown in rice ﬁelds. Early rice remains
were also reported from Baligang, some 300 km southwest,
on the bank of the Han River that ﬂows south as a tributary
of the Yangtze River (Deng et al., 2015). A question for
future research is whether soybean domestication occurred
in China or Korea (Lee et al., 2011): the presence of soy-
bean at Baligang dating to after 7000 cal BP (Deng et al.,
2015) does not resolve this issue.

several decades,

The occurrence of rice at Jiahu c. 8500 cal BP raises
issue concerning where and when rice was
another
the Pengtoushan-
domesticated. For
Bashidang culture area in the middle part of the Yangtze
River basin was seen as the “core area.” Another option
was added with excavations in the lower Yangtze valley of
several waterlogged sites (eg, Shangshan and Hemudu-
related sites)
that produced domesticated rice remains
dating about 8000/7800 cal BP. Currently, the late foragers
who could have been the ancestors of the local farmers who
ﬁrst domesticated rice are better documented from the
lower Yangtze. Here,
the sequence at Shangshan, a
sedentary village, began with the cultivation of barnyard
grass (Echinochloa sp.) at c. 11,000e9000 cal BP, based
on starch and phytoliths analyses retrieved from grinding
stones and other objects (Yang et al., 2015). In addition,
other grasses of the Triticeae family and wild rice are
present. Only the later phase of Shangshan corresponds
culturally to Kuahuqiao, another Neolithic village located
in the same area, where the appearance of a mixed
assemblage of wild and domesticated rice is dated to c.
8000/7800e7400 cal BP (Zheng et al., 2007). Rice as-
semblages at Tianluoshan, a neighboring site that dates to c.
6900e6400 cal BP demonstrates an increase of domesti-
cated rice in its assemblages (Fuller et al., 2009). In all
these sites, water chestnuts (Trapa), acorns, and other
gathered plant species are still a major part of the local diet,
in addition to ﬁshing and hunting deer and wild pigs.
Experimental studies indicate that boiling rice grains prior
to grinding reduces the chance of their starches being
preserved on the ﬂat surfaces of milling slabs. The deep
roots of steaming as a common procedure for food prepa-
ration are likely indicated by the production of pottery in

South China since 20/19,000 years ago (Wu et al., 2012;
Fuller and Rowlands, 2011).

Without delving into the issue of whether rice was ﬁrst
domesticated in the lower or the middle part of the Yangtze
basin, the sequence in the former area clearly indicates that
sedentary hunter-gatherers were involved in cultivation
(Lu, 1998). In addition, the dispersal of rice cultivation is
evidenced by rice phytolith remains from several sites, such
as Dingsishan and Xiaojing, both in Guangxi Province,
located some 500 km south of the Pengtoushan area, and
dating to after c. 6000 cal BP (Zhao, 2011). Indeed, the rate
of dispersal from the center of domestication into the vast
region of Southern China resembles the rates within the
terrestrial environment of the Levant (see earlier).

Further from these potential centers, current evidence
for plant exploitation in subtropical Southern China comes
from Xincun, a coastal village dated to c. 5000 cal BP.
Starch and phytolith analyses indicate a subsistence strat-
egy based on gathering a wide range of edible plants, such
as sago palm, banana, water chestnut, lotus root, arrow-
head, ferns, Job’s tears, and acorns (Yang et al., 2013). Rice
traces were identiﬁed as well, but their role within the local
economy is not clear.

Here, genetic studies of the origins of domesticated rice
should be brieﬂy mentioned, as well. The authors of one
review clearly state that “Lately . genetics has told us a
constantly changing story” (Gross and Zhao, 2014,
p. 6193). The best available genetic scenario for the history
of domestication is that of the wild rice, Oryza ruﬁpogon,
which was distributed over vast landscapes in China and
other regions of East Asia including varieties found in the
Ganges River Valley in India, was domesticated by more
than one human population. There is a tendency in most
genetic studies to view the original domestication as
occurring in the Yangtze River valley, due to the appear-
ance of Oryza japonica remains. Recognizing the well-
accepted introgression between the cultivars japonica and
indica, Gross and Zhao (2014, p. 6196) offer two possible
interpretations: either Oryza indica was the result of an
independent local domestication or there was only a single
domestication eventdof
japonicad“with indica [then]
being brought to a domesticated state through a series of
hybridization events between japonica and O. ruﬁpogon
populations” (Gross and Zhao, 2014, p. 6196).

THE SPREAD OF AGRICULTURE TO THE
“NONCENTERS” AND ITS IMPACTS

Europe and the Mediterranean Basin

Close to the Levant and Anatolia is Cyprus. Early navi-
gation of a minimal distance of 35 km of open water by
Terminal Pleistocene foragers brought the wild pig to the
island (Vigne et al., 2012). The size and dates of bones
uncovered in the Arcrotiri-Aetokremnos
rock-shelter

Multiple Origins of Agriculture in Eurasia and Africa Chapter | 19 315

indicate that
the wild suids were brought over at
c. 11,700e11,400 cal BP. Later, the lack of predators caused
their size to decrease, as expected for island populations,
and evidenced when their descendants were hunted by the
ﬁrst settlers who built rounded houses in Klimonas some
10,600 years ago (Vigne et al., 2012). By 10,400 cal BP the
Levantine farmers brought from the mainland the full agri-
cultural package of cereals, legumes, goat, sheep, cattle, and
pigs, as well as fallow deer, dogs, and later, the cat (Vigne
and Cucchi, 2005; Vigne, 2013, 2015).

The expansion of Southwestern Asian farmers from
Anatolia into Europe was known for many years, docu-
mented by archaeobotanical and archaeozoological studies
of numerous assemblages, as well as paleogenetics
(Fig. reviews in Zohary et al., 2012; Bellwood, 2005;
Diamond, 1997). The ﬁrst study of human movements
across Europe, suggested by A. Ammerman and L.
Cavalli-Sforza (1984), was labeled the “wave of advance.”
This demic-diffusion by people carrying the agricultural
package caused partial replacement of the local Late
Paleolithic hunter-gatherers (Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman,
2003). Corroborating evidence for the transmission of
crops through exchange and during the actual spread of
farming population was shown, for example, by barley’s
phylogeography across Eurasia (eg, Jones et al., 2012).
Migrants and transmissions occurred along the Danube
River and further west by the Rhine River and their trib-
utaries. The other path was coastal navigations across the
Mediterranean Sea, ﬁrst along the northern coast and later
along the African coast. Farmers ﬁrst colonized the
Mediterranean islands and then the coastal areas of
Italy, France, and Iberia (eg, Zilhao, 2014). Later they
moved inland, took over large areas from the endemic
Mesolithic foragers, and interbred with them in several
areas. Recent paleogenetic studies document additional
human dispersals from the Asian steppe into Europe
during the second half of the Holocene (eg, Haak et al.,
2015; Jones et al., 2015; Pinhasi et al., 2012; Veeramah
and Novembre, 2014).

Controversies over whether the agricultural package
could have been partially the result of local domestications
by Mesolithic foragers were resolved by detailed studies of
goat, sheep, pig, and cattle that demonstrated their Asian
origins (eg, Rowley-Conwy, 2011). The same statement
relates to the domesticated plants. Proposals that elements
of the same package were adopted by local Mesolithic
foragers, coexisting during a few centuries
to over
2000 years with the incoming farmers, were based on
scanty evidence. Debates concerning the possible domes-
tication of the European aurochs that survived until the 17th
century AD were recently resolved. The combination of
archaeozoological and genetic analyses demonstrated that
local aurochs did not contribute, or only to a very limited
extent, to the domestic cattle in Europe whose origins are
traced to Southwestern Asia (Tresset et al., 2009).

One of the major farming cultures is the Linear Band
Keramik (LBK) that originated in the Carpathian basin and
moved across central Europe, while in the Mediterranean
Europe the later Cardial pottery designates another set of
farming groups. The LBK farmers moved from one loess
area to another, often along river valleys. There are other
cultures identiﬁed by their
typical pottery types. The
detailed evidence (eg, Rowley-Conwy, 2011 and references
therein) indicates, as already suggested in the past (van
Andel and Runnels, 1995), that the monolithic wave of
advance was constructed of sporadic and punctuated
movements of farmers. Constant interactions between the
incoming farmers and local Mesolithic foragers probably
contributed to some degree of population mixing. However,
the basics of the southwestern Asian agro-pastoral package
were adopted across Europe except for the northern belt
where reindeer pastoralism evolved during the later
Holocene.

Korea and Japan

Since Paleolithic times the Korean peninsula was on the
receiving end of cultural changes and human migrations
from the vast terrestrial region of East Asia. Its geographic
situation can be compared to the position of Europe on the
western end of Eurasia. With the development of seafaring
additional arrivals could have taken place, and the narrow
straights that separate the Japanese archipelago from the
peninsula did not limit crossings at different times. The
current political situation hampered the efforts to connect
the research between Northeast China and South Korea but
the intensive investigations in the latter allows us to
describe plant cultivation by sedentary village inhabitants
that preceded the arrival of millet cultivation (Lee, 2011).
Similarly to other regions where the information is
available for Early Holocene cultures,
the evidence in
Korea comes from the Chulmun culture, subdivided into
Early (c. 7500e5500 cal BP), Middle (5500e4000 cal BP),
and Late (4000e3400 cal BP) phases. During the Early
Chulmun, vegetal economy continued the broad spectrum
of previous generations with some presence of millet in the
context of rounded dwellings. While being village in-
habitants they were hunter-gatherers and ﬁshers as the
culture is known from the early excavations spread along
the coast and river banks where they formed numerous
middens. Their exploitation of marine resources was
accompanied by a low level of plant cultivation and stor-
age. The number of villages characterized by plant culti-
vation increased during the Middle Chulmun due to the
introduction of broomcorn and foxtail millet.

A short distance across the Korea Straights is the
southern part of
the Japanese archipelago, where the
earliest Paleolithic sites are dated to c. 40,000 cal BP. The
preceding upper Paleolithic contexts were rich in stone
tools, and other hard rock objects (such as axes) were

316 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

uncovered. Microblade industries originating in continental
East Asia are documented in Hokkaido at c. 22,000 cal BP
and in Kyushu at c. 16,000 cal BP. At about this time,
pottery made its appearance on the islands.

The Paleolithic sequence was followed by the onset of
the Jomon culture subdivided into a few phases. The
Incipient Jomon coincides with the onset of pottery making
(c. 16,400e11,200 cal BP). The subsequent Initial phase
lasted from c. 11,200e7250 cal BP, and the Early Jomon
from c. 7250e5540 cal BP. The basic subsistence was
similar to that of the Paleolithic period with continued
hunting, ﬁshing, and gathering by semisedentary and
sedentary communities. During the earlier times oaks were
used for building houses but during the course of the
Middle Jomon (c. 5500e4500 cal BP) were replaced by
chestnut trees (Castanea crenata). The recovered evidence
in Eastern Japan sites shows the correlation between the
dominance of arboreal pollen in the cores and the charcoal
assemblages in the excavations. The shift to the durable,
easier felling of chestnut trees, with stone axes that were in
the tool-kits of the foragers in the islands since the Early
Upper Paleolithic, is interpreted as “agricultural” activity.
In addition, from the Early Jomon the lacquer trees (Tox-
icodendron verniciﬂuum and Rhus javanica) were either
introduced at that time from China or were naturally grown
in Japan, Korea, and China (eg, Crawford, 2011; Noshiro
and Sasaki, 2014).

Direct evidence for cultivation of annual plants is that of
the barnyard (Echinoloa crus galli), the ancestor of the
Japanese millet, identiﬁed in the excavations of Nakano B,
a village site with squarish pit-houses in Southwestern
Hokkaido dated to 9000e8700 cal BP (ie, Initial Jomon
period). The discovery “strongly suggests that it was going
under selection akin to domestication” (Crawford, 2008,
2011, p. 448). This activity occurred in the context of
systematic collection of small grains and leafy green plants
including bottle gourd, hemp, and others as well as ﬂeshy
wild fruits including nuts which lasted from the Initial
through the Middle Jomon periods. In addition, the eco-
nomic strategy of the Jomon people included ﬁshing and
hunting. Not surprisingly the argument whether to refer to
these societies as “afﬂuent foragers” or by some other term
(Crawford, 2008 and references therein) makes no differ-
ence if the direct evidence demonstrates that the original
population of the Ainu practiced “plant husbandry” or
“marginal cultivation” and made pottery, similarly to the
Chinese villagers in the lower Yangtze River basin (Yang
et al., 2015). The important issue is identifying the nature of
the socioeconomic trajectory of those communities. In the
case of the Japanese archipelago the major revolutionary
change occurred with the invasion of the rice-growing
farmers from Korea some 2800 years ago bearing the
Yayoi material culture who, through the process of taking
over most of the archipelago, became the recent Japanese.

Southeast Asia and India

The information concerning rice domestication in the
Yangtze river basin can be tied with the dispersal of rice
farming that reached coastal China by about 5000 cal BP
and dispersed directly by farmers and indirectly through
products into Southeast Asia slightly after 4500 cal BP
(Bellwood, 2005; Higham, 2015). The origins of migrants
and products were in the southern vegetation belt of China
where charred remains of roots and tubers were recovered
in the Zengpiyan cave (Zhao, 2011). This tropical and
subtropical belt was according to C. Sauer the origins of all
agricultural systems (Sauer, 1952). He suggested that
vegetative propagation should logically precede grain-
based cultivation. Edible roots and tubers that reproduced
asexually are easier to handle than self- or wind-pollinated
plants.

Undoubtedly,

the cases of Borneo, Philippines,

the
Indonesian islands, and New Guinea could support Sauer’s
model but the archaeological evidence is yet insufﬁcient. In
the islands and archipelagos such as the Philippines the
introduction of rice as staple food was brought by Neolithic
migrants some 4000 years ago and adopted by local hunter-
gatherers who domesticated the banana, sugar cane, taro,
and yam (eg, Barker and Janowski, 2011 and papers
therein; Denham, 2011; Bellwood, 2013).

In New Guinea the history is divided to the periods
before and after the arrival of the Austronesian Neolithic
migrants around 3500 cal BP. Studies of
indigenous
domesticates of fruits and tubers included in the highlands
the karuka Pandanus complex (Pandanus julianettii/iwen/
brosimos complex), edible pitpit (Setaria palmifolia), and
Rungia (Rungia klossii), and in the lowlands the species of
marita Pandanus (Pandanus conoideus), Canarium spp.,
and Terminalia spp., as well as sago (Metroxylon sagu).
Several species have broad altitudinal
range such as
sugarcane (Saccharum ofﬁcinarum) and the Australimusa
bananas (Musa spp.) while the original environment of the
tuber Pueraria lobata is unknown. Archaeologically it was
demonstrated that employing the vegetative propagation
occurred together with the development of cultivation on
mounded ﬁelds or “swamp gardens” around 7000e
6500 cal BP while ditched ﬁelds, draining the extra water
appeared by c. 4,000 cal BP, led to increasing degrees of
domestication (Denham, 2011; Fullagar et al., 2006).

Dispersals westward of rice farming occurred across
terrestrial routes or by coastal navigation into India (eg,
Fuller, 2011; Fuller et al., 2011; Gross and Zhao, 2014).
Recent survey indicates that the earlier agriculture system
was established in the Indus due to transmissions from
Southwestern Asia of a portion of the agricultural package
c. 9000e8500 cal BP (Meadow, 1996). Other agricultural
systems attributed to the Neolithic period were those in the
Ganges River Valley. Several could have been a result of

Multiple Origins of Agriculture in Eurasia and Africa Chapter | 19 317

relationships with South China. Others were possibly local
initiations. The late foraging sites, known as Mesolithic, are
dated to a long period from 12/10,000 cal BP through c.
4000 cal BP (Fuller, 2007 and references therein). In most
regions of the Indian subcontinent farming is reported as
beginning after c. 6000 cal BP with late persistence of
foraging societies in the various areas but especially in the
southern region (eg, Lukacs, 2002). The paucity of detailed
reports from Late Pleistocene and Early Holocene foragers’
sites prevents testing the social processes that were
responsible for the emergence of cultivation. It leaves the
impression that India was a noncenter and that the emer-
gence of local domesticates was due to the introduction of
foreign plants (Fuller et al., 2004).

Africa

four

of

types

includes

The African world presents a set of interesting questions
concerning the study of the origins of agro-pastoral soci-
eties when compared to Asia. Its gross geographic subdi-
vision
the
Mediterranean landscapes in the north and the southern
end, the Sahara as a planetary desert, the tropical West and
Central Africa, and the savanna lands in the east. The huge
area of the continent south of the Sahara did not produce
any evidence for early domestication of neither plants nor
animals.

environments:

The earliest dispersal of farming was into Egypt, the
Nile Valley, and along the Mediterranean coastal lands
through the Maghreb. Currently the best evidence indicates
connections with the Levant, slightly before and mainly
after the collapse of the “8200 cal BP cold event,” whether
by sea or by land through Sinai and the Red Sea coast (Bar-
Yosef, 2001; 2013; Weninger et al., 2009; Wengrow et al.,
2014). Domesticated crops such as wheat, barley, and
broad bean were introduced from their
indigenous
Levantine homeland, as well as goat and sheep, at about
9000e8000 cal BP (Wetterstrom, 1993, 1998; Holdaway
et al., 2016). Movements of humans along the Red Sea,
with active communications with people in the Arabian
Peninsula are recorded in current genetics (Hodgson et al.,
2014). In the western direction the presence of South-
western Asian founder crops such as einkorn, emmer and
naked wheat, naked barley, and broad bean, are recorded
by 7200 cal BP in a few Early Neolithic sites in Morocco
(Morales et al., 2013; Linstädter et al., 2012; Zilhão, 2014).
As somewhat similar dates among Early Neolithic sites
characterize the sites on the Iberian coast it is suggested
that either both coastal areas were colonized at the same
time or that an interaction between the two areas was an
ongoing process.

Returning to the southern direction, a question should
be raised. Can we observe an impact by migrants from
Southwestern Asia
animals,

transmitting

seeds,

in

indicate that

the strongest

techniques, and ideas to Africans who inhabited the Sahara
and the Sahel-Savanna belt south of the desert? Genetics, as
mentioned earlier,
impact of
long-distance connections of Asians is mostly recognized
in Ethiopia and the Horn of Africa (Gallengo Llorente
et al., 2015; Hodgson et al., 2014). On the western side of
the continent we have no data that could indicate an impact
of
information concerning intentional
cultivation from the Maghreb where the Southwestern
Asian agricultural package arrived earlier then local millet
cultivation.

transmission of

The main and most intriguing controversy concerns the
domestication of the cattle (Bos taurus) in the Eastern
Sahara. Indeed, the number of cattle bones is rather small.
The original observations were based on the excavated
material in Nabta playa about 100 km east of the Nile
Valley (Gautier, 2001) and later during additional excava-
tions in the site of E-06-1, one of the El-Adam clusters of
Neolithic sites (Jórdeczka et al., 2013). In this site remains
of simple hut ﬂoors were exposed including ﬁreplaces,
grinding stones, pottery, ostrich eggshell beads, and animal
bones. Radiocarbon dates place the deposits at c.
10,300e10,000 cal BP. The authors suggest that the cattle
was domesticated or tamed by the bearers of the Arkinian
culture in the Nile Valley (Jórdeczka et al., 2013).

taurine

An alternative explanation is offered by the genetics
investigations demonstrating that
cattle was
domesticated in Southwest Asia and was introduced to
Africa, possibly from Arabia to the Horn region. Later, as
expected, the domestic African cattle show genetic contri-
butions from wild African aurochsen males. Finds from the
later millennia of the Holocene indicate additional genetic
complications due to the impact of the introduction of the
Indian cattle (Bos indicus or zebu) during later millennia
(eg, Stock and Gifford, 2013). However, the Sahara was
originally the home of Late Pleistocene foragers. With the
increasing aridity they continued to survive in oases.
Mobile herders with cattle, goat, and sheep, originating in
the Nile Valley, expanded through this vast desert region
reaching the Western Sahara by some 5000/4000 years ago.
The three milk-producing animals were adopted by local
populations living on the boundary of the tropical forest,
recorded archaeologically at c. 4000 cal BP. It is suggested
that
the
dietary additive of milk drinking but its main advantage,
understood now due to genetic studies, is the decrease of
mortality caused by malaria (Cordain et al., 2012).

the new subsistence strategy did allow for

Here we should note Harlan’s remark concerning Af-
rican environments south of the Sahara that “unlike the
Near Eastern African crops lack cohesion. Many have
limited distributions; some are found only in some limited
areas of West Africa” (Harlan, 1992, p. 182). The main
difference between the domesticated species of the two
regions is that the African plants have a tendency to be

318 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

cross-pollinated. Therefore, in order for domestication to
succeed they should be planted away from their natural
habitat.

include

land races

Different domesticated species are recorded in limited
areas within the Sahel belt as well as the savannaeforest
belt that stretches across the continent (Figs. 19.6 and 19.7).
The range of
the Pearl millet
(P. glaucum) that characterizes the drier areas and is found
in Mauritania at c. 4000 cal BP (Amblard and Pernés,
1989). In the savannaeforest belt that borders the tropical
forest Guinea rice (Oryza glaberrima), fonio (Digitaria
exilis and Digitaria iburu), Guinea yam (Dioscorea
retundata), oil palm (Elaesis guineensis), cowpea (Vigna
unguiculata)dan important legume species and its relative
plant, Bambara groundnut (Voandzeia subterrane or Vigna
subterranea)dwere exploited and eventually domesticated
by the local population (Harlan, 1992; Bellwood, 2013;
Asersea et al., 2012; Oas et al., 2015).

Northern Sudan shares the climate of the Sahel belt and
South Sudan, especially its southernmost margins, enjoys
the climate and vegetation of
the marginal Ethiopian
highlands. This region produced archaeobotanical assem-
blages introduced from Egypt, one or 2000 years later,
recovered during the excavations of Neolithic villages. The
White Nile River was probably the highway that allowed
bringing Southwestern Asian domesticates into Sudan.
Southern Sudan, affected by the monsoon system, shared
the Holocene economy with the north as well as the Ethi-
opian environments.

The highlands of Ethiopia, on the eastern end of the
Sahel, are characterized by topographic heterogeneity,
climatic, and soil variability that favors the presence of a
large number of land races. In spite of the number of
domesticated species it is not seen as a “center” (Harlan,
1992; Fig. 19.7). The plants are sorghum (S. bicolor)
that expanded westward in the Sahel, ﬁnger millet

6,000

6,000

6,900

7,800

5,900

6,100

7,400

7,600

7,000

7,400

7,700

7,200

6,700

7,400

7,700

7,500

8,000

8,500

9,000
8,500

10,500

9,000

8,500

11,700-10,500

11,700

0

500

1,000 KM

O.B-Y

FIGURE 19.6 Dispersals of Neolithic farming groups by and sea and the transmission of the “agricultural package” through terrestrial Europe and along
the southern costs with cal BP dates of selected areas. After Rowley-Conwy, P., 2011. Westward Ho! The spread of agriculturalism from central Europe to
the Atlantic. Current Anthropology 52 (S4), 431e451; Bellwood, P., 2013. First Migrants: Ancient Migrations in Global Perspective. Wiley Blackwell.

Multiple Origins of Agriculture in Eurasia and Africa Chapter | 19 319

9

3

3

1
2

3

32

3

2

2

3

4

7

9

8

6

6

5 & 10

10

0

3000

KM

FIGURE 19.7 Farming centers across the Sahel and the forest belt in Africa during the Early to Late Holocene (Redrawn after Harlan, J.R., 1992. Crops
& Man. American Society of Agronomy, Inc., and Crop Science Society of America, Inc.): 1. Annual braciaria or just Braciaria; 2. Fonio millet/white fonio;
3. African rice; 4. Yam; 5. Ethiopian banana and noog (an annual herb); 6. tef, annual grass with small size grain; 7. Cowpea (similar to peanut from the
Fabaceae family); 8. Sorghum; 9. Millet; 10. Finger millet.

(E. coracana), the cereal tef (E. tef), and ensete (Musa
ensete), a banana-like plant with edible pulp at the base of
the leaves.

In sum, Egypt and the Nile Valley received the products
of southwestern Asia and had their impact on the Sahara
and further south on the Ethiopian Neolithic societies. It is
conceivable that the spread of pastoral groups and local
domestication of plants in the Sahel reached Western
Africa, where by about 4500 cal BP there is an independent
local plants’ domestication, perhaps affected by the drying
desert, based on the previous hunting and gathering

economy. The later developments including the spread of
the Bantu people are not discussed here.

BRIEF REVIEW OF THE AMERICAS

Examining brieﬂy the sequence of domestication centers
and noncenters in the Americas must begin with Meso-
america, where the primary domesticates determined not
only the local history of social evolution but also the
outcome of
the historical Colombian exchange that
will not be discussed in this paper (eg, Bellowod, 2013).

320 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

A major research advantage is that the population of the
Americas colonized continents that had no previous
human occupations. Although the debate on when, how,
and where did the East Asian immigrants arrive or land,
and how many times did it happen, is not fully resolved.
The available evidence indicates a demographic increase
during the Terminal Pleistocene and mostly during the
Holocene. Recognition of this process, which allows us to
identify the kind of social organizations of foragers who
got acquainted with the local plant resources as well as
the limited number of animals (eg, camelids, guinea pigs,
and turkey). The rich Humboldt Current of the Paciﬁc
resulted in an evolved maritime economy once thought to
have been the origins of South American civilization
(Moseley, 1997).

Information concerning the type of foragers’ dwellings
and shifts in their plans by early cultivators seems to have
been the same as identiﬁed in other regions of the world
(eg, Flannery, 2002). In the long process that led to the
establishment of cultivation that evolved to full-scale
agricultural economy while keeping a major component
of foraging, round huts were the ﬁrst. The ﬂimsy round
structures were mostly built by females while better-built
houses were the work of males as documented ethno-
graphically. This hut type gave way to the square and
rectangular buildings,
together with the emergence of
public areas (plazas) and intra-and intersettlements cere-
monial centers
(eg, Lavallée, 1995; Flannery, 2002;
Quilter, 2014; Moore, 2014).

The core area of the domestication was in lowlands of
Southwestern Mexico and most of the evidence for the
presence of domesticates is obtained from phytoliths and
starch analysis (Piperno et al., 2015; Piperno, 2011). The
domesticated plants
squash
(Curcurbita argyrosperma), pumpkin (Cucurbita pepo),
common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris), and chili peppers
(Capsicum annuum) as well as fruit trees (Piperno and
Pearsall, 1998; Piperno and Smith, 2012).

(Zea mays),

are maize

Dog

and

turkey

(Canis

familiaris)

(Meleagris
gallopavo) were the only animal domesticates that played a
minor role in the diet of Central and Mesoamerican farmers
(Speller et al., 2009; Bellwood, 2005). The impressive
building achievements of Mesoamerican civilizations were
thus created without pack animals or livestock. Dogs
apparently arrived from East Asia, but Guinea pig
was domesticated in the central Andes as well as the
camelids.

Earlier proposals that

the bottle gourds (Lagenaria
siceraria) originated in Asia (Erickson et al., 2005) turned
to be a mistaken identiﬁcation (Kistler et al., 2014). The
plant arrived from Africa as noted by earlier botanists. By c.
10,000 cal BP peoples inhabiting Middle America had
domesticated pumpkins (Smith, 2011), and by 8700 cal BP,

maize (Piperno et al., 2009; Ranere et al., 2009).
The transmission of this staple southward has a date of c.
7100 cal BP in Panama (Central America) and appears later
around 4500 cal BP in the southeast coast of the continent.
The archaeology of the Central Andes and the coastal
plain of Southwestern America (Quilter, 2014) demon-
strates, according to current research, that the process of
adopting maize as a major staple food occurred in a “frog
leaf” progression similarly to the spread of founder crops in
Europe. The current fragmentary picture is exempliﬁed
with a few cases.

During the Early and Middle Holocene from c. 10,200
through 6300 cal BP valley inhabitants in Northern Peru
adopted crop plants such as squash (Cucurbita moschata),
peanuts (Arachis sp.), and cotton (Gossypium barbadense)
(Piperno and Dillehay, 2008). In coastal Peru the earliest
plant remains, ie, corn cobs, husks, stalks, and tassels, were
found at c. 6700e3000 cal BP or the middle and late pre-
ceramic and early ceramic periods (Grobman et al., 2012).
In Ecuador maize was cultivated and consumed as
indicated by the retrieved evidence from domestic contexts
at about 5300e4950 cal BP (Zarillo et al., 2008).

Agricultural

techniques were evolved in Peru and
Bolivia creating raised ﬁelds and large earthen platforms
that prevented waterlogging and ﬂooding, increased soil
fertility, conserved moisture, and facilitated nutrient pro-
duction (Erickson, 1992). Among the plants the cultivation
of potato (Solanum tuberosum) can be traced genetically to
Central Andean and Chilean landraces, exhibiting a large
morphological and genetic diversity (Spooner et al., 2005).
An important grain crop is the quinoa (Chenopodium
quinoa) originating in the Andes some 4000 years ago. It is
assumed that it was domesticated at about the same time as
the camelids-llama and alpaca (c. 6000e4000 cal BP) that
were employed as draft animals. The domestication of the
Guinea pigs occurred within the same time range.

Amazonia is currently searched for early evidence of
cultivation (McMichael et al., 2012). Planting tubers such
as cassava (manioc) is one of the common staples in
Northern South America as well as in Central America.
Cassava is a tuberous root that propagates vegetatively by
cutting the stems and planting (Pujol et al., 2002). Sweet
potato (Ipomoea batatas) is another major resource that
genetically seems to have multiple origins, and was also
domesticated in Central America and in South America
(Roullier et al., 2013). Different
trees were also food-
providing sources. In sum, the South American emerging
agriculture was a mixed package of seeds, roots, tubers, and
trees.

Finally, as another center for local origins of agriculture
we turn to Eastern North America. The archaeobotanical
evidence is based on six sites, spread over a distance of
1000 km, and attributed to the Late Archaic, dated to

Multiple Origins of Agriculture in Eurasia and Africa Chapter | 19 321

c. 5000e3800 cal BP (Smith, 2011 and references therein).
The four open-air sites are located on riverbanks, and others
are a rock-shelter, an occupation along the foot of a cliff,
and a shell-midden. They were residential or seasonal
habitations, sometimes with a few clay ﬂoors indicating the
presence of ﬂimsy huts. Pits, ﬁreplaces, and discard zones
produced a wealth of carbonized material. The environment
was that of a forest where hickory, oak and walnut trees
were exploited together with small seed plants (Smith,
2011). Two chenopods species, bottle gourd (L. siceraria),
squash (C. pepo), and sunﬂower were domesticated along
with other wild plants. The economy included hunting of
white tail deer, collecting turtle and shellﬁsh, ﬁshing, and
trapping waterfowl. Occupations are often considered as
seasonal.

Other plants that were cultivated by local foragers from
c. 5000e3700 cal BP were the erect knotweed (Ploygo-
little barley (Hordeum pusillum), and
num erectum),
maygrass
(Phalaris carolinian). Maize arrived from
Mexico in this region only c. 2200 cal BP. Smith (2011)
considers that
these Late
Archaic sites does not represent the impact of environ-
mental downturn or a response to population packing but
the attraction of the ameliorated environmental opportu-
nities. This explanation depends on the strength of the
evidence from the preceding earlier Archaic sites in the
region.

the subsistence strategy of

DISCUSSION

The global history of agricultural origins and the ensuing
developments can be viewed in a similar way to the eco-
nomic successes and failures of regional adaptations of
products and techniques developed during the Industrial
Revolution as analyzed by recent historians. The latter is
the major technological and economic change that took
place in England from c.1750/1780 AD through the 19th
century, according to holders of the short chronology (eg,
Mokyr, 2002). Its history, when compared to the previous
12 or 11 millennia, served as a socioeconomic model for G.
Childe. Fully aware of the Stone Age subdivisions, he
accepted the evidence collected by contemporary European
archaeologists that the Neolithic period is when the com-
ponents of farming societies such as pottery, axes-adzes,
built houses, and more, ﬁrst appeared. He named the
transition to farming as the “Neolithic Revolution” (1929,
1952). His proposal followed the original
idea of the
American geologist R. Pumpelly whose investigations in
central Asia prompted him to suggest that the Holocene
drying of this area motivated humans in oases to start
cultivation. This hypothesis was later named as the “oasis
theory” that correlated a climatic change with the onset of
agriculture.

Childe followed A. Toynbee, a 19th century historian,
and others in comparing the course of the historically
recorded changes in Britain to prehistoric western Asia,
often referred to as the Near East. While the study of the
Industrial Revolution is based on a wealth of quantitative
information concerning demographics, new machinery,
labor movements, and more, it is not the same for the
study of the prehistoric “revolution.” The emergence of
agro-pastoral societies took a longer time to accomplish in
the centers, and its interpretation depends on the archae-
ological reports that document the social and economic
changes along with the development of religious and so-
cial domains. The documented changes of the Neolithic
Revolution, which occurred in a relatively fast
rate,
measured in evolutionary scale, can be summarized
archaeologically by employing ethnographic data (eg,
Flannery and Marcus, 2012; Kelly, 2013). Together with
the recorded evidence concerning the Industrial Revolu-
tion the main components are as follows (eg, Mokyr,
2002; Deane, 1979; Mathias and Davis, 1989; Price and
Feinman, 2010):

1. The onset of cultivation by foragers was a systematic
application of practical wisdom passed on through the
“social memory” of a given social entity (“tribe”).
Implementing the in-depth knowledge of life cycles of
plants and patterns of behavior of domesticable wild an-
imals facilitated repeated trials in the production of
plant food and animal husbandry. Steady annual culti-
vation emerged in sedentary or semisedentary hamlets
and villages. Dwellings changed from rounded huts to
rectangular buildings in the course of this slow but sig-
niﬁcant process.

2. The realization that the production of stored surplus
beyond the annual needs of a family or a band assisted
in gaining power over nonfarming groups and conse-
quently enabled the geographic expansion of budding-
off communities. These spread into new arable lands,
mostly in river valleys, as well as pastures in hilly
landscape
and semidesert
environments.

in steppic

and later

3. The long-distance routes that facilitated exchange or
barter of precious commodities were employed for the
transmissions of technical knowledge and agricultural
products resulting in the emergence of wealthier fam-
ilies, forming the local elite. It motivated additional
traveling into other lands by using sea vessels and/or
river transport. Taking over areas occupied by hunter-
gatherers was the inevitable outcome of the need for ex-
tra arable land.

4. Transfer of labor from activities related to the produc-
tion of primary staple food to the production of special
goods for exchange and trade with neighboring as well

322 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

as
further-away communities marked the cultural
achievements of the Early Neolithic period (c. 11,700e
8200 cal BP) in the Fertile Crescent. Richer village
communities allowed for training and hosting mobile,
skilled artisans, and beneﬁted from their products for
local use and exchange.

5. Attributing social power to individuals who could serve
the community as leaders, organizers, and negotiators
with other communities whether close (belonging to
the same tribe) or beyond their controlled territory,
was an additional step in social evolution. The emer-
gence of “big men” or “chiefs,” whether or not
in
control of the religious domain, facilitated the enhance-
ment of social cohesion based on the original Paleolithic
concept of “us” and “them.”

6. Earlier aggregation sites, whether in a village or in a
special geographic space, allowed for establishing
ceremonial centers, adding an extra level for organized
religious activities.

the Industrial Revolution,

Similar to the debates concerning the roots and reasons
for
there are
the onset of
disagreements concerning the why question as regards the
onset of the agricultural revolution. We phrase it as “what
triggered the Neolithic or Agricultural Revolution?”
Supporters of the various hypotheses employ the archaeo-
logical records for their own interpretations by examining
different regions in the world to reveal
the processes
involved in the so-called transition from foraging to
farming. This chapter does the same. The region best
documented, in spite of certain gaps, is the Levant. Without
getting entangled with current views of various scholars
that argue for
the use of Broad Spectrum, Niche
Construction, or Optimal Foraging theories (eg, Smith,
2011; Zeder, 2015; Gremillon et al., 2014), or even a
“No-model Model” (Harlan, 1992), I will ﬁrst stress the
common observations for the emergence of the various
centers and later the noncenters.

the Near East,

An ecological approach to why people cultivate places a
considerable weight on the available regional geographic
features and the naturally available plant and animal
resources. The Mediterranean climatic and vegetation belt
that stretches around the basin of this sea is the largest of its
kind in the world. Its eastern periphery, known as South-
western Asia or
in all
components. As clearly stressed by Diamond (1997, 2012),
on a global scale, it is the most diverse in terms of topo-
graphic features, cold and rainy winters and dry summers,
domesticable plants, and animal species. Indeed, the evi-
dence for early cereal cultivation and animal domestication
raises the question of why did it happened in the Levant.
The answers are sought in the ecological advantages.
An earlier study proposed the relationships between the
wild cereal grain size and human selection (Bar-Yosef and
Kislev, 1989). Diamond (1997, 2012) cites the in-depth

is the richest

study of Blumler (1992) that compared the size of seeds
among plant resources in different regions. Blumler found
that 56 large seed species are common in the Mediterranean
region of Western Asia and Southern Europe that
outnumber any of the large seeds in similar vegetation as-
sociations in the world. While this observation is correct, in
other areas, such as Northern China, smaller grain species
such as the broomcorn and foxtail millet, were domesti-
cated. The cause therefore for successful cultivation on a
worldwide scale should be sought not only in the ecological
advantages but in the local social contexts and rate of
innovation among foragers.

In searching for why did the cultivation of various
plants and the domestication of animals, where the
adequate progenitors were present, began some 15e
12 millennia ago, we need to examine the known behavior
of Late Pleistocene foragers.

The current literature on hunter-gatherers indicates that
the need for food is the main cause of either short- or long-
distance mobility employing residential or logistical moves,
or the combinations of both (Binford, 2001; Kelly, 2013). If
we add to this the knowledge kept in the social memory,
human ability for positive foresights, as well as making
mistakes, then the recognition of acute food stress events
may result in short- or long-term planning. Pressures are
variable due to ecological and social stresses. An abrupt
climatic crisis such as a series of drought years in the
Mediterranean basin and increasing relative densities of
other foragers’ bands competing for the same sources may
result in increasing sense of territoriality (property owner-
ship), changing subsistence strategies by intensiﬁcation, as
well as competition and physical conﬂicts.

that

Circumstances of alternating situations of “plenty” and
“scarce” motivated various kinds of human interactions
with their environments. The Paleolithic modes of pro-
curements changed, as witnessed archaeologically and
summarized earlier, during the Late Pleistocene and the
Holocene across the continents. Why? In the detailed
recorded cases the archaeological data indicate situations of
required restricted anticipated
social pressures
mobility, semisedentism and/or
full sedentism, and a
certain degree of territorial control. During most of the
Paleolithic sedentism was practiced as a cyclical, temporary
solution. Only from the Late Pleistocene (c. 23,000e
11,700 cal BP) it became the sole successful strategy in the
Levant, and in areas such as North China and South China.
With the lack of social covenant that respects property
rights across a large area the adherence to cultivation of the
best available edible plants and fruit trees, even on a rela-
tively small scale, required giving up residential mobility
and construct permanent dwellings. In addition, readiness
for unpredictable conﬂicts was needed. Apparently, sed-
entism (or semisedentism) was a tactical solution adopted
by the pioneers of cultivation and resulted in the common
acceptance of new social rules (eg, Flannery and Marcus,

Multiple Origins of Agriculture in Eurasia and Africa Chapter | 19 323

2012). The ensuing demographic pressures are now seen as
the major factor in the demand for land (eg, Ellis et al.,
2013). However, the survival of a family who decided to
quit or was unlucky to be expelled from its village society
was secured when an alternative place, a refuge was
available. Genetics recorded the case of
farmers who
returned to being hunter-gatherers in Thailand’s forests
(Oota et al., 2005).

In several regions cultivation and animal domestication
(wherever it was an option) succeeded. In others it failed.
An overview of the centers provides the impression that the
original
investments resulting in the domestication of
founder crops were a success. The same is true concerning
the domestication of goat, sheep, pig, and cattle. Within
several millennia rapid human population growth charac-
terized Southwestern Asia (eg, Bouquet-Appel, 2011), and
this process repeated itself in every center and noncenter
alike (papers in Bouquet-Appel and Bar-Yosef, 2008). But
we should note that when archaeological records are suf-
ﬁciently detailed, short failures are detected such as in the
Levant around c. 10,200 cal BP (eg, Borrell et al., 2015).
This event is better marked in the more arid areas in the
short occupational gap between the PPNA and PPNB pe-
riods (Goring-Morris and Belfer-Cohen, 2011; Belfer-
Cohen and Goring-Morris, 2011).

Summing up the ﬁrst steps of cultivation and plant
domestication in the Levant I brieﬂy mention the arguments
presented earlier (section The Fertile Crescent). The debate
centers on how long it took the ﬁelds of Neolithic farmers
to be dominated by fully domesticated cereals. The options
are two to three centuries (eg, Hillman and Davies, 1992;
Abbo et al., 2013) or a longer process of over a millennium
or two (Willcox, 2012; Fuller, 2007). In addition, there
were also the unsuccessful trials with wild oat, rambling
vetch, rye, and wild black lentil (eg, Weiss et al., 2006;
Abbo et al., 2013).

The argument for a short time of domestication in the
Levant is theoretically derived from Zipf’s “law of least
effort” and Levi-Straus’s statement of human capacities for
conscious selection (Abbo et al., 2013). However,
this
approach does not take into account that human decisions
do not conform to the logic of economic preferences as
shown by “game theory” (Kahneman, 2003).

Molecular biology plays a role in investigating the
prehistory of agriculture by analyzing the living de-
scendants of the plants such as wheat, barley, rice, and
maize as well as that of domesticated animals (dogs, goats,
sheep, pig, cattle, and more). However, without direct
archaeological evidence, as already stressed by J. Harlan
(1992) it is impossible to correlate the phylogenetic ana-
lyses with a historical sequence, even with the estimated
age for the genetic bottlenecks of the domesticated plants.
Paleogenetics do a better job concerning animals as the
analysis is based on archaeological samples. However, with
the plants this type of investigation is still in its infancy

(Gept, 2014). Humans, once they started managing and
manipulating plants and animals, never stopped innovating
and thus the same plants and animals passed through more
than one mutational event, and introgression of genes from
their wild relatives, either accidentally or intentionally.
Genetic analysis, when done through the use of a mixture
of statistical methods, including the computational analysis
named “Approximate Bayesian Computation,” clariﬁes and
stresses the single and earlier domestication events (Ger-
bault et al., 2014). Together with the archaeological evi-
dence
the
domesticated animals and plants it allows us to trace the
dispersal routes discussed earlier.

radiocarbon dates of

that produces

the

Today’s records demonstrate that there were just a few
centers and numerous noncenters. Once agriculture was
established in one region, interactions by land and sea with
other locations initiated the patterns of exchanges of plants
and animals such as the later historical Colombian ex-
change (eg, Crosby, 1993; Bellwood, 2013). This process
began during the Holocene but was enhanced after 8000 or
7000 cal BP. A. Sherratt (1981) labeled the improved and
enriched agricultural package of this time as the “Second-
ary Products Revolution.” Due to space limitations this
interesting phase in the development of the foundations of
modern agro-pastoral societies is not discussed. Instead, I
have tried to demonstrate the nature of the “origins” when
hunter-gatherers societies became farmers by cultivating
selected plants, tending certain fruit trees, planting tubers,
constructing round dwellings, and establishing sedentary
communities and property rights over a given territory. This
process repeated itself in Eurasia, Africa, and the Americas
demonstrating in its incipient phase similar human behavior
resulting in a responsibility for a continuum from foraging
to farming. The tipping point that demarcates the separation
between the two strategies is when most of the diet is based
on the founder crops and herding. Small-scale foraging
continues by farmers. I also suggest that the archaeological
remains that reﬂect a major change in energy expenditure
when constructing and maintaining houses and ceremonial
centers should be considered as a major marker, whether all
plants are fully domesticated or not. In addition to man-
aging cultivation and storage, exerting territorial control,
increasing in long-distance exchanges, and the presence of
mobile artisans are the cumulative expressions of what the
term Neolithic Revolution means. Implicitly, describing
this process as “Neolithization” is what is seen as the main
cause for
the
feedback dynamic interaction between humans and their
environments, is what several decades ago was a research
topic resulting in two major volumes entitled “Man’s Role
in Changing the Face of the Earth” (Thomas, 1955).

the Anthropocene. Niche Construction,

Preindustrial societies are considered as conducting
ecosystem engineering directed toward wild plants and
animals, and therefore are involved in subsistence and
habitat improvements (Smith, 2011). These relationships

324 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

were probably a cyclical phenomenon during the Paleo-
lithic but drastically changed during the Late Pleistocene
and the Holocene in the respective centers and noncenters.
Relative demographic pressures during this period in Eur-
asia and Africa and during the Holocene in the Americas
motivated humans to adopt similar solutions. Once culti-
vation and sedentism were established as a permanent
subsistence strategy, it became the tipping point in human
evolution. Retractions and failures probably occurred in
more than one case during this long-term process. Those
that succeeded determined the current history of our planet.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I thank M. Tibayrenc and F. Ayala for inviting me to contribute this
chapter. I did not intend to cover the entire world but as I continued to
build the case, in particularly for plant domestication, I felt the need
for additional information to be summarized to clarify my position on
the issue of how foragers became farmers. I am grateful to A. Belfer-
Cohen (Hebrew University), D. Bar-Yosef Mayer
(Steinhardt
Museum of Natural History, Tel-Aviv University), E. Weiss (Bar-Ilan
University), and D.J. Cohen (Department of Anthropology, National
Taiwan University, Taiwan) for commenting on and copyediting
earlier drafts of this manuscript. All shortcomings, omissions, and
mistakes are mine.

REFERENCES

Abbo, S., Lev-Yadun, S., Gopher, A., 2010. Agricultural origins: centers
and noncenters; a near eastern reappraisal. Critical Reviews in Plant
Sciences 29, 317e328.

Abbo, S., Zezak, I., Schwartz, E., Lev-Yadun, S., Kerem, Z., Gopher, A.,
2008. Wild lentil and chickpea harvest in Israel: bearing on the origins
of Near Eastern farming. Journal of Archaeolgical Science 35,
3172e3177.

Abbo, S., Lev-Yadun, S., Gopher, A., 2011. Origin of Near Eastern Plant
Domestication: Homage to Claude Levi-Strauss and “La Pensée
Sauvage”. Genetic Resources and Crop Evolution 58, 175e179.

Abbo, S., Lev-Yadun, S., Gopher, A., 2012. Plant domestication and crop
evolution in the Near East: on events and processes. Critical Reviews
in Plant Sciences 31 (3), 241e257.

Abbo, S., Pinhasi van-Oss, R., Gopher, G., Saranga, Y., Ofner, I.,
Peleg, Z., 2013. Plant domestication versus crop evolution: a con-
ceptual framework for cereals and grain legumes. Trends in Plant
Science 19, 351e360.

Albright, W.F., 1957. From the Stone Age to Christianity: Monotheism

and the Historical Process. John Hopkins Press, Baltimore.

Amblard, S., Pernés, J., 1989. The identiﬁcation of cultivated pearl millet
(Pennisetum) amongst plant impressions on pottery from Oued Chebbi
(Dhar Oualata, Mauritania). The African Archaeological Review 7,
117e126.

Ammerman, A.J., Cavalli-Sforza, L.L., 1984. The Neolithic Transition and
the Genetics of Populations in Europe. Princeton University Press,
Princeton.

Anderson, M.K., Wholgemuth, E., 2012. Californian Indian proto-
agriculture:
In: Gepts, P.,
Famula, T.R., Bettinger, R.L., et al. (Eds.), Biodiversity in Agricul-
ture. Cambridge University Press, pp. 190e224.

characterization

its

and

legacy.

Arbuckle, B.S., Whitcher Kansa, S., Kansa, E., et al., 2014. Data sharing
reveals complexity in the westward spread of domestic animals across
Anatolia. PLoS One (6), e99845 doi:10371/journal.pone.0099845.

Asersea, A.,A., Räsänena, L.A., Assefa, F., et al., 2012. Phylogeny and
genetic diversity of native rhizobia modulating common bean (Pha-
seolus vulgaris L.) in Ethiopia. Systematic and Applied Microbiology
35, 120e131.

Asouti, E., Fuller, D.Q., 2012. From foraging to farming in the southern
Levant: the development of epipalaeolithic and pre-pottery Neolithic
plant management strategies. Vegetation History and Archaeobotany
21, 169e182.

Auffrey, J.C., Tchernov, E., Nevo, E., 1989. Origine de commensalisme de
la souris domestique (Mus musculus domesticus) vis-a-vis l”homme.
Comptes Rendus de l’Académie des Sciences 307 (Serie III),
517e522.

van Andel, T., Runnels, C.N., 1995. The earliest farmers in Europe. An-

tiquity 69, 481e500.

Bar-Oz, G., 2004. Epipalaeolithic Subsistence Strategies in the Levant: A
Zooarchaeological Perspective. American School of Prehistoric
Research Monograph Series, Brill, Boston.

Bar-Yosef, O., 2011. Climatic ﬂuctuations and early farming in West and

East Asia. Current Anthropology 52 (S4), S175eS193.

Bar-Yosef, O., 2001. From sedentary foragers to village hierarchies: the
emergence of social institutions. In: Runciman, G. (Ed.), The Origin of
Human Social Institutions. Oxford University Press, pp. 1e38.

Bar-Yosef, O., 2013. Nile Valley-Levant interactions: an eclectic review.
In: Shirai, N. (Ed.), Neolithization of Northeastern Africa, Studies in
Early Near Eastern: Production, Subsistence, & Environment, vol. 16.
Ex Oriente, Berlin, pp. 237e247.

Bar-Yosef, O., 2014. Southeast Turkish Neolithic: a view from the
southern Levant. In: Özdogan, M., Basgelen, N., Kuniholm, P. (Eds.),
The Neolithic of Turkey, 6. Archaeology and Art Publications,
Istanbul, pp. 293e320.

Bar-Yosef, O., Kislev, M.E., 1989. Early farming communities in the
Jordan Valley. In: Harris, D.R., Hillman, G.C. (Eds.), Foraging and
Farming: The Evolution of Plant Exploitation. Hyman Unwin, Lon-
don, pp. 632e642.

Bar-Yosef, O., Valla, F. (Eds.), 1991. The Natuﬁan Culture in the Levant.

International Monographs in Prehistory, Ann Arbor.

Bar-Yosef, O., Eren, M.I., Yuan, J., Cohen, D.J., Li, Y., 2012. Were
bamboo tools made in prehistoric Southeast Asia? An experimental
view from South China. Quaternary International 269, 9e21.

Bar-Yosef, O., Valla, F. (Eds.), 2013. Natuﬁan Foragers in the Levant:
Terminal Pleistocene Social Changes in Western Asia. International
Monographs in Prehistory, Ann Arbor.

Barker, G., Janowski, M. (Eds.), 2011. Why Cultivate? Anthropological
and Archaeological Approaches to Foraging-farming Transitions in
Southeast Asia. McDonald Institute Monographs, Cambridge
University.

Baker, O., Lee, O.Y.-C., Wu, H.T., et al., 2015. Human tuberculosis

predates domestication in ancient Syria. Tuberculosis 95, S4eS12.

Balaresque, P., Bowden, G.R., Adams, S.M., et al., 2010. A predominantly
Neolithic origin for European paternal lineages. PLoS Biology 8 (1),
e1000285. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1000285.

Barton, L., Brantingham, P.J., Ji, D., 2007. Late Pleistocene climate
change and Paleolithic cultural evolution in northern China: Impli-
cations from the Last Glacial Maximum. In: Madsen, D.B., et al.
(Eds.), Late Quaternary climate change and human adaptation in arid
China. Elsevier, pp. 105e128.

Multiple Origins of Agriculture in Eurasia and Africa Chapter | 19 325

Barton, L., Newsome, S.D., Chen, F.-H., et al., 2009. Agricultural origins
and the isotopic identity of domestication in northern China. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 106, 5523e5528.

Belfer-Cohen, A., 1995. Rethinking social stratiﬁcation in the Natuﬁan
culture: the evidence from burials. In: Campbell, S., Green, A. (Eds.),
The Archaeology of Death in the Ancient Near East. Oxbow Mono-
graph 51, Oxford, pp. 9e16.

Belfer-Cohen, A., Bar-Yosef, O., 2010. First

things ﬁrst: abstract &
ﬁgurative artistic expressions in the Levant. In: Bahn, P. (Ed.), An
Enquiring Mind: Studies in Honor of Alexander Marshack. American
School of Prehistoric Research Monographs Series, Oxbow: Oxford &
Oakville, pp. 3e17.

Le Bailly, M., Leuzinger, U., Schlichtherle, H., Bouchet, F., 2005.
Diphyllobothrium: Neolithic parasite? Journal of Parasitology 91 (4),
957e959.

Caracuta, V., Barzilai, O., Khalaily, H., et al., 2015. The onset of faba bean
farming in the Southern Levant. Scientiﬁc Reports 5, 14370. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1038/srep14370, 1e9.

Cauvin, J., 2000. The Birth of the Gods and the Origins of Agriculture.

Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Cavalli-Sforza, L.L., Feldman, M.W., 2003. The application of molecular
genetic approaches to the study of human evolution. Nature Genetics
33 (Suppl.), 266e274.

Childe, G.V., 1929. The Danube in Prehistory. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Childe, V.G., 1952. New Light on the Most Ancient Near East. Routledge

Belfer-Cohen, A., Goring-Morris, N.A., 2011. Becoming farmers: the in-

& Paul, London.

side story. Current Anthropology 52 (Suppl. 4), S209eS220.

Cohen, D.J., 2011. The beginnings of agriculture in China: a multiregional

Bellwood, P., 2005. First Farmer: The Origins of Agricultural Societies.

view. Current Anthropology 52, S273eS293.

Blackwell Publishing.

Bellwood, P., 2013. First Migrants: Ancient Migrations in Global

Perspective. Wiley Blackwell.

Benz, M., Deckers, K., Rössner, C., et al., 2015. Prelude to village
life. Environmental data and building traditions of the epipalaeolithic
settlement at Körtik Tepe, Southeastern Turkey. Paléorient 41 (2),
9e30.

Bestel, S., Crawford, G.W., Liu, L., et al., 2014. The evolution of millet
domestication, middle Yellow River region, north China: evidence
from charred seeds at the late upper Paleolithic Shizitan locality 9 site.
Holocene 24, 261e265.

Bettinger, R.L., Barton, L., Richerson, P.J., et al., 2007. The transition to
agriculture in Northwestern China. In: Madsen, D.B., Chen, F.H.,
Gao, X. (Eds.), Late Quaternary Climate Change and Human Adap-
tation in Arid China. Elsevier, pp. 83e101.

Binford, L.R., 1981. Bones: Ancient Men and Modern Myths. Academic

Press, New York.

Binford, L.R., 2001. Constructing frames of reference: An Analytical
Method for Archaeological Theory Building Using Ethnographic and
Environmental data sets. University of California Press.

Collard, M., Buchanan, B., O’Brien, M.J., 2013. Population size as an
explanation for patterns in the Paleolithic archaeological record: more
caution is needed. Current Anthropology 54 (S8), S388eS396.

Colledge, S., 2002.

Identifying pre-domestication cultivation in the
archaeobotanical record using multivariate analysis: presenting the
case for quantiﬁcation. In: Cappers, R.T.J., Bottema, S. (Eds.), The
Dawn of Farming in the Near East. Ex Oriente, Berlin, pp. 141e152.
Colledge, S., Conolly, J., 2010. Reassessing the evidence for the cultiva-
tion of wild crops during the younger Dryas at Tell Abu Hureyra,
Syria. Environmental Archaeology 15, 124e138.

Collins, D.A., McGrew, W.C., 1988. Habitats of three groups of chim-
panzees (Pan troglodytes) in western Tanzania compared. Journal of
Human Evolution 17, 553e0594.

Cordain, L., Hickey, M.S., Kim, K., 2012. Malaria and rickets represent
selective forces for the convergent evolution of adults lactase persis-
tence. In: Gepts, P., Famula, T.R., Bettinger, R.L., et al. (Eds.),
Biodiversity in agriculture. Cambridge University Press, pp. 299e308.
Crawford, G.W., 2008. The Jomon in early agriculture discourse: issues
arising from Matsui, Kanehara and Pearson. World Archaeology 40
(4), 445e465.

Bird, R., 1999. Cooperation and conﬂict: the behavioral ecology of the

Crawford, G.W., 2011. Advances in understanding early agriculture in

sexual division of labor. Evolutionary Anthropology 8, 65e75.

Japan. Current Anthropology 52, S331eS345.

Blumler, M.A., 1992. Seed Weight and Environment in Mediterranean-
type Grasslands in California and Israel. University of California,
Berkeley (Ph.D. thesis).

Bouquet-Appel, J.P., Bar-Yosef, O. (Eds.), 2008. The Neolithic De-

mographic Transition and its Consequences. Springer.

Bouquet-Appel, J.-P., 2011. The agricultural demographic transition and
after agriculture inventions. Current Anthropology 52, S497eS-510.
Borrell, F., Junno, A., Barceló, J.A., 2015. Synchronous environmental
and cultural change in the emergence of agricultural economies
10,000 years ago in the Levant. PLoS One 10 (8), e0134810. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0134810.

Brock, F., Higham, T., Ditchﬁeld, P., Ramsey, C.B., 2010. Current pre-
treatment methods for AMS radiocarbon dating at the oxford radio-
carbon accelerator unit (ORAU). Radiocarbon 52, 103e112.

Brown, T.A., Jones, M.K., Powell, W., Allaby, G., 2008. The complex
origins of domesticated crops in the fertile crescent. Cell 24 (2),
103e109.

Butzer, K., 2015. Anthropocene as an evolving paradigm. Holocene 25

(10), 1539e1541.

Le Bailly, M., Harter, S., Bouchet, F., 2003. A l’interface de la biologie et

de l’archéologie: la Paléoparasitologie. Archéopages 11, 12e17.

Crosby, A., 1993. Ecological Imperialism: The Biological Expansion of

Europe, 900e1900. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Cucchi, T., Hulme-Beaman, A., Yuan, J., Dobney, K., 2011. Early
Neolithic pig domestication at Jiahu, Henan Province, China: clues
from molar shape analyses using geometric morphometric approaches.
Journal of Archaeological Science 38, 11e22.

De Candolle, A.D., 1884. Origin of Cultivated Plants. Kegan Paul, Trench.
Dahlberg, F. (Ed.), 1981. Woman the Gatherer. Yale University Press,

New Haven, pp. 75e120.

Davis, S.J.M., Valla, F.R., 1978. Evidence for domestication of the dog

12,000 years ago in the Natuﬁan of Israel. Nature 276, 608e610.

Deane, P., 1979. The First Industrial Revolution, second ed. Cambridge

University Press, Cambridge.

Deng, Z.X., Qin, L., Gao, Y., et al., 2015. From early domesticated rice of
the middle Yangtze basin to millet, rice and wheat agriculture:
archaeobotanical macro-remains from Baligang, Nanyang basin,
Central China (6700e500 BC). PLoS One 10 (10), e0139885. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0139885.

Denham, T., 2011. Early agriculture and plant domestication in new
Guinea and island southeast Asia. Current Anthropology 52,
S379eS395.

326 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

Diamond, J., 1997. Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Soci-

eties. W.W. Norton & Company.

Diamond, J., 2012. The local origins of domestication. In: Gepts, P.,
Famula, T.R., Bettinger, R.L., et al. (Eds.), Biodiversity in Agricul-
ture. Cambridge University Press, pp. 9e20.

Eitam, D., Kislev, M., Karty, A., Bar-Yosef, O., 2015. Experimental barley
ﬂour production in 12,500-year-old rock-cut mortars in southwestern
Asia.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0133306.

1e10.

PLoS

One

Ellis, E.C., Kaplan, J.O., Fuller, D.Q., et al., 2013. Used planet: a global
history. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 110, 7978e7985.

Erickson, C.L., 1992. Prehistoric landscape management in the Andean
impact.

highlands: raised ﬁeld agriculture and its environmental
Population and Environment 13, 285e300.

Erickson, D.L., Smith, B.D., Clarke, S.A.C., et al., 2005. An Asian origin
for a 10,000-year-old domesticated plant in the Americas. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
102, 18315e18320.

Ervynck, A., Dobney, K., Hong, O.H., Meadow, R., 2001. Born free? New
evidence for the status of Sus scrofa at Neolithic Çayönü Tepesi
(southeastern Anatolia, Turkey). Paléorient 27 (2), 47e73.

Evershed, R.P., Payne, S., Sherratt, A.G., Copley, M.S., et al., 2008.
Earliest date for milk use in the Near East and southeastern Europe
linked to cattle herding. Nature 455, 528e531.

Fullagar, R., Field, J., Denham, T., Lentfer, C., 2006. Early and mid
Holocene tool-use and processing of taro (Colocasia esculenta), yam
(Discorea sp.) and other plants at Kuk Swamp in the highlands of
Papua New Guinea. Journal of Archaeological Science 33, 595e614.
Flannery, K.V., 2002. The origins of the village revisited: from nuclear to

extended households. American Antiquity 67, 417e433.

Flannery, K.V., 1969. Origins and ecological effects of early domestica-
tion in Iran and the Near East. In: Ucko, P.J., Dimbleby, G.W. (Eds.),
The Domestication and Exploitation of Plants and Animals. Duck-
worth, London, pp. 73e100.

Flannery, K., Marcus, J., 2012. The Creation of Inequality. How Our
Prehistoric Ancestors Set the Stage for Monarchy, Slavery, and Em-
pire. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.

Fort, J., 2012. Synthesis between demic and cultural diffusion in the
Neolithic transition in Europe. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America 109, 18669e18673.

Fuller, D.Q., 2007. Contrasting patterns in crop domestication and
insights from the Old

domestication rates: recent archaeological
World. Annals of Botany 100, 903e924.

Fuller, D.Q., 2010. An emerging paradigm shift in the origins of agri-

culture. World Anthropology 17 (1), 8e12.

Fuller, D.Q., 2011. Finding plant domestication in the Indian subcontinent.

Current Anthropology 52, S347eS362.

Fuller, D.Q., Rowlands, M., 2011. Ingestion and food technologies:
maintaining differences over the long-term in West, South and East
Asia. In: Wilkinson, T.C., Sherratt, A., Bennett, J. (Eds.), Inter-
weaving Worlds: Systematic Interactions in Eurasia, 7th to 1st
Millennia BC. Oxbow Books, Oxford, pp. 37e60.

Fuller, D.Q., Korisettar, R., Venkatasubbaiah, P.C., Jones, M.K., 2004.
Early plant domestications in southern India: some preliminary
archaeobotanical results. Vegetation History and Archaeobotany 13,
115e129.

Fuller, D.Q., Willcox, G., Allaby, R.G., 2011. Cultivation and domesti-
cation had multiple origins: arguments against the core area hypoth-
esis for the origins of agriculture in the Near East. World Archaeology
43, 628e652.

Fuller, D.Q., Willcox, G., Allaby, R.G., 2012. Early agricultural pathways:
moving outside the “core area” hypothesis in Southwest Asia. Journal
of Experimental Botany 63, 617e633.

Galibert, F., Quignon, P., Hitte, C., André, C., 2011. Toward under-
standing dog evolutionary and domestication history. Comptes
Rendus Biologies 334, 190e196.

Gallego Llorente, M., Jones, E.R., Eriksson, A., et al., 2015. Ancient
Ethiopian genome reveals extensive Eurasian admixture throughout
the African continent. Science 350, 820e822.

Garrard, A.N., Byrd, B.F., 2013. Beyond the Fertile Crescent: Let Palae-
olithic and Neolithic Communities of the Jordanian Steppe, vol. 1.
Oxbow Books, Oxford & Oakville.

Gautier, A., 2001. The early to late Neolithic Archaeofaunas from Nabta
and Bir Kiseiba. In: Wendorf, F., Schild, R., Associates (Eds.), Ho-
locene Settlement of the Egyptian Sahara, The Archaeology of Nabta
Playa, vol. 1. Plenum, New York, pp. 609e635.

Gept, P., 2014. Domestication of plants. In: Encyclopedia of Agriculture

and Food Systems, vol. 2. Elsevier, San Diego, pp. 474e486.

Gerbault, P., Liebert, A., Itan, Y., et al., 2011. Evolution of lactase
persistence: an example of human niche construction. Philosophical
Transactions of
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 366,
863e877. http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2010.0268.

Gerbault, P., Allaby, R.G., Boivin, N., et al., 2014. Storytelling and story
testing in domestication. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 111, 6159e6164.

Goren-Inbar, N., Sharon, G., Melamed, Y., Kislev, M., 2002. Nuts, nut
cracking, and pitted stones at Gesher Benot Ya’aqov, Israel. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 99, 2455e2460.

Goren-Inbar, N., Melamed, Y., Zohar, I., et al., 2014. Beneath still waters
e multistage aquatic exploitation of Euryale ferox (Salisb.) during the
Acheulian. Internet Archaeology 37.

Goring-Morris, A.N., Belfer-Cohen, A., 2011. Neolithization processes in
envelope. Current Anthropology 52,

the outer

the Levant:
S195eS208.

Gourichon, L., Helmer, D., 2008. Etude archeozoologique de Mureybet.
In: Ibanez, J.J. (Ed.), Le site neolithique de Tell Mureybet (Syrie du
Nord). En hommage a Jacques Cauvin, pp. 115e228. BAR Interna-
tional series 1843.

Grobmana, A., Duccio Bonavia, D., Dillehay, T.D., et al., 2012. Pre-
ceramic maize from Paredones and Huaca Prieta, Peru. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
109 (5), 1755e1759.

Gremillion, K.J., Barton, L., Piperno, D.R., 2014. Particularism and the
retreat from theory in the archaeology of agricultural origins. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 111, 6171e6177.

Grosman, L., Munro, N., Abadi, I., et al., 2016. Nahal Ein Gev II, a
late Natuﬁan community at the sea of Galilee. PLoS One 11 (1),
1e32. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0146647.

Gross, B.L., Zhao, Z., 2014. Archaeological and genetic insights into the
origins of domesticated rice. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 111, 6190e6197.

Fuller, D.Q., Qin, L., Zheng, Y., et al., 2009. The domestication process
and domestication rate in rice: spikelet bases from the lower Yangtze.
Science 323, 1607e1610.

Haak, W., Lazaridis, I., Patterson, N., et al., 2015. Massive migration from
the steppe was a source for Indo-European languages in Europe.
Nature 522, 207e211.

Multiple Origins of Agriculture in Eurasia and Africa Chapter | 19 327

Hammer, K., 1984. Das Domestikationssyndrom. Kulturpﬂanze 32,

11e34.

Hardy, K., Blakeney, T., Copeland, L., et al., 2009. Starch granules, dental
calculus and new perspectives on ancient diet. Journal of Archaeo-
logical Science 36, 248e255.

Harlan, J.R., 1971. Agricultural origins: centers and noncenters. Science

174, 468e473.

Harlan, J.R., 1992. Crops & Man. American Society of Agronomy, Inc.,

and Crop Science Society of America, Inc.

Harlan, J.R., 1995. The Living Fields. Our Agricultural Heritage. Cam-

bridge University Press.

Harris, D.R., 2007. Agriculture, cultivation and domestication: exploring
the conceptual framework of early food production. In: Denham, T.,
Iriarte, J., Vrydaghs, L. (Eds.), Rethinking Agriculture: Archaeolog-
ical and Ethnoarchaeologiucal Perspectives. Left Coast Press, Walnut
Creek, California, pp. 15e35.

Hartman, G., Bar-Yosef, O., Brittingham, A., Grosman, L., Munro, N.D.,
2016. Hunted gazelles evidence cooling, but not drying, during the
Younger Dryas in the southern Levant. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 113, 3997e4002.
Henry, A.G., Brooks, A.S., Piperno, D.R., 2011. Microfossils in calculus
demonstrate consumption of plants and cooked foods in Neanderthal
diets (Shanidar III, Iraq; Spy I and II, Belgium). Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 108,
486e491.

Hershkovitz, I., Donoghue, H.D., Minnikin, D.E., Besra, G.S., Lee, O.Y.,
Gernaey, A.M., Galili, E., Eshed, V., Greenblatt, C.L., Lemma, E.,
Bar-Gal, G.K., Spigelman, M., 2008. Detection and molecular
characterization of 9,000-year-old Mycobacterium tuberculosis from
a Neolithic settlement in the eastern Mediterranean. PLoS One 3,
e3436.

Higham, C.F.W., 2015. Debating a great site: Ban non Wat and the wider

prehistory of Southeast Asia. Antiquity 89 (347), 1211e1220.

Hillman, G.C., 2000. Abu Hureyra 1:

Hodgson, J.A., Mulligan, C.J., Al-Meeri, A., Raum, R.L., 2014. Early
Back-to-Africa migration into the horn of Africa. PLoS Genetics 10
(6), e1004393. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1004393.
the Epipalaeolithic.

In:
Moore, A.M.T., Hillman, G.C., Legge, A.J. (Eds.), Village on the
Euphrates: From Foraging to Farming at Abu Hureyra. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, Oxford, pp. 327e399.

Hillman, G.C., Davies, M.S., 1990. Measured domestication rates in wild
wheats and barely under primitive cultivation, and their arcaheological
implications. Journal of World Prehistory 4, 157e222.

Hillman, G.C., Hedges, R., Moore, A., et al., 2001. New evidence of
Lateglacial cereal cultivation at Abu Hureyra on the Euphrates. The
Holocene 11, 383e393.

Hodder, I., 2007. Catalhöyük in the context of the middle eastern

Neolithic. Annual Review of Anthropology 36, 105e120.

Hole, F. (Ed.), 1987. The Archaeology of Western Iran. Smithsonian

Institution Press.

Holdaway, S., Phillipps, R., Emmitt, J., Wendrich, W., 2016. The Fayum
revisited: reconsidering the role of the Neolithic package, Fayum north
shore, Egypt. Quaternary International in press.

Horwitz, L.K., Tchernov, E., Ducos, P., et al., 1999. Animal domestication

in the southern Levant. Paléorient 25 (2), 63e80.

Hunt, H.V., Campana, M.G., Lawes, C., et al., 2011. Genetic diversity and
phylogeography of broomcorn millet (Panicum miliaceum L.) across
Eurasia. Molecular Ecology 20, 4756e4771.

Jepma, M., Verdonschot, R.G., van Steenberger, H., et al., 2012. Neural
mechanisms underlying the induction of relief of perceptual curiosity.

Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 6 (5), 1e9. http://dx.doi.org/
10.3389/fnbeh.2012.00005.

Jones, M., Brown, T., 2007. Selection, cultivation and reproductive
isolation: a reconsideration of the morphological and molecular sig-
nals of domestication. In: Denham, T., Iriarte, J., Vrydaghs, L. (Eds.),
Rethinking Agriculture: Archaeological and Ethnoarchaeological
Perspectives. Left Coast Press, Walnut Creek, CA, pp. 36e49.

Jones, G., Jones, H., Charles, M.P., et al., 2012. Phylogeographic analysis
of barley DNA as evidence for the spread of Neolithic agriculture
through Europe. Journal of Archaeological Science 39, 3230e3238.
Jones, E.R., Gonzalez-Fortes, G., Connell, S., et al., 2015. Upper Palae-
olithic genomes reveal deep roots of modern Eurasians. Nature
Communications. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ncomms9912.

Jones, R., Meehan, B., 1989. Plant foods of the Gidjinggali: ethnographic
and archaeological perspectives from northern Australia on tuber and
seed exploitation. In: Harris, D.R., Hillman, G.C. (Eds.), Foraging and
Farming: Evolution of Plant Exploitation. Unwin Hyman, London,
pp. 120e135.

Jórdeczka, M., Królik, H., Masojc, M., Schild, R., 2013. Hunteregatherer
cattle-keepers of early Neolithic el Adam type from Nabta playa: latest
discoveries from site Ee06e1. African Archaeological Review 30,
253e284. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10437-013-9136-1.

Kahneman, D., 2003. Maps of bounded rationality: psychology for
behavioral economics. American Economic Review 93, 1449e1475.
Kelly, R.L., 2013. The Lifeways of Hunter-Gatherers: The Foraging

Spectrum. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Kimura, B., Marshall, F.B., Chen, S., et al., 2011. Ancient DNA from
Nubian and Somali wild ass provides insights into donkey ancestry
and domestication. Proceedings of the Royal Society B 278, 50e57.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2010.0708.

Kistler, L., Montenegro, A., Smith, B.D., et al., 2014. Transoceanic drift
and the domestication of African bottle gourds in the Americas.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 11, 2937e2941.

Kislev, M.E., Hartman, A., 2012. Food crops from Nahal Zehora. In:
Gopher, A. (Ed.), Village Communities of the Pottery Neolithic Period
in Menashe Hills, Israel: Archaeological Investigations at the Site of
Nahal Zehora. Tel Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, pp. 1321e1325.

Kuijt,

I., Finlayson, B., 2009. Evidence for

food storage and pre-
domestication granaries 11,000 years ago in the Jordan Valley. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 106, 10966e10970.

Larson, G., Liu, R., Zhao, X., et al., 2010. Patterns of East Asian pig
domestication, migration, and turnover revealed by modern and
ancient DNA. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 107, 7686e7691.

Larson, G., Karlsson, E.K., Angela Perri, A., et al., 2012. Rethinking dog
domestication by integrating genetics, archeology, and biogeography.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 109, 8878e8883.

Larson, G., Albarella, U., Dobney, K., Rowley-Conwy, P., et al., 2007.
Ancient DNA, pig domestication, and the spread of the Neolithic into
Europe. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 104, 15276e15281.

Lavallé, D., 1995. The First South Americans. University of Utah Press,

Salt Lake City.

Lee, G.-A., 2011. The transition from foraging to farming in prehistoric

Korea. Current Anthropology 52, S307eS329.

Lee, G.-A., 2012. Archaeological perspectives on the origins of azuki

(Vigna angularis). Holocene 23 (3), 453e459.

328 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

Lee, G.-A., Crawford, G.W., Liu, L., Chen, X., 2007. Plants and people
from the early Neolithic to Shang periods in north China. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
104, 1087e1092.

Lee, R.B., DeVore, I. (Eds.), 1968. Man the Hunter. Aldine Publishing

Company, Chicago.

Lev, E., Kislev, M.E., Bar-Yosef, O., 2005. Mosuterian vegetal food in
Kebara cave, Mt Carmel. Journal of Archaeological Science 32,
475e484.

Lev-Yadun, S., Gopher, A., Abbo, S., 2000. The cradle of agriculture.

Science 288, 1602e1603.

Lindblad-Toh, K., Wade, C.M., Mikkelsen, T.S., et al., 2005. Genome
sequence, comparative analysis and haplotype structure of the do-
mestic dog. Nature 438, 803e819. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
nature04338.

Linstädter, J., Medved, I., Solich, M., Weniger, G.-C., 2012. Neolithisation
process within the Alboran territory: models and possible African
impact. Quaternary International 274, 219e232.

Lipson, M., Po-Ru Loh, P.-R., Nick Patterson, N., et al., 2014. Recon-
structing Austronesian population history in island southeast Asia.
Nature Communications
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
ncomms5689.

4689.

5,

Litt, T., Ohlwein, C., Neumann, et al., 2012. Holocene climate variability
in the Levant from the Dead Sea pollen record. Quaternary Science
Reviews 49, 95e105.

Liu, G., 2007. Analysis of the sites. In: Yang, H., Liu, G., Tang, C. (Eds.),
The Origin of Jades in East Asia; Jades of the Xinglongwa Culture.
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, pp. 2e55.

Liu, l, 2015. A long process towards agriculture in the middle yellow river
valley, china: evidence from macro- and micro-botanical remains.
Journal of Indo-Paciﬁc Archaeology 35, 3e14.

Liu, L., Field, J., Fullagar, R., Bestel, S., et al., 2010. What did grinding
stones grind? New light on Early Neolithic subsistence economy in the
Middle Yellow River Valley, China. Antiquity 84, 816e833.

Liu, L., Bestel, S., Shi, J., et al., 2013. Paleolithic human exploitation of
plant foods during the last glacial maximum in North China. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 110, 5380e5385.

Liu, L., Ge, W., Bestel, S., Jones, D., et al., 2011. Plant exploitation of the
last foragers at Shizitan in the Middle Yellow River Valley China:
evidence from grinding stones. Journal of Archaeological Science 38,
3524e3532.

Lu, T.L.-D., 1998. The microblade tradition in China: regional chronolo-
gies and signiﬁcance in the transition to Neolithic. Asian Perspectives
37, 84e112.

Lu, T.L.-D., 1999. The Transition from Foraging to Farming and the

Origin of Agriculture in China. BAR International Series.

Lu, H., Zhang, J., Liu, et al., 2009. Earliest domestication of common
millet (Panicum miliaceum) in East Asia extended to 10,000 years
ago. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 106, 7367e7372.

Lubock, J., 1865. Pre-historic Times. Willams and Norgate, London.
Lukacs, J.R., 2002. Hunting and gathering strategies in prehistoric India: a
biocultural perspective on trade and subsistence. In: Morrison, K.D.,
Junker, L.L. (Eds.), Forager-traders in South and Southeast Asia.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 41e61.

Madella, M., Jones, M.K., Goldberg, P., et al., 2002. The exploitation of
plant resources by Neanderthals in Amud Cave (Israel): the evidence
from phytolith studies. Journal of Archaeological Science 29,
703e719.

Maher, L., Richter, T., Macdonald, D., et al., 2012. Twenty thousand-year-
old huts at hunter-gatherers settlement in Eastern Jordan. PLoS One 7,
e31447.

Mariotti Lippia, M., Foggia, B., Arangurenb, B., et al., 2015. Multistep
food plant processing at Grotta Paglicci (Southern Italy) around
32,600 cal B.P. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 112, 12075e12080.

Marshall, F.B., Dobney, K., Denham, T., Capriles, J.M., 2014. Evaluating
the roles of directed breeding and gene ﬂow in animal domestication.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 111, 6153e6158.

Marshall, F., Weissbrod, L., 2011. Domestication processes and
morphological change: through the lens of the donkey and African
pastoralism. Current Anthropology 52, S397eS413.

Martin, L., Edwards, Y., 2013. Diverse strategies: evaluating the appear-
ance and spread of domestic caprines in the southern Levant. In:
Colledge, S., Conolly, J., Dobney, K., et al. (Eds.), The Origins and
Spread of Domestic Animals in Southwest Asia and Europe. Left
Coast Press, Walnut Creek, CA, pp. 49e82.

Mathias, P., Davis, J.A. (Eds.), 1989. The First Industrial Revolution.

Balckwell, Oxford & Cambridge.

McGovern, P., 2003. Ancient Wine: The Search for the Origins of Vini-

culture. Princeton University Press, Princeton.

McMichael, C.H., Piperno, D.R., Bush, M.B., et al., 2012. Sparse pre-
Columbian human habitation in western Amazonia. Science 336,
1429e1431.

Meadow, R.H., 1996. The origins and spread of agriculture and pasto-
ralism in northwestern South Asia. In: Harris, D.R. (Ed.), The Origins
and Spread of Agriculture and Pastoralism in Eurasia. Smithsonian
Institution Press, pp. 390e412.

Mokyr, J., 2002. The Gifts of Athena: Historical Origins of the Knowledge

Economy. Princeton University Press, Princeton.

Moore, J.D., 2014. A Prehistory of South America: Ancient Cultural
Diversity on the Least Known Continent. University Press of
Colorado, Boulder.

agriculture

Morales, J., Pérez-Jordà, G., Peña-Chocarro, L., et al., 2013. The origins
remains
of
from Epipalaeolithic and early Neolithic levels of Ifri Oudadane
(Morocco). Journal of Archaeological Science 40, 2659e2669.

in north-West Africa: macro-botanical

Moseley, M., 1997. The Incas and Their Ancestors: The Archaeology of

Peru. Thames and Hudson, London.

Munro, N.D., 2004. Zooarchaeological measures of hunting pressure and
occupation intensity in the Natuﬁan. Current Anthropology 45, S5eS33.
Nadel, D., Weiss, E., Simchoni, O., et al., 2004. Stone age hut in Israel
yields world’s oldest evidence of bedding. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 101,
6821e6826.

Naderia, S., Rezaeia, H.-R., Pompanona, F., et al., 2008. The goat
domestication process inferred from large-scale mitochondrial DNA
analysis of wild and domestic individuals. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 105,
17659e17664.

Namdar, D., Amrani, A., Getzov, Milevski, I., 2014. Olive oil storage
during the ﬁfth and sixth millennia BC at Ein Zippori, Northern Israel.
Israel Journal of Plant Sciences 1e14. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
07929978.2014.960733.

Negi, C.S., 2010. The institution of taboo and the local resource man-
agement and conservation surrounding sacred natural sites in Uttar-
akhand, Central Himalaya. International Journal of Biodiversity and
Conservation 2, 186e195.

Multiple Origins of Agriculture in Eurasia and Africa Chapter | 19 329

Noshiro, S., Sasaki, Y., 2014. Pre-agricultural management of plant re-
sources during the Jomon period in Japanda sophisticated subsistence
system on plant resources. Journal of Archaeological Science 42,
93e106.

Oas, S.E., D”Andrea, A.C., Watson, D.J., 2015. 10,000 year history of
plant use at Bosumpra Cave, Ghana. Vegetation History and
Archaeobotany 24, 635e653. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00334-015-
0514-2.

Price, T.D., Fienman, G. (Eds.), 2010. Pathways to Power: New Per-

spectives on the Origins of Social Inequality. Springer.

Pujol, B., Gigot, G., Laurent, G., et al., 2002. Germination ecology of
cassava (manihot esculenta crantz, Euphorbiaceae)
in traditional
agroecosystems: seed and seedling biology of a vegetatively propa-
gated domesticated plant. Economic Botany 56, 366e379.

Purugganan, M.D., Fuller, D.Q., 2009. The nature of selection during plant

domestication. Nature 457, 843e848.

Oota, H.,B., Pakendorf, G., Weiss, A., et al., 2005. Recent origin and
cultural reversion of a hunter-Gatherer group. PLoS Biology 3,
536e542.

Purugganan, M.D., Fuller, d.q, 2011. Archaeological data reveal slow rates
of evolution during plant domestication. Evolution 65 (1), 171e183.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1558-5646.2010.01093.x.

Orland, I.J., Bar-Matthews, M., Ayalon, A., et al., 2012. Seasonal reso-
lution of eastern Mediterranean climate since 34 ka from Soreq cave
speleothem. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta 89, 240e255.

Ottoni, C., Flink, L.G., Evin, A., et al., 2013. Pig domestication and
human-mediated dispersal in western Eurasia revealed through ancient
DNA and geometric morphometrics. Molecular Biology and Evolu-
tion 30, 824e832.

Ozkan, H., Willcox, G., Graner, A., et al., 2011. Geographic distribution
and domestication of wild emmer wheat (Triticum dicoccoides). Ge-
netic Resources and Crop Evolution 58 (1), 11e53 on line July 2010.
Özdogan, M., 2011. Archaeological evidence on the westward expansion
of farming communities from Eastern Anatolia to the Aegean and the
Balkans. Current Anthropology 52, S415eS430.

Peleg, Z., Fahima, Z., Korol, A.B., et al., 2011. Genetic analysis of wheat
domestication and evolution under domestication. Journal of Experi-
mental Botany 62, 5051e5061, 2011.

Peters, J., Helmer, D., Von Den Deisch, A., Saña Segui, M., 1999.
Early animal husbandry in the northern Levant. Paléorient 25 (2),
27e48.

Pinhasi, R., Fort, J., Ammerman, A.,J., 2005. Tracing the origin and spread
of agriculture in Europe. PLoS Biology 3 (12), 2020e2028. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.0030410.

Pinhasi, R., Thomas, M.G., Hofreiter, M., et al., 2012. The genetic history

of Europeans. Trends in Genetics 28 (10), 496e505.

Quilter, J., 2014. The Ancient Central Andes. Routlege, London & New

York.

Ranere, A.J., Piperno, D.R., Holst, I., et al., 2009. The cultural and
chronological context of early Holocene maize and squash domesti-
cation in the Central Balsas River Valley, Mexico. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 106,
5014e5018.

Redding, R.W., 2005. Breaking the mold: a consideration of variation in
the evolution of animals domestication. In: Vigne, J.D., Peters, J.,
Helmer, D. (Eds.), First Steps of Animal Domestication. Oxbow
Books, Oxford, pp. 41e48.

Ridout-Sharpe, J., 2015. Changing lifestyles in the northern Levant: late
Epipalaeolithic and early Neolithic shells from Tell Abu Hureyra.
Quaternary International 390, 102e116.

Riehl, S., Benz, M., Conard, N.J., et al., 2011. Plant use in three Pre-
Pottery Neolithic sites of the northern and eastern Fertile Crescent: a
preliminary report. Vegetation History and Archaeobotany 21,
95e106.

Riehl, S., Zeidi, M., Conard, N.J., 2013. Emergence of agriculture in the

foothills of the Zagros mountains of Iran. Science 341, 65e67.

Richerson, P.J., Boyd, R., Bettinger, R.L., 2001. Was agriculture
impossible during the Pleistocene but mandatory during the Holo-
cene? A climate change hypothesis. American Antiquity 66,
387e411.

Piperno, D.R., 2011. The origins of plant cultivation and domestication in
the new world tropics: patterns, process, and new developments.
Current Anthropology 52 (S4), S453eS470.

Rosen, A.M., 2010. Natuﬁan plant exploitation: management risk and
stability in an environment of change. Eurasian Prehistory 7,
117e131.

Piperno, D.R., Dillehay, T.D., 2008. Starch grains on human teeth reveal
early broad crop diet in northern Peru. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 105,
19622e19627.

Piperno, D.R., Pearsall, D.M., 1998. The Origins of Agriculture in the

Lowland Neotropics. Academic Press, New York.

Piperno, D.R., Ranere, A.J., Holstb, I., et al., 2009. Starch grain and
phytolith evidence for early ninth millennium B.P. maize from the
Central Balsas River Valley, Mexico. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 106,
5019e5024.

Piperno, D.R., Smith, B.D., 2012. The origins of food production in
Mesoamerica. In: Nichols, D.L., Pool, C.A. (Eds.), The Oxford
Handbook of Mesoamerican Archaeology. Oxford University Press,
New York, pp. 151e164.

Piperno, D.R., Weiss, E., Holst, I., Nadel, D., 2004. Processing of wild
cereal grains in the upper Palaeolithic revealed by starch grain anal-
ysis. Nature 430, 670e673.

Piperno, D.R., Holst, I., Winter, I., McMillan, O., 2015. Teosinte before
domestication: experimental study of growth and phenotypic vari-
ability in Late Pleistocene and early Holocene environments. Qua-
ternary International 363, 65e77.

Rosenberg, M., Redding, R.W., 2000. Hallan Çemi and early village or-
ganization in eastern Anatolia. In: Kuijt, I. (Ed.), Life in Neolithic
Farming Communities: Social Organization, Identity, and Differenti-
ation. Plenum Press, New York, pp. 39e61.

Roullier, C., Benoit, L., McKey, D.B., Lebot, V., 2013. Historical col-
lections reveal patterns of diffusion of sweet potato in Oceania
obscured by modern plant movements and recombination. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 110, 2205e2210.

Rowley-Conwy, P., 2011. Westward Ho! The spread of agriculturalism
from central Europe to the Atlantic. Current Anthropology 52 (S4),
431e451.

Romero, I.G., Mallick, C.B., Liebert, A., et al., 2011. Herders of Indian
and European cattle share their predominant Allele for
lactase
persistence. Molecular Biology and Evolution. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1093/molbev/msr190A.

Salque, M., Bogucki, P.I., Pyze, J., et al., 2013. Earliest evidence for
cheese making in the sixth millennium BC in northern Europe. Nature
493, 522e525.

Schoch, W.H., Bigga, G., Böhner, U., et al., 2015. New insights on the
wooden weapons from the Paleolithic site of Schöningen. Journal of
Human Evolution 89, 214e225.

330 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

Schmidt, K., 2005. “Ritual Centers” and the Neolithisation of Upper

Mesopotamia. Neo-Lithics 2 (05), 13e21.

Schmidt, K., 2011. Göbekli Tepe. In: Özdogan, M., Basgelen, N.,
Kuniholm, P. (Eds.), The Neolithic of Turkey: The Euphrates basin.
Archaeology and Art Publications, Istanbul, pp. 41e83.

Shennan, S., 2000. Population, culture history, and the dynamics of culture

change. Current Anthropology 41, 811e835.

Shelach, G., 2000. The earliest Neolithic cultures of northeast China:
Recent discoveries and new perspectives on the beginning of agri-
culture. Journal of World Prehistory 14, 363e413.

Sherratt, A., 1981. Plough and pastoralism: aspects of the secondary
products revolution. In: Hodder, I., Isaac, G., Hammond, N. (Eds.),
Pattern of the Past: Studies in Honor of David Clarke. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, pp. 261e306.

(Eds.), Natuﬁan Foragers in the Levant: Terminal Pleistocene Changes
in Western Asia. IMP Ann-Arbor, Michigan, pp. 83e87.

Taylor, R.E., Bar-Yosef, O., 2014. Radiocarbon Dating: An Archaeolog-

ical Perspective. Left Coast Press, Walnut Creek, CA.

Tchernov, E., 1991. Biological evidence for human sedentism in southwest
Asia during the Natuﬁan. In: Bar-Yosef, O., Valla, F.R. (Eds.), The
Natuﬁan Culture in the Levant. International Monographs in Prehis-
tory, Ann Arbor, pp. 315e340.

Tchernov, E., Valla, F.R., 1997. Two new dogs, and other Natuﬁan dogs,
from the southern Levant. Journal of Archaeological Science 24,
65e95.

Thieme, H., 1997. Lower Paleolithic hunting spears from Germany. Nature

385, 807e810.

Thomas, W.L., 1955. Man’s Role in Changing the Face of the Earth.

Savolainen, P., Zhang, Y.P., Luo, J., et al., 2002. Genetic evidence for an

University of Chicago Press.

East Asian origin of domestic dogs. Science 298, 1610e1613.

Sauer, C.O., 1952. Agricultural Origins and Dispersals. MIT Press,

Cambridge.

Simmons, A.H., 2007. The Neolithic Revolution in the Near East.
Transforming the Human Landscape. The University of Arizona
Press.

Skoglund, P., Ersmark, E., Palkopoulou, E., Dalén, L., 2015. Ancient wolf
genome reveals an early divergence of domestic dog ancestors and
admixture into high-latitude breeds. Current Biology 11, 1515e1519.
Smith, B.D., 2011. The cultural context of plant domestication in Eastern

North America. Current Anthropology 52, S471eS484.

Snir, A., Nadel, D., Groman-Yaroslavski, I., et al., 2015. The origins of
cultivation and proto-weeds, long before Neolithic farming. PLoS One
1e22. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0131422.

Torfstein, A., Goldstein, S.L., Stein, M., Enzel, Y., 2013. Impacts of
abrupt climate changes in the Levant from last glacial dead sea levels.
Quaternary Science Reviews 69, 1e7.

Tresset, A., Bollongino, R., Edwards, C.J., et al., 2009. Early diffusion of
domestic bovids in Europe: an indicator for human contacts, exchange
and migrations? In: D’Errico, F., Hombert, J.-M. (Eds.), Becoming
Eloquent: Advances in the Emergence of Human Language, Human
Cognition and Modern Cultures. John Benjamins Publishing Com-
pany, pp. 69e90.

Trut, L., Oskina, I., Kharlamova, A., et al., 2009. Animal evolution during
the domesticated fox as a model. BioEssays 31,

domestication:
349e360. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/bies.200800070.

Ungar, P.S. (Ed.), 2007. The Evolution of the Human Diet: The Known,

the Unknown, and the Unknowable. Oxford University Press.

Speth, J.D., 2010. The Paleoanthropology and Archaeology of Big-game

Valla, F.R., 1988. Aspect du sol dl’abri 131 de Mallaha (Eynan). Paléo-

Hunting: Protein, Fat, or Politics? Springer, New York.

rient 15, 283e296.

Speller, C.F., Kemp, B.M., Wyatt, S.D., et al., 2009. Ancient mitochon-
drial DNA analysis reveals complexity of indigenous North American
turkey domestication. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences of the United States of America 107, 2807e2812.

Spooner, D.M., McLean, K., Ramsay, G., et al., 2005. A single domesti-
length
cation for potato based on multilocus ampliﬁed fragment
polymorphism genotype. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 102, 14694e14699.

Stock, F., Gifford-Gonzalez, D., 2013. Genetics and African cattle
domestication. African Archaeological Review 30, 51e72. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10437-013-9131-6.

Starkovich, B.M., Stiner, M.C., 2009. Hallan Çemi Tepesi: high-ranked
game exploitation alongside intensive seed processing at
the
epipaleolithic-Neolithic transition in southeastern Turkey. Anthro-
pozoologica 44, 41e61.

Stevens, N.E.S., McElreath, R., 2015. When are two tools better than one?
Mortars, milling slabs and the California acorn economy. Journal of
Anthropological Archaeology 37, 100e111.

Tanno, K., Willcox, G., 2006. How fast was wild wheat domesticated?

Science 311, 1886.

Tanno, K.-I., Willcox, G., 2012. Distinguishing wild and domestic wheat
and barley spikelets from early Holocene sites in the Near East.
Vegetation History and Archaeobotany 21, 107e115.

Tanno, K.-I., Willcox, G., Muhesen, S., et al., 2013. Preliminary results
from analysis of charred plant remains from a burnt Natuﬁan building
at Dederiyeh cave in northwest Syria. In: Bar-Yosef, O., Valla, F.

Vavilov, N., 1926. Studies on the Origins of Cultivated Plants. Nst. Appl.

Bot. Plant Breed, Leningrad.

Veeramah, K.R., Novembre, J., 2014. Demographic events and evolu-
tionary forces shaping European genetic diversity. Cold Spring Harbor
Perspectives
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/
cshperspect.a008516.

Biology

in

6.

Vigne, J.-D., 2011. The origins of animal domestication and husbandry: a
major change in the history of humanity and the biosphere. Comptes
Rendus Biologies 334, 171e181.

Vigne, J.-D., 2013. Domestication process and domestic ungulates: new
observations from Cyprus. In: Colledge, S., Conolly, J., Dobney, K.,
Manning, K., Shennan, S. (Eds.), The Origins and Spread of Domestic
Animals in Southwest Asia and Europe. Left Coast Press, Walnut
Creek, CA, pp. 115e128.

Vigne, J.D., 2015. Early domestication and farming: what should we know
or do for a better understanding? Anthropozoologica 50 (2), 123e150.
Vigne, J.-D., Coucchi, T., 2005. Premières navigations au Proche-Orient:

les informations indirectes de Chypre. Paléorient 31, 186e194.

Vigne, J.-D., Carrère, I., Briois, F., Guilaine, J., 2011. The early process of
mammal domestication in the Near East: new evidence from the pre-
Neolithic and pre-pottery Neolithic in Cyprus. Current Anthropology
52, S255eS271.

Vigne, J.-D., Briois, F., Zazzo, A., Willcox, G., et al., 2012. First wave of
cultivators spread to Cyprus at least by 10,600 y ago. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
109, 8445e8449.

Multiple Origins of Agriculture in Eurasia and Africa Chapter | 19 331

Waguespack, N.M., 2005. What do women do in large-game hunting
societies? The organization of male and female labor in foraging so-
cieties:
implications for early Paleoindian archaeology. American
Anthropological 107, 666e676.

Wayne, R.K., vonHoldt, B.M., 2012. Evolutionary genomics of dog

domestication. Mammalian Genome 23, 3e18.

Weiss, E., 2015. “Beginnings of fruit growing in the old world” e two

generations later. Israel Journal of Plant Sciences 62, 75e85.

Weiss, E., Kislev, M.E., Hartmann, A., 2006. Autonomous cultivation

before domestication. Science 312, 1608e1610.

Weiss, E., Wetterstrom, W., Nadel, D., Bar-Yosef, O., 2004. The broad
spectrum revisited: evidence from plant remains. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 101,
9551e9555.

Weninger, B., Clare, L., Rohling, E.J., et al., 2009. The impact of rapid
climate change on prehistoric societies during the Holocene in the
eastern Mediterranean. Documenta Praehistorica 36, 551e583.

Wetterstrom, W., 1993. Foraging and farming in Egypt: the transition from
hunting and gathering to horticulture in the Nile valley. In: Shaw, T.,
Sinclair, P., Andah, B., Okpoko, A. (Eds.), The Archaeology of Af-
rica: Food, Metals and Towns. Routledge, pp. 165e226.

Wetterstrom, W., 1998. The origins of agriculture in Africa: with particular
reference to sorghum and pearl millet. The Review of Archaeology 19,
30e47.

abundance. I. Antiﬁdants. International Journal of Primatology 19 (6),
949e970.

Yang, X., Wan, Z., Perry, L., et al., 2012. Early millet use in northern
China. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 109, 3726e3730.

Yang, X., Barton, H.J., Wan, Z., et al., 2013. Sago-type palms were an
important plant food prior to rice in southern subtropical China. PLoS
One 8 (5), e63148. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0063148.

Yang, X., Fuller, D.Q., Huan, X., et al., 2015. Barnyard grasses were
processed with rice around 10,000 years ago. Nature Scientiﬁc Re-
ports 5, 16251. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/srep16251.

Yaroshevich, A., Kaufman, D., Nuzhnyy, D., et al., 2010. Designs of
microlithic projectiles during the Late Epi-Palaeolithic in the Southern
Levant
tested by archery experiments. Journal of Archaeological
Science 37, 368e388.

Yen, D.E., 1989. The domestication of environment. In: Harris, D.R.,
Hillman, G.C. (Eds.), Foraging and Farming: The Evolution of Plant
Exploitation. Unwin Hyman, London, pp. 55e75.

Yuan, J., Flad, R.K., 2002. Pig domestication in ancient China. Antiquity

76, 724e732.

Zeder, M.A., 2011. The origins of agriculture in the Near East. Current

Anthropology 52, S221eS235.

Zeder, M., 2012. Domestication of animals. Journal of Archaeological

Research 68 (2), 161e190.

Wengrov, D., Dee, M., Foster, S., et al., 2014. Cultural convergence in the
Neolithic of the Nile Valley: a prehistoric perspective on Egypt’s place
in Africa. Antiquity 88, 95e111.

Zeder, M., 2015. Core questions in domestication research. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
112, 3191e3198.

Willcox, G., 2005. The distribution, natural habitats and availability of
wild cereals in relation to their domestication in the Near East: mul-
tiple events, multiple centres. Vegetation History and Archaeobotany
14, 534e541.

Willcox, G., 2012. Searching for the origins of arable weeds in the Near

East. Vegetation History and Archaeobotany 21, 163e167.

Willcox, G., 2012b. Pre-domestic cultivationduring the late Pleistocene
and early Holocene in the northern Levant.
In: Gepts, P.,
Famula, T.R., Bettinger, et al. (Eds.), Biodiversity in Agriculture.
Cambridge University Press, pp. 92e109.

Willcox, G., Nesbitt, M., Bittmann, F., 2012. From collecting to cultiva-
tion: transitions to a production economy in the Near East. Vegetation
History and Archaeobotany 21, 81e83.

Zhang, C., Hung, H.-C., 2012. Later hunter-gatherers in southern China,

18 000e3000 BC. Antiquity 86, 11e29.

Zhang, C., Hung, H-c, 2013. Jiahu 1: earliest farmers beyond the Yangtze

river. Antiquity 87, 46e63.

Zhao, Z., 2010. New data and new issues for the study of origins of rice
agriculture in China. Archaeological and Anthropological Sciences 2,
99e105.

Zhao, Z., 2011. New archaeobotanic data for the study of the origins of

agriculture in China. Current Anthropology 52, S295eS306.

Zarrillo, S., Pearsall, D.M., Raymond, J.S., et al., 2008. Directly dated
starch residues document early formative maize (Zea mays L.) in
tropical Ecuador. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 105, 5006e5011.

Willcox, G., Stordeur, D., 2012. Large-scale cereal processing before
domestication during the tenth millennium BC cal. in northern Syria.
Antiquity 86, 99e114.

Zheng, Y.-F., Sun, G.-P., Chen, X.-G., 2007. Characteristics of the short
rachillae of rice from archaeological sites dating to 7000 years ago.
Chinese Science Bulletin 52, 1654e1660.

Willcox, G., Savard, M., 2011. Botanical evidence for the adoption of
cultivation in Southeast Turkey. In: Ozdogan, M., Basgelen, N.,
Kuniholm, P. (Eds.), The Neolithic in Turkey: The Tigris Basin.
Archaeology and Art Publications, Istanbul, pp. 267e280.

Wu, X., Zhang, C., Goldberg, P., et al., 2012. Early pottery et 20,000 years

ago in Xianrendong, China. Science 336, 1696e1700.

Wrangham, R., Conklin-Brittain, N.L., Hunt, K.D., 1998. Dietary response
of chimpanzees and Cercopithecines to seasonal variation in fruit

Zilhao, J., 2014. Early prehistoric navigation in the western Mediterranean:
implications for the Neolithic transition in Iberia and the Maghreb.
Eurasian Prehistory 11 (2), 185e200.

Zohary, D., Hopf, M., Weiss, E., 2012. Domestication of Plants in the Old
World: The Origin and Spread of Cultivated Plants in Southwest Asia,
Europe and the Mediterranean Basin. Oxford University Press,
Oxford.

Chapter 20

The Quantum Origin of Life: How the
Brain Evolved to Feel Good

S. Hameroff
The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, United States

INTRODUCTION: WHICH CAME FIRST,
FEELINGS OR THE BRAIN?

What Drives Conscious Behavior?

According to Darwin’s theory of evolution, adaptations
through random mutations serve an organism’s genes, the
ﬁttest genes surviving through reproductive success. How-
ever, Darwin’s theory renders consciousness epiphenomenal
and illusory, leaves apparent gaps in evolution, and has been
questioned as its sole guiding force. For example, Kauffman
(1993) has invoked principles of self-organization and
nonlinear emergence in life and its evolution. But to what
end? What is life evolving toward? What’s the point?

In psychology and cognitive neuroscience, purposeful
conscious behavior is predicated on personal reward, on an
animal or human wanting to feel good (or avoid feeling
bad). Conscious feelings drive behavior, whether for im-
mediate or delayed gratiﬁcation, altruism (“it feels better to
give than to receive”), and/or spiritual peace and content-
ment. Primacy of feelings has been asserted since Epicurus
in ancient Greece, Freud’s (1961) “pleasure principle” in
psychiatry, and dopamine-mediated “reward” in psychol-
ogy and neuroscience. Damasio (1999) has emphasized
the primacy of emotional feelings, as has Panksepp (1998),
and Peil (2014) who suggests they derive from a “deeper
authority” which may regulate and guide our behaviors.

In philosophical terms, feelings and conscious aware-
ness are composed of mental features termed qualia, whose
essential nature remains a scientiﬁc mysterydwhat it is like
to be (Nagel, 1974), also known as the hard problem
(Chalmers, 1996). We could have been unfeeling zombies,
programmed to promote our species, but without qualia and
inner experience. But we do have them, and we are
conscious, although how and why remain unknown.

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00020-X
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

The mainstream view in neuroscience contends con-
sciousness,
feelings and qualia emerge from complex
computation among many simple brain neurons (Dennett,
1991; Tononi, 2012; Churchland, 2013). Such computa-
tional emergencedbrain-as-computerdimplies conscious-
ness appeared on earth as an adaptation of biological
evolution, and may eventually be replicated in silicon.
However, these views neglect the question of what life is;
are based on cartoon-like abstractions of actual neurons;
and fail to provide testable predictions, falsiﬁability, nor
any semblance of experimental validation.

These failings have pushed some computationalists to-
ward philosophical panpsychism, the assertion that qualia
are properties of matter (Koch, 2012), or of discrete events
in an experiential medium (panexperientialism, as proposed
by Whitehead, 1929, 1933). Others suggest mental qualities
derive from deeper, intrinsic features of the universe, fea-
tures giving rise to qualia, along with matter, charge, spin,
and various cosmological parameters (Penrose, 1989;
Chalmers, 1996). In these views, qualia-like features pre-
ceded life, perhaps encoded in reality, in the structure, or
makeup of the universe described as fundamental spacetime
geometry. If so, pleasurable qualia may have preceded life,
and prompted its origin and evolution to optimize feelings.
However in looking inward in search of qualia, pan-
psychists and panexperientialists must encounter
the
mysterious world of quantum mechanics, and speciﬁcally
the “measurement problem,” related to the “collapse of the
wave function.” At small scales, and the cutoff is seemingly
variable, strange laws of quantum physics reign, eg,
quantum particles exist in superposition of multiple states
or locations simultaneously, described by a quantum wave
function. Such superpositions are not seen in our everyday
world, as efforts to measure or observe them apparently

333

334 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

result in collapse to deﬁnite states. Why quantum super-
positions are not seen is a mystery known as the mea-
surement problem, which seems in some way related to
consciousness.

Experiments from the early 20th century appeared to
show that conscious observation caused superposition wave
functions to collapse to deﬁnite states, randomly choosing a
particular reality. Consciousness was said to collapse the
wave function (attributed to von Neumann, Wigner, Stapp,
and Chalmersdsee Stapp, 2007dbut often termed the
Copenhagen interpretation, after the Danish origin of Niels
Bohr; see below). The Copenhagen interpretation allowed
useful quantum experiments, but placed consciousness
outside science, as an extrinsic entity causing collapse.
Other
interpretations include multiple worlds (Everett,
1957), in which each superposition possibility branches and
evolves to form its own universe, resulting in an inﬁnite
number of parallel worlds.

Still others stipulate various objective thresholds for
quantum state reduction (objective reduction, or OR), one
by Sir Roger Penrose (1989, 1994) combining features of
the Copenhagen interpretation and multiple worlds, and
introducing consciousness into science as an intrinsic
feature of the universe. To do so, Penrose characterized
superpositions as in the ﬁrst step in multiple worlds, sep-
arations in spacetime geometry, and the structure of the
universe. But unlike multiple worlds, spacetime separa-
tions, according to Penrose, are unstable, separations
continuing only until
reaching an objective threshold
related to the quantum uncertainty principle, EG ¼ h/t. The
magnitude of the superposition is EG (its gravitational self-
energy), h is the PlanckeDirac constant and t the time at
which OR self-collapse occurs.

In this

superpositions

approach, whenever

reach
threshold, OR events select particular classical states,
accompanied by moments of (proto) conscious experienced
qualia, basic units of feeling and awareness. The choice of
classical states in OR events are inﬂuenced by (resonate
with) what Penrose termed Platonic values embedded in the
ﬁne scale structure of the universe. The qualitative feeling of
each quale, ie, good, bad, or otherwise, would depend on
resonance and geometry of speciﬁc spacetime separations
with deeper, Platonic levels of the universe. Most signiﬁ-
cantly, unlike the Copenhagen interpretation in which
consciousness causes collapse, Penrose OR proposes
that collapse causes consciousness (or
that collapse is
consciousness).

In this regard, Penrose OR is aligned with the process
philosophy of Alfred North Whitehead (1929, 1933) who
viewed consciousness as a sequence of discrete “occasions
of experience.” Abner Shimony (1993) suggested White-
head conscious events, or ‘occasions’ were equivalent to
quantum state reductions, or moments of collapse of the
wave
are

function. Generally, Whitehead occasions

“simple, dull and monotonous,” and must be “combined,”
or “organized” into full, rich conscious moments. Similarly,
noncognitive, protoconscious qualia occurring with each
OR event must be combined, organized, or orchestrated
into full rich conscious experience, as described in an
iconoclastic theory, orchestrated objective reduction (Orch
OR), put forth in the mid-1990s by Sir Roger Penrose and
this author (Penrose and Hameroff, 1995; Hameroff and
Penrose, 1996a,b, 2014aec).

Orch OR suggests that conscious awareness and inten-
tional purpose derive from organized (orchestrated) OR
events in cytoskeletal structures called microtubules inside
brain neurons. Microtubules are self-assembling lattice
polymers of the protein tubulin which organize intracellular
activities, process information, and vibrate coherently in
various related frequencies over a wide spectrum, from
terahertz through gigahertz, megahertz, and kilohertz (Sahu
et al., 2013a,b, 2014). Orchestration implies that microtu-
bule quantum states are organized through sensory inputs,
memory and natural microtubule resonances prior to OR
threshold to account for conscious cognition and full, rich
conscious experience (Orch OR). Microtubule states
selected in Orch OR events in neuronal dendrites and soma
can regulate synaptic plasticity and trigger axonal ﬁrings to
exert causal action and conscious behavior.

Protoconscious OR events occurring throughout

the
universe would be random and disjointed, metaphorically
like isolated sounds and tones, eg, noise, of an orchestra
warming up. On the contrary, sequences of Orch OR events
would be akin to music, a symphony, jazz, Indian raga, or
rock-and-roll classic. Such proposed Orch OR music, vi-
brations, and resonances in the ﬁne-scale structure of the
universe would be self-aware, not needing a listening
audience.

However, the notion of functional quantum biology has
been viewed skeptically. Technological quantum devices
require extreme cold and isolation to avoid disruption
by thermal decoherence, and so living systems have
been considered too warm, wet, and noisy for functional
quantum mechanisms. But plant photosynthesis uses quan-
tum coherence in warm sunlight to produce chemical energy
and food (Engel et al., 2007). Photons collected by plants
are converted to electron resonance excitations (excitons),
and transferred through a protein for conversion to chemical
energy, propagating as quantum superposition of all
possible pathways through a group of eight chromophores.
These chromophores are comprised of nonpolar pi electron
resonance clouds, geometrically arrayed nanometers apart,
and coupled to coherent vibrations (see below). Buried in
nonpolar, hydrophobic (water-aversive) regions, the chro-
mophores constitute a quantum underground, shielded from
decoherence, or premature OR via the polar, aqueous
environment. Without quantum coherence, food would not
be prevalent, and perhaps life could not exist at all.

The Quantum Origin of Life: How the Brain Evolved to Feel Good Chapter | 20 335

Useful mechanisms are conserved in evolution. If a
potato or asparagus can utilize quantum coherence, our
brains, and speciﬁcally microtubules, might be expected to
do so for cognition and consciousness.

The internal structure of microtubule protein subunits
(tubulin) appears analogous to the quantum underground
of pi resonance chromophores in plant photosynthesis.
Computer models of tubulin structure show pi electron
resonance clouds in aromatic amino acid rings of trypto-
phan, phenylalanine, and tyrosine in clusters and channels
(Craddock et al., 2012a). Thus pi resonance regions in
both photosynthesis proteins and tubulin in microtubules
are buried and arrayed in a (dry) nonpolar solubility region
shielded from (wet) polar interactionsda quantum un-
derground. This particular solubility region is precisely
where anesthetic gas molecules bind and selectively erase
correlationdsee
consciousness
below), and seems to be the origin of consciousness.
Recent studies suggest anesthetics act by dampening ter-
ahertz (1012 Hz) quantum dipole oscillations in microtu-
bule interiors (Pan et al., 2007; Emerson et al., 2013;
Craddock et al., 2015), these rapid oscillations being the
inner apex of a spatiotemporal hierarchy leading to elec-
troencephalography (EEG; see Fig. 20.15).

(the MeyereOverton

According to Orch OR, quantum states and dipole os-
cillations in pi resonance clouds in a MeyereOverton
quantum underground within neuronal microtubules are
orchestrated by synaptic inputs, memory, and vibrational
resonance. This enables superpositions to avoid random,
noncognitive interactions, and solely process purposeful
information. Thus when the EG ¼ h/t
and meaningful
threshold is met in orchestrated conditions, fully conscious
Orch OR moments are said to occur, resonating with deeper
level Platonic values in spacetime geometry. In pursuit of
good feelings, Orch OR connects consciousness to the ﬁne-
scale structure of the universe. Over appropriate time
scales, Orch OR events optimize pleasurable qualia.

On the biological side, Orch OR is fully consistent with
known neuroscience, action of anesthetics and psychoac-
tive drugs; generates testable predictions (some validated,
none refuted); has medical and philosophical implications;
provides mental states with causal power and intentional
awareness; and surpasses other theories of consciousness in
terms of evidence and testability. Similar to panpsychism,
Orch OR implies that qualia, ie, feelings, preceded life.

It is suggested here that primitive protoconscious feel-
ings occurred via Penrose OR in pi electron resonance
clouds of micelle-like structures of dopamine-like mole-
cules in nonpolar regions of the prebiotic primordial soup,
the original quantum underground. OR-mediated feelings
provided feedback and motivation for self-organizing pi
resonance clouds (pi stacks) in the origin and evolution of
life, and the brain. Intention and purpose optimized qualia.
Life and the brain evolved to feel good.

CONSCIOUSNESS ON THE EDGE
BETWEEN QUANTUM AND CLASSICAL
WORLDS

In a broad sense, reality is described by two worlds: our
familiar material (classical) world predictably follows the
laws of Newton, Maxwell, and others. However, at small
scales (and the size cutoff is unknown and seemingly var-
iable), strange quantum laws reign. For example, quantum
particles exist
in multiple locations or states simulta-
neously, coexisting possibilities known as quantum super-
position, represented by a quantum wave function. But we
do not see quantum superpositions in our perceived world,
reality somehow materializing from quantum possibilities,
the wave function appearing to collapse to deﬁnite states.
How and why this happens remain unknown, seemingly
related to measurement and conscious observation, known
as the measurement problem in quantum mechanics.

Another quantum feature is coherence, or condensation,
in which quantum particles unify as single objects governed
by one wave function, for example Bose-Einstein conden-
sates. If any particle is perturbed, others feel it and react,
prompting suggestions that quantum coherence supports
binding and synchrony of mental and physiological events.
A third quantum feature is nonlocal entanglement in which
quantum particles remain connected when spatially sepa-
rated, a bizarre prediction but conclusively demonstrated,
and commonly utilized in quantum information technology.
Entanglement may include temporal nonlocality, explain-
ing backward time referral of subjective information
in the brain, eg, Libet’s et al. (1979) sensory experi-
ments, enabling real time conscious control of our actions
(Hameroff, 2012).

Why do not we see quantum superpositions in our
consciously perceived world? This is the measurement
problem, and interpretations include:

l The conscious observer (Copenhagen interpretation).
Early quantum experiments seemed to indicate that if
a machine measured a quantum system,
the results
remained in superposition until observed by a human.
Proposed by Eugene Wigner, John von Neumann, and
more recently Henry Stapp and David Chalmers, the
conscious observer approach allowed Niels Bohr
(whose Danish origin prompted the Copenhagen inter-
pretation) and others to ignore questions related to the
reality of superposition, and pragmatically perform
quantum experiments.

But the Copenhagen interpretation led to paradox.
Erwin Schrödinger considered implications of an
unobserved superposition ampliﬁed to macroscopic
scale in his still-famous thought experiment known as
Schrödinger’s cat. Imagine a cat in a box with a vial
of poison. Release of the poison is coupled to the state

336 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

of a quantum superposition. According to Copenhagen,
Schrödinger noted, the cat would be both dead and alive
until
the box is opened and the cat observed by a
conscious observer. Copenhagen associated conscious-
ness with collapse, but cast it as a mysterious entity
outside science.

l Decoherence. This approach suggests that any interac-
tion of a quantum superposition with its classical envi-
ronment, eg, by thermal
interactions, degrades the
quantum system. But decoherence does not address iso-
lated superpositions, nor explain how quantum systems
can ever be isolated. Moreover, some quantum pro-
cesses are enhanced by environmental heat and/or
noise.

l Multiple worlds interpretation (MWI; Everett, 1957).
MWI claims each possibility in any superposition
evolves without collapse, producing its own reality,
resulting in an inﬁnite number of parallel universes.
Despite a lack of testability, MWI is extremely popular.
l Objective reduction (OR). These approaches suggest
quantum superpositions evolve by the Schrödinger

equation until reaching an objective threshold, at which
collapse (reduction) occurs. Among these, Sir Roger
Penrose (1989, 1994, 1996) described a speciﬁc OR
threshold at which wave functions collapse, selecting
classical states and producing quantized moments of
protoconscious qualia.

Penrose began by addressing superpositiondhow par-
ticles can be in two or more places simultaneouslydin
terms of Einstein’s general relativity in which matter is
equivalent to spacetime curvature. That equivalence was
famously veriﬁed at
large scales (eg, distant starlight
bending around the sun) by Sir Arthur Eddington in 1919,
but Penrose applied it to microscopic scales, eg, tiny par-
ticles as tiny spacetime curvatures. Superpositions are then
regions of
separated spacetime
(Fig. 20.1).

curvatures,

alternate

Spacetime separations would occur also in MWI, each
curvature evolving its own universe (Fig. 20.2, left). But in
Penrose OR, spacetime separations are unstable, and pro-
posed to self-collapse, or undergo reduction by an objective

FIGURE 20.1 Spacetime geometry schematized as one spatial and one temporal dimension in which particle location is represented as curvature.
(A) Top and bottom show spacetime histories of two alternative particle locations. (B) Quantum superposition of both particle locations as bifurcating
spacetime depicted as the union (glued together version) of the two alternative histories. Adapted from Penrose, R., 1989. The Emperor’s New Mind:
Concerning Computers, Minds, and the Laws of Physics. Oxford University Press, Oxford, p. 338.

FIGURE 20.2 Two views of the fate of superpositions. Left: Each possibility evolves in its own universe, as per the multiple words interpretation
(MWI). Right: Penrose objective reduction (OR); as superposition curvature E reaches threshold (by EG ¼ h
 
/s), OR occurs and one particle ceases to
exist. The other location/curvature is selected, and becomes classical, accompanied by a moment of conscious experience (BING).

The Quantum Origin of Life: How the Brain Evolved to Feel Good Chapter | 20 337

threshold given by EG ¼ h/t, a version of the uncertainty
principle. EG is the gravitational self-energy of the super-
position (the energy required to separate a particle, or its
equivalent spacetime geometry from itself by separation
distance s), h is the PlanckeDirac constant, and t the time at
which OR reduction will occur. Each OR self-collapse
chooses classical states, and is accompanied by a quan-
tized protoconscious experienceda quale. (A distinction
between protoconscious OR moments and fully conscious
Orch OR moments will be discussed later.) Thus, con-
sciousness is seen as a process on the edge between
quantum and classical worlds.

In the Copenhagen interpretation, postcollapse states
selected by conscious observation are chosen randomly,
probabilistically (the Born rule, after physicist Max Born).
However in Penrose OR the choices (and quality of sub-
jective experience) are inﬂuenced bydresonate withd
what Penrose
called noncomputable Platonic values
embedded in the ﬁne scale structure of spacetime geometry.
These Platonic values, patterns, or vibrations in the makeup
of the universe, may encode qualia, and pertain to mathe-
matics, geometry, ethics, and aesthetics, and the 20 or so
dimensionless constants governing the universe. These
include the ﬁne structure constant, the mass ratios for all
fundamental particles, the gravitational constant and many
more, all precise to many decimal points.

If

these numbers were slightly different,

life and
consciousnessdat
least as we know themdwould be
impossible. As described in the Anthropic principle (AP),
the universe is ﬁne-tuned for consciousness and life. But
how and why these key values are so precise are unknown,
and approached by several versions of the AP. In strong AP
(Barrow and Tipler, 1986),
the universe is somehow
compelled to harbor and enable consciousness. The weak
AP (Carter, 1974) suggests there exist multiple universes,
and that only this particular one harbors conscious beings
able to ponder the question. The weak AP is often aligned
with MWI or multiverse concepts.

Penrose OR avoids the need for MWI and supports
strong AP, suggesting that over aeons, dimensionless
constants deﬁning the universe evolved and self-organized
to optimize life, qualia, and consciousness. How could that
have happened? What is life?

LIFE IN THE QUANTUM
UNDERGROUND

Life has been described in two types of general approaches:
functionalism and vitalism. Functionalism characterizes life
by its behaviors, including (from Lynn Margulis Sagan,
1995) self-organization, homeostasis, metabolism, growth,
replication/reproduction,
adaption,
focuses on
and evolution. Richard Dawkins
self-replication as life’s essential feature, but all
these

response to stimuli,

(1989)

functions occur also in nonbiological computer programs,
eg, as artiﬁcial life (eg, Langton, 1995), video games, and
weather patterns.

Living systems seem to have some unitary quality, akin
to oneness, often ascribed to an emergent property of
functional processes, much like consciousness is often
ascribed to emergence from complex brain computation. In
both cases, however, mechanisms, or thresholds for such
emergence, are unidentiﬁed.

On the other hand, 19th century vitalists saw a unifying
energy ﬁeld, or life force pervading living systemsdélan
vital. As molecular biology developed,
reductionists
pushed vitalism from favor,
the notion of a life force
becoming taboo. But 19th-century vitalism was based
either on electromagnetism, or on forces outside science, as
quantum mechanics had yet to be discovered. In his famous
book What is Life?, Erwin Schrödinger (1935) suggested
life’s unitary oneness derived from quantum coherence in
biomolecular lattices which were aperiodic crystals.

Others agreed. Nobel

laureate Albert Szent-Gyorgyi
life in coordinated sub-
(1960) saw the essence of
molecular quantum electron movements in nonpolar regions
of biological systems. Russian physicists Phillipe and Albert
Pullman (Pullman and Pullman, 1963) attributed life to
quantum behavior of electrons in pi resonance clouds, and
biophysicist Herbert Frohlich (1968, 1970, 1975) described
the essential unifying feature of living systems as quantum
coherent dipoles in nonpolar regions in geometrically con-
strained proteins (eg, membrane proteins and cytoskeleton).
How could quantum coherence relate to cognition and
consciousness? The concept of a quantum computer was
introduced by Richard Feynman (1986), Paul Benioff
(1982), and David Deutsch (1985), who showed how su-
perpositions, eg, of both 1 and 0 bit states could act as
quantum bits, or qubits, entangle and collapse/reduce to
classical bits of either 1 or 0. But technological qubits
require isolation and extreme cold to avoid decoherence,
thermal disruption of seemingly delicate quantum super-
positions (or premature OR in the Penrose approach).
Consequently, living systems have been considered too
warm, wet, and noisy for functional quantum mechanisms.
However, photosynthesis proteins utilize quantum coher-
ence, and microtubules and their component protein tubulin
have quantum resonances in terahertz, gigahertz, mega-
hertz, and kilohertz at ambient temperatures (Sahu et al.,
2013a,b, 2014). But how can quantum systems self-
organize, avoid decoherence, and govern biology in a
warm and seemingly chaotic microenvironment?

The answer may be found in a simple truth: oil and

water do not mix.

Consider a solubility phase perspective on the makeup
of biological organisms. Rather than viewing living crea-
tures as composites of tissues, cells, molecules, and atoms,
they may be viewed instead as sets of various solubility

338 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

ie,

phases,
regions with different and distinct solvent
characteristics, where particular molecules may bind and
dissolve. Pharmacologists use solubility to determine where
drugs bind in the body, an essential factor being degree of
polarity, ie, how highly charged are the drug molecule
(solute) and its environment (solvent).

interactions.

Water, blood, and bodily ﬂuids are polar solvents in
which electrically charged solute molecules, eg, most drugs
and hormones, bind and dissolve by hydrogen bonds and
other polar
In such microenvironments,
quantum superpositioned charges will rapidly bind and
entangle with others, increasing EG to quickly reach OR
threshold by EG ¼ h/t. OR events in such polar media,
occurring ubiquitously, would be random, and accompa-
nied merely by noncognitive, isolated moments of proto-
conscious
and
repetitious Whitehead occasions). Polar microenvironments
are inhospitable to quantum superpositions.

dull, monotonous,

experience

(like

However, the body and brain also include nonpolar,
oil-like solubility phases, composed largely of benzene-like
pi resonance clouds in aromatic rings which coalesce
in nonpolar
spatially segregated from polar
ones (eg, oil and water do not mix!). Nonpolar groups
bury themselves within protein, lipids, and nucleic acid

regions

molecules (eg,
the pi stack in DNA), are friendly to
quantum superpositions, and are the mediumdthe quantum
undergrounddin which anesthetics speciﬁcally act to erase
consciousness (see later in this chapter). Nonpolar regions
are essential to organic chemistry, which starts with carbon.
Carbon atoms each have four electrons to bond with
other atoms, eg, hydrogens and other carbons to form hy-
drocarbon chains called alkanes, with the general formula
CnH2nþ2 where n is the number of carbons and length of the
chain (Fig. 20.3). Carbons can also share two electrons, a
double bond or pi resonance bond, and hydrocarbon chains
with a single double bond are called alkenes, with the
general formula CnH2n. Pi resonance implies a free electron
(from carbon’s outermost pi orbital) shared between carbon
atoms, either oscillating between the two (molecular orbital
theory), or delocalized, ie, in quantum superposition within
a pi electron resonance cloud covering both carbons
(resonance theory).

Nineteenth century chemists were puzzled by the
structure of benzene, an oily, ﬂammable hydrocarbon with
the formula C6H6, ﬁtting neither alkanes nor alkenes. Then
the German chemist Kekule had a dream about snakes of
varying lengths, which he later recognized as alkanes and
alkenes. One longer snake in Kekule’s dream swallowed its

FIGURE 20.3 Carbon atoms can each form four covalent bonds, eg, with other carbons or hydrogens. Alkanes (top left) are a series of hydrocarbons
with the general formula CnH2nþ2. Alkenes (top right) are hydrocarbons with one carbonecarbon (pi resonance) double bond, and the general formula
CnH2n. However, benzene had the formula C6H6 and was nonpolar and water-insoluble. Kekule’s dream (lower left) suggested a ring structure which
turned out to be correct with three carbonecarbon pi resonance double bonds. This is often represented as a hexagon with three extra bonds/lines (lower
right).

The Quantum Origin of Life: How the Brain Evolved to Feel Good Chapter | 20 339

tail, forming a ring (like the mythical Ouroboros). Kekule
concluded it was benzene, C6H6, a hexagonal ring with
three carbonecarbon pi electron resonance bonds.

Benzene’s three pi resonance electrons are not conﬁned
to speciﬁc carbons, but delocalize and align in electron

FIGURE 20.4 Electron resonance cloud dipoles of adjacent benzene
(phenyl) rings can couple at precisely the proper separation distance (van
der Waals radius), oscillate, and exist in superposition of both dipole
orientations. Natural resonant frequencies for such rings are in terahertz
(1012 Hz).

cloud dipoles which couple by van der Waals forces (or
spin
form superpositions
(Fig. 20.4).

coupling),

oscillate,

and

Pi resonance clouds are the basis for organic chemistry.
Replacing hydrogens in benzene makes an attachable
phenyl ring which, along with indole (6 þ 5) rings are
called aromatic because of generally sweet, pleasant smells.
Adding one or more charged, polar ends to aromatic rings
makes amphipathic biomolecules, nonpolar on one end,
polar on another. They include aromatic amino acids
phenylalanine, tyrosine and tryptophan, and psychoactive
dopamine, serotonin,lysergic acid diethylamide, dimethyl-
tryptamine, etc. (Fig. 20.5). When these bind to membrane
receptors (or microtubules), nonpolar groups insert into
nonpolar interior regions, and their charged, polar ends
stick outward toward the exterior,
forming a micelle
structure. In bulk form, benzene is ﬂammable and oily, but
when geometrically constrained, eg, in ﬂat sheets as gra-
phene, or cylindrical
fullerene nanotubes, pi electron
resonance clouds couple in extended cooperative systems
with interesting quantum properties (Figs. 20.6 and 20.7).
Though electrically neutral and nonpolar, pi electron
resonance clouds are polarizable, and, when adjacent (at the
angstrom-level van der Waals radius) attract and couple by
induced quantum dipoles (van der Waals London forces,
quadrupoles, magnetic dipoles). Such coupling is enhanced

Amphipathic 

molecules

Amino acid

Neurotransmitter 

Psychedelics

Benzene

Phenylalanine

Non-polar

H

Charged 
polar tail

+

H

_

Polar

Indole

Non-polar

Charged 
polar tail

+

Polar
_

H

H

H

NH

H

H

O

OH

Tryptophan

NH

H N

O

O

Dopamine
OH
OH

H

H

H

NH

Serotonin

LSD

HN

DMT

O

NH

HO

Psilocybin

NH

PO

O

NH

NH

H C

H C

N

O

H C

N

CH

H C

N

CH

FIGURE 20.5 Amphipathic biomolecules have a nonpolar head composed of pi electron resonance clouds (gray) of phenyl (benzene) and indole ar-
omatic rings, and tails with polar, charged ends. Virtually all psychoactive molecules are amphipathic including neurotransmitters and psychedelic drugs.

340 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

FIGURE 20.6 A simpliﬁed view of the origin of life. Amphipathic molecules (eg, in the primordial soup) attract and couple by van der Waals dipoles in
a micelle (as suggested by Oparin) with a nonpolar interior and water-soluble exterior. Such structures are precursors to protein folding and formation of
lipid membranes and nucleic acids (Fig. 20.7).

FIGURE 20.7 Amphipathic molecules form lipid bilayer (left) and nucleic acids DNA and RNA by similar mechanism, with nonpolar, water-excluding
pi resonance quantum interiors, and polar, charged exteriors soluble in water.

by the hydrophobic effect (oil and water do not mix), which
drives protein folding and results in pi stacking in which
resonance rings are arrayed at speciﬁc spacings and geo-
metric orientations. At the van der Waals radius, electron
clouds can couple and oscillate by van der Waals London
forces and excitons.

Quantum spin transfer through pi resonance clouds
is enhanced by increased temperature (Ouyang and
Awschalom, 2003), and pi resonance clouds are optically
active and able to ﬂuoresce, ie, absorb photons which
induce excited electron states, and then emit lower energy
photons when the excited states drop to lower states. This
quantum-level energy can also be efﬁciently transferred

nonradiatively between excited resonance clouds separated
by up to 2 nm by Förster resonance electron transfer
(FRET), or excitons. In plant photosynthesis, FRET-like
excitons occur among seven or eight chromophores (more
complex arrays of pi resonance rings) arrayed nanometers
apart in Fenna-Matthews-Olson complex (FMO) proteins.
Photons from the sun are collected in an adjacent molecule,
converted to electronic energy, and transferred through
FMO to a third molecule for conversion to chemical energy
and food. The electronic energy transfer occurs through all
chromophores simultaneouslyda quantum superposition
resulting in optimal efﬁciency. Life on earth depends on
quantum coherence in photosynthesis proteins.

The Quantum Origin of Life: How the Brain Evolved to Feel Good Chapter | 20 341

Tubulin proteins comprising microtubules (discussed
later in Section: Microtubules and Sex in the Primordial
Soup) each have eight tryptophan indole rings arrayed in a
geometry strikingly similar to that in FMO photosynthesis
proteins. Using molecular modeling, Craddock et al.
(2014, 2015) showed FRET-like excitons passing through
tubulin among eight
resonance clouds,
driven by ambient energy, and blocked by anesthetics
which bind naturally in nonpolar regions.

tryptophan pi

Interiors of DNA and membranes have similar arrays and
stacks of pi resonance clouds and nonpolar regions. Taken
together, a quantum-friendly, nonpolar solubility phase of pi
electron resonanceda quantum undergrounddis shielded
inside biomolecules, distributed throughout living systems,
and hospitable to quantum superposition. Compelling evi-
dence from anesthesia research directly links consciousness
to this quantum underground.

ie,

In the mid-19th century, gases, such as diethyl ether and
nitrous oxide (“laughing gas”) were discovered to have
anesthetic properties,
inhaling these gases caused
humans and animals to lose consciousness, or some
observable correlate, eg, mice falling over, or salamanders
not moving in response to stimulation. When the anesthetic
gas was exhaled away, the subjects and animals woke up,
snapping back to consciousness, essentially unchanged.
Potencies were determined for each anesthetic, ie, the gas
concentration at which half of a group of mice, or sala-
manders, will roll over, and half remain upright. Amaz-
ingly, each gas acted at
the same concentration in all
animals, identical concentrations anesthetizing a mouse,
salamander, or human. By the turn of the 20th century,
dozens of anesthetic gases had been discovered, curiously
with various different
types of chemical structures, eg,
ethers, halogenated hydrocarbons, nitrous oxide, and the
inert gas xenon. Scientists sought a common molecular
property, independent of structure, which correlated with
anesthetic potency. The answer was solubility in an oil-like,
nonpolar solubility region, in a quantum underground of pi
resonance clouds.

Working separately, Hans Meyer (1901) and Ernst
Overton (1901) ranked anesthetic potency for many anes-
thetics in various animal models, and tested anesthetic
solubility in different types of solvents, each ﬁnding the
same result. Over many orders of magnitude, among many
chemically disparate structures, potency of all anesthetics
for all animals correlated near perfectly with their solubility
in a particular nonpolar medium, characterized by a low
lambda (15.2e19.3 SI Units),
Hildebrand coefﬁcient
closely resembling olive oil and benzene (Hameroff, 2006).
The MeyereOverton correlation shows that anesthetics act
(by quantum London dipole dispersion forces), in nonpolar
regions involving pi electron resonance clouds. As anes-
thesia is fairly selective (eg, sparing nonconscious brain
activities which continue during anesthesia), consciousness

apparently originates in pi resonance cloud regions in the
quantum underground.

If

so,

the environment-hosting consciousnessdthe
MeyereOverton quantum undergrounddmay have hosted
the origin of life.

A general consensus is that life on earth began in a
prebiotic primordial soup, proposed independently in the
1920s by the Russian biologist Alexander Oparin and
British geneticist J.B.S. Haldane. The soup refers to a
simmering mix from which life’s biomolecular building
blocks could have emerged three to four billion years ago,
the requirements being an oxygen-poor atmosphere (now
known to have been the case at that time), sea water, an
energy source (eg, sunlight, heat, radiation, thermal vents,
lightning), and necessary chemical components.
In a
famous experiment in the 1950s, chemistry graduate stu-
dent Stanley Miller and his professor Harold Urey (Miller
and Urey, 1959) simulated the primordial soup with
methane, ammonia, hydrogen, and electric sparks for
lightning. They found amphipathic molecules having both
polar and nonpolar components, including pi resonance
rings. These were apparently the seeds of life. But then
what happened?

Richard Dawkins (1986, 1989) suggests molecular
self-replicators carried life until genes and evolution were
in place (cf, Dennett, 1995). RNA molecules, with stacks
of nonpolar pi resonance clouds as central cores, may
have acted as self-replicators. But if so, how and why
did amphipathic
and
interactive?

replicators become

functional

Oparin had suggested amphipathic molecules formed
micelles in which nonpolar parts of the molecules, eg, ar-
omatic pi resonance rings, stick together in the micelle
interior by van der Waals forces and hydrophobic effects
(oil avoiding water). Polar ends of these same amphipathic
molecules would then radiate outward from the central
nonpolar conﬂuence, forming hydrogen bonds with sur-
rounding water. This process can result in water-soluble,
spheroidal micelles, precursors to proteins and nucleic
acids which are non-polar on the inside, and polar on the
outside (Figs. 20.6e20.9). Oparin suggested micelles
gained functions and began to organize, evolve, and func-
tion as protocells. But why would they?

Micelles have self-organized in laboratory experi-
ments and are considered by some to be primitive forms
of artiﬁcial life (Rasmussen, 2010). In some cases, opti-
cally active components are included in the nonpolar
(quantum-friendly) interior (Rasmussen, 2010; Tamulis
and Grigalavicius, 2014), enabling quantum entanglement
between adjacent micelles.

Electric and magnetic dipoles of pi resonance clouds
oscillate in terahertz (1012 Hz) in the infrared region of the
optical spectrum. As the earth cooled, terahertz radiation
in thermal noise could have driven pi stack oscillations in

342 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

FIGURE 20.8 Simpliﬁed micelle qubit (only three amphipathic molecules are shown as opposed to hundreds or thousands). Left: Dipoles in nonpolar
interior of Oparin micelle oscillate, eg, in terahertz. Right: Dipoles exist in quantum superposition of both possible states. Taken together the micelle is
proposed to function as a quantum bit, or qubit.

FIGURE 20.9 A simpliﬁed version of a protoconscious OR moment in the primordial soup. Three amphipathic molecules coalesce by nonpolar van der
Waals attractions (polar tails disengage) and entangle in superposition to reach threshold for OR self-collapse at time t ¼ h/EG. A quale, protoconscious
moment, or primitive feeling (BING) occurs. However, simple micelles as depicted here would rapidly entangle with the polar environment and undergo
OR/decoherence to result in protoconscious moments with random qualia lacking cognition or meaning. Much larger micelles, eg, with many more pi
resonance clouds forming a protected quantum underground would be required.

The Quantum Origin of Life: How the Brain Evolved to Feel Good Chapter | 20 343

primitive micelles which became essential features of life.
Vattay et al. (2015) have shown that pi resonance clouds
are arrayed at precisely critical distances from each
other in proteins to be at the edge between quantum and
classical behaviors, ie, the separation distance at which
mechanical vibrations can bring the groups into, and out
of, quantum coherent superposition. Graphene (a planar
layer of pi resonance rings) acts as a terahertz antenna,
transferring up to 100 terabits per second. But
the
question remains why micelles or other structures based
on pi
clouds with quantum properties
would purposefully self-organize. There were no genes,
no mutation-based evolution, no reward, no feedback,
no creatures to survive. What was the motivation, the
ﬁtness function toward which life evolved? Was there a
spark of life? If so, what could it be? A possible, logical
answer is feelings, eg, pleasurable qualia occurring by
Penrose OR.

resonance

Superpositions with electric charge in a polar, aqueous
medium, eg, on micelle exteriors, would rapidly entangle
by charge interactions to reach OR threshold with strictly
random inputs. Such OR events would culminate in
ﬂeeting, noncognitive, protoconscious momentsdquantum
noise, in a musical metaphor. However, in nonpolar con-
ﬂuences of pi electron resonance clouds, shielded and
precisely arrayed in the quantum underground, super-
positioned dipoles could entangle collectively, oscillate
coherently,
to biomolecular mechanical
resonancesda coherent dance of quantum dipoles.

and couple

of

protoconscious

Superposition and coherence of just a few pi stack
rings (small EG) would require a long time t to reach
threshold (by t ¼ EG/h). Polar interactions would likely
intervene to contribute randomness, resulting in partially
coherent moments
experience
(Fig. 20.9). With larger pi stacks protected in nonpolar
quantum underground interiors of biomolecules and
micelle-like structures, resonance with Platonic vibrations
in spacetime geometry could occur so that associated
protoconscious qualia would begin to have primitive
feelings and emotions. The intensity and quality of such
feelings, eg, pleasure, would depend on particular geom-
etry of the pi stack (Fig. 20.9).

From Epicurus in ancient Greece to Freud’s pleasure
principle, and more recently Panksepp, Peil, and Damasio,
feelings and emotions are considered primary in human
and animal awareness and behavior, exempliﬁed by
dopaminergic reward pathways. But the essential nature of
emotions, their subjective feel, remains a mystery. Why do
good feelings feel good? Plato believed value, meaning,
and pleasure to reside in the “form of the good,” implying
inherent geometry. Penrose attributed Platonic forms and
values to fundamental spacetime geometry, extending to
the Planck scale. Biology is based on organic chemistry, in
turn based on pi electron resonance clouds of phenyl, or

the pleasure molecule,

benzene rings. Dopamine,
is a
prototypical amphipathic pi resonance phenyl ring mole-
cule, presumably present in the primordial soup. Perhaps
OR events, in particular pi resonance geometries, resonate
more deeply with Plato’s form of the good; encoded as
vibrations in the structure of the universe, these events
having feelings of greater pleasure. Such positive
qualiad“good vibrations”dcould have been the feedback
ﬁtness function by which life developed, with natural se-
lection and survival of the ﬁttest serving to optimize
feelings. Feeling good by pleasurable OR could have been
the spark of
life by resonating with Platonic values
embedded in the structure of the universe. Did biology
then evolve to orchestrate OR, to turn quantum noise into
conscious music, to “strike up the band?” To feel good?
How could that have happened?

OR is naturally causal, choosing among different pos-
sibilities, a requisite for intentional purpose. In a nonpolar
environment (the quantum underground) adjacent pi reso-
nance rings, attracted by van der Waals London force di-
poles and quadrupoles tend to align in one of two stable
orientations, separated by the van der Waals radius. The
two stable orientations are the “T,” in which one ring hangs
perpendicular from the middle of the second ring, and the
offset parallel (OP) orientation, in which two rings are
parallel in one plane, and offset.

OR events from various conﬁgurations would result in
speciﬁc superpositions of pi resonance clouds and partic-
ular rudimentary mental experiences. Thus, arrangements
of pi stack orientations can be a code for qualia. Adjacent pi
resonance rings may be arrayed as T or P, so a stack of
three rings would have four possible arrangements, PeP,
TeT, TeP, and PeT. When superposition and OR results
by EG ¼ h/t among these rings, particular qualia (eg, good,
bad) would occur. For example, PeP might have pleasur-
able feelings, and TeT unpleasurable ones. With causal
effects of OR outcomes inﬂuenced by feedback,
three-
dimensional pi stacks could then rearrange in orientation
sequences (including helical, branching, and different ring
types) to optimize and orchestrate OR-mediated feelings
and qualia. Over time and replication cycles, recurrent
feedback could optimize pi stack geometry for pleasurable
conscious feelings whose particular pi-stack orientations
would best resonate with Platonic values in spacetime
geometry.

Micelle-like structures, RNA, membranes, and other
structures in the primordial soup could self-organize their pi
stacks to optimize OR qualia. But pleasure, and ability to
causally affect the physical world to further increase plea-
sure, would soon become limited. Better organization,
memory, motility, communication, and reproduction were
required to feel even better. Self-assembling intelligent
polymers were the answer.

Enter microtubules.

344 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

MICROTUBULES AND SEX IN THE
PRIMORDIAL SOUP

 9 m)

Interiors of all animal cells are organized and shaped by the
cytoskeleton, a dynamic scaffolding of protein lattice
polymers. These self-organizing structures include micro-
tubules, microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs), actin,
and intermediate ﬁlaments, all anchored by the centriole, a
pair of microtubule-based mega-cylinders in the cell center
(centrosome), just outside the nucleus. Plant cells also have
microtubules and centrioles, and prokaryotes and arch-
aebacteria have similar, but slightly different protein
structures. All living cells are organized by microtubules or
closely related structures.
Microtubules (MTs) are cylindrical polymers 25 nm
(nm ¼ 10
in diameter, comprised usually of 13
longitudinal protoﬁlaments, each a chain of the protein
dimer tubulin. Composed of alpha and beta monomers
with net dipoles, tubulins give microtubules net dipoles.
Tubulins self-assemble and arrange in MTs in two types of
twisted hexagonal lattices (A-lattice and B-lattice) such
that helical pathways along contiguous tubulins in the A-
lattice repeat every three, ﬁve, and eight rows on any
protoﬁlament (the Fibonacci series). Within microtubules,
each tubulin may differ from its neighbors by genetic
variability, posttranslational modiﬁcations, phosphoryla-
tion states, binding of ligands, and MAPs, and transient
dipole orientation (Hameroff, 1987; Garham et al., 2015).
With many tubulins per cell, eg, 109 tubulins per neuron,
information capacity in a mosaic-like MT is enormous.
Epigenetic information is encoded in microtubule-based
centrioles (Balestra et al., 2015).

Due to their organizational roles, lattice structure and
coherent dynamics, microtubules have been suggested to
actively process information since Sherrington (1951)

described them as the cell’s nervous system. Descriptions
of MTs as computer-like devices (Hameroff and Watt,
1982; Hameroff, 1987; Rasmussen et al., 1990) viewed
individual tubulins as bit-like information units in Boolean
switching matrices, or cellular (molecular) automata played
on microtubule lattices. Simulation of
tubulin dipoles
interacting with neighbor dipoles and synchronized by
Fröhlich coherence showed rapid information integration
and learning (microtubule automata; Smith et al., 1984;
Rasmussen et al., 1990; Fig. 20.10).

Microtubules in neurons seemed particularly suited for
memory and some form of computation. In cell division
(mitosis), MTs disassemble and then reassemble as mitotic
spindles, anchored by centrioles, which separate chromo-
somes, establish daughter cell polarity, and rearrange for
cellular structure and function. However, neurons do not
divide once they are formed, and so neuronal microtubules
can remain assembled, providing a stable medium for
memory encoding.

Microtubules in neuronal soma and dendrites are unique
In axons, and all nonneuronal cells
in other ways.
throughout biology, microtubules are arrayed radially, like
spokes in a wheel, extending continuously from the hub-
like centriole outward toward the cell membrane, all with
the same polarity. However, microtubules in dendrites and
cell bodies/soma are short, interrupted and arrayed in mixed
polarity networks interconnected by MAPs, and stabilized
by MAP-capping proteins. Interrupted dendritic-somatic
microtubules are poorly suited for structural support, but
ideal for memory encoding and information processing
(Rasmussen et al., 1990).

The standard explanation for memory encoding in
neuroscience is synaptic plasticity,
ie, sensitivities at
particular synapses guiding activity through neuronal net-
works. However, synaptic proteins are transient and

FIGURE 20.10 Three time-steps (eg, at 10 MHz) of a microtubule automaton which is classical. Tubulin subunit dipole states (light gray, dark gray)
represent information. (A) Spin currents interact and compute along spiral lattice pathways. For example (upper, middle in each microtubule) two upward-
traveling spin waves intersect, generating a new vertical spin wave (a “glider gun” in cellular automata). (B) A general microtubule automata process. With
permission from Hameroff, S., Penrose, R., 2014a. Consciousness in the universe: a review of the ‘Orch OR’ theory. Physics of Life Reviews 11 (1), 39e79.

The Quantum Origin of Life: How the Brain Evolved to Feel Good Chapter | 20 345

recycled over hours to days, and yet memories can last
lifetimes. Craddock et al. (2012b) showed how synaptic
information in the form of calcium ion inﬂux activates the
hexagonal enzyme calcium-calmodulin-kinase II (CaM-
KII), which can then encode up to 6 bits of information on
microtubules by phosphorylation (Fig. 20.11).

Synaptic proteins are synthesized in neuronal cell
bodies/soma, and transported to synapses by dynein and
kinesin motor proteins traveling along microtubule tracks.
In interrupted dendritic-somatic microtubules, motor pro-
teins must
jump from microtubule to microtubule, and
choose particular pathways at synaptic branch points to
deliver synaptic cargo. Delivery is guided by speciﬁc
placement of tau on microtubule lattices as “trafﬁc signals”
or address code (Dixit et al., 2008), getting the right cargo
to speciﬁc synapses, serving memory and cognition.
Displacement of tau from microtubules results in neuroﬁ-
brillary tangles, microtubule instability, and the cognitive
dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease. CaMKII may encode
tau binding on microtubule lattices following synaptic
calcium inﬂux (Craddock et al., 2012b). Dendritic-somatic
microtubules are likely and convenient sites for memory
encoding, cognition, and consciousness.

FIGURE 20.11 Calcium-calmodulin-kinase II (CaMKII), a hexagonal
holoenzyme activated by synaptic calcium inﬂux extends six leg-like ki-
nase domains above and below an association domain. The six kinase
domains precisely match hexagonal size and geometry in both A-lattice
and B-lattice microtubules. With permission from Travis.

Microtubule-based processing implies a huge increase
in cellular and brain-wide information capacity. For
example, artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) proponents (including
advocates of the Singularity) aim to emulate the brain in
computers, and estimate brain capacity as 1011 neurons,
each with 103 synaptic connections ﬁring, or being excited
up to 100 times per second (102 Hz), giving a capacity of
1016 operations per second for the brain. But inside each of
those neurons are microtubules with 109 tubulins/neuron
capable of switching at 107 Hz (Sahu et al., 2013a,b, 2014),
for 1016 operations per second per neuron, and 1027 ops/s
for the brain. Microtubule information processing would
push the AI/Singularity goal for brain equivalence in
computers far into the future, and can account for memory.
But increased capacity per se does not address the hard
problem of consciousness, of subjective feelings, of qualia.
The only speciﬁc scientiﬁc mechanisms for qualia, feelings,
and subjective conscious experience which has ever been
proposed is Penrose OR.

In the mid-1990s, Sir Roger Penrose and I began to
suggest that microtubules could act as quantum computers
whose superpositioned qubits would halt, or terminate to
classical states by quantum state reductiond“collapse of
the wave function,” according to Penrose OR. Such events
would have cognitive representation and meaning by virtue
of microtubule information processing, unify or bind per-
cepts by entanglement, and have phenomenal experience,
or qualia, at each moment of OR. Through information
processing, memory, and natural resonances, brain micro-
tubules would orchestrate OR events
rich
conscious moments (Orch OR). Metaphorically, random,
meaningless OR notes, sounds, and noise qualia become
meaningful music.

into full,

tubulins,

The qubit for Orch OR microtubule quantum computing
was originally suggested to utilize superposition of alter-
interacting with sur-
nate states of individual
rounding neighboring tubulins
in hexagonal cellular
automata. When the atomic structure of tubulin became
known through crystallography in 1998 (Nogales et al.,
1998), clusters and channels of pi electron resonance clouds
of aromatic amino acids became apparent (Fig. 20.12).
Quantum transfer of electronic excitations and dipole
resonance among arrays of pi resonance clouds were pro-
posed to occur within tubulin, and also between and among
neighboring tubulins in helical pathways in microtubule
lattices, eg,
the ﬁve-start and eight-start helices of the
Fibonacci sequences in microtubule A-lattices. Accord-
ingly, net dipole orientations along helical pathways were
proposed to act as Orch OR qubits, along the lines of to-
pological quantum computing.

The Orch OR proposal

in the mid-1990s prompted
the
skeptical criticism,
notion that
thermal vibrations would disrupt seemingly
delicate quantum processes. Laboratory efforts to build

largely based on decoherence,

346 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

FIGURE 20.12 At left is the protein tubulin showing aromatic amino acid pi resonance clouds (tryptophan, phenlylalanine, tyrosine) and sites of
binding of anesthetic halothane (spheres). Band indicates nonpolar cluster of aromatic rings (quantum channel or quantum underground) with anesthetic
binding sites aligned along ﬁve-start helix in microtubule lattice. Right: Dipole qubit in microtubule in Orch OR theory, with quantum dipole states
oscillating, and forming quantum superposition of alternate states along ﬁve-start helical pathway in tubulin and microtubules. Dipoles may be electric or
magnetic, eg, related to electronic (and/or nuclear) spin. Similar qubit pathways may occur along eight-start pathways or other pathways.

quantum computers were conducted near absolute zero
temperature, and the brain (and biology in general) were
considered too warm, wet, and noisy. However, beginning
in 2007 (Engel et al., 2007), quantum coherence in plant
photosynthesis at ambient temperatures was discovered,
and found to depend on nonpolar (ie, dry, not wet) pi
resonance groups, and coupling to coherent mechanical
vibrations. As suggested by Frohlich (1968, 1970, 1975),
thermal vibrations pumped the quantum coherent states,
rather
than disrupted them. Subsequently, Anirban
Bandyopadhyay’s group (Sahu et al., 2013a,b, 2014) found
resonances in individual microtubules, and bundles of
microtubules in self-similar patterns occurring every two to
three orders of magnitude in terahertz, gigahertz, mega-
hertz, and kilohertz
(Fig. 20.13).
Conductances in microtubules at these frequencies were
determined to be quantum in nature because conductances
through entire microtubules were greater
(resistances
lower) than through individual tubulin proteins. A picture
emerges of microtubules as multiscalar biological quantum
resonators.

frequency ranges

The evolution of tubulin and microtubules is puzzling.
Why would tubulin, a single protein, evolve as a cog in a
machine, one brick in a skyscraper yet to be realized?
According to conventional evolutionary theory, the feed-
back ﬁtness function for tubulin would depend on higher
order microtubule activities not yet present. Proponents of
intelligent design cite microtubules and their composites

cilia and centrioles as structures which are difﬁcult
to
explain through natural selection. They may have a valid
objection, but lack a scientiﬁc alternative.

How did tubulin and microtubules (or their prokaryotic
and archaebacteria counterpart proteins) evolve? Consider a
possible scenario in the primordial soup. Pumped by
ambient terahertz radiation, pi resonance rings on amphi-
pathic molecules coalesced, coupled, and oscillated in
nonpolar micelle interiors. Van der Waals forces provided
separation between rings at quantum critical distances
(Vattay et al., 2015). As micelles incorporated more pi
resonance clouds (eg, clusters of three or four rings),
entangled quantum superpositions extended in an expand-
ing quantum underground. The resultant increasing “EG” in
each EG ¼ h/t OR event became, with feedback and
developing over time, more purely coherent so that sub-
jective protoconscious OR qualia became more cognitive
and intense, good or bad. Good feelings ensued from more
energetically favorable pi stack geometry which resonated
with Platonic values.

Here is a possible scenario. As the number of coupled
coherent rings and EG grew, intensity and quality of good
feelings also grew, providing feedback to pi stack geome-
try, eg, ﬂipping T and OP conﬁgurations within each mi-
celle’s quantum underground, optimizing qualia and
experience.

Rudimentary mental states exerted causal power, ar-
ranging pi resonance clouds within micelles which became

The Quantum Origin of Life: How the Brain Evolved to Feel Good Chapter | 20 347

FIGURE 20.13 Brain multiscalar hierarchy. Top row shows structure (left to right) pyramidal neuron cell body with interior microtubules, a single
microtubule, tubulin pathways through pi resonance clouds along which dipole oscillations, resonance transfers, and/or spin currents occur (top) pi cloud
dipole oscillations (bottom) anesthetics dispersing dipoles. (Bottom) Dynamics at frequency ranges matching structure in top row (Sahu et al., 2013a,b,
2014, Craddock et al., 2015).

proteins, membranes, and nucleic acids. With repetitive
feedback, clusters of pi resonance clouds optimized their
geometry for pleasurable qualia as particular sequences of
T and OP arrangements, coupling with other clusters by
FRET and excitons, and absorbing and resonating with
ambient terahertz, ultraviolet and cosmic microwave radi-
ation. This all served to further optimize OR-mediated
pleasure by pi cloud geometry.

But then what happened? Tubulins aligned by charge
interactions and entropy, forming lattice patches with pi
resonance clouds extending from one tubulin to its
neighbor, increasing OR-mediated pleasure. Cooperative
information exchange developed a logic based on hexag-
onal geometry of tubulin patches which rolled into cylin-
ders, stabilized by ultra-violet absorption and megahertz

mechanical resonances, reinforcing pi stack coherence,
developing a hexagonal-based information code, ramping
up OR pleasure even more. The microtubule was born.

Neighboring microtubules became interconnected by
MAPs forming networks of coupled resonators. Coherent
lattice vibrations enabled stable quantum coherence, as
Fröhlich predicted in the 1970s. Mixed polarity networks
were most conducive to cooperative resonance, leading to
orchestrated OR events, interference beats, and faster, richer,
and more intense moments of conscious experience. At
much higher frequencies and smaller scale, these processes
connect to fundamental spacetime geometry (Fig. 20.14).

Microtubules fused into doublets and triplets, further
ramping up OR pleasure. These then aligned into mega-
cylinders of nine doublets/triplets called cilia, centrioles,

348 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

FIGURE 20.14 (Top) Conventional views characterize the redness of a rose as a particular pattern of brain activity. (Bottom) The Orch OR theory
suggests redness is a particular pattern of curvature in fundamental spacetime geometry.

and ﬂagella. Membrane-covered cilia and ﬂagella acted as
sensors, as well as motor-like oars and whip-like propellers,
able to bend, move, and exert causal effects in their envi-
ronment
(the same mechanism moves synaptic cargo
through brain neurons).

Centrioles, the focal point of the cytoskeleton inside
cells, are two mega-cylinders arrayed in a mysterious
perpendicular alignment, each with a helical twist. Centri-
oles organize and anchor mitotic cell division, the ﬁrst step
being to spawn another mega-cylinder, rotating perpen-
dicularly. The original pair then separates, the daughter
centrioles twisting through cytoplasm, leading spindles and
chromosomes to perfect alignment and daughter cell des-
tiny. Perpendicular rotational spawning allows centriolar
information (as states of tubulin) to be transferred to sub-
sequent generations without genes, epigenetic Lamarckian
inheritance (Balestra et al., 2015).

Cilia, centriole, and ﬂagellar composites of microtu-
bules also gained new mechanical vibrations, further pro-
moting quantum resonances, and became able to detect
photons. Biologist Guenter Albrecht-Buehler (1992) iso-
lated fragments of cells containing the centriole, cytoplasm,
and enough cytoskeleton to move around, without nucleus
or DNA. He then shone infrared light at the fragments
which invariably turned and moved toward the light source.
He meticulously showed it was the centriole mega-
cylinders, 150 -nm inner diameter and w700 nm in
length, perfectly sized for optical wavelengths, which
received and responded to the photons (Fig. 20.15). Prim-
itive visual systems consist of ciliated ectoderm which,

along with centrioles and ﬂagella, may capture and detect
photons, pumping FRET-like excitons and promoting OR
pleasure qualia.

With membrane coats and metabolic machinery, solar-
powered ﬂagella became motile spirochetes, slithering
through the primordial soup in search of nutrients and
photons, catching rays and feeling good. OR pleasure
jumped exponentially. Musically, vibrational
resonance
brought harmony, range, and tunes.

By then, simple immobile prokaryotic cells had also
emerged with microtubule-like structures (FtsZ proteins),
lacking movement and internal compartmentalization,
their DNA and metabolic enzymes ﬂoating freely in
watery interiors. According to biologist Lynn Margulis-
Sagan (1995), prokaryotes underwent a series of symbi-
otic mergers to produce the eukaryotic animal cell, our
ancestor. She proposed prokaryotes ingested mitochondria
from another species, providing chemical energy in the
form of ATP, mitochondria remaining on as sheltered
intracellular organelles. Margulis-Sagan also suggested
prokaryotes ingested, or were invaded by spirochetesd
motile ﬂagellates, much like sperm penetrating an ovum.
The invading ﬂagellates became symbiotic with their
hosts,
forming the cytoskeleton, eg, cilia, centrioles,
ﬂagella, and microtubules. Eukaryotic animal cells were
able to sense their environment, move nimbly, and interact
with other organisms (Fig. 20.16). As genes developed,
cells became able to undergo mitosis. The cytoskeleton
may have also brought intelligence, consciousness, and
sexual reproduction.

FIGURE 20.15 Inside of centriole/cilia structure shows ﬁve (of nine) microtubule triplets. Wavelengths of visible and infrared photons match interior
cavity as waveguide/resonator. Centrioles and cilia are able to detect photons.

FIGURE 20.16 Symbiotic ingestion of/invasion by motile spirochetes into a primitive prokaryotic bacterium, resulting in the ﬁrst eukaryotic cell. The
spirochete’s ﬁlamentous proteins became, according to Margulis-Sagan’s endosymbiotic theory, the centrioles and cytoskeleton of eukaryotic cells,
providing movement and organization of cytoplasm. From Hameroff, S., 1987. Ultimate Computing-biomolecular Consciousness and Nanotechnology.
Elsevier, Amsterdam by Paul Jablonka.

350 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

Prokaryotes reproduce by simple division and budding
to form spores. Spirochetes undergo longitudinal ﬁssion,
separating along parallel microtubule doublets. With the
onset of genetic material, sexual
reproduction would
eventually enable evolution, gene mixing, species diversi-
ﬁcation, and adaptability. But how did it start? Evolu-
tionary biologists are unable to explain the origin of sexual
reproduction and gender.

Graham Bell (1982) says “Sex is the queen of problems
in evolutionary biology.” Richard Dawkins’ (1989) trade-
mark “selﬁsh gene” view ﬁnds sex “counter-productive,
throwing away half one’s genes with every reproduction.”
Ironically, Dawkins lists the origin of sex as one of three
remaining mysteries in evolution, along with conscious-
ness, and differentiation, the mechanism by which “genes
inﬂuence bodies.” All three mysteries can be explained
through microtubules.

In The Cooperative Gene, Mark Ridley (2008) writes
“Evolutionary biologists are much teased for their obses-
sion with why sex exists. People like to ask, in an amused
way,
from
obvious.. Sex is a puzzle that has not yet been solved; no
one knows why it exists”.

it obvious?’ Joking apart,

‘isn’t

it

is far

It is obvious. Sex feels good. Sex and sexual repro-
duction might have started through endosymbiosis, driven
by the quest for OR pleasure. Flagellated spirochetes were
likely the most agile and clever of creatures, marauders of
the soup. Sedentary prokaryotes were inviting targets. In a
manner analogous to sperm fertilizing eggs, spirochetes
wriggled through cell walls to reach bacterial interiors,
ﬁnding energy (eg, for dynein motors) and a stable, pro-
tected environment. Pi cloud arrays in host cell proteins
coupled their EG with that of ﬂagellar microtubules, the
mutual superpositions avoiding random distractions from
the polar environment and allowing orchestration. OR
threshold was approached more gradually, harmonically,
with orchestrated pi stack coherent contributions. When
threshold was ﬁnally reached by EG ¼ h/t, climactic and
pleasurable Orch OR moments occurred. Sex was born.

At ﬁrst, spirochetal invasions might have been tempo-
rary and predatorydone night stands. But spirochetal mi-
crotubules began to unpack, disassemble, and rearrange
through quantum dipole coupling with host protein pi
stacks. Microtubules moved in, further optimizing Orch OR
resonance and mutual beneﬁt and pleasure. The symbiosis
took hold. Mitosis by centrioles and microtubule spindles
separated chromosomes into perfectly paired matches,
combining genes from each parent, promoting diversiﬁca-
tion and adaptation. These evolutionary processes have
continued through the present day.

Microtubules radially arranged around centrioles, teth-
ered by actin proteins in tensegrity structures in cell in-
teriors. Rigid cell walls were replaced by ﬂexible
membranes. Megacylinder extensions in cilia, ﬂagella, and

axonemes enabled external sensing, agile locomotion, and
adaptive interactions with other cells and the outside world.
Within cell cytoplasm, centrioles and microtubules fostered
mitosis, gene mixing, mutations (inﬂuenced by Penrose
ORemediated Platonic inﬂuences in DNA pi stacks) and
evolution, all
in pursuit of more and more pleasurable
qualia. Cells began to communicate, compete and/or
cooperate, guided by feedback toward feeling good.

Cells joined through adhesion molecules and gap
junctions, resulting in multicellular organisms. Specializa-
tion occurred through differentiation via gene expression
through cytoskeletal proteins. In some types of cells, the
cytoskeleton became asymmetric and elongated, taking on
signaling and management roles as axonemes and neurons.
Neurons and other cells fused by gap junctions, and
chemical signaling ensued at synapses between axons, and
dendrites and soma within which microtubules became
uniquely arranged in mixed polarity networks, optimal for
integration, recurrent information processing, interference
beats, and orchestration of OR-mediated feelings. Neurons
formed networks, EG grew larger,
t grew shorter and
conscious experiences became more and more intense. At
EG of roughly 1011 tubulins in w300 neurons or axonemes
in simple worms and urchins, t became brief enough to
avoid random interactions, prompting, perhaps,
the
Cambrian evolutionary explosion (Hameroff, 1998). The
brain evolved in pursuit of pleasure, and in the musical
metaphor, the band began to play.

CONCLUSION: DID “QUANTUM
FEELINGS” SPARK THE ORIGIN AND
EVOLUTION OF LIFE?

Darwin’s theory of evolution through natural selection is a
pillar of modern science, but it is incomplete. Natural se-
lection fails to address the origin of life, the nature of
consciousness, and presumed incremental changes in evo-
lution cannot fully explain life’s molecular machinery.
Something is missing.

In modern times Darwin’s theory is taken to imply (eg,
Richard Dawkins’ “selﬁsh gene”) that behavior of living
organisms serves to promote genetic survival
through
reproductive success. But behavior in humans and animals
is driven by conscious feelings (eg, Epicurean delight,
Freud’s pleasure principle, dopaminergic reward, avoid-
ance of pain). The subjective nature of conscious feelings
(phenomenal experience, or qualia in philosophical terms)
has yet to be explained scientiﬁcally, theorists appealing to
either higher order emergence, or lower level panpsychism,
the latter suggesting qualia are intrinsic features of matter,
or deeper levels of reality. These deeper levels somehow
give rise not only to qualia, but also to matter, as well as
electrical charge, magnetic spin, and the various constants
and parameters which govern the universe. In approaching

The Quantum Origin of Life: How the Brain Evolved to Feel Good Chapter | 20 351

these deeper levels another mystery arises, that of quantum
mechanics and collapse of the wave function.

At small scales, particles exist in multiple states or lo-
cations simultaneouslydquantum superposition, described
by a quantum wave function. Yet such superpositions are
not seen in our consciously observed world, and the reason
may have something to do with consciousness itself.

One longstanding view is that

the act of conscious
observation causes superposition to reduce, or collapse, to
classical states, that consciousness causes collapse of the
wave function. However, this view, termed the Copenha-
gen interpretation after the Danish origin of Neils Bohr, its
early proponent, fails to consider the underlying reality of
superposition, and puts consciousness outside science. But
rather
than consciousness causing collapse, as in the
Copenhagen interpretation, Sir Roger Penrose has taken the
opposite approach, suggesting that collapse causes con-
sciousness (or is consciousness), a process in fundamental
spacetime geometry, the ﬁne scale structure of the universe,
each OR event a qualia moment of subjective experience.
Such events would be occurring ubiquitously in micro-
scopic electrically charged environments throughout
the
universe, quickly reaching threshold and undergoing OR
with random, meaningless, and disjointed protoconscious
qualia. However, such primitive experiences could include
pleasurable feelings or painful ones.

If so, OR events and qualia were occurring when life
began, eg, in earth’s primordial soup billions of years ago.
Biomolecular self-organization could have been driven by
optimizing pleasurable OR qualia, and avoiding painful
ones. Were pleasurable qualia the spark of life driving
evolution? Do they continue to be so?

In the early universe, and continuing to the present time,
OR events would generally occur in electrically charged,
polar environments like water or most forms of matter.
There, quantum states quickly entangle and react chemi-
cally to reach OR threshold (decoherence), producing
random, noncognitive protoconscious qualia which would
come and go without a trace. However, also present in the
early universe, eg, in the primordial soup from which life
began, were nonpolar, uncharged oil-like environments of
pi electron resonance clouds. When properly arrayed in
nonpolar
are
quantum-friendly, enabling superpositions to avoid random
entanglements, and be orchestrated (Orch OR) in appro-
priate structural lattices with resonance, memory, and in-
puts. Orch OR events, eg, in microtubules inside brain
neurons,
rich
conscious moments.

could then culminate

in meaningful,

regions, pi

electron resonance

clouds

Quantum friendly nonpolar regions pervade biology,
buried within cores of microtubules and nearly all bio-
molecules, shielded from polar, aqueous interactions, and
deﬁned by a solubility parameter akin to olive oil. The
MeyereOverton correlation shows such nonpolar sites, eg,

composed of aromatic amino acid pi electron resonance
clouds in protein interiors, to be the sites where anesthetics
act to selectively erase consciousness. The MeyereOverton
quantum underground appears to host consciousness in the
brain, and may have enabled the origin of life.

It is suggested here that life originated billions of years
ago to optimize OR-mediated qualia in nonpolar mole-
cules in the primordial soup. Pi electron resonance clouds
in dopamine-like amphipathic molecules coalesced in
geometric pi-stacks,
forming micelle-like proto-cells,
RNA, membranes, and simple proteins with quantum-
friendly regions for OR events. Positive pleasurable feel-
ings, and avoidance of negative ones, are suggested to
have provided feedback for self-organizing pi stack ge-
ometries optimal for pleasure. Absorption of ambient
terahertz, gigahertz, and megahertz radiation help promote
resonance, larger micelle structures, microtubules, cilia,
centrioles, ﬂagella, eukaryotic cells, and eventually the
brain, in pursuit of feelings, resonating with the ﬁne-scale
structure of the universe.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Thanks to Sir Roger Penrose, Jack Tuszynski, and Travis Craddock
for collaboration; Paul Fini, Debra Knowles, and Dave Cantrell for
artwork; and Marjan MacPhee, Kamber Geary, Nicolle Harbor, and
Abi Behar-Monteﬁore for manuscript support.

REFERENCES

Albrecht-Buehler, G., 1992. Rudimentary form of cellular “vision”. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 89, 8288e8292.

Balestra, F.R., von Tobel, L., Gönczy, P., 2015. Paternally contributed
centrioles exhibit exceptional persistence in C. elegans embryos. Cell
Research 25, 642e644.

Barrow, J.D., Tipler, F.J., 1986. The Anthropic Cosmological Principal.

Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Bell, G., 1982. The Masterpiece of Nature: The Evolution and Genetics of

Sexuality. Croom Helm, London.

Benioff, P., 1982. Quantum mechanical Hamiltonian models of turing

machines. Journal of Statistical Physics 29, 515e546.

Carter, B., 1974. Large number of coincidences and the anthropic principle
in cosmology. In: IAU Symposium 63: Confrontation of Cosmolog-
ical Theories with Observational Data. Reidel, Dordrecht,
pp. 291e298. Republished in General Relativity and Gravitation
(2011) 43(11):3225e3233.

Chalmers, D.J., 1996. The Conscious Mind e In Search of a Fundamental

Theory. Oxford University Press, New York.

Churchland, P.S., 2013. Touching a Nerve e The Self as Brain. W.W.

Norton & Company, New York.

Craddock, T., St George, M., Freedman, H., Barakat, K., Damaraju, S.,
Hameroff, S., Tuszynski, J.A., 2012a. Computational predictions of
volatile anesthetic interactions with the microtubule cytoskeleton:
implications for side effects of general anesthesia. PLoS One 7 (6),
e37521. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone. 0037251.

352 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

Craddock, T., Tuszynski, J., Hameroff, S., 2012b. Cytoskeletal signaling:
is memory encoded in microtubule lattices by CaMKII phosphoryla-
tion? PLoS Computational Biology 8 (3), e1002421. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002421.

Craddock, T.J.A., Friesen, D., Mane, J., Hameroff, S., Tuszynski, J.A.,
2014. The feasibility of coherent energy transfer in microtubules.
Journal of the Royal Science Interface 11, 20140677.

Craddock, T.J.A., Hameroff, S.R., Tuszynski, J.A., 2015. Anesthetics act
in quantum channels in brain microtubules to prevent consciousness.
Current Topics in Medicinal Chemistry 15, 523e533.

Damasio, A., 1999. The Feeling of What Happens. Harcourt, San Diego.
Dawkins, R., 1986. The Blind Watchmaker. W.W. Norton & Company,

New York.

Dawkins, R., 1989. The Selﬁsh Gene. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Dennett, D.C., 1991. Consciousness Explained. Little Brown, Boston.
Dennett, D.C., 1995. Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the

Hameroff, S., Penrose, R., 2014b. Reply to seven commentaries on
“consciousness in the universe: review of the ‘Orch OR’ theory”.
Physics of Life Reviews 11 (1), 94e100.

Hameroff, S., Penrose, R., 2014c. Reply to criticism of the ‘Orch OR
qubit’ e orchestrated objective reduction is scientiﬁcally justiﬁed.
Physics of Life Reviews 11 (1), 104e112.

Hameroff, S., Watt, R.C., 1982. Information processing in microtubules.

Journal of Theoretical Biology 98, 549e561.

Hameroff, S., 1987. Ultimate Computing-biomolecular Consciousness and

Nanotechnology. Elsevier, Amsterdam.

Hameroff, S., 1998. Did consciousness cause the Cambrian evolutionary
explosion? In: Hameroff, S.R., Kaszniak, A.W., Scott, A.C. (Eds.),
Toward a Science of Consciousness II: The Second Tucson Discus-
sion and Debates. MIT Press, Cambridge.

Hameroff, S., 2006. The entwined mysteries of anesthesia and con-

sciousness. Anesthesiology 105, 400e412.

Meanings of Life. Simon and Schuster, New York.

Hameroff, S., 2012. How quantum brain biology can rescue conscious free

Deutsch, D., 1985. Quantum theory, the Church e turing principal and the
universal quantum computer. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London 400, 97e117.

Dixit, R., Ross, H., Goldman, Y.E., Holzbaur, E.L., February 22, 2008.
Differential regulation of dynein and kinesin motor proteins by tau.
Science 319 (5866), 1086e1089.

Emerson, D., Weiser, B., Psonis, J., Liao, Z., Taratula, O., Fiamengo, A.,
Wang, X., Sugasawa, K., Smith, A., Eckenhoff, R., Dmochowski, I.,
2013. Direct modulation of microtubule stability contributes to
anthracene general anesthesia. Journal of the American Chemical
Society 135, 5398.

Engel, G., Calhoun, T., Read, E., Ahn, T., Caron Manc Caronal, T.,
Cheng, Y., Blankenship, R., Fleming, G., 2007. Evidence for wave-
like energy transfer through quantum coherence in photosynthesis
systems. Nature 446, 782e786.

will. Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience 6, 1e17.

Kauffman, S., 1993. The Origins of Order: Self Organization and Selection

in Evolution. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Koch, C., 2012. Consciousness: Confessions of a Romantic Reductionist.

MIT Press, Cambridge.

Langton, C.G. (Ed.), 1995. Artiﬁcial Life: An Overview. MIT Press,

Cambridge.

Libet, B., Wright Jr., E.W., Feinstein, B., Pearl, D.K., 1979. Subjective
referral of the timing for a conscious sensory experience-a functional
role for the somatosensory speciﬁc projection system in man. Brain
102, 193e224.

Margulis, L., Sagan, D., 1995. What Is Life? Simon Schuster, New York.
Meyer, H., 1901. Zur Theorie der Alkolnarkose. Naunyn-Schmiedeberg’s
Archives of Experimental Pathology and Pharmacology 46, 338e346.
Miller, S., Urey, H.C., 1959. Organic compound synthesis on the primitive

Everett, H., 1957. Relative state formulation of quantum mechanics. Re-

earth. Science 130 (3370), 245e251.

views of Modern Physics 29, 454.

Nagel, T., 1974. What us it like to be a bat? The Philosophical Review 83

Feynman, R.P., 1986. Quantum mechanical computers. Foundations of

(4), 435e450.

Physics 16, 507e531.

Nogales, E., Wolf, S.G., Downing, K.H., 1998. Structure of the tubulin

Freud, S., 1961. Beyond the Pleasure Principle. Trans. James Strachey, the

dimer by electron crystallography. Nature 391, 199e203.

standard ed. Liveright Publishing Corporation, New York.

Ouyang, M., Awschalon, D.D., 2003. Coherent spin transfer between

Frohlich, J., 1968. Long range coherence and energy storage in biological

molecularly bridged quantum dots. Science 301, 1074e1078.

systems. International Journal of Quantum Chemistry 2, 641e649.

Overton, E., 1901. Studein ueber die narkosen. Verlag von Gustav Fischer,

Frohlich, H., 1970. Long range coherence and actions of enzymes. Nature

Switzerland.

228, 1093.

Frohlich, H., 1975. The extraordinary dielectric properties of biological
materials and the action of enzymes. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 72, 4211e4215.
Garham, C.P., Vemu, A., Wilson-Kubalek, E.M., Yu, I., Szyk, A.,
Lander, G.C., Milligan, R.A., Roll-Mecak, A., May 21, 2015.
Multivalent microtubule recognition by tubulin tyrosine ligase-like
family glutamylases. Cell 161 (5), 1112e1123.

Hameroff, S.R., Penrose, R., 1996a. Orchestrated reduction of quantum
coherence in brain microtubules: a model for consciousness. In:
Hameroff, S.R., Kaszniak, A.Q., Scott, A.C. (Eds), Toward a science
of consciousness; the ﬁrst Tucson discussions and debates, MIT Press,
Cambridge Mathematics and Computers in Simulation 40, 453e480.
Hameroff, S.R., Penrose, R., 1996b. Conscious events as orchestrated

Pan, J., Xo, J., Eckenhoff, M., Eckenhoff, R., 2007. Halothane binding
proteome in human brain cortex. Journal of Proteome Research 6,
582e592.

Panksepp, J., 1998. Affective Neuroscience: The Foundations of Human

and Animal Emotions. Oxford University Press, New York.

Peil, K.T., 2014. Emotion: the self-regulatory sense. Global Advances in

Health and Medicine 2, 80e108.

Penrose, R., Hameroff, S.R., 1995. What gaps? reply to Grush and

Churchland. Journal of Consciousness Studies 2, 98e112.

Penrose, R., 1989. The Emperor’s New Mind: Concerning Computers,

Minds, and the Laws of Physics. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Penrose, R., 1994. Shadows of the Mind-a Search for the Missing Science

of Consciousness. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Penrose, R., 1996. On gravity’s role in quantum state reduction. General

space-time selection. Journal of Consciousness Studies 1, 36e53.

Relativity and Gravitation 28, 581e600.

Hameroff, S., Penrose, R., 2014a. Consciousness in the universe: a review

Pullman, B., Pullman, A., 1963. Quantum Biochemistry. Interscience,

of the ‘Orch OR’ theory. Physics of Life Reviews 11 (1), 39e79.

New York.

The Quantum Origin of Life: How the Brain Evolved to Feel Good Chapter | 20 353

Rasmussen, S., Karampurwala, H., Vaidyaath, R.,

Jensen, K.,
Hameroff, S., 1990. Computational connectionism within neurons: a
model of cytoskeletal automata subserving neural networks. Physica
D: Nonlinear Phenomena 42, 428e449.

Rasmussen, S., 2010. Life after the synthetic cell. Nature 465 (7297), 422.
Ridley, M., 2008. The Cooperative Gene. Simon and Schuster, New York.
Sahu, S., Ghosh, S., Hirata, K., Fujita, D., Bandyopadhyah, A., 2013a.
Multi-level memory-switching properties of a single brain microtu-
bule. Applied Physics Letters 102, 123701.

Sahu, S., Ghosh, S., Fujita, D., Bandyopdhyay, A., 2014. Live visualiza-
tions of single isolated tubulin protein self-assembly via tunneling
current: effect of electromagnetic pumping during spontaneous growth
of microtubule. Scientiﬁc Reports 4, 7303.

Sahu, S., Ghosh, S., Ghosh, B., Aswanid, K., Hirata, K., Fujita, D.,
Bandyopadhyay, A., 2013b. Atomic water channel controlling
remarkable properties of a single brain microtubule: correlating single
protein to its supramolecular assembly. Biosensors and Bioelectronics
47, 141e148.

Schrödinger, E., 1935. Die gegenwarte situation in der quantenmechanik.
Naturwissenschaften 23, 807e812, 823e828, 844e849. Translation
by Trimmer,.T. In: Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society
124, 323e338.

Sherrington, C.S., 1951. Man on His Nature. Cambridge University Press,

Cambridge.

Shimony, A., 1993. Search for a Naturalistic World View, Vol. II Natural

Science and Metaphysics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Smith, S., Watt, R., Hameroff, S., 1984. Cellular automata in cytoskeletal

lattice protients. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena 10, 168e174.

Stapp, H.P., 2007. Mindful Universe: Quantum Mechanics and the

Participating Observer. Springer, New York.

Szent-Gyorgyi, A., 1960.

Introduction to a Submolecular Biology.

Academic Press, Cambridge (Reprinted by Elsevier, 2012).

Tamulis, A., Grigalavicius, M., 2014. Quantum emtanglement in photo-
active prebiotic systems. Systems and Synthetic Biology 8 (2),
117e140.

Tononi, G., 2012. Phi: A Voyage from the Brain to the Soul. Pantheon

Books, New York.

Vattay, G., Salahub, D., Casbai, I., Nassimi, A., Kaufmann, S.A., 2015.
the origin of
life. Journal of Physics:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/626/1/

Quantum criticality at
Conference
012023.

Series.

Whitehead, A.N., 1929. Process and Reality. Macmillan, New York.
Whitehead, A.N., 1933. Adventures of Ideas. Macmillan, London.

Chapter 21

Empathy, Theory of Mind, Cognition,
Morality, and Altruism

M. Reimers1 and B. Oakley2
1Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, United States; 2Oakland University, Rochester, MI, United States

INTRODUCTION

Many researchers, as well as the general population, feel
that empathy is the primary underlying motivator of altru-
istic behavior
(Batson, 2009, 2012; De Waal, 2009;
Rameson et al., 2012; Rifkin, 2009). This “weighted to-
ward empathy” approach has an important
impact on
societydtraining programs to help teach altruistic attitudes
to youngsters and adolescents, for example, often empha-
size the empathic components of altruism and show little
concern for other emotional issues in altruistic behavior and
the importance of cognition (Oakley, 2014).

An important point of this chapter is that cognition
plays a major role in altruistic behavior, as do emotions
other than empathy. Empathy, in fact, can play a lesser role
in altruism than is often acknowledged (Bernhardt and
Singer, 2012; Decety and Yoder, 2015; Prinz, 2011). As
Prinz notes, empathy is not only not necessary for altruistic
actionsdsometimes, it can actually get in the way of those
actions. And empathy does not necessarily motivate
altruismdPrinz notes, “one might judge that it is bad to
kill an innocent person even if his vital organs could be
used to save ﬁve others who desperately need transplants.
Here, arguably, we feel cumulatively more empathy for
the ﬁve people in need than for the one healthy person, but
our moral
track that empathetic
response.” Other emotions besides empathy also play an
important role in altruism, including feelings of disappro-
bation, disgust, contempt, gratitude, admiration, and guilt
(Prinz, 2011).

judgment does not

Empathy can provide simplistic immediate assistance
for others, but as with the cheating student who pleads for
empathy, asking to be let off the hook “just this one time,”
sometimes knee-jerk empathetic responses
to others’

problems can create new problems, both for the person
involved and for society as a whole. As Decety and Cowell
note, “care-based morality piggybacks on older evolu-
tionary motivational mechanisms associated with parental
care. This explains why ‘empathy’ is not always the royal
road to morality and can at times be a source of immoral
action by favoring self- or kin-related interest” (Decety and
Cowell, 2014).

As this chapter describes, sometimes empathic pro-
grammatic approaches to providing altruistic support for
others can backﬁre, worsening the very situations they were
meant to solve. Unfortunately, as discussed in detail further
on, the all-too-human tendencies in these cases has long
been to resist factual revelations about the failure of such
programs and to instead redouble empathic efforts rather
than to stand back and see whether very different ap-
proaches might serve populations in better stead.

Such empathy-heavy approaches can also contribute to
a worsening of the divide between political parties. Those
who don’t support sometimes overly simplistic, empathic
approaches to helping others, particularly the disadvan-
taged, can be easily demonized as heartless or racist. Little
concern is given for the fact that truly compassionate ways
of interacting with and helping others generally involve far
more than simple empathy or obvious (and often subtly or
not-so-subtly self-serving) demonstrations of helping
(Fig. 21.1).

The focus of this chapter is to grapple with our knowledge
of empathy and theory of mind (ToM), relate these concepts
to the concept of cognition, and then synthesize these con-
cepts in a nuanced fashion regarding their relationship to the
overarching concept of altruism. This chapter forms an
attempt to integrate strands of neuroscientiﬁc, psychological,

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00021-1
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

355

356 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

"Slow"

cognitively-
oriented
responses

"Fast"
affective
responses

Altruism

FIGURE 21.1 Altruism is often erroneously considered to be arising in
large part from affective systems related to empathy. In reality,
true
altruism often involves both fast and slow processes in the Kahneman
(2011) sense. In other words, altruism often involves “faster” affective
(emotional) considerations, which include a much broader array of emo-
tions than simple empathy and can include cortical as well as mesolimbic
structures. But altruistic acts also include “slower” cognitive processes
primarily afﬁliated with the orbitofrontal and prefrontal cortices. Helpful
behavior, in fact, often involves a careful weighing of both affective and
cognitive concerns. What seems at ﬁrst helpful can, in the long run, prove
harmful. Moreover, altruism is often thought of as something so obvious
that it’s hardly necessary to explain the term. Yet different groups can
differ substantially in what they think is altruistic. A simple example of this
phenomenon can be seen when examining the history of the Greek credit
crisis from either a Northern or Southern European perspective.

and societal research to better understand how to truly help
others (Fan et al., 2011).

It is enlightening to realize that three of the terms in the
title of this chapter, empathy, ToM, and altruism, are ne-
ologisms, recently introduced into English, sometimes with
underlying ideological agendas they support.1 As neolo-
gisms, we should not expect these terms to correspond
neatly with observable, measurable natural phenomenad
that
the joints” (Campbell
et al., 2011).

is, with nature “carved at

NEUROSCIENCE AND DYNAMICS OF
EMPATHY

Empathy has received extravagant attention in the research
literaturedneuroscientiﬁc examples
include (Bernhardt

1. Empathy is an English translation of the German word Einfühlung,
literally “feeling into” another person’s experience, particularly pain or
distress. Einfühlung was coined by Robert Vischer in the mid 1800s
(Vischer et al., 1993). In 1909, psychologist Edward Titchener (1909/
2014) coined the English word empathy as a translation of Einfühlung. The
phrase theory of mind was introduced by Premack and Woodruff (1978) in
an article about chimpanzees being able to infer goals of an actor in a
video. The term altruism (in French, altruisme), is the oldest of the ne-
ologisms, and was introduced by Auguste Comte (1798e1857), to oppose
the term egoism, as part of a broad positivist program to reform human
society and morals (Wilson, 2015, p. 90; Zaki and Ochsner, 2012).

and Singer, 2012; Decety, 2015; Mathur et al., 2010;
Walter, 2012; Zaki and Ochsner, 2012). To capture the fact
that empathy often seems to include both affective and
cognitive components, it is sometimes deﬁned along the
lines of (Zaki and Ochsner, 2012), who group the processes
of empathy into three broad classes: “(1) experience
sharing: vicariously sharing targets’ internal states (Gallese
et al., 2004), (2) mentalizing: explicitly considering (and
perhaps understanding) targets’ states and their sources
(Leslie et al., 2004), and (3) prosocial concern: expressing
motivation to improve targets’ experiences (for example,
by reducing their suffering) (Batson, 2011).” Along the
lines of (3), however, it should be noted that a meta-anal-
ysis has shown only a weak correlation between empathy
and prosocial behavior (Neuberg et al., 1997).

A number of studies have used functional MRI to
identify brain regions involved in empathic response (see
reviews by (Bernhardt and Singer, 2012; Decety, 2015; Fan
et al., 2011; Shamay-Tsoory, 2010)). Not all studies ﬁnd
consistent regions, but many studies ﬁnd involvement of
the anterior cingulate gyrus, and to a lesser extent the
ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) and anterior
insula. The anterior cingulate,
together with posterior
cingulate, is activated when the subject is in pain. Thus
there may be a kind of mirroring function for pain, as there
seems to be in premotor cortex for movements, although
the cingulate is not among the regions identiﬁed as con-
taining mirror neurons. The anterior
is often
responsive to interoceptive feeling, although no mirror
functions have been reported for it. The vmPFC is often
activated in moral judgments and when thinking about
close relationships; it is also reported in ToM tasks. Thus
the activation of vmPFC may be a more reﬂective aspect of
empathy.

insular

Fan and Han (2008) ﬁrst used electroencephalography
(EEG) to study the rapid evolution of a subject’s response
to pictures of others in pain. They distinguished an early
and a later component of the empathy response. The early
response occurred at 150e200 ms and was largely over the
frontal aspects of the prefrontal cortex (PFC). The later
response occurred at 400e600 m and seemed to be coming
largely from medial areas; given the geometry of the re-
gions they interpreted these later currents as reﬂecting ac-
tivity in cingulate or medial PFC. They suggested that the
ﬁrst component reﬂected an immediate emotional response
and the later response reﬂected more cognitive processing,
and such an interpretation is often given. Nevertheless,
while such an interpretation appeals to conventional wis-
dom, it does seem inconsistent with the usual attributions of
cognitive functions to anterior PFC, and of emotional
functions to the cingulate (sometimes called the limbic
lobe).

Cheng et al. (2014) found that these two EEG com-
ponents of the empathy response follow different time

Empathy, Theory of Mind, Cognition, Morality, and Altruism Chapter | 21 357

courses during child development. Speciﬁcally the ﬁrst
component decreases in size during middle childhood,
while the second seems to increase. Following the inter-
pretation of others, they propose that the decrease in the
ﬁrst component reﬂects a decrease in emotional response
and an increase in cognitive response with maturity. As
pointed out earlier, an interpretation of the data consistent
with the usual attributions of function, would be almost
the reverse. Perhaps the initial shock value of others’ pain
decreases, while the “feeling with” in the anterior cingu-
late increases as children learn to imagine others’ experi-
ences. This interpretation is also consistent with the
evidence on individual differences, discussed next. A
related study ﬁnds that the later component, but not the
earlier component, is predictive of actual generosity in
behavior (Cowell and Decety, 2015).

Individual differences in empathy are evident to us in
daily life. Furthermore, there has been much discussion
about how empathy differs among autistic and psycho-
pathic individuals. Some early fMRI studies of individual
differences found rough correlations between activation of
the cingulate cortex and questionnaire-based measures of
empathic traits. Several EEG studies from Jean Decety’s
lab and collaborators have investigated how empathic
response differs among autistic and psychopathic people; it
turns out that although both groups are often said to exhibit
diminished empathy,
the brain responses of these two
groups differ from normal in opposite ways. The psycho-
paths typically showed the same level of early response, but
showed a diminished later component compared to
normal subjects (Decety et al., 2015). In contrast, autistic
individuals
(Fan
et al., 2013).

showed a higher early component

Decety and his group also observed in psychopaths a
greater decrease of mu rhythm (a kind of resting rhythm)
over motor areas; such decrease is often associated with
“mirror neuron” processing. This suggests that psychopaths
may be simulating the actions of others, perhaps even more
than normal subjects.

There is considerable variation between people in
empathy. Some of this variation may be genetic. A genome-
wide study conﬁrmed an association between different
variants of the oxytocin receptor and empathy’s opposite,
psychopathy, and also found other genetic associations
(Bakermans-Kranenburg and van IJzendoorn, 2014).

THEORY OF MIND (ToM)

ToM also now termed “mentalizing,” refers broadly to at-
tributions of knowledge and intent to others. ToM has
become a very popular area of study in social psychology
in the past two decades. Nevertheless, even basic deﬁni-
tions remain contentious. In the original formulation of
Premack and Woodruff (1978) it referred to inferring goals

from actions: a chimpanzee was shown a series of pictures
of a human actor attempting to accomplish something, and
then asked to select one of two pictures of an outcome
(presumably desired). The chimpanzee could do this fairly
well. So, the phrase ToM originally referred to inferring
others’ goalsdand by extension, to intentions.

The term was expanded during the 1990s to under-
standing the state of knowledge of actors, especially their
false beliefs. More recently psychologists have studied the
ability to correctly recognize emotions from others’ faces
(Ickes, 1993, 2001). It is not clear whether all these diverse
aptitudes reﬂect a common underlying core competence; or,
if not depending on a common core competence, in what
ways, and to what extent these capacities enhance each
other. What
the capacities described as
“empathic accuracy” are, contrary to the expectations of
many researchers in the 1990s, uncorrelated with the more
usual (emotional) senses of the word empathy, across
normal subjects as well as autistic individuals (Demurie
et al., 2011; Zaki et al., 2008, 2009a,b). Interestingly, one
recent study found a relationship between an oxytocin re-
ceptor gene, ToM, and prosocial behavior in children (Wu
and Su, 2015), suggesting some genetic contribution to
individual differences in emotional empathy.

is clear is that

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN EMPATHY,
TOM, MORALITY, AND OTHER NEURAL
NETWORKS

Although both empathy and ToM are ill-deﬁned, fMRI
experiments that try to elicit various kinds of empathy
usually activate several regions including the vmPFC (Fan
et al., 2011), which is also an area that is elicited by many
experiments that try to elicit various kinds of ToM func-
tions (Siegal and Varley, 2002). There is little consensus on
the function of vmPFC.
a concise characterization of
However we speculate,
following (Siegal and Varley,
2002), that vmPFC may be where cognition meets emotion:
that understanding of other people may allow a more
effective altruism than simply an emotional response.

One interesting study related ToM, empathy, and the
broad-scale mind-wandering to moral cognition (Bzdok
et al., 2012, 2015). They note: “the neural network sub-
serving moral decisions probably reﬂects functional inte-
gration of distributed heterogeneous networks, is dissociable
into cognitive and affective components, as well as highly
similar to the brain’s default activity pattern.” Through meta-
analysis Bzdok’s team revealed that ToM appears to involve
a distinct abstracteinferential socialecognitive network
involving the dorsomedial PFC, frontal pole, inferior frontal
gyrus, middle temporal gyrus, medial PFC, precuneus,
temporal pole, temporoparietal junction, and vmPFC. This
network appears to overlap signiﬁcantly with the brain ac-
tivity patterns observed during moral cognition.

358 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

By contrast, as Bzdok’s group went on to reveal,
empathy appears to activate a distinct automaticeemotional
socialecognitive network that “vicariously maps others’
affective states.” The network includes the anterior cingu-
late cortex, anterior insula, amygdala, brainstem, dorso-
medial PFC, inferior frontal gyrus, middle temporal gyrus,
posterior cingulate cortex, supplementary motor area, and
the temporoparietal junction. The study’s conclusion was
that the neural correlates of moral cognition more strongly
resemble ToM than they do empathy.

THE MESOLIMBIC AND CORTICAL
SYSTEMS AND THEIR RELATIONSHIP
WITH ALTRUISM

Research has revealed that humans feel pleasure at the
altruistic act of giving because it activates their mesolimbic
“pleasure” system, which stimulates activation of dopa-
mine. As noted in (Moll et al., 2006), “donating to societal
causes recruited two types of reward systems: the VTAe
striatum mesolimbic network, which also was involved in
pure monetary rewards, and the subgenual area, which was
speciﬁc for donations and plays key roles in social attach-
ment and afﬁliative reward mechanisms in humans. and
other animals.” This mesolimbic activation, it seems, is the
source of that “warm glow” we get when we help others.
(As Sam Kean memorably puts it: “What your mother told
you, then, is true: it is better to give than to receive. She
probably just didn’t realize that, neurologically, giving is
roughly on par with eating fudge or getting laid” (Kean,
2015).) Warm mesolimbic “glow” feelings are also related
to the glow of drug addictiondin other words, these feel-
ings may be helpful at times, but they are not an unalloyed
good.

A well-known study on pathological generosity
(Ferreira-Garcia et al., 2013; Kean, 2015), revealed that
damage to the lenticular nucleus and nearby pathways
induce an overly generous attitude that can cause difﬁ-
culties in a person’s being able to function in society. This
appears to happen because the lenticular nucleus and
nearby pathways serve as a conduit to feed information
about what is happening in the mesolimbic system back
toward the frontal cortices. This severing of the feedback
loop can induce a person to give incessantly for that hit of
dopamine pleasure, in a somewhat analogous fashion to
rats who will, in preference to receiving food or water, die
of exhaustion from repeatedly pressing a lever to activate
metal electrodes implanted into their nucleus accumbens
(Hoult, 1984).

In Ferreira-Garcia et al.’s case of pathological gener-
osity, “Mr. A.” suffered a left lenticulocapsular stroke that
changed his personality from that of a cautious and
responsible individual
to a person who was ﬁnancially

incapable of managing his affairs. As (Ferreira-Garcia
et al., 2013) note:

[Mr. A.] would spend his money with street kids, buying
them soda, candies, and junk food. There was no evidence
of pedophilia, as emphasized by his wife, brother-in-law,
and friends, who were always with him when he was out.
Were it not for the close attention of Mr. A’s wife, he would
be constantly in debt. At one point, Mr. A and his brother-
in-law started a small business of homemade fries, which
eventually failed because he did not worry about debtors
and because he gave away most of his product. If con-
fronted by his mother or wife, he would make a joke and
evade discussion. If pressed further, he sometimes would
become angry and then leave the house for a while.

This unusual case clariﬁes that tempering mechanisms
that can judiciously tone down the activation of mesolimbic
areasdin other words, mechanisms that can help douse the
“warm glow”dappear to be provided, at least in part, by
the PFC and orbitofrontal cortices, as well as by the dis-
inhibiting desired actions and inhibiting undesired actions
decision making that occurs in the basal ganglia. The pre-
frontal cortex and orbitofrontal cortices, in fact, appear to
be generally involved in the decisions underlying “real-life
altruistic behaviors” (Moll et al., 2005, 2006). It appears the
lateral orbitofrontal cortex restricts the impulse to give
through aversive mechanisms such as anger, moral disgust,
and other “more abstract forms of culturally mediated so-
cial disapproval” (Moll et al., 2006). General decision
making encompasses a broad swathe of neural circuitry
(Hikosaka et al., 2014; Hwang, 2013; Lee, 2013).

A number of different medical and nonmedical condi-
tions can contribute to an overwillingness to help others, to
the point where the “giver” can him or herself become
endangered, and the subject of the givers’ attention can be
harmed (Oakley et al., 2012; Oakley, 2013). Such condi-
tions include Williams syndrome (Riby et al., 2012), de-
mentia (Dorey et al., 2008; Mendez et al., 2006),
neurosyphilis (Nágera, 1944), Parkinson’s disease treated
with dopaminergic drugs (O’Sullivan et al., 2010), and the
amorphous behavior
afﬁliated with “codependency”
(McGrath and Oakley, 2012).

WHAT IS ALTRUISM? (HINT: IT’S NOT
NECESSARILY WHAT IT LOOKS LIKE)

Jacob Neusner and Bruce Chilton (2005) supplied an
expanded deﬁnition of altruism in their Altruism in World
Religions (p. xi):

A standard dictionary deﬁnition describes altruism as
“unselﬁsh concern for the welfare of others: opposed to
egoism.” The four components of this deﬁnition distinguish
altruism from other kinds of care for others. “Unselﬁsh”

Empathy, Theory of Mind, Cognition, Morality, and Altruism Chapter | 21 359

carries with it the notion that the altruist acts for the sake of
the other rather than himself or herself. “Concern” sug-
gests that altruism entails a motivation as well as an action.
“Welfare” means that the goal is to beneﬁt, rather than
harm, the other. And “others” implies that the altruist is
capable of seeing the object of concern as someone distinct
from himself or herself.

Altruistic behavior is often thought

to be virtually
synonymous with prosocial behavior, which is the subject
of an immense body of research in the social sciences
(Beilin and Eisenberg, 2013; Bénabou and Tirole,
2005; Dovidio et al., 2006; Schroeder and Graziano, 2015).
But in fact, surprisingly often, truly altruistic behavior can
seem superﬁcially as antisocial
than prosocial
(Oakley, 2013).

rather

THE PROBLEM WITH PROSOCIALITY

We should point out that there is confusing and circular
reasoning going on in any attempt
to deﬁne prosocial
behavior.
the popular
description from Wikipedia:

to take a look at

is useful

It

Prosocial behavior, or “voluntary behavior intended to
beneﬁt another,” (Eisenberg et al., 2007) is a social
behavior that “beneﬁt[s] other people or society as a
whole,” (Psychwiki.com) “such as helping,
sharing,
donating, co-operating, and volunteering” (Brief and
Motowidlo, 1986). These actions may be motivated by
empathy and by concern about the welfare and rights of
others, (Sanstock, 2007, pp. 489e491) as well as for
egoistic or practical concerns (Eisenberg et al., 2007).
Evidence suggests that prosociality is central to the well-
being of social groups across a range of scales (Helliwell
and Putnam, 2004; Straubhaar et al., 2013). Empathy is a
strong motive in eliciting prosocial behavior, and has deep
evolutionary roots (Decety, 2011).

Using this description of prosociality, such behaviors as
stepping back to allow a person to learn self-efﬁcacy; or
turning off empathy and refusing to give to an alcoholic
begging for money for a bottle of whisky on a street
cornerdor for that matter, refusing to give an undeserved
bump in grade to a beseeching studentdwould tend to not
be counted as prosocial behavior, even though such
behavior could be motivated by concern for the welfare of
others. In a similar way, proponents of the death penalty
can point toward solid scientiﬁc research indicating that the
death penalty spares between 10 and 24 innocent victims of
murder (Sunstein and Vermeule, 2005)dyet those who
support
the death penalty are rarely accused of being
prosocial.

For the purposes of this chapter, prosocial behavior is
taken with its usual connotation of being superﬁcially

for

that person or

helpful for others, whether or not it is truly helpful in the
greater scheme, either
for society.
Altruistic behavior, on the other hand is taken to mean that
the behavior is indeed truly helpful for the person in the
long run, or for society as a whole. Pathologically altruistic
behavior is behavior that is intended to be altruistic, but
which does not truly result in overall altruistic outcomes
(Oakley, 2013).

HARMFUL PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOR

By way of background, it’s important to note that in many
areas, scientiﬁc research can, even with researchers’ best
intentions, simply reify previous ﬁndingsdto the detriment
of scientiﬁc progress (Hyman, 2010). Thus, it’s no surprise
to ﬁnd that much scientiﬁc
the
commonsense notion that prosocial behavior is essentially
altruisticdor indeed, that superﬁcially prosocial activities
are truly prosocial in the sense of denoting behavior that is
positive and helpful for others. Who would even conceive
of conducting research that might reveal
that prosocial
behavior might not be altruistic?

research supports

But occasional glimmers reveal that prosocial behavior

is not necessarily altruistic.

An intriguing study was conducted by the inﬂuential
American criminologist Joan McCord (1978).2 This was
related to a previous intervention that was conducted in the
late 1930s and early 1940s. In this program, approximately
500 Boston school boys were randomly assigned to two
different groupsdone group was the control group, and
received no intervention. The other group was assigned to a
ﬁve year treatment program that included counselors who
visited the families, on average, twice each month; the
families were encouraged to call on the program for
assistance. Many of these “intervention” students also
received academic tutoring, some received medical or
psychiatric attention, were sent to summer camps, and were
brought into contact with community programs such as the
Boy Scouts and the YMCA.

2. Joan McCord was well-known for her ability to marshal “mountains of
evidence to question the effectiveness of social programs championed by
both liberals and conservatives” (Martin, 2004). McCord found that ofﬁ-
cials took sometimes affront to the idea of evaluation of social programs,
since if one was found ineffective, it could tar other social programs. Her
response was to note “That fear, perhaps justiﬁed in some quarters, would
be like blocking publication of damaging effects of Celebrex, thalidomide,
or estrogen because the publication could slow work in disease preven-
tion” (Martin, 2004). Other important works which McCord (1979) helped
author include (Dishion et al., 1999), which explored developmental and
intervention evidence relevant
to iatrogenic effects in peer-group in-
terventions, and pointed toward the surprising relationship between
maternal self-conﬁdence and maternal affection, along with father’s
deviance, parental aggressiveness, parental conﬂict, and supervision, in
accounting for a signiﬁcant proportion of the variance in number of con-
victions for serious crimes.

360 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

Thirty years later, Joan McCord was able to track down
480 of the original 506 participants in the study. Forty-eight
had died. Questionnaires were sent
to 208 men in the
treatment group and 202 from the control group. Responses
were received from 113 men in the treatment group (54%)
and 122 men in the control group (60%). Subjectively,
members of the treatment group gave it high marks.

However, as McCord notes:

Despite the large number of comparisons between treat-
ment and control groups, none of the objective measures
conﬁrmed hopes that treatment had improved the lives of
those in the treatment group. The objective evidence pre-
sents a disturbing picture. The program seems not only to
have failed to prevent
from committing
crimesdthus corroborating studies of other projects. but
also to have produced negative side effects. As compared
with the control group,

its clients

1. Men who had been in the treatment program were more

likely to commit (at least) a second crime.

2. Men who had been in the treatment program were more

likely to evidence signs of alcoholism.

3. Men from the treatment group more commonly mani-

fested signs of serious mental illness.

4. Among men who had died, those from the treatment

group died younger.

5. Men from the treatment group were more likely to
report having had at least one stress-related disease; in
particular, they were more likely to have experienced
high blood pressure or heart trouble.

6. Men from the treatment group tended to have occupa-

tions with lower prestige.

7. Men from the treatment group tended more often to

report their work as not satisfying.

McCord suggested several explanations for her ﬁndings.

1.

Interaction with “hard-core” unemployables “may pro-
duce later internal conﬂicts that manifest themselves
in disease and/or dissatisfaction.”

2. “Agency intervention may create dependency upon
outside assistance. When this assistance is no longer
available, the individual may experience symptoms of
dependency and resentment. The treatment program
may have generated such high expectations that subse-
quent experiences tended to produce symptoms of
deprivation.”

3. “[T]hrough receiving the services of a ‘welfare project,’
those in the treatment program may have justiﬁed the
help they received by perceiving themselves as
requiring help.”

Joan McCord is not alone in ﬁnding substantive
problems with well-meaning research projects that are not
accorded the same scientiﬁc scrutiny as less obviously

examples

well-intentioned programs. For
involving
the elimination of racial prejudice, the reduction of sex
differences in mathematical performance, the reduction
of drug use and adolescent behavior problems, the miti-
gation of posttraumatic stress disorder, and the reduction
of family violence, among many other areas, see (Cole,
2001; Eidelson and Soldz, 2012; Kalev et al., 2006;
Lilienfeld, 2007; Petrosino et al., 2000, 2003; Sander
and Taylor, 2012; Wilson, 2011; Wright and Cummings,
2005).

ALTRUISM THROUGH EVOLUTION
TO TODAY

for

evolution

of

the

altruism (or

How did our species become (partly) altruistic? Most ex-
planations
of
cooperationdnot entirely the same) run into the “free-
rider” problem (related to the problem framed as “The
Prisoner’s Dilemma”). Brieﬂy stated, this is that although if
everyone cooperates, we are all better off, it is generally
thought that the individual has a better chance of success if
she or he does not cooperate but enlists the help of altruists
without returning the favor. Since selective pressures on
genes act on individuals rather than for groups, this sce-
nario argues against genes predisposing to altruistic be-
haviors becoming common (Wilson, 2015).

Various forms of altruism have repeatedly evolved, of
which the best known are social
insects. The most
commonly accepted idea to explain the evolution of
altruism or cooperation is kin selection, or “inclusive
ﬁtness.” This means that helping those with whom you
share a large fraction of your genes propagates those genes.
Thus altruism can arise when nest-mates share a large
fraction of their genes as often happens among the well-
known social insects (eg, sister wasps share three-fourths
of their genes).

This scenario has been challenged by several eminent
theoreticians and biologists (eg, Nowak et al., 2010; see
also the extensive correspondence on this paper), who
argue kin selection can only explain altruism under very
speciﬁc unusual conditions, which rarely hold in nature,
but that under some more commonly observed conditions
on population structure, altruism emerges as a winning
strategy. These ideas are related to the other popular
explanation of altruism, that is reciprocity, popularized by
Robert Wright (1994). There is still some controversy
about this, and it seems to run into trouble in human
evolution, where altruism is far from perfect (André and
Day, 2007). Some have suggested some mix of kin se-
lection and reciprocity may allow imperfect reciprocity to
be selected (Ale et al., 2013).

This is not the place to deﬁnitively answer this question,
but we point out two approaches that draw on the unique

Empathy, Theory of Mind, Cognition, Morality, and Altruism Chapter | 21 361

social structure of human ancestors. First, models and
behavioral-economic analyses have shown that altruistic
tendencies can be selected (Choi and Bowles, 2007):

1.

2.

3.

If people who in cooperative bands do signiﬁcantly bet-
ter than those in noncooperative groups;
If people are somewhat rationaldselecting bands that
are more cooperative, if they can get in;
If people can move somewhat freely between groups.

Anthropologists’ long-time observations and quantita-
tive data on preferences for cooperators among the Hadza
(Apicella et al., 2012) conﬁrm some of the essential char-
acteristics of these models in hunter-gatherer societies,
which are thought to resemble our ancestral human soci-
eties for 3 million years.

A second hypothesis by Sarah Hrdy derives from the
need for wide-ranging foraging and cooperative hunting
necessary for the lifestyle that human ancestors adopted
about 4e5 Ma on the savannah. Plant food comes in rare
and hidden packages; hunting animals requires skilled
tracking and stalking. For both food types, humans had to
forage far from camp and could not easily take young
children. Looking after other people’s children (as Hrdy
calls it, “alloparenting”) seems to be widespread among
hunter-gatherer groups today and most likely is an ancestral
practice that was crucial for survival on the savannah. Hrdy
argues that generalized empathy would be necessary for
such practices.

She notes (Hrdy, 2009, p. 66): “rearing conditions
among a line of early hominins meant that youngsters grew
up depending on a wider range of caretakers than just their
mothers, and this dependence produced selection pressures
that favored individuals who were better at decoding the
mental states of others, and ﬁguring out who would help
and who would hurt.”

Since hunter-gatherer bands are often composed of
unrelated extended families (Dyble et al., 2015), it could be
that both kin selection and reciprocity played roles in
enabling alloparenting.

How do these considerations shed light on the role of

empathy in the evolution of human altruism?

Empathy may be a component of much altruistic
behavior, but other feelings besides empathy, such as loy-
alty, obligation, and even guilt, also contribute to cooper-
ative or altruistic behavior. As (Lee, 1984) points out, the
most common topic of conversation among his hunter-
gatherer subjects was whether particular people had ful-
ﬁlled their traditional obligations. So perhaps empathy was
not the only or even the main driver of human altruism.
Nevertheless, empathy has helped shape human altruism,
and may have shaped other crucial aspects of human evo-
lution, such as culture.

We have a very long childhood and require children
to learn a complex culture. Numerous studies have

documented that we learn complex series of arbitrary ac-
tions faster than our primate relatives (Dean et al., 2012),
and that social interaction is the key.

However,

in the end, we must acknowledge that
altruism in today’s complex,
large-scale environment,
where millions of people interact through a number of
widely varying systems, including both government, busi-
ness, and religious enterprises, is nothing like the evolu-
tionary “savannah style”
simplicity of past human
environments, where perhaps 150 people were the most
that a person would interact with (Dunbar, 1992). As a
consequence, it is important to be aware of the extraordi-
nary complexity that underlies our attempts to both help
and hurt one another, and to be wary of approaches that
place undue emphasis on any particular neuroscientiﬁc
underpinning related to morality and altruism.

REFERENCES

Ale, S.B., Brown, J.S., Sullivan, A.T., 2013. Evolution of cooperation:
combining kin selection and reciprocal altruism into matrix games
with social dilemmas. PLoS One 8 (5), e63761.

André, J.-B., Day, T., 2007. Perfect reciprocity is the only evolutionarily
stable strategy in the continuous iterated prisoner’s dilemma. Journal
of Theoretical Biology 247 (1), 11e22.

Apicella, C.L., Marlowe, F.W., Fowler, J.H., Christakis, N.A., 2012. So-
cial networks and cooperation in hunter-gatherers. Nature 481 (7382),
497e501.

Bakermans-Kranenburg, M.J., van IJzendoorn, M.H., 2014. A sociability
gene? Meta-analysis of oxytocin receptor genotype effects in humans.
Psychiatric Genetics 24 (2), 45e51.

Batson, C.D.,

altruistic motivation.

2009. Empathy-induced

In:
Mikulincer, M., Shaver, P.R. (Eds.), Prosocial Motives, Emotions, and
Behavior. American Psychological Association, Washington, DC,
pp. 15e34.

Batson, C., 2011. Altruism in Humans. Oxford University Press.
Batson, C.D., 2012. The empathy-altruism hypothesis. In: Decety, J. (Ed.),
Empathy: From Bench to Bedside. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
pp. 41e54.

Beilin, H., Eisenberg, N., 2013. The Development of Prosocial Behavior.

Academic Press.

Bénabou, R., Tirole, J., 2005. Incentives and Prosocial Behavior. National

Bureau of Economic Research.

Bernhardt, B.C., Singer, T., 2012. The neural basis of empathy. Annual

Review of Neuroscience 35, 1e23.

Brief, A.P., Motowidlo, S.J., 1986. Prosocial organizational behaviors.

Academy of Management Review 11 (4), 710e725.

Bzdok, D., Schilbach, L., Vogeley, K., Schneider, K., Laird, A.R.,
Langner, R., Eickhoff, S.B., 2012. Parsing the neural correlates of
moral cognition: ALE meta-analysis on morality, theory of mind, and
empathy. Brain Structure and Function 217 (4), 783e796.

Bzdok, D., Groß, D., Eickhoff, S.B., 2015. The neurobiology of moral
cognition: relation to theory of mind, empathy, and mind-wandering.
In: Handbook of Neuroethics. Springer, pp. 127e148.

Campbell, J.K., O’Rourke, M., Slater, M.H., 2011. Carving Nature at Its
Joints: Natural Kinds in Metaphysics and Science. MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, MA.

362 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

Cheng, Y., Chen, C., Decety, J., 2014. An EEG/ERP investigation of the
development of empathy in early and middle childhood. Develop-
mental Cognitive Neuroscience 10, 160e169.

Fan, Y., Han, S., 2008. Temporal dynamic of neural mechanisms involved
in empathy for pain: an event-related brain potential study. Neuro-
psychologia 46 (1), 160e173.

Choi, J.K., Bowles, S., 2007. The coevolution of parochial altruism and
war. Science 318 (5850), 636e640. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/
science.1144237.

Fan, Y., Duncan, N.W., de Greck, M., Northoff, G., 2011. Is there a core
neural network in empathy? An fMRI based quantitative meta-
analysis. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 35 (3), 903e911.

Cole, S., 2001. What’s Wrong With Sociology? Transaction Publishers,

New Brunswick, NJ.

Cowell, J.M., Decety, J., 2015. The neuroscience of implicit moral eval-
uation and its relation to generosity in early childhood. Current
Biology 25 (1), 93e97.

De Waal, F.B.M., 2009. The Age of Empathy. Crown, New York, NY.
Dean, L.G., Kendal, R.L., Schapiro, S.J., Thierry, B., Laland, K.N., 2012.
Identiﬁcation of the social and cognitive processes underlying human
cumulative culture. Science 335 (6072), 1114e1118.

Fan, Y.-T., Chen, C., Chen, S.-C., Decety, J., Cheng, Y., 2013. Empathic
arousal and social understanding in individuals with autism: evidence
from fMRI and ERP measurements. Social Cognitive and Affective
Neuroscience. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/scan/nst101.

Ferreira-Garcia, R., Fontenelle, L.F., Moll, J., de Oliveira-Souza, R., 2013.
Pathological generosity: an atypical impulse control disorder after a
left subcortical stroke. Neurocase 20 (5), 496e500.

Gallese, V., Keysers, C., Rizzolatti, G., 2004. A unifying view of the basis

of social cognition. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 8 (9), 396e403.

Decety, J., Cowell, J.M., 2014. The complex relation between morality and
empathy. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 18 (7), 337e339. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2014.04.008.

Helliwell, J.F., Putnam, R.D., 2004. The social context of well-being.
Philosophical Transactions-Royal Society of London Series B Bio-
logical Sciences 1435e1446.

Decety, J., Yoder, K.J., 2015. Empathy and motivation for justice:
cognitive empathy and concern, but not emotional empathy, predict
sensitivity to injustice for others. Social Neuroscience 1e14. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/17470919.2015.1029593.

Decety, J., Lewis, K.L., Cowell, J.M., 2015. Speciﬁc electrophysiological
components disentangle affective sharing and empathic concern in
psychopathy. Journal of Neurophysiology. http://dx.doi.org/10.1152/
jn.00253.2015.

Hikosaka, O., Kim, H.F., Yasuda, M., Yamamoto, S., 2014. Basal ganglia
circuits for reward value-guided behavior. Annual Review of Neuro-
science 37, 289.

Hoult, T.F., 1984. Human sexuality in biological perspective: theoretical
and methodological considerations. Journal of Homosexuality 9
(2e3), 137e155.

Hrdy, S.B., 2009. Mothers and Others: The Evolutionary Origins of

Mutual Understanding. Harvard University Press.

Decety, J., 2011. The neuroevolution of empathy. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences 1231, 35e45. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-
6632.2011.06027.x.

Hwang, E.J., 2013. The basal ganglia, the ideal machinery for the cost-
beneﬁt analysis of action plans. Frontiers in Neural Circuits 7.
http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fncir.2013.00121.

Decety, J., 2015. The neural pathways, development and functions of
empathy. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences 3, 1e6. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cobeha.2014.12.001.

Demurie, E., De Corel, M., Roeyers, H., 2011. Empathic accuracy in
adolescents with autism spectrum disorders and adolescents with
attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder. Research in Autism Spectrum
Disorders 5 (1), 126e134.

Dishion, T.J., McCord, J., Poulin, F., 1999. When interventions harm:
peer groups and problem behavior. American Psychologist 54 (9),
755.

Dorey, J.-M., Beauchet, O., Anterion, C.T., Rouch, I., Krolak-Salmon, P.,
Gaucher, J., Gonthier, R., Akiskal, H.S., 2008. Behavioral and psy-
chological symptoms of dementia and bipolar spectrum disorders:
review of the evidence of a relationship and treatment implications.
CNS Spectrums 13 (09), 796e803.

Dovidio, J.F., Piliavin, J.A., Schroeder, D.A., Penner, L., 2006. The Social
Psychology of Prosocial Behavior. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
Publishers.

Hyman, S.E., 2010. The diagnosis of mental disorders: the problem of

reiﬁcation. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology 6, 155e179.

Ickes, W., 1993. Empathic accuracy. Journal of Personality 61 (4),

587e610.

Ickes, W., 2001. Measuring empathic accuracy. Interpersonal Sensitivity:

Theory and Measurement 219e241.

Kahneman, D., 2011. Thinking, Fast and Slow. Farrar Straus & Giroux,

NY.

Kalev, A., Dobbin, F., Kelly, E., 2006. Best practices or best guesses?
Assessing the efﬁcacy of corporate afﬁrmative action and diversity
policies. American Sociological Review 71 (4), 589e617.

Kean, S., 2015. The man who couldn’t stop giving. The Atlantic.
Retrieved from: http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2015/
05/the-man-who-couldnt-stop-giving/389531/.

Lee, R.B., 1984. The Dobe! Kung. Holt Rinehart & Winston.
Lee, D., 2013. Decision making: from neuroscience to psychiatry. Neuron

78 (2), 233e248. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2013.04.008.

Leslie, A.M., Friedman, O., German, T.P., 2004. Core mechanisms in

Dunbar, R.I., 1992. Neocortex size as a constraint on group size in pri-

‘theory of mind’. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 8 (12), 528e533.

mates. Journal of Human Evolution 22 (6), 469e493.

Lilienfeld, S.O., 2007. Psychological treatments that cause harm. Per-

Dyble, M., Salali, G., Chaudhary, N., Page, A., Smith, D., Thompson, J.,
Vinicius, L., Mace, R., Migliano, A., 2015. Sex equality can explain
the unique social structure of hunter-gatherer bands. Science 348
(6236), 796e798.

spectives on Psychological Science 2 (1), 53e70.

Martin, D., March 1, 2004. Joan McCord, Who Evaluated Anticrime Ef-
forts, Dies at 73. New York Times. Retrieved from: http://www.
nytimes.com/2004/03/01/nyregion/01mccord.html.

Eidelson, R., Soldz, S., May, 2012. Does Comprehensive Soldier Fitness
Work: CSF Research Fails the Test. Working Paper Number 1.
Coalition for an Ethical Psychology, Bala Cynwyd, PA.

Mathur, V., Harada, T., Lipke, T., Chiao, J., 2010. Neural basis of
extraordinary empathy and altruistic motivation. NeuroImage 51,
1468e1475.

Eisenberg, N., Fabes, R.A., Spinrad, T.L., 2007. Prosocial development.
In: Handbook of Child Psychology. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., p. 11

McCord, J., 1978. A thirty-year follow-up of treatment effects. American

Psychologist 33 (3), 284.

Empathy, Theory of Mind, Cognition, Morality, and Altruism Chapter | 21 363

McCord, J., 1979. Some child-rearing antecedents of criminal behavior in
adult men. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 37 (9), 1477.
McGrath, M., Oakley, B., 2012. Codependency and pathological altruism.
In: Oakley, B., Knafo, A., Madhavan, G., Wilson, D.S. (Eds.), Path-
ological Altruism. Oxford University Press, New York, pp. 49e74.
Mendez, M.F., Chen, A.K., Shapira, J.S., Lu, P.-H., Miller, B.L., 2006. Ac-
quired extroversion associated with bitemporal variant of frontotemporal
dementia. Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences 18 (1),
100e107.

Moll, J., de Oliveira-Souza, R., Moll, F.T., Ignácio, F.A., Bramati, I.E.,
Caparelli-Dáquer, E.M., Eslinger, P.J., 2005. The moral afﬁliations of
disgust: a functional MRI study. Cognitive and Behavioral Neurology
18 (1), 68e78.

Moll, J., Krueger, F., Zahn, R., Pardini, M., de Oliveira-Souza, R.,
Grafman, J., 2006. Human frontoemesolimbic networks guide de-
cisions about charitable donation. Proceedings of the National Acad-
emy of Sciences 103 (42), 15623e15628.

Nágera, A.V., 1944. Tratado de psiquiatría. Salvat Editores S. A.
Neuberg, S.L., Cialdini, R.B., Brown, S.L., Luce, C., Sagarin, B.J.,
Lewis, B.P., 1997. Does Empathy Lead to Anything More Than Su-
perﬁcial Helping? Comment on Batson et al.

Riby, D., Bruce, V., Jawaid, A., 2012. Everyone’s friend? The case of
Williams syndrome. In: Oakley, B., Knafo, A., Madhavan, G.,
Wilson, D.S. (Eds.), Pathological Altruism. Oxford University Press,
New York.

Rifkin, J., 2009. The Empathic Civilization: The Race to Global Con-

sciousness in a World in Crisis. Penguin, NY.

Sander, R., Taylor Jr., S., 2012. Mismatch. Basic Books, NY.
Sanstock, J.W., 2007. A Topical Approach to Life-Span Development.

McGraw-Hill, New York.

Schroeder, D.A., Graziano, W.G., 2015. The Oxford Handbook of Pro-

social Behavior. Oxford University Press.

Shamay-Tsoory, S.G., 2010. The neural bases for empathy. The Neurosci-

entist 17 (1), 18e24. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1073858410379268.

Siegal, M., Varley, R., June 2002. Neural systems involved in ‘Theory of

Mind’. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 3 (6), 463e471.

Straubhaar, J., LaRose, R., Davenport, L., 2013. Media Now: Under-

standing Media, Culture, and Technology. Cengage Learning.

Sunstein, C.R., Vermeule, A., 2005. Is Capital Punishment Morally
Required? The Relevance of Life-Life Tradeoffs. U Chicago Law &
Econ, pp. 05e06. Olin Working Paper (239).

Titchener, E.B., 1909/2014. Introspection and empathy. Dialogues in

Neusner, J., Chilton, B., 2005. Altruism in World Religions. Georgetown

Philosophy, Mental and Neuro Sciences 7 (1), 25e30.

University Press, Washington, DC.

Nowak, M.A., Tarnita, C.E., Wilson, E.O., 2010. The evolution of euso-

ciality. Nature 466 (7310), 1057e1062.

Oakley, B., Knafo, A., Madhavan, G., Wilson, D.S. (Eds.), 2012. Patho-

Vischer, R., Fiedler, C., Wolfﬂin, H., Goller, A., Hidebrand, A.,
Schmarsow, A., 1993. Empathy, Form, and Space: Problems in
German Aesthetics, 1873e1893 (H.F. Mallgrave & E. Ikonomou,
Trans.). Getty Center for the History of Art and the Humanities.

logical Altruism. Oxford University Press, New York, NY.

Walter, H., 2012. Social cognitive neuroscience of empathy: concepts,

Oakley, B.A., 2013. Concepts and implications of altruism bias and
pathological altruism. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences 110 (Suppl. 2), 10408e10415.

Oakley, B., 2014. Empathy in academe: on the origins of pathological
altruism. Academic Questions 27 (1), 48e64. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1007/s12129-013-9403-2.

O’Sullivan, S.S., Evans, A.H., Quinn, N.P., Lawrence, A.D., Lees, A.J.,
2010. Reckless generosity in Parkinson’s disease. Movement Disor-
ders 25 (2), 221e223.

Petrosino, A., Turpin-Petrosino, C., Finckenauer, J.O., 2000. Well-meaning
programs can have harmful effects! Lessons from experiments of pro-
grams such as scared straight. Crime & Delinquency 46 (3), 354e379.
Petrosino, A., Turpin-Petrosino, C., Buehler, J., 2003. Scared Straight and
other
juvenile awareness programs for preventing juvenile de-
linquency. The Annals of the American Academy of Political and
Social Science 589 (1), 41e62.

Premack, D., Woodruff, G., 1978. Does the chimpanzee have a theory of

mind? Behavioral and Brain Sciences 1 (04), 515e526.

Prinz, J., 2011. Is empathy necessary for morality? In: Goldie, P.,
Coplan, A. (Eds.), Empathy: Philosophical and Psychological Per-
spectives. Oxford University Press, New York, NY, pp. 211e229.

Psychwikicom. Prosocial

behavior. Retrieved

from:

http://www.

psychwiki.com/wiki/Prosocial_Behavior.

Rameson, L.T., Morelli, S.A., Lieberman, M.D., 2012. The neural corre-
lates of empathy: experience, automaticity, and prosocial behavior.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 24 (1), 235e245.

circuits, and genes. Emotion Review 4 (1), 9e17.

Wilson, T., 2011. Redirect: The Surprising New Science of Psychological

Change. Little, Brown and Company, New York, NY.

Wilson, D.S., 2015. Does Altruism Exist? Culture, Genes, and the Welfare

of Others. Yale University Press, New Haven, CT.

Wright, R., Cummings, N. (Eds.), 2005. Destructive Trends in Mental

Health. Brunner-Routledge, New York, NY.

Wright, R., 1994. The Moral Animal: The New Science of Evolutionary

Psychology. Pantheon Books, New York.

Wu, N., Su, Y., 2015. Oxytocin receptor gene relates to theory of mind and
prosocial behavior in children. Journal of Cognition and Development
16 (2), 302e313.

Zaki, J., Ochsner, K., 2012. The neuroscience of empathy. Nature

Neuroscience 15 (5), 675e680. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nn.3085.

Zaki, J., Bolger, N., Ochsner, K., 2008. It takes two the interpersonal
nature of empathic accuracy. Psychological Science 19 (4),
399e404.

Zaki, J., Bolger, N., Ochsner, K., 2009a. Unpacking the informational

bases of empathic accuracy. Emotion 9 (4), 478.

Zaki, J., Weber, J., Bolger, N., Ochsner, K., 2009b. The neural bases of
empathic accuracy. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
106 (27), 11382e11387.

Chapter 22

Cognitive Ethology and Social Attention

A. Kingstone1, K.E.W. Laidlaw1, E. Nasiopoulos1 and E.F. Risko2
1University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 2University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada

that work were that

INTRODUCTION
The seed for this chapter was originally sown in the 1980s
when the lead author (Alan Kingstone) was an under-
graduate student volunteering in an animal
learning
laboratory that used black hooded rats to investigate the
processes and mechanisms of human cognition. The two
fundamental assumptions of
(1)
humans and other animals have much in common and (2)
by controlling and manipulating the environment of the
latter, and measuring the resultant behavior, one could
discover principles of cognition that scale up and apply to
humans. When Alan Kingstone went to graduate school, he
cut out
the nonhuman middleman and studied human
cognition directly. But the ﬁeld’s basic research assump-
tions were the same: (1) human cognition is subserved by
processes that are stable across different environments (just
as they were assumed to be invariant across different spe-
cies), and (2) one can maximize analytical power in the
investigation of cognitive processes by minimizing all
variability in a situation save for the factor that is being
manipulated.

These working assumptions were best exempliﬁed by
Michael Posner’s book Chronometric Explorations of Mind
(1978), which had established itself as a classic text in the
1980s for those studying human cognition and attention.
According to Posner, the key for revealing the fundamental
mechanisms of the mind and brain was to develop a simple
model task that could be applied broadly with any number
of different populations (eg, infants, aged, patients) and
measures (eg, behavior and brain imaging). For Posner, the
model
task was the attention-cuing paradigm (Posner,
1980), which researchers now call the “Posner paradigm.”
As this paradigm has been used perhaps more than any
other task in attention research (eg, visual search, inhibition
of return, change blindness, etc.), and because it plays a

foundational role in the ﬁeld of social attention research, we
will consider it in some detail.

In the Posner paradigm, a central ﬁxation point

is
ﬂanked by two boxes in the center of a computer screen.
The participant’s task is simply to press the space bar on a
computer keyboard as quickly as possible when a visual
target object appears inside either one of the boxes. This
target object is preceded by what is called an attentional
cue, which is either a brief peripheral ﬂash surrounding one
of the two boxes (Fig. 22.1A), or a central arrow pointing
toward one of the boxes (Fig. 22.1B).

Because the brain processes attended items more quickly
than unattended items, target detection time can be used to
determine where attention is allocated. In the Posner para-
digm, the standard ﬁnding is that target detection time is
faster when a target appears at the cued location (ie, the box
that brightens or is pointed at by the arrow) than the uncued
location (ie, the box that does not brighten or is not pointed at
by the arrow). These results indicate attention being allocated
to the cued location and away from the uncued location.

Despite the common pattern of results generated by
central directional and peripheral cues, the kinds of atten-
tional orienting the cues engage are thought to be very
different. When one of the two boxes is ﬂashed brieﬂy, as
depicted in Fig. 22.1A, people are faster to detect a target in
the ﬂashed box, even when the ﬂash does not predict where
the target will occur (ie, the target appears in the cued box
50% of the time and in the uncued box 50% of the time).
Because participants have no good reason to expect the
target to appear at the cued/ﬂashed location versus the
uncued/unﬂashed location, but they nevertheless shift their
attention to the cued location, researchers have taken this
result as evidence that the ﬂash “pulls” attention to the cued
location in a manner that is beyond the control of the
participant. This type of reﬂexive orienting is often called

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00022-3
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

365

366 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

(A)

(B)

FIGURE 22.1 Examples of a Posner cueing task. Each panel presents three stages of a typical trial: start, cue onset, and target onset. In these examples,
the target (a small black asterisk) demanding a speeded response, appears at either the cued location or the uncued location. (A) The peripheral cue does
not reliably predict where the target will appear; (B) the central arrow cue is spatially predictive.

exogenous, bottom-up, or
stimulus-driven attentional
orienting because the orienting is initiated by an environ-
mental event rather than by the participant.

In contrast, when a central arrow points toward one of
the two boxes, as depicted in Fig. 22.1B, attention is
thought to be oriented volitionally to the box pointed at by
the arrow. This attention shift is considered an endogenous
or top-down form of orienting in that the participant has
some control over the initial orienting behavior. In support
of this view, initial reports (Jonides, 1981) indicated that
when cued by a central arrow, target detection is faster at
the cued location but only when the arrow points to the
location where the target will occur at a rate that is far
above chance (eg, 80% of the time the target appears at the
cued location and 20% of the time in the uncued location).
In other words, because the cue is spatially predictive (eg,
valid 80% of the time) a participant is willing to “push”
attention volitionally to the cued location which in turn
leads to faster target detection at the cued versus uncued
location.

Since the 1980s, countless studies have used this model
task, or some variation of it, to discern the basic mecha-
nisms of exogenous and endogenous attention. These in-
vestigations include, but are in no way limited to, studies
with infants and children, healthy adults and aged in-
dividuals, brain-lesioned patients, as well as single cell and
neuroimaging investigations (see Carrasco, 2011, for a
recent review).

Despite the wide application of the Posner paradigm,
one might reasonably ask: what does detecting a light at a
cued or uncued location have to do with the many rich
experiences that people share every day, such as chatting
with a friend or driving a car to work? On the face of it, the
answer is not very much. Nevertheless, as noted above, the
assumption is that the principles of human attention and
behavior studied in the laboratory using model tasks like
the Posner paradigm will shed light on those cognitive
processes as they operate in everyday situations. In the
words of one of the top researchers in the ﬁeld: “A man
does not use one brain in the laboratory and another in
the rest of his life” (Broadbent, 1971, p. 3). While the
statement is obviously true, it does not necessitate that there
is a direct relationship between the principles inferred from
performance on a simple laboratory task and the principles
governing
everyday
situations.

performance

during

complex

The concern that

laboratory tasks may not capture
important aspects of everyday behavior was addressed by
Kingstone et al. (2003) when they noted that, among other
things, the world that people live in is an inherently social
one, and that
testing people in isolation with simple
arbitrary symbolic stimuli may be, at best, missing a sig-
niﬁcant part of the bigger picture, or at worst getting things
altogether wrong. To illustrate this point, they reported that
strange and unexpected things happen when one introduces
two small modiﬁcations to the Posner paradigm. Generally

Cognitive Ethology and Social Attention Chapter | 22 367

speaking, these changes serve to switch the Posner para-
digm from an asocial task to one that includes some social
context (eg, Friesen and Kingstone, 1998; Driver et al.,
1999; Langton and Bruce, 1999). Their ﬁrst change was to
replace the left and right arrows with a schematic face with
eyes directed to the left or right. The other change was to
eliminate the predictive value of the central cue for the
location of the target, so that participants would have no
reason to attend volitionally to where the eyes were directed
(Fig. 22.2). Note that because the eyes were centrally
the predictiond
located and spatially nonpredictive,
derived from thousands of studies using the Posner
paradigmdwas that participants would not volitionally
shift attention to the cued/gazed-at
location (ie, central
directional cues, like arrows, need to be spatially predictive
to produce orienting; Jonides, 1981).

As an aside, these new social cuing data encouraged
researchers to revisit the original work with the Posner
paradigm, which revealed that contrary to the original
assumption that nonpredictive arrow cues fail to produce
exogenous orienting, it is now generally accepted that they
do, albeit it is generated differently from what is observed
using gaze cues (Friesen et al., 2004; Ristic et al., 2007).
Note the implication of the ﬁnding that nonpredictive ar-
rows produce orienting is that several decades of attention
research and thousands of studies using the Posner para-
digm have been misinterpreting their own results: though
they thought that they were measuring volitional attention
and the brain mechanisms that subserve it, they were in fact
measuring something altogether very different (cf. Ristic
and Kingstone, 2006, 2009, 2012; Olk et al., 2008, 2010;
Olk and Kingstone, 2015).

However,

the results were altogether different from
what was expected. Participants shifted their attention to
where the eyes were directed, despite the fact that they
knew that the eyes did not predict where a target would
occur. Even after receiving hundreds of trials with this
irrelevant
social cue, participants would continue to
shift attention to the location gazed at by the eyes of the
schematic face (ie, targets were detected faster when they
appeared at the location that the eyes looked at rather than
the one to which the eyes were not directed). In short, the
behavioral predictions borne out of research using the
Posner paradigm failed to correctly predict how people
would perform when a simple social modiﬁcation was
introduced. This result seemingly casts doubt on the
prospect
the principles derived from this simple,
Spartan paradigm would scale easily to how attention
operates in our complex, social environments.

that

theories

that will

experimental

and maximizing
can generate

To summarize, attention research has traditionally
sought to simplify the issue of investigation by making the
experimental context both impoverished and controlled.
The hope is that by minimizing the complexity of the
environment
control,
investigators
apply
successfully across different contexts. The Posner cueing
paradigm is a classic representation of this approach. Yet,
as suggested above, the greater promise (ie, general theories
of how attention functions beyond the laboratory) does not
seem to be on the horizon. It is important to note that while
the focus here has been on the Posner paradigm, the same
underlying assumptions form the bedrock of other model
paradigms in cognitive science (eg, visual search, inhibition
of return, oculomotor capture, and the attentional blink
to name some of the more popular model tasks in the
ﬁeld) and as a result they all suffer the same shortcomings.

FIGURE 22.2 Example of a gaze cueing task. Each panel presents three stages of a typical trial: start, cue onset, and target onset. In these examples, the
target (a small black asterisk), demanding a speeded response, appears at either the cued location or the uncued location. Note that the direction of the eye
gaze does not reliably predict where the target will appear.

368 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

is,

That
they all assume that cognitive processes are
relatively stable across situations and as such can be best
understood by simplifying the environment
in order to
impose rigorous experimental control. These assumptions
have justiﬁeddand even necessitateddstudying human
cognition and behavior in extremely controlled, simpliﬁed,
and artiﬁcially contrived laboratory paradigms. But
if
cognitive processes turn out not to be quite as invariant as
assumed and/or some of the features of everyday cognition
that are “simpliﬁed away” turn out to be fundamental, then
this kind of approach is likely to yield “fragile” principles
that fail to predict behavior across a range of contexts. The
example above, involving the theoretical difﬁculties caused
by the simple introduction of an everyday social stimulus
into the traditional Posner paradigm, suggests that,
in
fact, the basic approach might not be yielding the general
principles we had hoped.

Given the difﬁculties outlined above, it might be time
to take seriously the idea that cognitive processes vary
and are affected by what is happening elsewhere within the
cognitive system. As such,
the operation of a given
cognitive process will depend critically on the speciﬁc
situational context
is embedded.
Studying individuals in isolation on simple tasks are
destined to generate principles of cognition that, while
internally valid, lack the ability to survive across different
situations, especially those that occur during the natural
complexities of everyday life.

in which a subject

If

then what are researchers

there are both practical and principled reasons
to conclude that
lab-based studies grounded on the
assumptions of invariance and simpliﬁcation are unlikely to
shed light on cognitive processes as they are expressed in
real-life situations,
to do?
Historically the ﬁeld’s response has generally taken one of
the two forms. One reaction is to deny that there is a problem.
This response enables one to maintain the initial assumption
that cognitive processes are invariant and that our Spartan
tasks are capturing their basic function, and thus allows one
to continue to create and study laboratory-speciﬁc phenom-
enon under the guise that the results are relevant at a broader
level. The other reaction is to acknowledge that there is a
problem, but then continue to conduct research predicated on
the same assumptions. Both responses are what Broadbent
(1991) has called “pathological.”

Occasionally, investigators, such as Donald Broadbent
and Ulric Neisser have tried a third response. They
acknowledged that cognitive processes are inﬂuenced
by situational changes that in many cases are not captured
by the simpliﬁed and well-controlled tasks and worked hard
to bring the implications of this fact to the awareness of
others. But without an alternative research approach,
investigators in the 1990s struggled to avoid slipping
into one of the two pathological responses of the past.
However, alternative approaches are now beginning to

emerge, one of which is called cognitive ethology. We
describe this approach, and some of its ﬁndings, in the next
section.

COGNITIVE ETHOLOGY
The fact
that cognitive processes can change with the
situational context in which a subject is embedded presents
a serious challenge to researchers hoping to generalize their
work to our everyday cognitive lives. In response, many
have chosen to redeﬁne the scope of their research objec-
tives to understanding how a particular phenomenon, such
as inhibition of return, behaves only in a laboratory setting
(Klein, 2000), whereas some have emphasized the impor-
tance of investigating behavior that emerges within more
natural contexts, typically involving a complex analysis of
coordinated sequences of actions (Ballard and Hayhoe,
2009; Ballard et al., 1995; Hayhoe and Ballard, 2005; Land
and Lee, 1994; Land and Hayhoe, 2001; Land and
McLeod, 2000).

In addition to these approaches, others have begun to
embrace the fact
that cognition varies with situational
context and have turned it into the very focus of their
laboratory enterprise, as is the case with some within the
embodied, situated, and distributed cognition traditions
(eg Glenberg, 2010; Hollan et al., 2000; Hutchins, 1995;
Killeen and Glenberg, 2010; Aydede and Robbins, 2009;
Wilson, 2002). Cognitive ethology represents such a
response (Kingstone et al., 2003; Kingstone et al., 2008;
Kingstone, 2009; Smilek et al., 2006). Although the
cognitive ethology approach shares elements with others
that emphasize the need to understand behavior
in
more natural contexts (Ballard et al., 1995; Land and
Hayhoe, 2001), its aim is to provide research scientists
with a methodology for bridging the gap that exists
between uncontrolled real-life phenomena and controlled
laboratory investigation, so that the effect studied in the lab
can make direct and relevant contact with everyday life. In
a nutshell, cognitive ethology proposes that one should
ideally study a phenomenon both as it naturally occurs
within a complex real-world environment as well as in
more simpliﬁed and controlled lab-based situations. By
combining investigations at a more naturalistic level
with those in a more controlled research environment,
one can determine which lab-based ﬁndings are likely
to scale up to a natural environment and which ﬁndings are
speciﬁc to a controlled research environment.

While the general reader might ﬁnd the proposal of
cognitive ethology to be self-evident and simply involve
the application of basic scientiﬁc common sense,
is
instructive
laboratory
research in the ﬁeld of human cognition has been founded
on the critical assumptions that human cognition is
subserved by processes that are invariant across situations.

that historically,

to remember

it

Cognitive Ethology and Social Attention Chapter | 22 369

Taking this as a given together with the notion that
experimental control improves internal validity, it follows
that
those processes are therefore best understood in
simpliﬁed and controlled experimental situations. The
former invariance assumption enables one to conduct a
study in the laboratory and then to propose that the process
being measured will be expressed in everyday life. The
second assumption is derived from the ﬁrst: given that
processes are assumed to be invariant across situations, it
follows that one can reduce situational variability, thereby
maximizing analytical power, without compromising the
nature of the process one is measuring. Together these
assumptions drive a researcher away from the complexities
of everyday life while at the same time enabling one to
make the claim that
the process in question operates
identically in everyday life as in the lab, without any
need or even obligation to test or conﬁrm that the claim is
valid.

In contrast, cognitive ethology rejects the standard
assumption of invariance and the sufﬁciency of using the
simpliﬁed, highly controlled tasks that it engenders for
making claims about human cognition that are likely to
scale up to more naturalistic contexts. In their place, this
approach embraces the notion that cognition and behavior
are highly context dependent and that much can be learned
by observing, describing, and measuring what people do
and experience in an uncontrolled natural situation of
interest. In other words, the approach is characterized by
loosening the assumptions of invariance and the need for
control for the scientiﬁc and objective study of human
behavior under natural conditions. The goal
to
eliminate lab-based studies but to build a clear connection
between what occurs naturally in everyday life and the
experiments that are conducted under more controlled
conditions.

is not

One way to employ a cognitive ethology methodology
is to start with a simple lab study and then steadily increase
the situational complexity to determine if, or when, the
results and conclusions start to change. In our own lab we
have employed such an approach with regard to social
attention. Below, we summarize some of the key ﬁndings
of this work as it progresses systematically upwards in a
range of complexity toward a comparison against real-life
behavior.

COGNITIVE ETHOLOGY: LAB TO LIFE

Images of One Person
When looking at another’s face, ﬁxations tend to cluster
around the internal features, which include the eyes,
mouth, and nose (Henderson et al., 2005; Walker-Smith
et al., 1977). Of these, the eyes are the most frequently
ﬁxated (Henderson et al., 2005; Pelphrey et al., 2002;
Walker-Smith et al., 1977; Yarbus, 1967). That people
show a bias to attend to another’s eyes is not altogether
surprising. After all,
the eyes provide the looker with
valuable social information about a person’s intentions,
emotions, and attentional focus. Indeed, in our lab we
have been hard pressed to ﬁnd a task that gets people to
stop looking at the faces and eyes of the individuals in the
scenes. For instance, Laidlaw et al. (2012) presented
participants with a series of upright and inverted faces.
Participants were simply asked to look at the faces as they
normally would (free-viewing) or
instructed to avoid
looking at either the eyes, or as a control, the mouth. For
both upright and inverted faces, participants showed a
strong bias to attend to the eyes and the mouth during
free-viewing (though the bias was far stronger for the
eyes; see Fig. 22.3). When the participants were instructed

FIGURE 22.3 Heat maps representing average locations of participants’ ﬁxations for upright and inverted faces in Free Viewing, Don’t Look: Eyes, and
Don’t Look: Mouth conditions. Warmer colors denote greater overlap across participant ﬁxations. Adapted with permission from Laidlaw, K.E.W., Risko,
E.F., Kingstone, A., 2012. A new look at social attention: orienting to the eyes is not entirely under volitional control. Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology: Human Perception & Performance 38, 1132e1143.

370 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

the mouth,

to avoid looking at
they were able to do
this without fail, typically by directing their gaze to the
eyes of the faces. However, when instructed to avoid
looking at the eyes, participants were able to eliminate
looks to the eyes for the inverted faces but were not
completely successful when the faces were upright. Taken
together, these results suggest that there is a reﬂexive
tendency to look at
the eyes when a face is upright.
Moreover, as holistic processing is strongest with upright
faces and weaker or even absent with inverted faces
(Yovel and Kanwisher, 2005), it appears that nonvoli-
tionally orienting to the eyes requires holistic face
processing.

That there is a bias to look at the eyes when a face
is presented in isolation begs the question of whether the
bias is still measurable when selection of the feature is
made more complex. When looking at faces in isolation,
holistic face processing may drive ﬁxations to the middle
of peoples’ faces. It follows then that people may attend
to the eyes of others based on convenience: they are the
closest feature to where the eyes naturally land (Andrews
et al., 2010; Bindemann et al., 2009). Alternatively, eye
selection may be so critical
lives that
others have argued for a distinct neural module (for
example, within the superior temporal sulcus, or STS) that
is uniquely tuned to the eyes of others, regardless of how
they are presented on the face, or elsewhere on a stimulus
(eg, Akiyama et al., 2006).

to our social

this bias was also present

A study by Levy et al. (2012) aimed to distinguish
between these two accounts. Observers were presented
with images of people, nonhuman creatures with eyes in
the middle of their faces (“humanoids”), or creatures with
eyes positioned in abnormal locations, such as on their
hands (“monsters”). There was a profound and signiﬁcant
the eyes of
bias toward looking early and often at
humanoids. Critically,
for
looking at the eyes of monsters demonstrating that the
selection bias for the eyes is not for the middle of a
person’s face but for their eyes. These data strongly
support the idea that the human brain is specialized for
acquiring social, behaviorally relevant information from
others: we can quickly, and even nonvolitionally (Laidlaw
et al., 2012), select for the gaze of others, even when the
location of the eyes is atypical. As gaze selection is the
key precursor to gaze following, which is common to both
humans and nonhuman primates,
is reasonable to
this behavior is subserved by a neural
speculate that
system that
is shared across primates (Emery, 2000;
Deaner and Platt, 2003), with both lesion and functional
neuroimaging studies implicating the STS as a likely seat
of this ability (see Birmingham and Kingstone, 2009 for a
recent review; Calder et al., 2007; Campbell et al., 1990;
Heywood et al., 1992; Hoffman and Haxby, 2000;
Kingstone et al., 2004).

it

Images of People
To date the studies we have considered have investigated
how people look at
images depicting isolated faces or
bodies of people (and monsters). Indeed, in the literature
there are very few studies that have examined how people
look at photos that contain people as well as a host of other
things to be ﬁxated (eg, chairs, tables, doors, lamps, and so
forth). Indeed, in many scene perception studies, which
seem ideally suited to test for a bias toward social stimuli,
researchers often exclude social scenes (ie, those containing
people) for fear of those social stimuli unduly inﬂuencing
observers’ attentional allocation. But this ideadthat people
would preferentially attend to other people at the expense
of other visually complex stimulidhad until
recently
remained relatively untested (though see Yarbus, 1967).
More than this, might people preferentially attend to certain
features of people in complex scenes? Stated differently, if
eyes have a privileged status when they are presented as
part of an isolated face or person, is it also the case that they
will be preferentially selected when scene complexity is
increased? To test this within the philosophy of a cognitive
ethology approach of increasing situational complexity,
while also reducing experimental control, we gave people a
host of different social scenes to look at and avoided giving
participants any speciﬁc task (Birmingham et al., 2008a,b).
Speciﬁcally, participants were presented with real-world
photographs of people engaged in a variety of natural
social situations (eg, a person sitting alone or with others
drinking coffee, people looking at and sharing a menu, and
so forth). Their instruction was to simply “look at these
photos the way you normally would.”

Despite the increase in stimulus complexity and decline
in instructional control, the results of this work showed that
observers looked mostly at the eyes, and looked relatively
infrequently at the rest of the scene (eg, bodies, foreground
objects, background objects). These investigations also
found that attention to the eyes of others could be modu-
lated by social factors. For instance, observers selected the
eyes more frequently in scenes high on social content, that
is, scenes containing multiple people doing something
together, as compared to scenes with multiple people not
interacting or scenes with only one individual performing
an activity. In addition, attention to the eyes of others
increased when observers were indirectly prompted to
focus on social aspects of the scene (eg, when asked to
report what the people in the scenes are thinking) relative to
when performing other less socially focused tasks, such as
describing the scenes in general (Birmingham et al., 2008b;
see also Smilek et al., 2006).

Finally, and perhaps most

importantly, Birmingham
et al. (2009) demonstrated that when these complex social
scenes are presented to observers, they quickly ﬁxate the
eyes of the people in the scenes independent of their

Cognitive Ethology and Social Attention Chapter | 22 371

FIGURE 22.4 The general regions deﬁned (eyes, heads, bodies, foreground objects, and background) and their corresponding saliency maps (white
areas indicate regions of higher saliency) overlaid with the ﬁrst ﬁxations (yellow points). Adapted with permission from Birmingham, E., Bischof, W.F.,
Kingstone, A., 2009. Saliency does not account for ﬁxations to eyes within social scenes. Vision Research 49, 2992e3000.

objective stimulus saliency (see Fig. 22.4). This is note-
worthy because until very recently it was held that where
people look could largely be explained by the visual
primitives that are salient in a scene (Itti and Koch, 2000).
The saliency model from Itti and Koch (2000), which was
derived from scenes that rarely contained people, assumes
that where people look in photos is determined by a
“winner take all” visual saliency map (eg,
luminance,
contrast, color in the scenes) above and beyond any other
features of the image. This model suggests that once the
most salient region is ﬁxated, it is inhibited for a period of
time and the next eye movement is made to the next most
salient region, and so forth. The work of Birmingham et al.
(2009) invalidates this saliency model (see also Foulsham

and Underwood, 2007, 2008). Thus by increasing stimulus
complexity and reducing experimental control, a prevailing
model of human attention is found wanting.

As an interesting aside,

this disconﬁrmation of the
saliency model echoes a similar fate to that of the Posner
paradigm. In both cases, substantive methods and models
in the ﬁeld of cognition and attention are found incapable
of accurately predicting performance when a social
element is introduced into the experimental situation. That
said, to date, the research presented here has been a rather
narrow representation of a cognitive ethology approach.
To be sure, we have progressed in terms of stimulus
complexity from photos of faces in isolation to photos of
people with other people, and in terms of experimental

372 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

control we have loosened the grip from telling people
where not to look to instructing them to view stimuli as
they please, but still, the upshot is that the participants are
simply looking at static images on a computer screen.
Therefore the next step was to examine if the bias to look
at the eyes of others persists when participants are pre-
sented with dynamic images (ie, video), and if it does, to
take a step into the real world.

Dynamic Images of People
In real life people move about, they look at each other, and
they talk to one another. As noted above,
to date the
research showing a bias to look at the eyes of people has
been based entirely on static images. What happens when
observers are shown scenes of people moving and
talking? Foulsham et al. (2010) (see also Cheng et al.,
2013) asked precisely this question. Participants watched
videos of different groups of three individuals sitting
around a table discussing a hypothetical situation regarding
the most important items that they would take to the moon
(see Fig. 22.5). What Foulsham et al. (2010) found is that
despite the fact that these groups were highly dynamic,
there was a tremendous consistency in the observers’
looking behavior both in terms of location and timing, with
participants primarily looking at the eyes of the people in
the video. Interestingly, this result held even when the
social status of the people in the scenes was taken into

account. That is, although the people judged to be of higher
status were looked at more than those of lower status, it was
the person’s eyes that observer’s tended to ﬁxate on most,
regardless of their status.

It is also noteworthy that, as was the case with the
Birmingham et al. (2009) studies, these ﬁndings cannot be
explained in terms of basic low-level stimulus saliency,
provided these video stimuli included features like visual
motion and sound onsets. Foulsham and Sanderson (2013)
and Coutrot and Guyader (2014) both investigated whether
looks to the faces and eyes of individuals engaged in
conversation are signiﬁcantly affected by changes in visual
saliency, or whether the audio is present or absent. Their
results indicated that
the addition of an audio track
increased looks to the faces and eyes of the talkers, and also
resulted in greater synchrony for when the observers looked
at the speakers (Foulsham and Sanderson, 2013). Critically,
however, whether sound was present or not, and indepen-
dent of changes in low-level visual saliency (Coutrot and
Guyader, 2014), people spent most of their time looking at
the faces and eyes of the individuals in the videos.

Collectively, these data converge on the conclusion that
there is a preferential bias to attend to the eyes of others,
and this bias generalizes across all levels of complexity,
from static images of single faces to photos containing
multiple people immersed among other objects, to dynamic
scenes of groups of people talking and interacting. This
kind of generalization of what clearly is a rich and robust

FIGURE 22.5 The amount of gaze given to different parts of the people was accomplished by deﬁning moving areas of interest for the eyes and head
(the relative sizes of which are depicted with a diagram of one target in the right panel). The proportion of ﬁxations on each of these regions, averaged
across all observers, is shown in the left panel. Adapted with permission from Foulsham, T., Cheng, J.T., Tracy, J.L., Henrich, J., Kingstone, A., 2010.
Gaze allocation in a dynamic situation: effects of social status and speaking. Cognition 117, 319e331.

effect is quite impressive. And naturally the strong impli-
cation is that what we are ﬁnding in the lab across all these
levels of complexity and control will also be
different
found to occur
the
cognitive ethology approach, however, demands that ﬁnd-
ings in the lab be tested against real life performance, as it
is possible that there are one or more factors in real life that
are not being captured in the lab. As we shall see, this is
precisely the case.

life. The methodology of

in real

initial

they would naturally do. Our

COGNITIVE ETHOLOGY: LIFE TO LAB
According to cognitive ethology, when measuring perfor-
mance at
the real-world level, one wants to minimize
experimental control, thereby freeing the individual to do
what
foray into
research at this level of investigation went as follows. Upon
entering the lab participants were given ﬁve dollars and
asked to walk across the university campus to a cafe and
buy themselves a treat (eg, a pastry or coffee), and then to
return to the lab. The entire journey took about 30 min.
Participants wore an eye tracker that recorded a ﬁeld view
of their trip (video and audio) as well as what they looked at
during the journey. Several days later, participants returned
to the lab and this time they watched videos of their own
walk and the recording from the trip of others, while having
their eye movements monitored. This allowed us to
compare where participants looked when they were actually
walking across the campus versus where they looked when
they were watching a video of the trip.

Cognitive Ethology and Social Attention Chapter | 22 373

Rather, a key difference between watching a person walk
past you in a video, and having a person walk past you in
real life, is that in real life there is the potential to interact
with the person, whereas this is not possible for the person
on the video.

To test this hypothesis, we again applied the cognitive
ethology approach and tried to recreate in the lab the
phenomenon that we had just observed in real life. To do
this we measured participants’ looking behavior as they
were sitting in a waiting room, either in the presence of a
confederate posing as another research participant, or in the
presence of a videotape of the same confederate (see
Fig. 22.6). Thus, the potential for social interaction existed
only when the confederate was physically present. While
wearing a mobile eye tracker, participants waited in a room
for about 2 min, under the guise that the experimenter had
stepped out to collect materials necessary for the study to
begin. In this way, participants were unaware that
the
2-min waiting period was part of the experiment. In the
room, there was either a confederate sitting to their left,
quietly completing a questionnaire, or a video of the same
confederate from a different session playing on a computer
screen to the participants’ right-hand side. The computer
station was set up to look as though a research assistant had
left
the room.
Participants’ eye movements were coded for looks to the
confederate (either videotaped or live; coded for looks to

the video playing and stepped out of

Based on what we have seen so far, the strong predic-
tion is that participants will look at the eyes of the people
on the campus both when they are actually making the walk
across campus, and purchasing their treat, and when they
are watching a video recording of the trip. However, this is
not what Foulsham et al. (2011) found. What we discov-
ered is that when people were watching the video of their
own trip, or the trip taken by someone else, they tended to
look at the peopledespecially their eyes. This is, of course,
exactly what we would expect to ﬁnd based on previous
research. However, this is not exactly what we found for
people who were actually walking across campus. To be
sure, there was a marked tendency to look at people in real
life but this was limited to when they were far away from
the participant. As people came nearer, the participants
would look away. Note this is not what happened when the
same individuals were in the lab and watching videos of
their own trip and that of other participants. When watching
a video, the participants were all too willing to look at
another person as they approached, and then to continue to
look at them while they walked past.

What

is going on? Our intuition, and possibly the
reader’s as well, is that the difference between these two
conditions is not just a difference in stimulus complexity.

FIGURE 22.6 Participants sat in the middle of the room wearing an eye
tracker while either a confederate sat to their left or a videotape of the same
confederate played to their right. Experimental set-up from Laidlaw,
K.E.W., Foulsham, T., Kuhn, G., Kingstone, A., 2011. Potential social
interactions are important to social attention. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 108, 5548e5553.

374 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

the upper body only), or to the baseline object (for those
watching the video, the baseline was the empty chair that
the live confederate would have sat in during the alternate
condition; for those in the room with the confederate, the
baseline was the blank computer screen that would play the
video for other participants).

Although participants frequently looked at the video-
taped confederate, they seldom turned toward or looked at
the live confederate. In fact, relative to the baseline, they
were biased not to look at the real confederate. This is
precisely the opposite behavior
researchers have
observed for images of peopledwhere participants are
preferentially biased to look toward the faces of people
when they are represented in images (eg, Birmingham
et al., 2009; Levy et al., 2012).
these data
demonstrate that the mere opportunity for social interaction
can profoundly alter social attention, with participants
being biased to look away from a stranger.

In sum,

that

Converging evidence for this conclusion comes from a
series of studies using naturalistic observation (Gallup
et al., 2012a,b). For example, Gallup et al. placed an object
in a busy hallway and monitored individual’s gaze behavior
with respect to that object using a hidden camera. The
researchers were interested in the extent to which pedes-
trians would be inﬂuenced by the gaze direction of other
pedestrians (ie, gaze following). Gallup et al. demonstrated
that overall looks toward the object increased when other
nearby pedestrians looked toward the object. Interestingly,
this depended on which way the participant was facing.
When the participant was behind a pedestrian, looks to the
object
increased. When the participant was facing the
pedestrian who gazed at the object, however, participants
were actually less likely to look at the object than if no one
had looked at the object (ie, the baseline condition). Thus,
the gaze of an oncoming pedestrian directed toward a
nearby object appeared to inhibit the likelihood of another
pedestrian directing their gaze to that object. Recall that this
behavior
is the opposite of what one would expect
given the repeated demonstrations in the laboratory that
individuals have a strong (and, some have argued, auto-
matic) tendency to follow the gaze of eyes that are depicted
in a schematic face.

Collectively, these studies have demonstrated that in
live situations the effect of other people’s eyes is the
opposite of what would be expected from laboratory
experiments, where participants are asked to look at pic-
tures or videos of other people. The underlying principle
developed from this work appears to be straightforward:
put a participant in a situation where there is a potential cost
for looking at someone (eg, engaging in awkward conver-
sation) and people will avoid looking at or following the
gaze of other people. Critically, these data suggest that past
studies have, at best, grossly overestimated the effect of
human eyes and faces on attention as it’s realized in more

naturalistic environments, and at worst, got it completely
backwards.

reasoning,

is the normative social context

There is no question from Foulsham et al. (2011),
Laidlaw et al. (2011), and Gallup et al. (2012a,b) that in the
real world people look less at other people, and less where
other people are looking, than laboratory studies would
suggest. What is less obvious is whether this represents a
general principle of looking behavior in natural situations.
Clearly, one possibility is that people always look less at
others in a live situation than conventional studies would
predict. This is certainly what the data suggest. However, it
is worth noting that in the studies by Foulsham, Laidlaw,
and Gallup the social norm was not to engage in a social
interaction (eg, sitting with a stranger in a waiting room as
in Laidlaw et al., 2011). Thus, another possible overarching
principle is that
that
dictates whether one looks at another person. The studies to
date have involved situations where it was simple for
people to construe a negative social outcome for engaging
with another person (eg, an awkward exchange followed by
prolonged silence). Following this
if one
reversed the context
to one where engaging in social
interaction may be concurrent with social norms rather than
opposed, looks toward another person might be enhanced.
To test between these two alternatives, Wu et al. (2013)
observed participants’ looking behavior in a natural situa-
tion, the sharing of a meal, where social interaction would
be in line with social norms (ie, a positive consequence of
social interaction) rather than opposed to social norms (ie, a
negative consequence of social
interaction). Volunteers,
who were under the impression that the study involved taste
perception, were simply asked to sit in a cafeteria setting
and eat a prepared salad and answer a questionnaire
afterward. They sat
in the room either alone, or with
another volunteer (dyads). Unbeknownst
two
hidden cameras were placed in the room, so that their eating
behavior could be recorded and their looking behavior
measured. In this situation, the social consequences of a
social interaction are reversed compared to the context used
by Foulsham, Laidlaw, and Gallup. Unlike being in a
waiting room, for example, in an eating situation the social
norm is to engage in conversation over a meal. Indeed, one
would intuitively think there is now a social cost for not
engaging in interactiondstaring down at your food the
entire meal would seem rude. And indeed, as predicted, Wu
et al. found an increased preference for participants to look
at each other in this situation compared to the data collected
in nonsocial situations (eg, looks between dyads were at
least twice as great as the looks to the real-life confederate
reported by Laidlaw et al., 2011).

it

to them,

These data, when combined with the studies of
Foulsham, Laidlaw, and Gallup suggest
the social
norms of different contexts will precipitate either negative
or positive consequences to engaging in social interaction

that

and social attention will change correspondingly based on
the speciﬁc situation. This notion has led us to a new
framework for understanding social attention.

The Duality of Eye Gaze
To date we have emphasized that
the key difference
between being in the presence of a representation of a
person (eg, a photo or video), and an actual living person, is
that in the former there is no potential for social interaction
and in the latter there is. This distinction, as valid as it may
be, begs the larger question as to why eye gaze between
people is relevant to social interactions.

Our answer to this question began with a consideration
of the morphology of the human eye. The human eye’s
morphology is unique among primates in that it possesses a
white sclera surrounding a darker iris and pupil. As a result
of this high visual contrast, and unlike nonhuman primates,
it is easy to determine where a human being is looking (eg,
Anderson et al., 2011). One provocative proposal is that the
high contrast polarity of the human eye is an evolutionary
adaptation that has facilitated communication between
people (Kobayashi and Kohshima, 1997). That is, unlike
other primates, humans sacriﬁced camouﬂage of
their
looking behavior for the visibility of communication. As a
result we can determine quickly and quietly, and with
remarkable ﬁdelity, where someone else is looking and
similarly, others can quickly and quietly determine where
we are looking. What this means is that human eyes can
serve two distinct functions. They can be directed in the
environment to acquire information in the world, and they
can also be directed to signal information in the world to
others. The dual
summarized
eloquently by Argyle and Cook (1976) when they stated
40 years ago that “Whenever organisms use vision, the eyes
become signals as well as channels” (p. xi). In other words,
the eyes both gather information (ie, act as a channel) and
communicate information to others (ie, act as a signal). This
capacity of human gaze to both acquire and signal
information is what we refer to as the duality of gaze.

function of gaze was

Our hypothesis is that this duality of gaze is critical to
the social interactions between individuals that we have
been concerned with here, and it is why looking behavior
can change so dramatically when people are in the presence
of others compared to simply viewing images of others.
When people are in the presence of images, their eyes do
not signal information, they just acquire it. Thus they are
free to look at
the
additional consideration of what
their eye movements
might be communicating to someone else. In contrast,
when people are in the presence of other people, their eyes
acquire and signal information, and people need to adjust
their looking behavior to accommodate these two, some-
times competing demands.

them without

things that

interest

Cognitive Ethology and Social Attention Chapter | 22 375

There are a handful of recent studies that speak directly
to this point. One comes from an extension of the original
Wu et al. (2013) eating study. In a series of three experi-
ments, Wu et al. (2014) investigated if, and when, humans
signal gaze information to other humans while eating. What
he found is that there is the general tendency for a person to
look away from someone who is about to bite into their
food. Critically, this look away is driven by the eater ﬁrst
signaling with their eyes that they are about to open their
mouth wide and put food into it. Speciﬁcally, what Wu
et al. found is that participants are signiﬁcantly more likely
to look down at their food just before taking a bite when
they are eating with another person versus when they are
eating alone,
indicating an awareness of the signaling
power of one’s own gaze in a social situation. When that
signal was conveyed, the other person would then look
away from the eater. In short, the Wu et al. study provides
the ﬁrst clear evidence that people use their eyes system-
atically to signal to others, and that when this is read by
another,
that signal results in a response behavior that
aligns with a situation’s social norm (eg, it is rude to look at
someone when they open their mouth wide to take a bite
and, therefore, the socially appropriate behavior is to look
away).

Note

again the

a

social norms

importance of

live or videotaped individual

in
looking behavior between individuals, which was ﬁrst
raised in the previous section as a critical factor for whether
people did (Wu et al., 2013) or did not look at a stranger
(Foulsham et al., 2011; Laidlaw et al., 2011) or follow their
gaze (Gallup et al., 2012a,b). A similar normative effect of
gaze was also observed in a study by Freeth et al. (2013),
where
interviewed
eye-tracked participants. While looks to the interviewer’s
face were common in both live and video-taped conditions,
when the interviewer made eye contact, participants in the
live condition were more likely to look at the face and body
of the interviewer
than were those in the videotaped
condition. In the live condition, participants appeared better
able to ascribe the interviewer’s eye contact as a signal that
accompanied with it a normative response to return that
gaze. We argue that not only are people aware of the power
of gaze as a signal, as Wu et al. (2014) demonstrate, but
that people weigh the beneﬁts and costs associated with
signaling one’s own attention. The result of this decision
often might be contingent on how one’s signaling behavior
aligns with perceived social norms within a particular social
context as deﬁned either by the situation (eg, eating vs. a
waiting room) or, as we see next, the very nature of the
relationship between two individuals.

In a single simple study, Jarick and Kingstone (2015)
demonstrated that the effect of eye contact could be quickly
and profoundly altered merely by having participants, who
had never met before, play a game in a cooperative or
competitive manner. After the game, participants were

376 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

asked to make eye contact for a prolonged period of time
(10 min), which is well beyond the natural period of a few
seconds (Argyle and Dean, 1965). The working hypothesis
was that if making eye contact with another person brings
into play the duality of eye gazedthat is, gaze serves to
both read information from, and signal
information to,
another persondand that the nature of this gaze commu-
nication varies with social context, then requiring people to
hold their eye gaze far beyond the comfort zone of a few
seconds should serve to amplify the communication that is
occurring between individuals to the point that it would be
observable in their behavior alone. As shown in Fig. 22.7,
this prediction was conﬁrmed.

The cooperative dyads’ general behavior, presented on
the left of Fig. 22.7, is punctuated by talking, laughing,
smiling, and repeated failures to maintain eye contact for

sustained periods of time, consistent with the notion that
individuals ﬁnd eye contact uncomfortable and thus they
reduce this discomfort by limiting the sending and
receiving of (potentially intimate) gaze signals and distract
themselves with conversation (eg, Argyle and Dean, 1965).
In contrast, the competitive dyads presented on the right of
Fig. 22.7, rarely talk, laugh, or even smile, holding direct
eye gaze with one another for remarkably long sustained
periods of time, with a break in gaze being clearly the
exception rather than the rule. This is consistent with the
idea that within a competitive context, eye contact could be
perceived as a portrayal of dominance (eg, Exline et al.,
1965) and thus these participants performed the task as a
staring contest. Indeed, some of the participants in the
competitive condition did mention the strategy of a staring
contest before the eye contact task. In sum, this simple

Cooperative Dyads

Competitive Dyads

Talk
Laugh
Smile
Eye contact

Talk
Laugh
Smile
Eye contact

Talk
Laugh
Smile
Eye contact

Talk
Laugh
Smile
Eye contact

Talk
Laugh
Smile
Eye contact

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

Time (seconds)

Time (seconds)

FIGURE 22.7 Scarf plots representing the behavioral markers for ﬁve representative dyads in each group who were instructed to maintain sustained eye
contact for the total of 10-min period. Note that some dyads total times are longer than 10 min (600 s) due to the subject-driven breaks in between (eg, to
rub their eyes, laugh, yawn, stretch, ask a question, etc.). Adapted with permission from Jarick, M., Kingstone, A., 2015. The duality of gaze: eyes extract
and signal social information during sustained cooperative and competitive dyadic gaze. Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 01423. http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/
fpsyg.2015.01423.

study stands as a singular demonstration that when two
individuals make eye contact, their gaze serves a commu-
nicative function that is exquisitely sensitive to and shaped
by small manipulations to the social context that forms their
relationship. Just by asking participants to work together on
a puzzle for 5 min, either cooperatively or competitively,
can profoundly alter their ability to sit side by side and look
each other in the eye for a period of time.

Implied Social Presence
In the previous section, we saw how the cognitive ethology
approach, which is designed to compare human perfor-
mance in lab-based and real-world settings, revealed that
the consistent and profound bias to ﬁxate and follow the
eyes of others that are represented in photos and videos is
not replicated in the natural world when the object of one’s
attention are real people (Foulsham et al., 2011). By taking
this initial real-world observation by Foulshamdwhich
you may recall involved individuals walking across campus
to buy a treat at a cafédback into a more controlled
situation, we determined that a critical difference between
“lab and life” is that unlike images of people in the lab, in
the real-world social attention between individuals is a
two-way street, where each person signals as well as reads
gaze information. Moreover, we discovered that the nature
of this gaze signaling changes with the social context as
deﬁned by a situation’s normative rules and the relationship
between individuals.

One interesting anecdotal ﬁnding to emerge when we
were ﬁrst piloting the Foulsham et al. (2011) study was that
several people in the lab self-reported that they felt like they
were monitoring their looking behavior because they knew
that later someone in the lab would see what they had been
looking at. Speciﬁcally, they felt as if they were being
mindful not to look at things that might put them in a “bad
light.” For instance, they might avoid staring at an attractive
person’s behind while walking behind them on campus as
this might violate a social norm (eg, it is not appropriate to
objectify someone by staring at their body). This suggested
to us that people were so aware of the duality of their
gazedthat it both acquires and signals informationdthat
the receiver of the signal did not need to be physically
present to have an impact on where people looked. In short,
merely the implication of a social presence (ie, another
observer) was sufﬁcient for people to change their looking
behavior.

Past work supports

the idea that

implied social
presence might impact behavior (eg, Aiello and Svec, 1993;
Putz, 1975). For instance,
images of eyes can evoke
cooperative behavior in people, augmenting the likelihood
of
from cafeteria tables
(Ernest-Jones et al., 2011) and even inﬂuencing people to
increase monetary contributions toward an “honor box”

individuals cleaning up litter

Cognitive Ethology and Social Attention Chapter | 22 377

system for consuming drinks (Bateson et al., 2006).
Security cameras, which imply the presence of others, also
increase prosocial behaviors such that individuals are more
likely to provide help to others in a public setting with
security cameras versus without (Van Rompay et al., 2009).
Based on these data Risko and Kingstone (2011)
entertained the hypothesis that one’s awareness of gaze as
a signal, combined with the desire to adhere to social
norms, might lead people to change their looking behavior
when they are aware that their eyes are being monitored.
To wit, simply wearing an eye tracker might be sufﬁcient
to imply the presence of another individual and alter
looking behavior. To test this, volunteers came to the lab
and took part in a short sham experiment where they
responded to stimuli on a computer while they sat alone in
a room with the door closed. Mounted on the wall in this
testing room was a sexy swimsuit calendar. After
completing the computer task, participants remained alone
in the room for a short amount of time. It was participants’
looking behavior to the calendar during this free time that
was of interest, and the computer task was simply the
cover story to allow for the measurement of natural
looking behavior toward the calendar.

One group of participants wore an eye tracker that
they believed was turned on and recording their gaze.
Another group wore an eye tracker that they believed to be
turned off. A third group did not wear an eye tracker at all.
A hidden camera concealed in the sexy calendar recorded
looking behavior, which was later coded ofﬂine. The
results, illustrated in Fig. 22.8, were unequivocal. If people
wore an eye tracker that they believed was turned on, they
were disinclined to look at the sexy calendar. If, however,
they wore an eye tracker that they believed was turned off,

FIGURE 22.8 Percentage of participants who looked at the sexy cal-
endar as a function of whether they wore an eye tracker or not, and whether
they believed it to be off or on when being worn. Adapted with permission
from Risko, E.F., Kingstone, A., 2011. Eyes wide shut: implied social
presence, eye tracking and attention. Attention, Perception, and Psycho-
physics 73, 291e296.

378 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

or if were not wearing an eye tracker at all, then they were
all too willing to look at the calendar.

it

This study demonstrates that eye trackers serve as an
implied social presence. More importantly, however, it
shows that people are so aware of the dual function of
their eyes e speciﬁcally that they signal as well as acquire
informationdthat merely an implied social presence of
another person is sufﬁcient
to produce a signiﬁcant
change in looking behavior, with looks conforming to the
situation’s social norm (eg,
is not appropriate to
objectify women). Note that an interesting replication and
extension of this ﬁnding (Nasiopoulos et al., 2015) sug-
gests that self-monitoring one’s looking behavior may be
an effortful process. After wearing an active eye tracker
for
revert back to the
behavior they would indulge in if they thought no one was
watching them (ie, they look at the calendar). Critically,
however, the subtlest reminder of the tracker will reac-
tivate the self-monitoring behavior, speaking again to the
sensitivity that people have to the dual function of their
eyes.

just 10 min participants will

this

A very clever variation of

implied social
presence effect was reported by Gobel et al. (2015). Par-
ticipants consented to be ﬁlmed while they looked at faces
of people of different social rank. In the implied presence
condition, the participants thought that the actual people
whose faces they were looking at would later see their (the
participant’s) ﬁlm. In the no social presence condition the
participants thought that their ﬁlm would be stored away
and not viewed by anyone. Gobel et al. (2015) predicted
that only in the implied social presence condition would
participants consider their gaze behavior as a social signal,
and this would be evident by their looks conforming to the
social norms associated with looking at people of higher or
lower rank (de Waal, 1989; Emery, 2000). For instance, in
the implied social presence condition, participants would
avoid looking at the eyes of higher-ranking individuals. In
contrast, in the no social presence condition they would be
all too willing to look the high-ranking people in the eyes.
This is precisely the pattern of results that Gobel et al.
(2015) discovered.

found that natural

In sum, we have

real-time
social attention between individuals is a two-way street,
where each person signals as well as
reads gaze
information (Wu et al., 2014), and that the nature of this
gaze signaling changes with the social nature of
the
relationship between individuals (Jarick and Kingstone,
2015). This duality of gaze is so powerful, and our
real-world awareness of it is so strong, that it can have a
profound impact on looking behavior even when the person
who might receive that signal is not physically present
(Richardson and Gobel, 2015; Nasiopoulos et al., 2015;
Risko and Kingstone, 2011).

SUMMARY
We began this chapter noting that investigations of human
cognition are normally predicated on the assumption that
cognitive processes are invariant across different situations.
As a result, one can isolate cognitive processes using highly
simpliﬁed model
tasks in controlled lab situations, and
apply the ﬁndings from those studies to more complex
situations. However, we noted that the idea “If A then B” in
the lab does not necessarily mean “If A then B” in complex
everyday environments. A long-standing challenge to re-
searchers has been how to study human cognition without
regressing solely to the simplifying assumption of stability
and the resulting use of simpliﬁed, highly controlled tasks.
One possible solution is to apply an approach we call
cognitive ethology. This chapter has illustrated, with social
attention as the vehicle, how by rejecting the assumption of
stability, loosening control and accepting the possibility
that cognitive processes change across situations, signiﬁ-
cant scientiﬁc insights can be garnered. Speciﬁcally, we
found that initially when running experiments in the lab
using static and video images of people, there was a reliable
ﬁnding that people looked at the eyes of these images and
shifted their attention automatically to where those eyes
were directed. The strong prediction was that in real life
people look at the eyes and orient attention to where those
eyes are directed. Indeed, many researchers have made
precisely this claim.

However, a cognitive ethological approach demands
that one test these lab-based results against the real world.
And it was there that we found patterns of behavior that
were contrary to what had been found in the lab. Rather
than looking at faces of real people as they approached,
people looked away (Foulsham et al., 2011); and rather
than looking at the locations that people were directing
their eyes, observers looked away when they thought their
own actions were also observable by those people (Gallup
et al., 2012a,b). This gave rise to the hypothesis that what
was going on in the real world, and what had been lacking
in the lab, was the fact that in everyday, dynamic envi-
ronments, eyes both take in and signal
information to
others. That is, eyes serve a communicative function of
receiving and sending information.
In contrast, when
looking at images, one’s eyes just take in information.

With this real world behavior in place, and the duality
of gaze concept advanced, we returned to the lab to
investigate the hypothesis while always being on one’s
guard that the real-world effect may be altered when it is
moved into a more controlled setting. The results of these
investigations have given strong support to the duality of
gaze hypothesis (Risko et al., 2016). They also raised the
possibility that the communicative function of gaze is so
pronounced that even an implied social presence is enough

to impact looking behavior, a prediction that has been given
a ringing endorsement (Gobel et al., 2015; Nasiopoulos
et al., 2015; Risko and Kingstone, 2011).

Before closing, we would be remiss if we did not
acknowledge that we are not the only individuals to raise
serious concerns with the external validity and real world
value of simpliﬁed and controlled lab-based investigations
of human cognition. In what follows, we brieﬂy consider
how our cognitive ethology approach is similar to and
distinct from other frameworks.

The Ethological Approach
As the name of our cognitive ethology approach suggests, it
is in some ways similar to the ethological approach, which
gained prominence during the 1960s (eg, Carthy, 1966; see
Hutt and Hutt, 1970 for a review). Ethology focuses on
describing behavior patterns of humans and animals in their
natural contexts. Our approach and the classic ethological
approach are similar in that they both seek to provide a
detailed description of behavior as organisms interact
within their natural environment. Furthermore, both ap-
proaches consider it essential
that natural behavior be
observed and described as it normally occurs rather than
being modiﬁed or probed in overly controlled settings.

There are, however, several critical differences between
the two approaches. The primary difference is that, in our
cognitive ethology approach, as implied by the term
“cognitive,” the aim is to relate the observations to classi-
cally cognitive concepts such as attention. Our approach
views these concepts as being contextualized processes
revealed by the interaction of an individual with their
environment. In contrast, classical ethology was concerned
mainly with overt behavior and did not seek to draw
inferences about cognition.

The Ecological Approach
Our approach is also similar to the ecological approach
developed during the 1950s and 1960s (eg, Barker and
Wright, 1955; Wright, 1967; see Hutt and Hutt, 1970 for a
review). The ecological approach focuses on characterizing
the situations (ie, “habitats”) in which people behave by
observing and describing behavior and seeks to understand
how the environment (ie, “habitat”) relates to or determines
the latter. The primary similarity between this and our
approach is the assumption that characterizing situations is
necessary for understanding human behavior.

However, cognitive ethology differs from the ecological
approach in important ways. First, the approaches differ
with regard to emphasis or relative importance of the
environment and individual. While the ecological approach
places primary emphasis on the habitat, our approach does
require the importance of the habitat to overshadow the

Cognitive Ethology and Social Attention Chapter | 22 379

individual. Second, the approaches differ with respect to
the way they treat subjective reports and personal insights
of the participants in the studies. Though the ecological
approach allowed for considerably more discussion of
peoples’ mental
than the original ethological
approach, particularly those pertaining to the goals of their
behaviors (Wright, 1967), the ecological approach never-
theless focused on inferring such mental states from
observable behaviors. In other words, subjective reports are
not a valid method for inferring mental states within the
ecological approach.

states

In contrast, cognitive ethology considers subjective
reports and personal insights into one’s performance as
providing critical and informative data that must be
accounted for and incorporated into theories and explana-
tions. Indeed, combining objective data and subjective
reports is at
the heart of this approach. An excellent
example is how the anecdotal evidence that people felt like
they were controlling their looking behavior while wearing
an eye tracker during the pilot study of Foulsham et al.
(2011) resulted in a line of research regarding the duality of
gaze and implied social presence (eg, Risko and Kingstone,
2011; Nasiopoulos et al., 2015).

Ecological Optics
The central idea of Gibson’s theory (1950, 1979) is that
perception is driven by the structure of the environment.
The Gibsonian formula is “perception is a function of
stimulation and stimulation is a function of the environ-
ment” (Gibson, 1959, p. 459); therefore, perception is a
function of the environment. The theory is ecological
because it puts a strong emphasis on the environment,
much like the “habitat” in the ecological approach
described earlier.

There are several similarities between Gibson’s approach
and cognitive ethology. The ﬁrst is the idea that individuals
are embedded in an environment and that cognitive concepts
cannot be understood as being independent of that envi-
ronment. The second involves rejection of the assumption
of process stability. Gibson keenly observed that “the
stimulation of receptors and the presumed sensations . . .
are variable and changing in the extreme, unless they
are controlled in the laboratory” (Gibson, 1966, p. 3).
Thus the focus is on naturally occurring variability rather
than variability that
is manipulated or created in the
laboratory.

But

there are also important differences. Gibson’s
framework emphasizes the environment, and little consid-
eration is given to the individual, whereas cognitive
ethology places an equal emphasis on both. Second, the
ultimate goal of Gibson’s
to derive
perceptioneaction laws “of the most basic and general
kind” (Turvey, 1992, p. 86). In contrast, cognitive ethology

framework is

380 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

focuses on describing situations, though general principles
might emerge across different situations (eg, the duality of
gaze (or lack thereof) and situational norms as being a
primary determinant of looking behavior).

Neisser’s Ecological Validity
We enthusiastically agree with Neisser’s (1976) statement
that “a satisfactory theory of human cognition can hardly be
established by experiments that provide inexperienced
subjects with brief opportunities to perform novel and
meaningless tasks” (p. 8). Yet, while Neisser articulated
eloquently the need for more ecological validity, he did not
specify a systematic approach for attaining that ecological
goal. Our formulation of the cognitive ethology approach
articulates the assumptions and principles that must be
applied in order to attain ecological validity. In other
words, whereas Neisser outlined the problem in the ﬁeld,
we believe that we have outlined an approach that goes a
long way toward providing a solution to this problem (see
in detail Kingstone et al., 2008).

CONCLUDING COMMENTS
We follow in the footsteps of William James, Ulrich
Neisser, and others in arguing that the goal of cognitive
research is to understand how attention operates in the real
world and that controlled laboratory studies alone are
inadequate for the task. We suggest that controlled labo-
ratory investigations, and natural real world investigations,
are founded on different principles and each complements
the other. That complementary relationship was highlighted
in the present chapter and through the investigation of
social attention. Lab-based ﬁndings and principles (gaze
selection and following) were found wanting when natural
behavior was observed; but the ideas to emerge (the duality
of gaze) were tested (and continue to be tested) using
controlled experimentation. By moving between levels of
investigation and being aware of what principles are
underlying the research being conducted, we believe that
the cognitive ethology research approach has the potential
to enable researchers to reach their ultimate goal of
understanding human cognition as it operates across levels
of complexity, and ultimately, in everyday life.

REFERENCES

Anderson, N., Risko, E.F., Kingstone, A., 2011. Exploiting human
sensitivity to gaze for tracking the eyes. Behavior Research Methods
43, 843e852.

Andrews, T.J., Davies-Thompson, J., Kingstone, A., Young, A.W., 2010.
Internal and external features of the face are represented holistically in
face-selective regions of visual cortex. Journal of Neuroscience 30,
3544e3552.

Argyle, M., Cook, M., 1976. Gaze and Mutual Gaze. Cambridge University

Press, Cambridge, UK.

Argyle, M., Dean, J., 1965. Eye-contact, distance and afﬁliation. Sociometry

28, 289e304.

Aydede, M., Robbins, P. (Eds.), 2009. The Cambridge Handbook of

Situated Cognition. Cambridge University Press, New York, NY.

Ballard, D.H., Hayhoe, M.M., 2009. Modeling the role of task in the

control of gaze. Visual Cognition 17, 1185e1204.

Ballard, D.H., Hayhoe, M.M., Pelz, J.B., 1995. Memory representations in

natural tasks. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 71, 66e80.

Barker, R.G., Wright, H.F., 1955. Midwest and Its Children: The
Psychological Ecology of an American Town. Harper and Row, New
York.

Bateson, M., Nettle, D., Roberts, G., 2006. Cues of being watched enhance

cooperation in a real-world setting. Biology Letters 2, 412e414.

Bindemann, M., Scheepers, C., Burton, A.M., 2009. Viewpoint and center
of gravity affect eye movements to human faces. Journal of Vision 9,
1e16.

Birmingham, E., Bischof, W.F., Kingstone, A., 2008a. Social attention and
real world scenes: the roles of action, competition, and social content.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 61, 986e998.

Birmingham, E., Bischof, W.F., Kingstone, A., 2008b. Gaze selection in

complex social scenes. Visual Cognition 16, 341e355.

Birmingham, E., Bischof, W.F., Kingstone, A., 2009. Saliency does not
account for ﬁxations to eyes within social scenes. Vision Research 49,
2992e3000.

Birmingham, E., Kingstone, A., 2009. Human social attention: a new look
at past, present and future investigations. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences 1156, 118e140.

Broadbent, D.E., 1971. Decision and Stress. Academic Press, London.
Broadbent, D.E., 1991. A word before leaving.

In: Meyer, D.E.,
Kornblum, S. (Eds.), Attention and Performance, vol. XIV. Bradford
Books/MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 863e879.

Calder, A.J., Beaver, J.D., Winston, J.S., Dolan, R.J., Jenkins, R., Eger, E.,
Henson, R.N.A., 2007. Separate coding of different gaze directions in
the superior temporal sulcus and inferior parietal
lobule. Current
Biology 17, 20e25.

Campbell, R., Heywood, C.A., Cowey, A., Regard, M., Landis, T., 1990.
Sensitivity to eye gaze in prosopagnosic patients and monkeys with
superior temporal sulcus ablation. Neuropsychologia 28, 1123e1142.
Carrasco, M., 2011. Visual attention: the past 25 years. Vision Research

5113, 1484e1525.

Carthy, J.D., 1966. The Study of Behavior. William Clowes and Sons,

London.

Aiello, J.R., Svec, C.M., 1993. Computer monitoring of work perfor-
mance: extending the social facilitation framework to electronic
presence. Journal of Applied Social Psychology 23, 537e548.

Akiyama, T., Kato, M., Muramatsu, T., Saito, F., Umeda, S., Kashima, H.,
2006. Gaze but not arrows: a dissociative impairment after right
superior temporal gyrus damage. Neuropsychologia 44, 1804e1810.

Cheng, J.T., Tracey, J.L., Foulsham, T., Kingstone, A., Henrich, J., 2013.
Two ways to the top: evidence that dominance and prestige are distinct
yet viable avenues to social rank and inﬂuence. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 104, 103e125.

Coutrot, A., Guyader, N., 2014. How saliency, faces, and sound inﬂuence

gaze in dynamic social scenes. Journal of Vision 14 (5), 1e17.

Cognitive Ethology and Social Attention Chapter | 22 381

Deaner, R.O., Platt, M.P., 2003. Reﬂexive social attention in monkeys and

Gibson, J.J., 1979. The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception.

humans. Current Biology 13, 1609e1613.

Houghton Mifﬂin, Boston, MA.

Driver, J., Davis, G., Ricciardelli, P., Kidd, P., Maxwell, E., Baron-
Cohen, S., 1999. Gaze perception triggers visuospatial orienting by
adults in a reﬂexive manner. Visual Cognition 6, 509e540.

Glenberg, A.M., 2010. Embodiment as a unifying perspective for psy-
chology. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science 14,
586e596.

Emery, N.J., 2000. The eyes have it: the neuroethology, function and
evolution of social gaze. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Review 24,
581e604.

Ernest-Jones, M., Nettle, D., Bateson, M., 2011. Effects of eye images on
everyday cooperative behavior: a ﬁeld experiment. Evolution and
Human Behavior 323, 172e178.

Exline, R.V., Gray, D., Schuette, D., 1965. Visual behaviour in a dyad as
affected by interview content and sex of respondent. In: Tomkins, S.,
Izzard, C.
(Eds.), Affect, Cognition and Personality. Springer
Publishing, New York.

Foulsham, T., Underwood, G., 2007. How does the purpose of inspection
inﬂuence the potency of visual salience in scene perception?
Perception 36, 1123e1138.

Foulsham, T., Underwood, G., 2008. What can saliency models predict
about eye movements? Spatial and sequential aspects of ﬁxations
during encoding and recognition. Journal of Vision 82, 1e17.

Foulsham, T., Cheng, J.T., Tracy, J.L., Henrich, J., Kingstone, A., 2010.
Gaze allocation in a dynamic situation: effects of social status and
speaking. Cognition 117, 319e331.

Foulsham, T., Walker, E., Kingstone, A., 2011. The where, what and when
of gaze allocation in the lab and the natural environment. Vision
Research 5117, 1920e1931.

Foulsham, T., Sanderson, L.A., 2013. Look who’s talking? Sound changes
gaze behaviour in a dynamic social scene. Visual Cognition 21,
922e944.

Freeth, M., Foulsham, T., Kingstone, A., 2013. What affects social
attention? Social presence, eye contact and autistic traits. PLoS One
81, e53286. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0053286.

Friesen, C.K., Kingstone, A., 1998. The eyes have it!: reﬂexive orienting is
triggered by nonpredictive gaze. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 5,
490e495.

Friesen, C.K., Ristic, J., Kingstone, A., 2004. Attentional effects of
counterpredictive gaze and arrow cues. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception & Performance 30, 319e329.

Gallup, A.C., Chong, A., Couzin, I.D., 2012a. The directional ﬂow of
visual information transfer between pedestrians. Biology Letters 8,
520e522.

Gallup, A.C., Hale, J.J., Sumpter, D.J.T., Garnier, S., Kacelnik, A.,
Krebs, J.R., Couzin, I.D., 2012b. Visual attention and the acquisition
of
the National
the United States of America 109,
Academy of Sciences of
7245e7250.

information in human crowds. Proceedings of

Gobel, M.S., Kim, H.S., Richardson, D.C., 2015. The dual function of

social gaze. Cognition 136, 359e364.

Gibson, J.J., 1950. The Perception of the Visual World. Houghton Mifﬂin,

Boston, MA.

Gibson, J.J., 1959. Perception as a function of stimulation. In: Koch, S.
(Ed.), Psychology: A Study of Science, Study I. Conceptual and
Systematic, Sensory, Perceptual and Physiological Formulations, vol.
1. McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, pp. 456e501.

Gibson, J.J., 1966. The Senses Considered as Perceptual Systems.

Houghton Mifﬂin, Boston, MA.

Hayhoe, M., Ballard, D., 2005. Eye movements in natural behavior.

Trends in Cognitive Science 9, 188e194.

Henderson, J.M., Williams, C.C., Falk, R., 2005. Eye movements are

functional during face learning. Memory & Cognition 33, 98e106.

Heywood, C.A., Cowey, A., Rolls, E.T., 1992. The role of the face cell
area in the discrimination and recognition of faces by monkeys.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 335, 31e38.

Hoffman, E.A., Haxby, J.V., 2000. Distinct

representations of eye
gaze and identity in the distributed human neural system for face
perception. Nature Neuroscience 3, 80e84.

Hollan, J., Hutchins, E., Kirsh, D., 2000. Distributed cognition: toward
a new foundation for human-computer
interaction research.
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 72,
174e196.

Hutchins, E., 1995. Cognition in the Wild. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Hutt, S.J., Hutt, C., 1970. Direct Observation and Measurement of

Behavior. Charles C. Thomas Publisher, Springﬁeld, IL.

Itti, L., Koch, C., 2000. A saliency-based search mechanism for overt
and covert shifts of visual attention. Vision Research 40, 1489e1506.
Jarick, M., Kingstone, A., 2015. The duality of gaze: eyes extract and
signal social information during sustained cooperative and competitive
dyadic gaze. Frontiers in Psychology 6 (01423). http://dx.doi.org/
10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01423.

Jonides, J., 1981. Voluntary versus automatic control over the mind’s
eye’s movement. In: Long, J.B., Baddeley, A.D. (Eds.), Attention and
Performance, vol. IX. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ, pp. 187e203.

Killeen, P.R., Glenberg, A.M., 2010. Resituating cognition. Comparative

Cognition & Behavior Reviews 5, 59e77.

Kingstone, A., 2009. Taking a real

look at social attention. Current

Opinion in Neurobiology 19, 52e56.

Kingstone, A., Smilek, D., Ristic, J., Friesen, C.K., Eastwood, J.D., 2003.
Attention, researchers! It is time to take a look at the real world.
Current Directions in Psychological Science 12, 176e180.

Kingstone, A., Smilek, D., Eastwood, J.D., 2008. Cognitive Ethology: a
new approach for studying human cognition. British Journal of Psy-
chology 99, 317e345.

Kingstone, A., Tipper, C., Ristic, J., Ngan, E., 2004. The eyes have it!: an

fMRI investigation. Brain & Cognition 55, 269e271.

Klein, R.M., 2000. Inhibition of return. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 44,

138e147.

Kobayashi, H., Kohshima, S., 1997. Unique morphology of the human

eye. Nature 387, 767e768.

Laidlaw, K.E.W., Foulsham, T., Kuhn, G., Kingstone, A., 2011. Potential
social interactions are important to social attention. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 108,
5548e5553.

Laidlaw, K.E.W., Risko, E.F., Kingstone, A., 2012. A new look at social
attention: orienting to the eyes is not entirely under volitional control.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception & Perfor-
mance 38, 1132e1143.

Land, M.F., Hayhoe, M., 2001.

In what ways do eye movements
contribute to everyday activities? Vision Research 4125, 3559e3565.

382 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

Langton, S.R.H., Bruce, V., 1999. Reﬂexive social orienting. Visual

Cognition 6, 541e567.

Land, M.F., Lee, D.N., 1994. Where we look when we steer. Nature 369,

742e744.

Land, M.F., McLeod, P., 2000. From eye movements to actions: how

batsman hit the ball. Nature Neuroscience 3, 1340e1345.

Levy, J., Foulsham, T., Kingstone, A., 2012. Monsters are people too.

Biology Letter 9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsbl.2012.0850.

Nasiopoulos, E., Risko, E.F., Foulsham, T., Kingstone, A., 2015. Wear-
able computing: will it make people prosocial? British Journal of
Psychology 106, 209e216.

Neisser, U., 1976. Cognition and Reality. Freeman, San Francisco, CA.
Olk, B., Cameron, B., Kingstone, A., 2008. Enhanced orienting effects:
evidence for an interaction principle. Visual Cognition 16, 979e1000.
Olk, B., Hildebrandt, H., Kingstone, A., 2010. Involuntary but not
voluntary orienting contributes to a disengage deﬁcit in visual neglect.
Cortex 46, 1149e1164.

Ristic, J., Wright, A., Kingstone, A., 2007. Attentional control and
reﬂexive orienting to gaze and arrow cues. Psychonomic Bulletin and
Review 14, 964e969.

Ristic, J., Kingstone, A., 2006. Attention to arrows: pointing to a new
direction. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 59,
1921e1930.

Ristic, J., Kingstone, A., 2009. Rethinking attentional development: re-
ﬂexive and volitional orienting in children and adults. Developmental
Science 12, 289e296.

Ristic, J., Kingstone, A., 2012. A new form of human spatial attention:

automated symbolic orienting. Visual Cognition 20, 244e264.

Van Rompay, T.J., Vonk, D.J., Fransen, M.L., 2009. The eye of the
camera effects of security cameras on prosocial behavior. Environ-
ment and Behavior 41, 60e74.

Smilek, D., Enns, J.T., Eastwood, J.D., Merikle, P.M., 2006. Relax!
Cognitive style inﬂuences visual search. Visual Cognition 14,
543e564.

Olk, B., Kingstone, A., 2015. Attention and aging: measuring effects of
involuntary and voluntary orienting in isolation and in combination.
British Journal of Psychology 106, 235e252.

Turvey, M.T., 1992. Ecological foundations of cognition. In: Pick Jr., H.L.,
van den Broek, P., Knill, D.C. (Eds.), Cognition: Conceptual and
Methodological Issues. APA, Washington, DC, pp. 85e117.

Pelphrey, K.A., Sasson, N.J., Reznick, J.S., Paul, G., Goldman, B.D.,
Piven, J., 2002. Visual scanning of faces in autism. Journal of Autism
and Developmental Disorders 32, 249e261.

de Waal, F.B.M., 1989. Chimpanzee Politics: Power and Sex Among

Apes. John Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD.

Walker-Smith, G., Gale, A.G., Findlay, J.M., 1977. Eye movement stra-

Posner, M.I., 1978. Chronometric Explorations of Mind. Erlbaum, Hill-

tegies involved in face perception. Perception 6, 313e326.

sdale, NJ.

Wilson, M., 2002. Six views of embodied cognition. Psychonomic

Posner, M.I., 1980. Attention and the detection of signals. Journal of

Bulletin & Review 9, 625e636.

Experimental Psychology: General 109, 160e174.

Putz, V.R., 1975. The effects of different modes of supervision on vigi-

lance behaviour. British Journal of Psychology 66, 157e160.

Wright, H.F., 1967. Recording and Analyzing Child Behavior with
Ecological Data from an American Town. Harper and Row, New
York.

Richardson, D.C., Gobel, M.S., 2015. Social attention. In: Fawcett, J.,
Risko, E., Kingstone, A. (Eds.), The Handbook of Attention. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.

Wu, D.W.-L., Bischof, W.F., Kingstone, A., 2013. Looking while eating:
the importance of social context to social attention. Scientiﬁc Reports
3, 2356. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/srep02356.

Risko, E.F., Kingstone, A., 2011. Eyes wide shut: implied social presence,
eye tracking and attention. Attention, Perception, and Psychophysics
73, 291e296.

Wu, D.W.-L., Bischof, W.F., Kingstone, A., 2014. Natural gaze
signaling in a social context. Evolution & Human Behavior 35,
211e218.

Risko, E.F., Richardson, D.C., Kingstone, A., 2016. Breaking the fourth
wall of cognitive science: real world social attention and the dual
function of gaze. Current Directions in Psychological Science 25,
70e74.

Yarbus, A.L., 1967. Eye Movements and Vision (B. Haigh, Trans.).

Plenum Press, New York. Original work published 1965.

Yovel, G., Kanwisher, N., 2005. The neural basis of the behavioral

face-inversion effect. Current Biology 15, 2256e2262.

Chapter 23

Human Sociobiology and Group
Selection Theory

J. Alcock
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, United States

trait

for example,

(Alcock, 2001). So,

WHAT IS HUMAN SOCIOBIOLOGY?
Human sociobiology is an academic discipline whose
practitioners employ what has been called the adaptationist
program (Gould and Lewontin, 1979)
to explore the
evolutionary basis of human social behavior. The adapta-
tionist approach is one in which researchers use Darwinian
natural selection theory to advance and test hypotheses on
the possible adaptive (ie, reproductive) value of a particular
behavioral
the
observation that men appear to be selective in their choice
of mates leads to the adaptationist prediction that men will
ﬁnd young women at peak fertility more attractive than
women who are older. Female fertility peaks in the mid-
twenties and declines rapidly, especially after age 35
(Menkin et al., 1986). This prediction can be checked in
many ways, such as by examining the age at marriage of
men and their partners. As expected, men from many cul-
tures typically marry women who are younger than they
are (Buss, 1989) and so should succeed in having more
offspring overall on average than men who marry women
who are older, which as predicted, rarely occurs. (Ac-
cording to census data from the United States only about
14% of all wives are two years or older than their spouses;
http://economix.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/04/01/on-
see
whether-women-can-or-do-marry-younger-men/.)
The
mating preferences of men and women, an important aspect
of our social behavior, has been subjected to intensive
analysis by persons aware of Darwinian selection with
generally supportive results
(Buss, 2013; Buss and
Schmidt, 1993; Kenrick, 2011).

Human sociobiology can be said to be similar, if not
identical, to other evolutionary subdisciplines that also are
founded on natural selection theory, especially evolu-
tionary psychology, evolutionary anthropology and human

behavioral ecology (Daly and Wilson, 1999). True, there
are some differences between, say, human behavioral
ecology and evolutionary psychology, as in the emphasis in
the ﬁrst discipline on measuring the current reproductive
success of individuals exhibiting a putative behavioral
adaptation versus demonstrating that a psychological trait
appears to be designed to solve a reproductive problem that
would have confronted our ancestors, a major goal of
evolutionary psychologists (Smith et al., 2001). Even so, all
these academic disciplines can be accommodated under the
umbrella of behavioral ecology: the discipline that employs
adaptationism in the study of the behavior of all living
things in relation to their environment. The distinctive
feature of human sociobiology and allied disciplines is the
focus on a single organism, the human species, but the
research approach that underlies all these ﬁelds is essen-
tially the same as that applied to the behavioral ecology of
creatures as different as slime molds, parasitic plants, and
prairie voles, to name a few.

THE FIRST WAVE OF CRITICISMS OF
SOCIOBIOLOGY
Despite the broad-based nature of the adaptationist program
and its long use by researchers, persons applying this
approach to the study of human behavior have come under
ﬁre from their fellow academics. E.O. Wilson (1994) was
immediately attacked, verbally and physically, by persons
who strongly disapproved of the human component to the
ﬁeld of sociobiology that he named in 1975. His col-
leagues, Stephen Jay Gould and Richard Lewontin, were
prominent among those who vehemently disparaged the
discipline and Wilson: “These [discredited early ‘evolu-
tionary’] theories provided an important basis for the

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00023-5
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

383

384 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

enactment of sterilization laws and restrictive immigration
laws by the United States between 1910 and 1930 and
also for the eugenics policies which led to the establish-
ment of gas chambers in Nazi Germany. The latest attempt
to reinvigorate these tired theories comes with the
alleged creation of a new discipline, sociobiology” (Allen
et al., 1975).

Subsequent to the initial attacks on sociobiology, Gould
and Lewontin (1979) wrote an extremely inﬂuential article
(over 2500 citations as of late 2013) in which they criti-
cized the entire adaptationist program on various grounds,
but especially because adaptationists supposedly did not
follow scientiﬁc principles in their work and instead
accepted hypotheses (“just so stories” in Gould and Lew-
ontin’s labeling) without testing them. Similarly, evolu-
tionary psychologists have come in for their share of
criticism and then some (Buller, 2005; Ehrlich, 2000;
Gannon, 2002; Rose and Rose, 2000).

Needless to say, these criticisms did not go unnoticed
by sociobiologists and others who employ the adaptationist
program (Alcock, 2001; Buss and Haselton, 2005; Hagen,
2005; Kenrick, 1995). Among the responses given by ad-
herents of adaptationism was the point that “just so story” is
merely another, albeit disparaging, name for a possible
explanation (or hypothesis) and that sociobiological jour-
nals have always published articles that present data
designed to test hypotheses to determine if they are likely to
be true or false. In this the sociobiologist is no different
from any other scientist.

it

The advocates of sociobiology have also pointed out
that many of the critiques of the ﬁeld are based on a failure
to understand the difference between explanation and
justiﬁcation. All scientiﬁc research is aimed at explaining
something, not justifying the characteristic under investi-
gation. If a human sociobiologist concludes that
is
adaptive for men to behave in ways that increase their
chances of copulating with highly fertile women,
the
researcher is not arguing that this aspect of male behavior is
morally or socially desirable. Instead the researcher is
attempting to understand why men behave the way they do,
not to justify what may well lead individuals to engage in
immoral or socially damaging behavior. The difference
between explanation and justiﬁcation is easily understood
when the subject organism is a slime mold or elephant seal,
but critics of the application of evolutionary theory to hu-
man behavior often either fail to grasp the distinction or try
to blur it so as to paint the adaptationist as an apologist for
actions that most people consider wrong.

The human sociobiologist approaches human social
behavior in the same way that behavioral ecologists and
other evolutionary researchers study the possible adaptive
value of the behavior of slime molds and elephant seals. If
this approach, based on natural selection theory, works for
slime molds and elephant seals, then why not tackle human

behavior in the same way? We are an animal species. Our
gametes have DNA in them. When individuals attempt to
reproduce, their special DNA may or may not be passed on
to the next generation. Because natural selection must have
acted on human genetic variation in the past, we can expect
humans to behave in ways today that would have promoted
the transmission of those forms of genes that were associ-
ated with reproductive success in the past. This is a
potentially testable proposition. If wrong, suitable tests will
reveal
the error made by the human sociobiologist or
evolutionary psychologist.

Most evolutionary biologists, a subset of psychologists
and a number of sociologists have considered and rejected
the early criticisms of the application of adaptationism to
the study of human behavior (eg, Confer et al., 2010).
Despite the barrage of such criticism that sociobiologists
faced in the 1970s and 1980s, and that evolutionary psy-
chologists have had to cope with more recently, these ﬁelds
are ﬂourishing. For example, both in textbooks and in a
major psychology journal, there have been substantial in-
creases in the number of articles on evolutionary psychol-
ogy in recent years (Webster, 2007; see also http://bit.ly/
KZAaZw). Although there may still be pockets of resis-
tance, perhaps especially among the social sciences, it is
fair to say that the adaptationist approach has carried the
day (Alcock, 2001; Dunbar and Barrett, 2007; Lopreato
and Crippen, 1999). I shall now focus on another kind of
argument that has been and continues to be raised against
the adaptationist approach to humans (and other species). I
speak of the claim that some evolutionists have improperly
ignored an important novel theoretical approach, one based
on the occurrence of “multilevel” selection. Acceptance of
this approach would, according to its adherents, require a
major reevaluation of the adaptive basis of social behavior,
including that of humans.

KIN SELECTION AND HUMAN
SOCIOBIOLOGY
When developing hypotheses on the behavior of humans
and other animals, adaptationists have, as noted earlier,
usually tried to explain why a given behavior might
contribute to the reproductive success of individuals of
the species under examination. This approach has been
productive inasmuch as tests of particular adaptive value
hypotheses have often led researchers to conclude that the
evolved function of the trait is indeed to help individuals
reproduce successfully in an unconscious competition
with other members of their species. For example, the
male desire to copulate with and marry young women as
opposed to older ones generally leads men to seek out
highly fertile partners as opposed to less fertile ones. The
result: a greater chance of partner pregnancies and greater
lifetime reproductive success for the men so motivated.

Human Sociobiology and Group Selection Theory Chapter | 23 385

There are cases in which animals appear to give up
chances to reproduce personally in favor of helping others
in ways that might well boost the reproductive output of the
helped individuals. These cases, needless to say, create
problems for the adaptationist. How could cooperative
behavior of this sort persist in populations subject to natural
selection? And cases of self-sacriﬁcing behavior are not all
that uncommon in the animal kingdom in general,
including the human species. The evolutionary biologist
W.D. Hamilton (1964) is usually credited with a solution to
the puzzle that has become widely accepted, a solution that
rests upon an amended version of natural selection theory
usually called kin selection or inclusive ﬁtness theory.
According to this theory, the ultimate unconscious goal of
individuals is not really to reproduce personally more than
others of their species but to pass on more of their genes
to the next generation than their “rivals.” The direct way to
make a genetic contribution to the next generation is to
have an offspring that survives long enough to also
reproduce. The parent donates genes to its offspring and
these may have a chance to be copied and transmitted in the
next generation. Only genes that make it from one gener-
ation to the next can inﬂuence the development of in-
dividuals in the next generation.

But in addition to the direct contribution of genes via
personal reproduction, individuals might in some instances
help genetically similar others to reproduce, in which case
the helpful altruist might contribute to passing on the genes
it shares with the individual it helped. Relatives share genes
in common (thanks to shared ancestors) and therefore an
organism that gives up a chance to reproduce personally
could conceivably pass on more of its genes by boosting
the reproductive success of a relative. What is required is
that the helped relative increase its reproduction sufﬁciently
to more than compensate the helper for its loss of personal
reproduction. Kin selection has its effect, like natural se-
lection, via selection at the level of the gene. Kin selection
can lead to changes in gene frequencies that arise as a result
of relatives helping (or harming) each other in ways that
affect the opportunities for transmission of their special
DNA to the next generation.

Hamilton realized that the indirect route to genetic prop-
agations was just another way for an individual to help pass
his or her genes into the future, the sum total of which
constituted that individual’s inclusive ﬁtness (direct ﬁtness
plus indirect ﬁtness). This insight was greatly appreciated by
behavioral ecologists, including human sociobiologists, who
saw that they had a possible explanation for the evolution of
otherwise puzzling behaviors, namely helpful self-sacriﬁcing
actions whose cost in loss of direct ﬁtness could be demon-
strated to be less than the gain in indirect ﬁtness, leading to an
overall increase in that individual’s inclusive ﬁtness.

As others have pointed out (Gardner et al., 2011),
Darwin anticipated Hamilton’s solution even though he,

Darwin, knew nothing about genes. But he did know that
cattle breeders could select for desirable traits in cattle by
breeding the relatives of those individuals with the char-
acteristics (eg, densely muscled, meaty bodies) that they
wanted to see in the next generation of beef cows (Darwin,
1859). Hamilton had the beneﬁt of being a 20th century
biologist for whom the concept of genes was familiar.
Because he realized that the genetic currency of selection
was the same whether individuals reproduced personally or
helped their relatives reproduce, he made the inclusive
ﬁtness breakthrough.

GROUP SELECTION AND HUMAN
ALTRUISM
David Sloan Wilson (1975) and co-authors (eg, (2008))
have for many years now made the case that adaptationists
are far too narrowly focused on the theory of evolution by
natural selection at the level of the individual. It is not
enough, they argue, to have natural selection acting on
differences in reproductive success at the individual level
and kin selection acting on differences in the indirect ﬁtness
of individuals that help relatives reproduce. For multilevel
selectionists, selection can act at the level of the gene, the
individual, and the group. According to these theorists,
there are some behavioral attributes, especially cooperation
and altruism among individuals,
that cannot be fully
explained without
reference to the group selectionist
component of multilevel selection, namely selection that
acts on differences in the genetic success of entire groups of
individuals.

For adaptationists using inclusive ﬁtness theory, evo-
lution could have been shaped by natural selection acting
on reproductive differences among individuals within
groups and by kin selection acting on differences among
individuals in their effects on the reproductive success of
genetically similar others.
In contrast, D.S. Wilson’s
multilevel selection theory involves two components of
selection, one occurring within groups and another occur-
ring between groups, each with their own effects on the
transmission of genes to the next generation. However, as
Reeve (2000) and others (eg, West et al., 2011) make clear,
inclusive ﬁtness theory and multilevel theory are merely
different ways in which to cut up the same genetic pie
because in the last analysis evolution occurs only when the
processes of selection change the frequency of genes within
populations. According to Reeve (2000), “That is essen-
tially all there is to the mathematical relationship between
inclusive ﬁtness and multi-level selection modelsdthey are
essentially equivalent, their only differences being deﬁni-
tional.” For example, group selectionists treat groups
composed of relatives in terms of their total genetic con-
tributions to the next generation whereas inclusive ﬁtness
theorists
family groups as an aggregation of

treat

386 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

individuals, each with its own genetic success. However,
Wilson and his colleagues have insisted that despite the
mathematical equivalence of inclusive ﬁtness theory and
their version of group selection is
multilevel
essential
the evolution of
cooperation.

theory,
for a proper analysis of

WHY HAVE WILSON’S VIEWS ON THE
IMPORTANCE OF MULTILEVEL
SELECTION BEEN LARGELY IGNORED BY
EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGISTS?
There is little doubt that many animal species, including of
course humans, live in groups and that in effect, some
groups outcompete others, even destroying rival groups
altogether. This is true, for example, in ants and termites in
which founding females (and their partners in the case of
termites) form small colonies that may succeed in killing or
absconding with the members of nearby colonies (eg,
Hölldobler and Wilson, 1990; Rissing and Pollock, 1987).
Needless to say, similar behavior occurs in human societies
that have engaged in genocide and slavery now and in the
recent past (and by extension long ago) as some groups and
tribes have wiped others out completely (Diamond, 1992).
It is appealing to think that selection can occur at the
group level as groups within a species eliminate other
groups,
thereby affecting the transmission of genes to
subsequent generations (to the extent that groups differ
genetically). Even Darwin (1859) appeared to have
accepted that humans were potentially subject to group
selection, although he did not call it that, simply noting that
tribes with altruistic members who behaved morally
(nicely) toward each other might well outcompete tribes of
a less “moral” nature.

And D.S. Wilson has convinced some prominent bi-
ologists that he is right about the role of group selection in
shaping the social behavior of animals, including humans.
Among these recruits is none other than E.O. Wilson (not a
relative) who has become a strong advocate of multilevel
selection (Wilson and Wilson, 2007, 2008). Even so, the
vast majority of human sociobiologists and behavioral
ecologists in general have not come around. Why not?

There are several major reasons why group selection
theory has not become a driver of research on the social
behavior of humans and other animals. The ﬁrst reason has
to do with the history of group selection theory. As D.S.
Wilson is fond of noting, most of today’s biologists have
been inﬂuenced directly or indirectly by George C. Wil-
liams’s book Adaptation and Natural Selection in which he
explained why group-level explanations for social behavior
were almost certainly either wrong or unnecessary.
Williams (1966) wrote his book in response to the common
view at the time that hypotheses about the group or species

beneﬁts of a variety of traits were Darwinian. He showed
his readers that they were not.

I was one of

those readers who eventually read
Adaptation and Natural Selection but only after I had as
an undergraduate at Amherst College ﬁrst read V.C.
Wynne-Edwards’s huge book Animal Dispersion in
Relation to Social Behavior, a book I found fascinating
and wholly persuasive. Wynne-Edwards (1962) began his
book with an analysis of the whaling industry in North
America. He pointed out that because whalers failed to
conserve the resource on which their industry was foun-
ded, whalers effectively went extinct having so reduced
the populations of right whales, blue whales, and sperm
whales among others that there were insufﬁcient numbers
of prey to sustain whale hunting. His point was that unless
animal species had evolved restraints on their utilization of
key resources, they too would have gone extinct. He then
proceeded for hundreds of pages to interpret the social
interactions of animals as the means by which these spe-
cies had evolved the necessary social behaviors to keep
them from overpopulating the world and driving them-
selves into extinction. For example, when hordes of star-
lings gather together and engage in mass ﬂights at certain
times of the year, Wynne-Edwards proposed that
they
were providing one another with the information about the
size of the local population of their species so that when
the birds reproduced,
their breeding
activities to maintain their numbers at a level consonant
with the carrying capacity of the area. Individual birds
might lower their clutch size or refrain from breeding
altogether if the group was on the verge of getting too
large, a decision that would be good for all those depen-
dent on a limited resource. Similarly, Wynne-Edwards
noted that in territorial species, individuals that failed to
secure a suitable breeding site would sit out the breeding
season altogether rather than go on to reproduce. Their
failure to breed contributed to the overall production of
offspring at an appropriate level, according to Wynne-
Edwards, a level that did not constitute a threat to the
well-being of the species as a whole.

they could adjust

about

these

ideas, which I

When I talked to my undergraduate advisor Lincoln
enthusiastically
Brower
recounted to him, I was shocked when he told me that he
and most other biologists were not similarly persuaded that
individuals would sacriﬁce their reproductive chances to
beneﬁt their local population or species. Instead, I learned
the essence of Williams’s counter-argument from Brower,
which in a nutshell was that if there really were individuals
that reduced their production of surviving offspring to
beneﬁt others, they would in effect be committing genetic
suicide. The special alleles that predisposed individuals to
behave altruistically for the general good would be quickly
lost from the population through the reproductive restraint
exhibited by these genetically suicidal altruists.

Human Sociobiology and Group Selection Theory Chapter | 23 387

As my advisor pointed out, the logic of Williams’s
argument was overwhelming. Instead of positing that such
and such a social trait helped the species survive, something
that was done often in the mid-20th century and far more
casually by persons other than Wynne-Edwards, the logic
of Darwinian natural selection theory suggested that bi-
ologists would be better served by trying to develop hy-
potheses about the beneﬁt to the individual and its genes of
the trait in question. If starlings really did engage in mass
ﬂights that reduced how many eggs individuals laid at a
later date, one possible explanation consistent with natural
selection is that the birds reduced their reproduction so as
not to have most or all of their nestlings die of starvation.
By cutting back, the birds might maximize the number of
surviving offspring they produced, the only ones that could
carry their genes into the next generation. Likewise, if
nonterritorial birds failed to breed in a given year, one
Darwinian hypothesis is that these birds lacked the capacity
to acquire a territory with sufﬁcient resources to provide for
their offspring. Were they to attempt to breed, their progeny
would die without passing on the genes of the parents. But
if they were to postpone breeding until they were older and
more powerful or until the current territorial individuals had
died, freeing up space, the birds that exercised reproductive
restraint
in one year might go on to have surviving
offspring in one or more subsequent years, providing the
genetic basis for self-beneﬁting, temporary reproductive
restraint. These hypotheses are testable but for our purposes
the point is that these possible explanations do not require
that they evolve by a process in which individuals that
exhibit restraint and leave fewer surviving offspring (and
fewer copies of their genes) than others within their species
do so for the good of that species.

Williams not only explained why individual-level hy-
potheses were consistent with Darwinian theory and why
group beneﬁt hypotheses were usually neither Darwinian
nor logical, but he provided examples of how to test the
alternatives. If, for example, sex ratios had evolved to help
species survive over the long haul, then we might expect
sex ratios to become heavily female-biased during times
when the population had fallen well below the carrying
capacity of the environment. But when there were too many
individuals to be supported by a region, the sex ratio would
be predicted to become male-biaseddif sex ratio evolved
by Wynne-Edwardsian group selection. These sorts of
shifts are not observed in nature providing evidence against
a group selection theory of sex ratios. Instead, in the vast
majority of species, sex ratios remain consistently at or very
near 1:1.

This fact makes adaptive sense if sex ratios are the
product of Darwinian natural selection acting on variation
among individuals as the following thought experiment
makes clear.
Imagine a population in which parents
happen to produce more daughters than sons, creating a

In this situation,

female-biased sex ratio.
the average
reproductive success of a son increases, given the increased
opportunities overall
that males would have to acquire
multiple mates. Thus any genetic variant that predisposes
parents for a time to produce more sons than daughters will
be favored by natural selection acting at the level of the
individual, no matter its effect on the long-term survival of
the species. As males become more common in the popu-
lation as a whole, however,
their average reproductive
success approaches that of females. If there is an overshoot,
leading to a slightly male-biased sex ratio, then selection
will shift, favoring parents with a hereditary tendency to
produce daughters. When the sex ratio is one to one,
however, biasing the production of one sex over the other is
not selectively advantageous (since the average reproduc-
tive success of both sexes is the same), which is why most
sex ratios are in fact 1:1. Thus, sex ratio appears to be a
product of natural selection, not Wynne-Edwardsian group
selection, an illustration of the point that whereas natural
selection theory has produced predictions that are borne out
by the evidence, for the good of the species selection theory
has not (Williams, 1966). (The exceptions to the rule of a
1:1 sex ratio have also been studied and explained via in-
clusive ﬁtness theory without resort
to group selection
thinking (West et al., 2008).)

Williams’s book was tremendously inﬂuential. Many
biologists, myself included, believed that it was the most
important book since On the Origin of Species because it
reminded us of the logical foundations of Darwinian natural
selection and led us to be wary of the kind of throwaway
hypotheses about group beneﬁts that had become standard
by the 1960s. For D.S. Wilson and others interested in
reviving group selection, however, the acceptance of Wil-
liams’s ideas has become so widespread that they have
become dogma, preventing most biologists from keeping
an open mind about the newer, more sophisticated form of
group selection embodied in the term multilevel selection:
“Ever since [Williams’s book], students have been taught
that group selection is possible in principle, but can be
ignored in practice” (Wilson and Wilson, 2007). The
implication here is that the brainwashing that occurs early
in a researcher’s career can lead him or her to a lifelong
rejection of perfectly plausible ideas.

There is little doubt

that Adaptation and Natural
Selection helped make it difﬁcult for D.S. Wilson to ﬁnd a
receptive audience for his ideas. But not because most
evolutionary biologists have become indoctrinated ideo-
logues committed to individual-level selection as a result of
their early exposure to and acceptance of the arguments of a
key authority. Evolutionary biologists are devoted to Dar-
win’s On the Origin of Species and to Williams’s Adap-
tation and Natural Selection because of the power of the
underlying logic of these books, the abundant supporting
evidence that Darwin and Williams presented, and the

388 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

utility of these books for the development of productive
research programs. As I shall argue, the same cannot be
said for multilevel selection theory.

The posteWynne-Edwardsian group selectionists have
been at pains to show that multilevel selection is different
from the naïve group selection of the past. The key differ-
ence between the old or original form of group selection and
the newer forms is that the groups in the newer models are
groups within species, rather than entire species that are
supposed to be striving unconsciously for long-term sur-
vival. But in both naïve species-level group selection and the
more sophisticated variants proposed by D.S. Wilson and
others,
individuals give up some chances to reproduce
personally to help their group in some way. In Wynne-
Edwardsian group selection, the beneﬁt to the group was
the management of group size in keeping with the resources
available for that species. In Wilsonian multilevel selection,
the beneﬁt to the group is the creation of a more cooperative
unit capable of more highly coordinated group action. For
example, groups with self-sacriﬁcing altruists are said to be
able to better deal with other groups with fewer altruists.

As Wilson notes, Williams and others agree that groups
sometimes compete with one another in ways that have the
potential to alter gene frequencies within the species. But
group selection, according to the arguments of Williams
and others,
is a considerably less potent process for
evolutionary change than is reproductive competition
among the individual members of a group or species. The
best way to imagine this is to envision a scenario in which
group selection acts to increase the frequency of an allele
that reduces the reproductive success (ﬁtness) of some in-
dividuals within that group. Group selection of this sort will
be opposed by Darwinian natural selection in favor of
competing alleles that do not have the effect of lowering
individual ﬁtness. Special conditions are required therefore
if the group process is to overwhelm natural selection at the
individual level given that altruists will generally fail to
reproduce as much as the less altruistic members of the
group that beneﬁt from the presence of self-sacriﬁcing in-
dividuals. The effects of differences in the survival and
reproductive success of groups must exceed that of differ-
ences in the inclusive ﬁtness of individuals within groups.
This outcome in turn will depend on such things as the
degree of genetic differences among versus within groups
as well as the generation time of groups versus individuals
(Alexander, 1989).

In addition to the point that group selection favors
group-level adaptations only when between-group selec-
tion is more intense than within-group [natural] selection,
West et al. (2008, 2011) argue that group selection theory
is further limited in usefulness for researchers for practical
reasons. Whereas measurements of relatedness needed for
inclusive ﬁtness theory are readily available, calculating
the comparable measures needed to establish the ﬁtness of

a group is more difﬁcult. The practical difﬁculties asso-
ciated with using group selection theory have to be
overcome if it is to be used whereas the advocates of in-
clusive ﬁtness theory can point to a long list of research
accomplishments over the past 40 years (West et al.,
2008). As a result, when there has been an opportunity to
pursue a topic with group selection theory or kin selection
theory, researchers have almost universally chosen kin
selection theory (West et al., 2008).

Misconception
Natural selection favors selﬁsh, self-centered behavior
which means that altruistic, moral, unselﬁsh behavior re-
quires the group selection component of multilevel selec-
tion theory for its explanation.

Given that

there are good reasons for thinking that
multilevel selection theory comes with a number of difﬁ-
culties associated with its application, those who state that
we should use the theory must identify some issues that
compel us to become group selectionists to resolve these
puzzles. In fact, one of the central issues that supposedly
requires multilevel selection theory for its explanation is the
occurrence of behavior in group-living animals that is not
driven by a me-ﬁrst selﬁshness.

Here in an article by D.S. Wilson and Elliott Sober
(1994) is a statement that encapsulates this assertion: “an
effective group-oriented society cannot be composed of
individuals who are motivated solely by a calculus of self-
interest. The external social conventions that make free-
loading difﬁcult are evidently necessary but not sufﬁcient
and must be supplemented by a psychological attitude of
genuine concern for others; a direct calculus of group in-
terest rather than self interest is essential.”

The idea that natural selection will inevitably result in
the evolution of individuals who are motivated to behave
selﬁshly (in the everyday meaning of the word) is repeated
in the blurb on Amazon.com for the book Unto Others by
Sober and Wilson (1998): “No matter what we do, however
kind or generous our deeds may seem, a hidden motive of
selﬁshness lurksdor so science has claimed for years. This
book, whose publication promises to be a major scientiﬁc
event,
tells us differently. In Unto Others philosopher
Elliott Sober and biologist David Sloan Wilson demon-
strate once and for all that unselﬁsh behavior is in fact an
important feature of both biological and human nature.”

Or, as the group selectionist convert E.O. Wilson puts it
in his op-ed piece for the New York Times, “risking over-
simpliﬁcation,
individual selection promoted sin, while
group selection promoted virtue” (http://opinionator.blogs.
nytimes.com/2012/06/24/evolution-and-our-inner-conﬂict/).
It is difﬁcult for me to believe that the leading thinkers
on multilevel selection can have confused the immediate

Human Sociobiology and Group Selection Theory Chapter | 23 389

(ie, motivational) causes of our behavior with the ultimate
(evolutionary) causes, but
they have. As these quotes
make clear, we are asked to believe that, according to
Williams and others, if we are to succeed in passing on our
genes, we have to want
to boost our genetic success.
No one, however, thinks that because men want to copu-
late with relatively young women that they do so because
they hope to leave more copies of their genes than men
who are motivated to copulate only with older women.
Our proximate psychological mechanisms can get us to do
what is in the interests of our genes without providing
us with an awareness of the ultimate signiﬁcance of
our desires and actions (Alcock, 2013; Gaulin and
McBurney, 2001).

Just as critics of Richards Dawkins’s book The Selﬁsh
Gene (1976) failed to grasp the meaning of a metaphor, so
too multilevel proponents would have us take the words
“selﬁsh” and “altruistic” literally, ie, as in everyday English
when these words do imply something about the intentions
of the actor. But in reality, evolutionary biologists use the
word “selﬁsh” only to mean “reproductively successful” or
“genetically successful,” and “altruism” in this lexicon only
means “self-sacriﬁcing in reproductive terms.” Thus it is
entirely possible for an altruistic act to be “selﬁsh” in the
evolutionary sense of advancing an individual’s genetic
contribution to the next generation. As noted earlier,
altruism is adaptive (selected for) when the cost to the in-
dividual in terms of personal reproduction (or direct ﬁtness)
is outweighed by the gain to the individual in terms of the
increase in a relative’s reproductive success times the de-
gree of relatedness between the altruist and the relative (or
indirect ﬁtness). This is Hamilton’s rule, and a very useful
rule it is in evolutionary biology.

Thus, natural selection and kin selection acting at the
level of the individual favor whatever behavioral
ten-
dencies, intentions, motivations and the like advance the
actor’s genetic success, regardless of whether the actor is
aware of the evolved function of his, her, or its desires,
wishes, or intentions. If by behaving nicely to others, ie,
being moral, an individual gains a reputation for being a
nice person, and thereby increases his or her chances of
producing surviving offspring, then the behavior is “self-
ish” in evolutionary terms. If by helping relatives, an in-
dividual increases his or her indirect ﬁtness so much that it
more than compensates for any loss of direct ﬁtness, then
the altruism of the individual is “selﬁsh,” again in evolu-
tionary terms. Group selection theory is not needed to
explain why “unselﬁsh” (in Wilsonian terms) behavior has
evolved in so many organisms.

Misconception
Kin selection theory alone cannot account for the evolution
of many kinds of cooperative behavior within groups.

Once we get past the semantic issues and the confusion
engendered by mixing everyday and evolutionary meanings
of the words “selﬁsh” and “altruistic,” we can begin to
evaluate competing claims about the role of kin selection
versus group selection in the evolution of social behavior,
especially cooperative social actions. Remember that kin
selection can favor the kind of self-sacriﬁcing behavior that
helps relatives reproduce more than they would have
otherwise. Multilevel selectionists appear to have realized
the danger that Hamiltonian kin selection poses to their
arguments because as noted earlier they would have us
believe that altruism of any sort (such as that expressed
when humans behave morally with respect to their rela-
tives) requires group selection for its evolution. One way in
which to strengthen the case for this position is to call kin
selection outmoded, overblown, or just plain wrong.

Perhaps the most notable example of this approach
comes from a research report by Nowak et al. (2010). This
paper was written with E.O. Wilson as a coauthor, who by
then had renounced positions taken in Sociobiology (1975).
E.O. Wilson now claims that group selection has played a
major role in the evolution of the sterile (ie, altruistic)
castes present in colonies of certain insects (Wilson and
Hölldober, 2005). In support of this position, Nowak and
his colleagues dismissed kin selection theory via a mathe-
matical model as well as by identifying its supposed fail-
ures on evidentiary and practical grounds. For example,
they said that kin selection had failed because it is now
recognized that the unusual sex determination system of the
Hymenoptera (bees, ants, and wasps) almost certainly has
not played a central role in the evolution of sterile castes of
the social bees, ants, and wasps. In contrast, Hamilton
(1964) had once proposed that the fact that male Hyme-
noptera were haploid and females were diploid could have
contributed to the abundance of highly social species in this
order of insects. As Hamilton explained, if a female bee,
ant, or wasp mates with just one male, her daughters will all
share the same genes that are present in the genetically
identical sperm of the haploid male, a factor that results in
an unusually high level of genetic relatedness among those
daughters. The boost in relatedness should, all other things
being equal, make it more likely for females to gain ﬁtness
indirectly by helping certain of their sisters to reproduce,
resulting eventually in the evolution of a sterile or near-
sterile female worker caste in the social Hymenoptera. As
mentioned, these insects do feature a female worker caste
that rarely attempts to reproduce but instead helps in the
production of potentially reproducing members of the next
generation.

Although female workers are indeed the rule in the
social Hymenoptera, it is now known that in many species
the queens that found new colonies mate with several
males, which greatly reduces the genetic similarity of their
daughters and might, if haplodiploidy were the only factor

390 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

affecting the indirect ﬁtness of sisters that help other sisters,
reduce the indirect ﬁtness of altruistic (ie, worker) in-
dividuals. Despite the lowered genetic relatedness of the
workers, however, these females continue to sacriﬁce on
behalf of others in their colony. Moreover, as Hamilton
himself noted, there are highly social insects that lack the
special sex determination mechanisms of the bees, ants, and
wasps, most notably the termites, in which both males and
females are diploid and yet these insects are every bit as
highly social as the social bees, ants, and wasps. Because
haplodiploidy is not essential for the evolution of a sterile
worker caste, we must, according to Nowak et al. (2010),
conclude that kin selection is not a driver of altruism in the
social insects. In addition, Nowak and his colleagues went
on to assert that kin selection theory had proven of little use
for behavioral biologists. In other words, not only was it
possible to demonstrate mathematically that kin selection
could be ignored, but there was ﬁeld evidence against the
theory as well as practical reasons for dismissing the idea.
The paper by Nowak et al. (2010) generated a strong
response from adaptationists who have accepted kin se-
lection and inclusive ﬁtness theory as important amend-
ments to Darwinian natural selection. Adaptationists, most
of them behavioral ecologists, provided a collective rebuttal
(Abbot et al., 2011) that made two major points: ﬁrst, the
haplodiploid basis for the evolution of a sterile worker caste
is not central to kin selection theory (see also http://old.
richarddawkins.net/articles/508102-a-misguided-attack-on-
kin-selection) and second, the theory has, contra Nowak
et al. (2010), been responsible for all manner of research
discoveries about the evolution of cooperative behavior (a
point
that has been long documented; see Queller and
Strassman, 1998; Strassmann and Queller, 2007).

A key argument presented by Abbot et al. (2011) is that
haplodiploid sex determination is not central to the theory
of kin selection as applied to the evolution of altruism. All
that is required (as noted previously) is that the cost to an
individual in lost personal reproduction be exceeded by the
increase in another individual multiplied by the degree of
relatedness between the helper and the helpee. The ﬁtness
cost of help and its reproductive effect on another have
often been ignored thanks to all the attention given to r, the
coefﬁcient of relatedness between the altruist and the in-
dividual it helps (Herbers, 2006). A high degree of relat-
edness can move the needle toward altruism but so can a
low cost for the helper and so can a large beneﬁt for the
helpee. Haplodiploidy is only one of many factors that can
potentially affect the genetic gains or losses from helping
relatives. Assorted ecological factors can also strongly
affect the costs of helping as well as the beneﬁts to in-
dividuals that receive this help (Andersson, 1984).

In addition, the utility of kin selection theory has been
established beyond a doubt in a great many arenas, contrary
to the claims of Nowak et al. (2010). Kin selection theory

has led to powerful explanations of many forms of coop-
eration and altruism, alarm calling, the allocation of re-
sources from parents to offspring of the two sexes, policing
by colony members and rejection of nonkin from colonies,
conﬂict within generally cooperative units, and so on
(Abbot et al., 2011). Note especially that conﬂict does
occur within groups of social animals and when it does
happen, kin selection theory has provided solutions, often
by showing researchers that the individuals in opposition
are genetically dissimilar (Queller and Strassmann, 1998).
In contrast, the practical utility of the group selection
component of multilevel selection has been disputed (West
et al., 2011). For one thing, different authors have proposed
several different forms of the “new” group selection in
addition to the group selection component of multilevel se-
lection (West et al., 2011). This fact leads to confusion when
trying to test hypotheses that a social animal possesses
group-level adaptations that are the result of group-level
processes. In addition, most of the work on group selec-
tion theory has taken place via the development of models
designed to demonstrate the feasibility of the process and in
laboratory experiments designed to show that under certain
carefully controlled conditions, group selection can indeed
occur (Wade, 1976, 1978). These experiments typically
involve groups that are designed to be as much like families
as possible with maximum genetic differences among
groups and short generation times (Alexander, 1989).
Indeed, the assumptions of these models, especially those
having to do with population structure, play an important
role in whether one concludes that it is even possible for
group selection to occur (Molleman et al., 2013). Very few
applications of the theory have been done under natural
conditions with “real” organisms with the intent to test
predictions derived from the theory on the assumption that
the trait(s) under investigation promote the welfare or suc-
cess of groups over the inclusive ﬁtness of individuals.

Misconception
Only group selection theory can account for cooperation
among unrelated individuals that live in social groups.

But if altruism can often be explained by kin selection,
what about
the evolution of cooperation in groups
composed of unrelated individuals? The fact that these in-
dividuals do not share alleles in common by shared descent
means that the kin (or indirect) component of selection
cannot be responsible for the evolution of the helpful
behavior seen in such groups. Therefore, some group se-
lectionists have concluded, cooperative behavior must have
evolved via selection at the level of the group of unrelated
individuals, an argument that has been applied to the col-
onies of social insects that are composed of both kin and
nonkin. Often unrelated individuals in these colonies

Human Sociobiology and Group Selection Theory Chapter | 23 391

cooperate to the same extent that related colony members
do (Korb and Heinz, 2004), which has led some to argue
that their behavior is the product of group selection for the
resolution of conﬂict within the greater group.

The claim that group selection is needed to explain
cooperation among unrelated individuals living in groups is
odd given that in numerous cases, members of different
species, which are obviously not related to one another,
work together in ways that clearly beneﬁt all the individuals
of the different species. Consider the occurrence of mixed-
species ﬂocks of birds, in which the members of one spe-
cies respond to the alarm signals given by others with the
entire ﬂock then ﬂeeing from an approaching predator. The
alarm givers might beneﬁt by getting others to join with
them in forming a large, difﬁcult-to-attack mass of birds in
ﬂight; the joiners might gain by reducing the risk that they
will be left behind where they will be vulnerable to an
attacking predator. There are several other mutualistic
hypotheses that have been tested via observation of mixed-
species associations (eg, Campobello et al., 2012; Goodale
et al., 2010). The point is that being part of a group of
unrelated individuals does not eliminate the possibility that
group-related behaviors provide a survival (reproductive)
beneﬁt for all concerneddeven if they are members of
different species and therefore unrelated to one another.

The same applies to groups composed entirely of the
members of a single species, some of which are unrelated to
others (Krams et al., 2010; Sherman, 1985). It
is well
established, for example, that male lions form coalitions
that may or may not be made up of relatives such as
brothers or cousins (Grinnell et al., 1995; Packer and
Pusey, 1982). A coalition made up of unrelated males may
nevertheless be able to overwhelm a single male (or a
smaller coalition) that has monopolized the sexual services
of the female members of a pride. Were each unrelated
male to tackle an established pride master by himself, the
newcomer singletons would almost certainly fare less well
than unrelated males that work together when competing
for control of a pride. Should a coalition of unrelated males
take a pride from others, all the members of the successful
coalition have some chance of reproducing (albeit not
necessarily the same chance) in part because females often
come into estrous simultaneously (Packer and Pusey,
1982). The logic of natural selection theory suggests that
some chance of reproducing is better (for the cooperator’s
genes) than no chance of reproducing. Thus, cooperation
among nonrelatives can spread through a species via nat-
ural selection acting on individuals without the need to
invoke group selection.

We can use this approach when reevaluating one of the
putative examples of group selectioneshaping animal
behavior (see Dugatkin, 2002), a case involving a leafcutter
ant, Acromyrmex versicolor, that forms small groups of
unrelated foundress females after the winged forms have

been released from their colonies. These females live in the
same underground burrow and cooperate in the sense of
attacking other groups together while defending themselves
from assaults by other mini-colonies nearby. They do not
form dominance hierarchies so that the individuals that take
on the risky task of gathering food from the desert for the
group are not different in body size on average from the
others in an incipient colony. In other words, the cooper-
ative foragers are not contributing to the reproductive
success of relatives nor are they making the best of a bad
job, having been forced by their more dominant compan-
ions to do the dangerous job of foraging. The explanation
for this behavior favored by group selectionists is that
although cheating would be favored by natural (individual-
level) selection, the survival of any member of the group
depends on the ability of the group to ﬁnd enough food and
to fend off aggressive groups around them. The aggressive
competition between groups is said to generate a form of
group selection.

But the tolerance of individuals of unrelated cooperators
and their readiness to forage despite the mortality costs of
the behavior could just as easily be said to arise from
natural selection acting in a setting in which the odds that
an individual will be a surviving queen with a ﬂourishing
colony of her own is utterly dependent on the ability of
individuals to make it through the early colony establish-
ment phase (Bernasconi and Strassmann, 1999). In this
period, females that refuse to accept unrelated foundress
queens in their nest or try to “cheat” by letting others do the
risky job of foraging are very likely to die quickly when
their nests are overwhelmed by rival raiders or when their
group is weakened by a shortage of food that makes them
vulnerable to attack from others (Strassmann, 1989). In the
ant species, Veromessor pergandei, which behaves simi-
larly to A. versicolor, starting colonies with multiple
foundresses have greater success in brood raiding than
those with single queens (Rissing and Pollock, 1987).

In other words, many (most?) cases in which unrelated
individuals help one another are examples of a naturally
selected mutualism, with the direct beneﬁts of helping (an
increase in the odds of surviving to reproduce) outweighing
the ﬁtness costs of cooperating. At the very least, group
selectionist hypotheses must be matched against hypothe-
ses based on mutual beneﬁt cooperation with a demon-
stration that
the predictions from the two kinds of
hypotheses are not the same, if we wish to discriminate
between the two kinds of hypotheses.

WHAT ABOUT HUMANS?
Humans are a highly social species with a great capacity for
cooperation. Wilson believes that group selection theory
will prove to be especially useful for an understanding of
our own behavior.
the application of group

Indeed,

392 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

selection theory to human behavior has a long history if, as
noted earlier, we accept that Darwin (1859) considered the
idea in On the Origin of Species and suggested that moral
behavior might help members of one group defeat members
of another in a competition between tribes. However, as
Ruse (1980) points out, Darwin devoted only a few para-
graphs to the possibility of group selection in a book that
was overwhelmingly devoted to an explanation of how
natural selection might work at the individual level. Thus,
any appeal to Darwin as an authority on the subject of
group selection is weak at best.

Nonetheless, the desire to believe that we are a special
species, with a particularly strong capacity for generosity
and moral behavior, expresses itself in many ways. For
example, Francis Collins (a leading scientist and current
director of the National Institutes of Health), and doubtless
many others, feel that the moral behavior of humans is
fundamentally religious in nature and cannot be explained
in evolutionary terms (Collins, 2007). Although few sci-
entists agree with Collins that God was involved in making
us a moral creature, some are convinced that the coopera-
tive nature of humans really is exceptional. Experiments
that explore this aspect of our behavior include those in
which a person is given only a single chance to secure a
ﬁnancial reward in an experimental game with another in-
dividual with whom they will not
interact again. The
economically rational response would be for the main
“player” to take all the money he or she is offered but
instead many people give a portion of
the proceeds
they might otherwise reap to the other player (eg, Fehr and
Fishbacher, 2003; Gintis et al., 2003; but see Burton-
Chellew and West, 2013). Sharing is not encouraged or
required but even so many of those participating in ex-
periments of this sort do share the money they receive.

One explanation for this apparent eagerness to coop-
erate altruistically is that humans exhibit “strong reci-
procity,” namely the strong tendency to help others (and to
punish those that fail to cooperate). Wilson (2007) con-
siders researchers studying strong reciprocity to be in his
camp inasmuch as strong reciprocity could be the basis for
the maintenance of cohesive groups. But as West et al.
(2011) point out, the strong reciprocity explanation is not
evolutionary but instead focuses on the properties of un-
derlying psychological mechanisms that motivate us to do
some things rather than others. Proximate explanations of
this sort leave unanswered the question of why selection
(broadly deﬁned) has resulted in the spread of the psy-
chological attributes that induce individuals to do certain
things, not others.

For multilevel selectionists, the great cooperative po-
tential of people might be explained in evolutionary terms
as a result of selection for group-level adaptations given
that the cooperative propensity of humans often leads us to
form groups that compete effectively with other groups.

But before we go further down this road, let us consider
whether we really are as unique as is so often claimed.
Certainly we are not more altruistic than sterile worker ants
or wasps. Moreover, as noted already, many other species
exist
in which unrelated individuals work together for
mutual gain while also punishing noncooperators in the
group (West et al., 2011). It seems probable that we tend to
overrate the specialness of Homo sapiens.

True, humans seem to engage in far more reciprocal
cooperation than most other animals (West et al., 2011). In
behavior of this sort, the helper is more than repaid at a later
date for his or her cooperative behavior, either by the in-
dividual that he or she helped or by relatives of the helpee.
Reciprocal cooperation (as distinct from strong reciprocity)
has obvious potential ﬁtness beneﬁts for all participants and
does not rely on group selection theory for its explanation.
Throughout discussions about the level of selection,
proponents of multilevel selection seem to be arguing that
living in groups almost automatically leads to group se-
lection. Now no one disagrees with the claim that humans
have lived in small societies for much of our evolutionary
history nor is there any doubt that groups have interacted
aggressively with one another frequently during this time
(Bowles, 2009). But group living does not guarantee that
evolution will lead to adaptations that help entire groups
survive or reproduce at cost to some individuals within
these groups. Alexander (1979, 1987) has written exten-
sively on attributes that help bands of people in competition
with others but he has been able to use inclusive ﬁtness
theory to explain why such things as group-centered mo-
rality could have spread through our species. For adapta-
tionists, human ideas about what is moral have almost
certainly spread because they led our ancestors to help their
kin, thereby raising the helpers’ indirect ﬁtness, or because
they promoted the kind of group cohesiveness that raised
our ancestors’ direct ﬁtness during conﬂicts arising between
groups. Cooperation among nonrelatives, including recip-
rocal assistance, might be especially beneﬁcial for members
of our species when defending resources against other
aggressive bands nearby or when attempting to take re-
sources from neighboring tribes. Even the heroic self-
sacriﬁce of warriors who die in combat can be explained
in terms of
the
deceased ﬁghter confers on his kin, beneﬁts that could
translate into increased ﬁtness for the relatives that the dead
man left behind (Alexander, 1989). Alexander not only has
seen no need to invoke group selection to explain such
things as our selective morality, he has actively argued
against the utility of the theory of group selection as applied
to our species (Alexander, 1989). Again, given that there
are alternative hypotheses for such things as tribal afﬁlia-
tion and cooperation within groups, should not multilevel
selectionists explicitly contrast
their explanations with
showing exactly why group
alternative hypotheses,

reputational beneﬁts that

the indirect

Human Sociobiology and Group Selection Theory Chapter | 23 393

selection theory is required and why the predictions from
this theory are more often met than predictions from in-
clusive ﬁtness theory?

Cultural Group Selection
One other group selectionist argument as applied to human
behavior deserves our attention because we are unques-
tionably special in the extent to which cultural traditions
shape our behavior. Proponents of cultural group selection
argue that the success of a group depends on the cultural
traditions
(eg, Boyd and
Richerson, 2005, 2010). As a result, over time, some
groups (and their special cultures) replace others in a kind
of group selectionist process based on cultural traits rather
than genetic ones.

the society possesses

that

Before analyzing cultural group selection theory, we
must ﬁrst deal with the temptation to conclude that socio-
cultural hypotheses about human behavior should take
precedence over “biological” explanations for our social
nature. However, sociocultural hypotheses provide imme-
diate or proximate explanations for why we behave the way
we do without explaining why in evolutionary terms we
possess the proximate mechanisms that enable us to be a
sociocultural animal (Alcock and Crawford, 2008). More-
over, just because human behavior is learned and culturally
shaped does not mean that our actions are “environmental,”
free from the effects of standard evolutionary processes
based on differences in the inclusive ﬁtness of group
members. In reality, all behavioral traits, including learned
ones, are the developmental product of an interaction be-
tween the organisms’ genes and its environment.

The clearest demonstrations of this point come from
studies of song learning in birds and language acquisition in
humans. Both traits depend on the structure and functional
design of the nervous systems that underlie song learning
and language acquisition (Alcock, 2013). The white-
crowned sparrow that learns its species’ territorial song
does so because of a complex of brain systems that could
not have developed without genetic involvement. Humans
who learn Urdu or English do so because of a complex of
brain systems whose development depended on the genes
in young brain cells. The fact
the white-crowned
sparrow male attends to and learns its song by listening
to members of its own species while ignoring the songs of
other species tells us that the bird’s brain mechanisms have
evolved to bias learning in ways that promote individual
reproductive success. The same is true of our own species
with an infant’s brain predisposed to detect word sounds
from the mass of acoustical information that he or she re-
ceives, an ability that contributes to language acquisition by
the baby (eg, Saffran, 2001). Cultural
traditions are
certainly interesting and deserving of explanation. For
natural selectionists, cultural learning and the differences

that

among groups that result from our traditions reﬂect the
ability of the human brain to adopt a range of behavioral
options, but not an inﬁnite range, with instead biases and
peculiarities that induce us to behave in ways that are
usually adaptive in the kinds of environments our ancestors
experienced or were adaptive during the period when
the brain was evolving by standard Darwinian processes.
This is a testable proposition and has indeed been repeat-
edly tested by sociobiologists (broadly deﬁned) and by
evolutionary psychologists (eg, Barkow et al., 1992;
Pinker, 2002).

Thus, even though we are obviously a highly cultural
animal, it is reasonable to ask whether the ability to ac-
quire cultures evolved and if so, by what processdcultural
group selection acting on differences between groups or
standard natural selection acting on differences within
groups in the inclusive ﬁtness of individuals? Note that
learned cultural traditions can lead kin to help kin or they
can provide mutual reproductive beneﬁts for all
those
within a group, whether related or not. Consider religious
beliefs, which vary greatly from culture to culture, are
universal and highly important in the social behavior of
humans.

Religion and Human Behavior
Wilson (2002) has written about religion in the context of
cultural group selection. For him and other adherents of
this theory, religions are functional in the sense of being a
cultural adaptation that encourages individuals to sacriﬁce
for the well-being of their group, sometimes to compete
more effectively with other groups, sometimes not.
Whatever the case, religious belief contributes to selection
at the group level according to Wilson. But it is not as if
this is the only explanation for religious traditions, even
though Wilson (2002) does not acknowledge or explore
individual-level alternatives in his book on the subject
(Sosis, 2003). There, Wilson makes much of the fact that
the Nuer defeated the Dinka supposedly as a result of their
superior social organization (presumably affected by
their religious beliefs) as outlined in The Nuer Conquest
(Kelly, 1985).

But it is not enough to show that people live in groups
that sometimes compete aggressively with other groups,
each with their own religious beliefs, to demonstrate that
cultural group selection is responsible for the religiously
sanctioned sacriﬁces made by some within a tribe or soci-
ety. For one thing, all the members of a group that prevails
over another enjoy the inclusive ﬁtness beneﬁts of success
of this sort. Relatives within the winning group may derive
indirect ﬁtness gains; nonrelatives may share the spoils of
victory in a mutually beneﬁcial manner leading to gains in
personal reproduction. In other words, the simple fact that
in our
sometimes

species culturally different groups

394 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

compete is not evidence in itself of group-level cultural
selection.

Moreover in his one attempt to test his multilevel se-
lection hypotheses, Wilson (2005) fails to set his favored
approach against any alternative. For him, it is enough that
in a random sample of 35 religions, most seem to be
designed to deal with economic or other functional issues
while encouraging or enforcing behavior that strengthens
the bonds that hold religious entities together. Wilson notes
that some selection at the individual level is likely to occur
in the evolution of religious beliefs but he does not specify
what the individual-level effects might be nor how one
would evaluate the relative strength of individual-level
versus group-level selection during the evolution of reli-
gious beliefs. Because he never clearly sets predictions
from a group selectionist model against those arising from
various adaptationist hypotheses, the picture that he paints
remains muddled.

Alexander (1982) sees the conﬂicts that are inherent in
religious societies (and these are acknowledged by Wilson
(2002)) as the product of selection in favor of individuals
capable of both self-promoting and group-promoting
behavior because both kinds of behavior can, under some
circumstances, advance the ﬁtness of
individuals. For
example, Sosis and Bulbulia (2011) treat the costly activities
associated with many religious rituals as a way in which
individuals can signal
to their co-
religionists, the better to secure their cooperation in activities
that confer beneﬁts on all concerned. If true, religious cer-
emonies and other cultural trappings of various sorts are the
foundation for mutualisms (Sosis and Alcorta, 2003).

their commitment

CONCLUSION
Because of the possibilities for confusion when using
group selection theories, because of the practical advan-
tages of an individual-level approach, and because of a
long history of utility of inclusive ﬁtness theory for
researchers in testing predictions derived from individual-
level selection, the group selection component of multi-
level selection theory has proven no more attractive for
most researchers dealing with human behavior than it has
for behavioral ecologists and sociobiologists studying the
social behavior of other vertebrates. In one review of
human behavioral ecology, group selection is not even
mentioned (Nettle et al., 2013).
the authors
claim that “central to [human behavioral ecology] is the
adaptationist stance,” an approach based on inclusive
ﬁtness theory.

Instead,

If someone wishes to test modern group selectionist
hypotheses, then more power to that person. These in-
dividuals should, however, specify exactly what trait they
are interested in explaining before identifying the form
of group selection theory they are using. Then, after

demonstrating that it is feasible to measure among-group
genetic variation accurately, they will need to “determine
the ﬁtness consequences of phenotypic variation within and
among groups” (Sober and Wilson, 1998). This is an
onerous requirement but necessary to show that selection
among groups is either more powerful
than selection
against certain behavioral traits within groups or at the very
least that selection at the group level reinforces natural
selection among individuals. To date, these criteria have
not yet been achieved in research with nonhuman animals
living under natural conditions nor have they been secured
in studies of humans. For most human sociobiologists, the
adaptationist stance based on inclusive ﬁtness theory will
continue to be the approach of choice.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am indebted to Stuart West and his colleagues for their clear and
convincing papers on the evolutionary study of cooperation. Ron
Rutowski read a draft of my chapter and made many helpful sug-
gestions for its improvement.

REFERENCES

Abbot, P., Abe, J., Alcock, J., et al., 2011. Inclusive ﬁtness theory and

sociality. Science 471, E1eE4.

Alcock, J., 2001. The Triumph of Sociobiology. Oxford University Press,

New York.

Alcock, J., 2013. Animal Behavior: An Evolutionary Approach, tenth ed.

Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, MA.

Alcock, J., Crawford, C., 2008. Evolutionary questions for evolutionary
psychologists. In: Crawford, C., Krebs, D.L. (Eds.), Foundations of
Evolutionary Psychology. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, New York.
Alexander, R.D., 1979. Darwinism and Human Affairs. University of

Washington Press, Seattle, WA.

Alexander, R.D., 1987. The Biology of Human Morality. Aldine de

Gruyter, Hawthorne, NY.

Alexander, R.D., 1982. Biology and the moral paradoxes. Journal of

Biological Structures 5, 389e395.

Alexander, R.D., 1989. Evolution of the human psyche. In: Mellars, P.,
Stringer, C. (Eds.), The Human Revolution: Behavioral and Biological
Perspectives on the Origins of Modern Humans. Princeton University
Press, Princeton NJ.

Allen, E., et al., November 13, 1975. Against “sociobiology”. The New

York Review of Books 22.

Andersson, M., 1984. The evolution of eusociality. Annual Review of

Ecology and Systematics 15, 165e189.

Barkow, J.H., Cosmides, L., Tooby, J. (Eds.), 1992. The Adapted Mind:
Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture. Oxford
University Press, New York.

Bernasconi, G., Strassmann, J., 1999. Cooperation among unrelated in-
dividuals: the ant foundress case. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 14,
477e482.

Bowles, S., 2009. Did warfare among ancestral hunter-gatherers affect the

evolution of human social behaviors? Science 324, 1293e1298.

Boyd, R., Richerson, P.J., 2005. The Origin and Evolution of Cultures.

Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Human Sociobiology and Group Selection Theory Chapter | 23 395

Boyd, R., Richerson, P.J., 2010. Transmission coupling mechanisms:
cultural group selection. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society (B) 365, 3787e3795.

Buller, D.J., 2005. Adapting Minds: Evolutionary Psychology and the

Persistent Quest for Human Nature. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Burton-Chellew, M.N., West, S.A., 2013. Prosocial preferences do not
explain human cooperation in public-goods games. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 110,
216e221.

Buss, D.M., 1989. Sex differences in human mating preferences: evolu-
tionary hypotheses tested in 37 cultures. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 12, 1e49.

Hamilton, W.D., 1964. The genetical evolution of social behavior, I and II.

Journal of Theoretical Biology 7, 1e52.

Hagen, E., 2005. Controversial issues in evolutionary psychology. In:
Buss, D.M. (Ed.), The Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology. Wiley,
Hoboken, New Jersey.

Hölldobler, B., Wilson, E.O., 1990. The Ants. Belknap Press, Cambridge,

MA.

Kelly, R.C., 1985. The Nuer Conquest: The Structure and Consequences
of an Expansionist System. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor,
MI.

Kenrick, D.T., 1995. Evolutionary theory and the confederacy of dunces.

Psychological Inquiry 6, 56e61.

Buss, D.M., 2013. The science of human mating strategies: an historical

Kenrick, D.T., 2011. Sex, Murder and the Meaning of Life. Basic Books,

perspective. Psychological Inquiry 24, 171e177.

New York.

Buss, D.M., Haselton, M., 2005. The evolution of jealousy: a reply to

Korb, J., Heinze, J., 2004. Multilevel selection and social evolution of

Buller. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 9, 506e507.

insect societies. Naturwissenschaften 91, 291e304.

Buss, D.M., Schmidt, D.P., 1993. Sexual strategies theory: an evolutionary
perspective on human mating. Psychological Review 100, 204e232.
Campobello, D., Sara, M., Hare, J.F., 2012. Under my wing: lesser kestrels
and jackdaws derive reciprocal beneﬁts in mixed-species colonies.
Behavioral Ecology 23, 425e433.

Krams,

I., Berzins, A., Krama, T., Wheatcroft, D.,

Igaune, K.,
Rantala, M.J., 2010. Increased risk of predation increases cooperation.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B 277, 513e518.

Lopreato, J., Crippen, T., 1999. Crisis in Sociology: The Need for Darwin.

Transaction Publishers, New Brunswick, NJ.

Collins, F.S., 2007. The Language of God: A Scientist Presents Evidence

Menken, J., Trussell, J., Larsen, U., 1986. Age and infertility. Science 233,

for Belief. Free Press, New York.

1389e1394.

Confer, J.C., Easton, J.A., Fleischman, D.S., Goetz, C.D., Lewis, D.M.G.,
Perilloux, C., Buss, D.M., 2010. Evolutionary psychology: contro-
versies, questions, prospects and limitations. American Psychologist
65, 110e126.

Daly, M., Wilson, M., 1999. Human evolutionary psychology and animal

behaviour. Animal Behaviour 57, 509e517.

Darwin, C., 1859. On the Origin of Species. Murray and Sons, London.
Dawkins, R., 1976. The Selﬁsh Gene. Oxford University Press, New York.
Diamond, J., 1992. The Third Chimpanzee. HarperCollins, New York.
Dugatkin, L.A., 2002. Animal cooperation among unrelated individuals.

Naturwissenschaften 89, 533e541.

Dunbar, R.I.M., Barrett, L., 2007. Evolutionary psychology in the round.
In: Dunbar, R.I.M., Barrett, L. (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of
Evolutionary Psychology. Oxford University Press, London.

Molleman, L., Quinones, A.E., Weissing, F.J., 2013. Cultural evolution of
cooperation: the interplay between forms of social learning and group
selection. Evolution and Human Behavior 34, 342e349.

Nettle, D., Gibson, M.A., Lawson, D.W., Sear, R., 2013. Human behav-
ioral ecology: current research and future prospects. Behavioral
Ecology 24, 1031e1040.

Nowak, M.A., Tarnita, C.E., Wilson, E.O., 2010. The evolution of

eusociality. Nature 466, 1057e1062.

Packer, C., Pusey, A.E., 1982. Cooperation and competition within co-
alitions of male lions: kinship or game theory. Nature 296, 740e742.
Pinker, S.A., 2002. The Blank Slate: The Denial of Human Nature. Viking

Press, New York.

Queller, D.C., Strassmann, J.E., 1998. Kin selection and social insects.

Bioscience 48, 165e175.

Ehrlich, P., 2000. Human Natures: Genes, Cultures, and the Human

Reeve, H.K., 2000. Unto others: the evolution and psychology of unselﬁsh

Prospect. Island Press, Washington, D.C.

Fehr, E., Fischbacher, U., 2003. The nature of human altruism. Nature 425,

785e791.

Gannon, L., 2002. A critique of evolutionary psychology. Psychology

Evolution and Gender 4, 173e218.

behavior. Evolution and Human Behavior 21, 65e72.

Rissing, S.W., Pollock, G.B., 1987. Queen aggression, pleometrotic
advantage, and brood raiding in the ant Veromessor pergandei
(Hymenoptera: Formicidae). Animal Behaviour 35, 975e981.

Rose, H., Rose, S. (Eds.), 2000. Alas, Poor Darwin: Arguments against

Gardner, A., West, S.A., Wild, G., 2011. The genetical theory of kin

Evolutionary Psychology. Jonathan Cape, London.

selection. Journal of Evolutionary Biology 24, 1020e1043.

Ruse, M., 1980. Charles Darwin and group selection. Annals of Science

Gaulin, S.J.C., McBurney, D.H., 2001. Psychology: An Evolutionary

37, 615e630.

Approach. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.

Saffran, J.R., 2001. Words in a sea of sounds: the output of infant statis-

Gintis, H., Bowles, S., Boyd, R., Fehr, E., 2003. Explaining altruistic
behavior in humans. Evolution and Human Behavior 24, 153e172.
Goodale, E., Beauchamp, G., Magrath, R.D., Nieh, J.C., Ruxton, G.D.,
2010. Interspeciﬁc information transfer inﬂuences animal community
structure. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 25, 354e361.

Gould, S.J., Lewontin, R., 1979. The spandrels of San Marco and the
Panglossian paradigm: a critique of adaptationist thought. Proceedings
of the Royal Society of London B 205, 581e598.

tical learning. Cognition 81, 149e169.

Sherman, P.W., 1985. Alarm calls of Belding’s ground squirrels to aerial
predators: nepotism or self-preservation? Behavioral Ecology and
Sociobiology 17, 313e323.

Smith, E.A., Borgerhoff Mulder, M., Hill, K., 2001. Controversies in the
evolutionary social sciences. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 16,
128e135.

Sober, E., Wilson, D.S., 1998. Unto Others: The Evolution and Psychology

Grinnell, J., Packer, C., Pusey, A.E., 1995. Cooperation among male lions:

of Unselﬁsh Behavior. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

kinship, reciprocity or mutualism? Animal Behaviour 49, 95e105.

Herbers, J.M., 2006. Darwin’s one special difﬁculty: celebrating Darwin

200. Biology Letters 5, 214e217.

Sosis, R., 2003. Review of Darwin’s Cathedral: evolution, religion and the
nature of society by David Sloan Wilson. Evolution and Human
Behavior 24, 137e143.

396 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

Sosis, R., Alcorta, C.S., 2003. Signaling, solidarity and the sacred: the
religious behavior. Evolutionary Anthropology 12,

evolution of
264e274.

Sosis, R., Bulbulia, J., 2011. The behavioral ecology of religion: the
beneﬁts and costs of one evolutionary approach. Religion 41,
341e362.

Wilson, D.S., 1975. A theory of group selection. Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 72,
143e146.

Wilson, D.S., 2002. Darwin’s Cathedral: Evolution, Religion and the

Nature of Society. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.

Wilson, D.S., 2005. Testing major evolutionary hypotheses about religion

Strassmann, J.E., 1989. Altruism and relatedness at colony foundation in

with a random sample. Human Nature 16, 419e446.

social insects. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 4, 371e374.

Strassmann, J.E., Queller, D.C., 2007. Insect societies as divided organ-
isms: the complexities of purpose and cross-purpose. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
104, 8619e8626.

Wade, M.J., 1976. Group selection among laboratory populations of Tri-
bolium. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 173, 4604e4607.

Wilson, D.S.,

level

evolutionary

2007. Group

In:
Dunbar, R.I.M., Barrett, L. (Eds.), Handbook of Evolutionary Psy-
chology. Oxford University Press, New York.

processes.

Wilson, D.S., Sober, E., 1994. Reintroducing group selection to the human

behavioral sciences. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 17, 585e684.

Wilson, D.S., Wilson, E.O., 2007. Rethinking the theoretical foundation of

sociobiology. Quarterly Review of Biology 82, 327e348.

Wilson, D.S., Wilson, E.O., 2008. Evolution for “the good of the group.”

Wade, M.J., 1978. A critical review of the models of group selection.

American Scientist 96, 380e389.

Quarterly Review of Biology 53, 101e114.

Wilson, E.O., 1975. Sociobiology: The New Synthesis. Harvard Univer-

Webster, G.D., 2007. Evolutionary psychology’s increasing role in per-
sonality and social psychology. Evolutionary Psychology 5, 84e91.
West, S.A., Grifﬁn, A.S., Gardner, A., 2008. Social semantics: how useful has

group selection been? Journal of Evolutionary Biology 21, 374e385.

West, S.A., El Mouden, C., Gardner, A., 2011. Sixteen common mis-
conceptions about the evolution of cooperation in humans. Evolution
and Human Behavior 32, 231e262.

Williams, G.C., 1966. Adaptation and Natural Selection. Princeton Uni-

versity Press, Princeton, NJ.

sity Press, Cambridge, MA.

Wilson, E.O., 1994. Naturalist. Island Press, Washington, D.C.
Wilson, E.O., Hölldobler, B., 2005. Eusociality: origins and consequences.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 102, 13367e13371.

Wynne-Edwards, V.C., 1962. Animal Dispersion in Relation to Social

Behaviour. Oliver and Boyd, Edinburgh and London.

Chapter 24

Behavior Analysis, Darwinian
Evolutionary Processes, and the Diversity
of Human Behavior

W.M. Baum1,2
1University of New Hampshire, Durham, NH, United States; 2University of California, Davis, CA, United States

stems

The diversity of human behavior
from three
Darwinian evolutionary processes: genetic evolution, cul-
tural evolution, and behavioral evolution. Genetic evolution
by natural selection is the paradigmatic example of descent
with modiﬁcation or selection by consequences (Skinner,
1981). Cultural evolution accounts for the diversity of
practices across groups and through time (Boyd and
Richerson, 1985). Behavioral evolution, the third example
of selection by consequences, also called “shaping” of
behavior, occurs within the lifetime of an individual, and is
a primary focus of behavior analysis.

The science of behavior, or behavior analysis, is prop-
erly part of evolutionary biology. It is intimately tied to
evolutionary theory in two fundamental ways. First, evo-
lution is the explanation of why behavior and behavioral
processes exist at all. It is the only way to understand the
peculiarities and constraints that characterize matters like
classical and operant conditioning (Baum, 2013). Second,
behavioral explanations follow the same mode of expla-
nation as do evolutionary explanations. Skinner (1981)
called it “selection by consequences.” It may also be called
“historical explanation” (Baum and Heath, 1992).

suggests

that

(1999)

selection. Donahoe

Several writers have suggested that operant condition-
ing, or behavioral shaping, may be seen as parallel to nat-
ural
even
Thorndike may have recognized the resemblance between
the law of effect and natural selection at the end of the 19th
century. Skinner (1953, 1981) stated it overtly and made it
the centerpiece to his view of behavior (Ringen, 1999).
Gilbert (1970) drew out the parallel at length, and Staddon
and Simmelhag (1971; Staddon, 1973) enlarged on it by
distinguishing between “principles of variation”die, those

processes that give rise to behavioral variantsdand “prin-
ciples of selection”dthose processes that cause selection
among behavioral variants. More recently, Hull et al.
(2001), used the term “interactor” to apply both to organ-
isms in genetic evolution and to behavioral units in
behavioral evolution, and again compared behavioral evo-
lution to genetic evolution. The parallel is of more than
casual interest; it represents a revolution in thought.

POPULATION THINKING
The importance of selection and history has been under-
appreciated in the study of behavior within the traditions of
psychology. One reason is that psychology, like other sci-
ences, was inﬂuenced by philosophical views in which the
world is thought to be composed of ideal types into which
all particulars may be classiﬁed. In biology, typological
thinking affected the concept of species. In psychology,
typological thinking affected the concept of response, the
unit of behavior. In biology, typological thinking eventu-
ally gave way to population thinking, which is the
cornerstone of evolutionary theory and all selectionist
theories. The difference between the two ways of thinking
may be seen in their views on variation. In typological
thinking, variation is “error” and dealt with as a nuisance to
be eliminated by averaging. In population thinking, varia-
tion is central, and averaging is only an analytic conve-
nience. As Ernst Mayr (1959) wrote, “For the typologist,
the type (eidos) is real and the variation an illusion, while
for the populationist the type (average) is an abstraction and
only the variation is real” (p. 2). Arguably, Skinner’s
greatest contribution to the study of behavior was his

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00024-7
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

397

398 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

rejection of the typological view of behavioral units (re-
sponses). Mayr (1970) observed, “The replacement of
typological thinking by population thinking is perhaps the
greatest conceptual revolution that has taken place in
biology” (p. 5). The same may be said of the (ongoing)
revolution in the study of behavior.

From an ontological point of view, a population is an
individualdthat is, an integral, functioning entity that can
change and still retain its identity (Ghiselin, 1997). An
individual is a whole with partsdas opposed to a class or
category with criteria and instances. An individual changes
when its parts change. The parts of a population are its
members, and the population changes when its parts
change. The population of mice in a particular meadow is
an individual and is composed of the mice there. If the
proportion of dark-colored mice increases relative to the
proportion of
the population has
changed or evolved, but it is still the population of mice in
that meadow.

light-colored mice,

Population thinking means the appreciation of pop-
ulations as units of evolutionary change. Evolutionary
theory would be impossible without it. Darwin explained
the origin of species by conceiving of species as comprised
of populations that change across generations. The idea of
change in the composition of a population allowed evo-
lution to be explained as descent with modiﬁcation, the
result of variation with consequences for reproductive
success.

The explanation of behavior as an outcome of selection
by consequences similarly requires thinking about behavior
as comprised of individuals with parts that may change
(Baum, 2001, 2004, 2013; Glenn et al., 1992). Only if
behavioral change is seen as change in the composition of a
behavioral individual may it be explained as descent with
modiﬁcation. The behavioral analog to a population of
organisms is an activity, because an activity is an individual
with parts that may change when the parts change (Baum,
2002, 2004). A group’s pottery manufacturing is an activity
with parts like obtaining clay, processing the clay, shaping
the clay, decorating the pot, and ﬁring. If, say, the deco-
rations or
activity of
manufacturing pottery will have changed. My tennis play-
ing is an activity with parts like buying equipment, serving,
positioning, and returning the ball. My serving may change
if I toss the ball in the air differently or swing my racquet
differently, and if my serving changes, my tennis playing
changes. Behavior analysts think of changes in activities as
the result of contingencies between activity parts and
phylogenetically important events, and the effect of con-
tingencies is often labeled “selection by consequences”
(Baum, 2012; Skinner, 1981).

clay changed,

Taking the unit of change as an individualdpopulation
or activitydallows one to think of evolutionary change as
descent with modiﬁcation. To have explanatory power,

type of

the

however, descent with modiﬁcation or selection by conse-
quences requires identiﬁcation of an evolutionary process.
Plausibility requires construction of speciﬁc explanations,
which require speciﬁc mechanisms (Hull, 1988).

DARWINIAN EVOLUTIONARY PROCESS
A Darwinian evolutionary process includes three basic el-
ements: variation,
recurrence, and selection. Each is
necessary, and together they sufﬁce to ensure evolutionary
change (ie, descent with modiﬁcation).

Variation
Variation occurs within an individual
thought of as a
population or pool. A population of mice may be conceived
of as a pool of genes, each mouse containing a set of genes,
but because of recombination, a pool sufﬁciently ﬂuid that
the individual mice may often be ignored for purposes of
explaining change within the population. Within the pool,
different genes have different effects. Some inﬂuence coat
color, some lung capacity, and others the structure of the
brain. The key variation within any such pool is the vari-
ation among units that affect the same trait but produce
different phenotypic effectsdfor example, that inﬂuence
coat color but cause coat color to be dark or light. Evolu-
tionary change depends on the existence of substitutable
variants. In genetic evolution, such substitutable variants
are referred to as alleles. They are substitutable in the sense
that one allele may replace another, and they are mutually
exclusive in the sense that such replacement is all or none.
Evolutionary change consists of change in the relative
frequencies of substitutable variants within the pool or
population.

The substitutable variants in behavior are the smaller
parts of more extended activities, and the total activity over
a span of time constitutes the pool. A group’s pottery
making over the course of a decade may include a variety
of styles of decoration, and as time goes by, one of those
styles may replace the others, changing the group’s pottery
making. My tennis serving over the course of a year may
include variation in how high I toss the ball, and in time one
toss height may prevail, changing both my serving and my
tennis playing.

Functional Deﬁnition

The units within the pool are deﬁned, not by their structure,
but by their functiondthat is, by their effects. In genetic
evolution,
the question arises as to how to break the
genome into the constituent units that inﬂuence phenotype
(Dawkins, 1989a). Although DNA has structure, one
cannot tell which pieces should be called genes just by
examining the structure. According to Dawkins (1989b),

Behavior and Darwinian Evolutionary Processes Chapter | 24 399

a gene must have three properties: ﬁdelity (faithful
copying), longevity (long enough lifetime to be copied),
and fecundity (frequent copying). The units that possess
these properties, however, may be small or large pieces of
DNA, may be contiguous in a chromosome or not, may
even be in different chromosomes, and may even be in
different organisms [as in Dawkins’s example of parasites’
affecting phenotypic traits in hosts (Dawkins, 1989a,b)].
Whatever pieces of DNA act in concert to produce the
phenotypic effect may be said to be faithfully copied, to
endure well enough to be copied, and to be frequently
copied to constitute the gene. The alleles compete because
they differ in ﬁdelity, longevity, or fecundity. A degree of
copying ﬁdelity may be assumed, because it is necessary
for transmission. Differences in longevity and fecundity,
however, result from differences in the alleles’ phenotypic
effects. A darker coat color may increase its possessor’s
likelihood of surviving long enough to reproduce.

Phenotypic effects, though often thought of as effects
on morphology, are better seen as effects on the environ-
ment (Dawkins, 1989a). A darker coat color affects the
ability of predators to detect a mouse against the ground.
All phenotypic effects are environmental effects, because
they facilitate exploitation of resources, survival, or repro-
duction. The point becomes clearer if we focus on genetic
effects on behavior. Building a better nest alters the envi-
ronment of the nestlings. Dawkins uses the example of the
beaver’s dam construction, which creates the beaver pond
and reduces risk of predation, and has a host of other good
effects on the beaver’s environment. Human beings change
their environment in myriad ways, creating shelters, places
for plants to grow, instructional institutions, and so on. All
may be seen as effects on the environment that function
(usually) to enhance exploitation of resources, survival, and
reproduction.

This focus on function, in the form of environmental
effects, solves what would otherwise be an intractable
problem: how to deﬁne genes. In a broader view of selec-
tion by consequences, it solves the problem of deﬁning the
substitutable variants within the pool of variants.

The same problem of deﬁning units arises in cultural
evolution and in the evolution of individual behavior, both
of which constitute Darwinian evolutionary processes. As a
focus on the structure of DNA offers little guidance about
the deﬁnition of genes, so the structure of cultural practices
and individual operant activities tells little about how they
should be deﬁned. Not that structure is totally irrelevant; in
all
three processes, structure constrains the deﬁnitions.
DNA sequences specify the ordering of strings of amino
acids, different conﬁgurations coding for different amino
acids. Cultural practices and individual activities divide
along what Skinner (1938) called “natural lines of fracture”
(p. 33), constrained by anatomy and arrangements in the
nervous system. As the codons of DNA represent “natural

lines of fracture” and specify minimal units that may be
aggregated into genes, so ﬁxed-action patterns and the
structure of bones and muscles constrain what may be
aggregated into the substitutable variants of culture and
individual operant behavior (Skinner, 1969). The making of
a pot comprises motions of the ﬁngers and hands, but only
those motions that the structure of the ﬁngers and hands
allows. The physical motions, however, are little help when
it comes to deﬁning the evolutionary unit. That will be the
making of a certain kind of pot, and the substitutable var-
iants will be the making of other kinds of pot, some of
which may leak less, may be easier to handle, or may serve
a social
function by virtue of design. These variants
compete within the culture pool, just as alleles compete
within the gene pool.

three are deﬁned by what

All three unitsdgenes, cultural practices, and individ-
ual operant activitiesdare deﬁned in terms of environ-
mental effects. All
they
accomplish in the world with which they make contact.
Dawkins (1989a) made this clear about genes in his dis-
cussion of “extended phenotype.” Guerin (1997) clariﬁed
the point for cultural practices when he argued that the
functional unit of culture is “getting a job done.” Every
culture comprises “jobs” that must get done. At the most
general level, the jobs might be reproduction, obtaining
resources, protection from weather and enemies, and
maintaining group cohesion. These general jobs subsume
more speciﬁc jobs, such as child rearing, transport, and
ownership. Whatever the level of generality that suits the
analysis of culture,
the substitutable variants will be
different ways of getting the same job done. Different ways
of raising children, of transporting oneself and goods, or of
demonstrating group membership may compete with one
another and may differ in their outcomes. Skinner (1938,
1953, 1957) explicitly deﬁned operant “responses” (activ-
ities here) according to their environmental effects. One
might say, following Guerin (1997),
that a rat’s lever
pressing gets a job done. Although depression of a lever
constitutes a discrete unit of behavior, more extended
patterns produce more extended results. In the laboratory,
several presses may be required for a bit of food, consti-
tuting a larger unit. In the everyday world, extended
accomplishments always entail more speciﬁc accomplish-
ments. Helping an unhappy customer entails listening to the
complaint, making suggestions, talking to suppliers, and
so on. Making a living might entail ﬁnding a job, going to
work every day, specifying one’s duties, and so on. Giving
directions entails various utterancesdstatements about
location, queries, and descriptions of action. Different ways
of helping the customer, of making a living, or of giving
directions
that may
compete and may differ in their results. A customer may
come away more satisﬁed, one may make a better living,
and directions may be given more clearly.

constitute

substitutable variants

400 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

Pooling

In general,

All three processes, genetic, cultural, and behavioral evo-
lution, require a pool of variation that includes substitutable
variants.
the pool generates a frequency
distributionda proﬁle of
the frequencies of various
typesdthat may change with time. For talking about
evolutionary change, the important relative frequencies are
those of the substitutable variants. Change results from
competition. Fig. 24.1 illustrates the general idea. The top
diagram represents a hypothetical pool, within which are
substitutable variants A, B, C, and D, which occur at
different frequencies. They could represent four different
alleles for four different structures of an enzyme, or four
different ways to catch termites (eg, with ﬁngers, with a
leaf, with a stick, or with a leaf stem). The relative fre-
quencies are shown in the middle graph (open bars; the
shaded bars will be discussed later). Allele (variant) B
occurs at the highest frequency, then C, then D, and the
least frequent
is allele A. This pattern of relative fre-
quencies may remain stable with time or may change,
depending on selection.

Whereas the middle panel of Fig. 24.1 assumes
discontinuous variation, the open bars in the bottom panel
illustrate a hypothetical frequency distribution for varia-
tion ﬁne enough to be considered continuous. It could
represent variation in the genes affecting height or varia-
tion in squeezing clay that affects the thickness of the
walls of pots. Although the variants cannot be grouped
into discrete categories, they still exhibit a pattern of fre-
quencies that may remain stable or change, depending on
selection.

Fig. 24.1 illustrates the general idea of a pool charac-
terized by a pattern of frequencies, which constitutes the
essential element of variation in any Darwinian evolu-
tionary process. Genetic evolution, cultural evolution, and
behavioral evolution (shaping) all assume such a pattern of
variation, although they differ in details, such as whether
the units are localized or extended and whether variation is
continuous or discontinuous. Genes are usually thought of
as particular locations on chromosomes (ie, localized units)
and alleles as differing in physical structure (ie, varying
discontinuously), but when enough genes act in concert and
vary, the substitutable variation becomes (approximately)
continuous. Under some circumstances, such as partheno-
genesis,
the unit of variation may even be the entire
genome (Dawkins, 1989a). Then the substitutable variation
is certain to seem continuous. Although Dawkins (1989a,b)
suggested a discrete unit of cultural variation analogous to
the gene, the meme, nothing requires that the units of
culture be localized or that variation in culture be discon-
tinuous, any more than in genetic evolution. Boyd and
Richerson (1985),
for example, describe mathematical
models of cultural evolution that assume variation to be

B

B

A

B 
D 
C 
B 
A
C 
B  B

D
C
B

C
B

D
C

Frequency

Recurrence

A

B
Substitutable Variants

C

D

Frequency

Recurrence

Variant Dimension

FIGURE 24.1 Population, frequency, and recurrence. Top: a population
with four substitutable variants, A, B, C, and D. Middle: Frequencies and
recurrences of the variants. Bottom: Frequency and recurrence with
continuous variation.

continuous. In her classic book, Patterns of Culture, the
anthropologist Ruth Benedict (1934) described the patterns
of behavior in culture with the word “custom.” A custom or
a practice cannot be localized to particular moments of
time; it is an extended pattern of behavior that can only be
observed over a substantial period.

Behavior and Darwinian Evolutionary Processes Chapter | 24 401

With individual operant behavior, too, we are under no
compulsion to assume discontinuous variation or localized
units. That variation may be continuous is recognized in the
study of response dimensions such as force, duration, and
rate. The assumption that behavior must be deﬁned in terms
of momentary response units, however, has persisted for
over 100 years. Nineteenth-century connectionism, in the
forms of associationism and reﬂexology, promoted a view
of behavior as composed of localized units such as ideas,
sensations, and responses. That view was an accident of
history, however, and may be overcome. Baum and Rachlin
(1969), for example, suggested that behavior be divided
into periods ﬁlled with various activities. Favorite re-
sponses of the laboratory, such as the lever press and the
key peck, may be recast as activities, lever pressing and key
pecking, which extend in time (Baum, 1976). Rachlin
(1994) suggested that behavior generally be thought of as
organized into patterns extended in time (Baum, 1995a,
1997, 2002, 2004, 2013). As with the customs of culture,
an individual’s daily behavior may be divided into activ-
ities like working, attending to family, and entertainment,
none of which may be localized to moments in time.

the snapshot

In practice, however,

Frequency distributions like those in Fig. 24.1 presup-
pose that one may characterize the variation in a gene pool
or behavior pool by taking a sort of snapshot of the fre-
quencies at a moment in time. This might seem necessary
for analytical purposes, because the frequencies may be
changing.
is an
abstraction, just as instantaneous velocity in physics is an
abstraction, because any real sample is extended in time. In
a gene pool, birth and death constantly alter the picture. For
a behavioral pool, temporal extension is unavoidable. The
customs of a culture or the habits of an individual cannot
occur at a moment
in time. The problem of taking a
“snapshot” of frequencies is solved by choosing a time
period long enough to provide an adequate sample but short
enough that the pool may be thought of as unchanging for
that duration. Depending on rate of change, one might
gather data over a period of weeks, months, or years. As
long as change in the pattern of frequencies during a period
of sampling is negligible in comparison with change be-
tween samples, the course of change in the pool may be
studied. That population thinking is central
to genetic
evolution has long been recognized. Population thinking,
however, is equally central to understanding evolution of
cultural behavior and individual operant behavior (Glenn
et al., 1992; Hull et al., 2001).

Cultural Practices and Individual
Operant Behavior

The line between cultural practices and operant behavior
patterns may be ﬁne. Indeed, Skinner (1981) argued that
cultural patterns are operant patterns. Since cultural practices

presumably are maintained by their consequences,
they
might be considered operant patterns by deﬁnition. They may
be distinguished, however, for the purpose of discussing
cultural evolution by two characteristics. First, cultural
practices are the possession of a group. To be called a cultural
practice, a behavior pattern must occur in the members of a
groupdpossibly a subgroup within a larger group, but
deﬁnitely in more than one individual. Second, cultural
practices are transmitted from member to member in the
group. Unlike individual operant patterns, which one may
say are transmitted to the same individual at different times,
cultural practices are transmitted from one individual to
another and may occur in different individuals at the same
time.

Recurrence
Recurrence means “occurring again” or “coming up again.”
It is a general term for the tendency of a type of unit to
reappear, with variation, time after time in the populationda
more general term than “replication,” “transmission,” or
“retention” (Baum, 2001; Campbell, 1965).

The “Copying” Metaphor

Genetic evolution is usually taken as the paradigmatic
example of a Darwinian evolutionary process. As a proto-
type, genetic evolution has both advantages and disad-
vantages. An advantage is that
it has received enough
attention to be both familiar and relatively well understood.
A disadvantage is that, being comparatively well under-
stood, some of its peculiarities are too easily mistaken for
properties of evolutionary processes in general. This is
particularly true of its mode of recurrence, which is often
described with the metaphor of “copying.”

Evolutionary recurrence need little resemble copying a
page in a photocopier. The word “replication” may be a
synonym for copying, but may also be equated to recon-
struction, which, for DNA, would be closer to the mark. We
know about the uncoiling of the strands and the assembling
of amino acids into replicate strands, with some recombi-
nation and occasional errors. In meiosis, the entire genome
is replicated and divided into haploid components at once.
The entire haploid genome is passed as a whole to the next
generation. We need to ask, however, which properties of
genetic transmission are essential for evolution. Darwin
knew nothing of what we know about genetics today. Yet
he was the author of the theory of evolution. His ignorance
of genetics in no way prevented him from seeing the role of
recurrence.

Darwin understood what was necessary: that the traits
of parents tend to recur in offspring. More generally, the
traits of one generation are passed on to the next generation.
Even the words “parent,” “offspring,” and “generation”

402 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

impede generalization. The essential part
is recurrence
through time. Traits tend to “breed true.” In the gene pool
of a population of mice, the genes that make for a dark coat
tend to recur through time, with the result that dark coats
tend to recur (and possibly lower predation rate). In the
beavers’ gene pool, the genes that make for dam con-
structing tend to recur, and if substitutable variants exist,
each variant tends to recur, although selection may favor
one variant over others. True, the recurrence of genes is the
result of the details of reproduction, and those details are
essential to understanding many aspects of genetic evolu-
tion. For a general deﬁnition of evolutionary process,
however, what counts is the tendency of types in a popu-
lation to recur in time.

Today we forgive Darwin for having believed in the
inheritance of acquired characteristics, but writers about
culture point out that such inheritance does occur in cultural
evolution (eg, Boyd and Richerson, 1985). Again, how-
ever, the mechanism of recurrence is only important for
understanding the details of cultural evolution. That it en-
tails the inheritance of acquired characteristics helps us to
understand the ways in which cultural evolution differs
from genetic evolution. It is faster, for example, because
transmission may occur between any individuals, not just
parents and offspring, and may occur throughout the life-
time of an individual. It occurs as a result of imitation and
instruction, although we might argue about exactly what
those processes entail
(Baum, 2000, 2005). The key,
however, is that if a potter makes a certain kind of pot, his
students will make the same kind of pot, and their students
also, and so on. The practice recurs through time in the
culture’s pool of practices.

Suppose, instead of genetic evolution, we took behav-
ioral evolution (ie, shaping) as the paradigmatic example of
an evolutionary process. We would see immediately that
copying or replication is just one means of recurrence. A
pigeon in an experiment pecks at a key time after time. A
person goes to work day after day. Too little is known
about the nervous system to say what the mechanism is by
which behavior recurs in the same organism from time to
time. Luckily, we may proceed with studying behavior
without having any idea how recurrence is accomplished.
The situation resembles that in biology prior to the syn-
thesis of genetics with evolution in the early part of the 20th
century.

Imperfect Recurrence

Part of the reason for variation is that recurrence is often
imperfect. Hull (1988) deﬁnes a replicator as “an entity
that passes on its structure largely intact in successive
replications” (p. 408). A paraphrase for the sake of gen-
erality might substitute “recurrences” for “replications.”
Emphasis, however, should fall on the word “largely.”

Accidents happen. In genetic evolution, reconstruction of
DNA sometimes goes awry. In cultural evolution, imita-
tion and instruction may be inexact. In behavioral evolu-
tion,
too, variation is intrinsic to recurrence, because
context never exactly repeats, reconstruction even of a
stereotyped activity like key pecking varies, and accidents
happen. Recurrence need only have high ﬁdelity; it need
not be perfect. Indeed, one might argue that it must be
imperfect, if the pool is to include sufﬁcient variation to
produce novelty. Without novel types, a pool’s response
to selection must eventually cease.

Recurrence in Behavior

In genetic and cultural evolution, the units (genes or prac-
tices) may outlive their possessors (their “vehicles” in
Dawkins’s (1989b) parlance; their “interactors” in Hull’s
(1988)). Individual operant behavior, in contrast, must die
with its possessordby deﬁnition, because if it lived on in
others, it would be considered cultural. In no way, however,
does this disqualify behavioral shaping as an evolutionary
process. The key elements remain: a pool of variation,
substitutable variants, and recurrence of variants through
time. The frequency distributions in Fig. 24.1 might
describe genetic variation, cultural variation, or behavioral
variation. Whether they remain stable or change with time
depends on their relation to selection.

Selection
The key to selection is differential recurrence. If substitut-
able variant A1 tends, on the average and over time, to
recur more frequently than A2, the relative frequency of A1
increases at the expense of the relative frequency of A2.
This happens if the size of the pool of variants is ﬁxed or
increases more slowly than the variants’ rate of recurrence.
Usually one assumes the pool size to be ﬁxed, because the
size of a population of mice, for example, is limited by the
environment’s carrying capacitydthat
the resources
available to support the population. A behavioral pool, of
cultural variants or individual behavioral variants, is ﬁxed
by limits on time, because only so much behavior can occur
in a 24 h day. Consequently, when one substitutable variant
increases in frequency, another must decrease. If one
variant is more successful, it tends to replace the other.

is,

One substitutable variant succeeds over another by
virtue of superior environmental effects. For genetic evo-
lution,
this is where longevity and fecundity come in.
Genes endure if their vehicles (interactors) endure, and
recur if their vehicles (interactors) reproduce. The speciﬁc
reasons
for enhanced recurrence may be extremely
varieddbetter defending or capturing of resources, better
avoidance of predators, better defense against parasites,
better mate selection, more mates, more offspring, better

Behavior and Darwinian Evolutionary Processes Chapter | 24 403

care of offspring, and so on. All of these superior envi-
ronmental effects ultimately increase the recurrence of the
alleles that produce them and thus decrease the recurrence
of the less successful alleles. For cultural and behavioral
evolution, the same sorts of environmental effects act on
the pool, but
therefore, with some
slippage.

less directly and,

Selection in Culture

The consequences of cultural practices that vary, making
one variant more successful than another, may be thought
of as reinforcers and punishers. Practices are maintained
proximally by social reinforcement and punishment (Baum,
1995b, 2000, 2005; Skinner, 1981). “Our group shuns the
eating of pork” is backed up with punishment (eg, disap-
proval, ostracism) for eating pork. “This mode of adorn-
ment is correct” is backed up with reinforcement (eg, status,
mating opportunities) for adorning oneself so. Ultimately,
the maintaining and differentiating social reinforcement
and punishment are cashed out in terms of reproductive
success of the vehicles (interactors) that carry the genes
producing susceptibility to social consequences (“docility”;
Simon, 1990). If group membership is beneﬁcial to repro-
ductive success, then group cohesion and cooperation are
beneﬁcial, and practices that make for group cohesion and
the members’
cooperation are selected as a result of
docilitydtheir
susceptibility to social
consequences.
Indeed, Boyd and Richerson (1992) demonstrated theoret-
ically that social punishment allows selection of coopera-
tion and just about any other behavior salutary to the group.
[This summary omits other adaptations, such as sensory
specializations and imitation (Baum, 2000, 2005).]

Dawkins (1989b) argued that

the slippage between
proximal social consequences and ultimate reproductive
consequences allows cultural evolution to proceed inde-
pendently of genetic evolution. The logic of genetic evo-
lution goes against such a view (El Mouden et al., 2014). If
some alleles make for more docility than others, the most
successful alleles lie somewhere in the middle of the range
of possible levels of docility, somewhere between none and
“anything goes.” Too much docility means too little cer-
tainty of reproduction, because too much docility allows the
spread and maintenance of customs that reduce reproduc-
tion. Thus, ultimately, alleles producing too much docility
are selected against. (Boyd and Richerson (1985) make a
similar point in their discussion of the tension between
imitation and individual learning.)

One factor that curbs docility is primary reinforcement
and punishment. As Dawkins (1989b, p. 57) suggests,
consequences like “sweet taste in the mouth, orgasm, mild
temperature, smiling child” or “various sorts of pain,
nausea, empty stomach, screaming child” may have a ge-
netic base because their presence generally affects the

likelihood of successful reproduction. Such stimuli consti-
tute proximate tokens of ultimate reproductive success or
failure, called elsewhere phylogenetically important events
(PIE; Baum, 2005, 2012). If an interactor (vehicle) could be
put together that would increase any behavior that produced
the good environmental effects (circumstances that enhance
reproductive success) and avoided the bad environmental
effects (circumstances that depress reproductive success),
such an interactor (vehicle) would prosper, and genes it
carried would be more likely to recur in subsequent gen-
erations. As a result, genes that make for susceptibility to
reinforcement by ﬁtness-enhancing PIEs are selected. As a
result, neither individual behavior nor cultural customs will
stray too far from patterns that maintain the frequency of
those PIEs. They will stray, however, for two reasons. First,
the PIEs’ bearing on reproductive success is far from
certain. Sweet taste is a reinforcer, and some consumption
causes no problems, but overindulgence in sweets un-
dermines health. Second, PIEs may conﬂict with one
another. The same behavior that produces a smiling child
may also produce an empty stomach. Which should win out
may be far from clear; only the calculus of long-term
reproduction can tell. When short-term and long-term
consequences conﬂict
this way, dysfunctional behavior
may arise (Baum, 2016; Rachlin, 1995). Whether it persists
or not depends on whether patterns that enhance ﬁtness in
the long run, such as eating fruits and vegetables, replace
the dysfunctional ones, such as eating junk food (Baum,
2000, 2005, 2015; Rachlin, 1995). Although a person may
die before dysfunctional behavior is replaced, correction in
culture lies under no such limitation. It may take a few
generations.

Primacy of Reproductive Success

Maladaptive customs tend to drop out of the culture pool
for two reasons: ﬁrst, because failure to correct results in
natural selection. Those who overindulge in sweets tend to
become sick with diabetes and leave fewer offspring as a
result (Diamond, 1992). Maladaptive customs decrease in
frequency when their vehicles (interactors) leave fewer
descendants to continue the customs. Groups that follow
dangerous or abstinent practices, such as Quantrill’s
Raiders or the Shakers, tend to disappear. Second, but
probably more important,
is that maladaptive customs
contrast with their competitors (substitutable variants) in
the calculus of reinforcement and punishmentdie, in the
tokens of ﬁtness. Prohibition in the United States was a
response to the ruinous effects of overindulgence in
alcohol; today educational campaigns encourage patterns of
moderation or abstinence, based on better quality of life.
When a maladaptive custom like smoking tobacco spreads
through a culture because of short-term reinforcement, its
long-term punishing effects eventually come into focus in

404 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

the form of social contingencies that punish it more
immediately (or reinforce alternatives like nicotine patches
more immediately).

The power of reinforcers and punishers as tokens of
long-term reproductive success makes persistence of mal-
adaptive customs unlikely. The genetic underpinnings of
reinforcement and punishment argue against Dawkins’s
(1989a,b) conjecture that cultural evolution proceeds
independently of genetic evolution. The genes that underlie
learning and culture open the door, so to speak, to envi-
ronmental inﬂuence, but they do not ﬂing it wide.

in cultural and behavioral evolution,

Selection in all three processesdgenetic, cultural, and
behavioral evolutiondmay be traced back to reproductive
success of genetic variants. In genetic evolution, the rela-
tion is direct;
the
relation is less direct, but still present. When genes that
make behavior sensitive to its consequences are selected,
that must mean that the advantages of behavioral ﬂexibility
outweigh the costs it imposes in terms of energy and risk of
error. If not, competitor genes that allow less ﬂexibility
would prevail. So, tokens of reproductive success (PIEs)
attain the status of reinforcers, because variation in the
environment rewards ﬂexibility in the means to them. Signs
of health,
relationships became
powerful reinforcers, because the interactors (vehicles) for
which they were reinforcers reproduced more often. A
parallel argument applies to punishers, such as nausea,
pain, snakes, and frowns. The same mechanisms of rein-
forcement and punishment that select among substitutable
variants in behavioral evolution select also in cultural
evolution. The differences are that cultural evolution entails
transmission from individual to individualdimitation and
instructiondand therefore depends heavily on social
stimuli for provenance, and social reinforcement and pun-
ishment for selection.

resources, and social

In all three of the processes we are discussing, a ques-
tion arises about the extent of the vehicles or interactors.
Hull (1988) deﬁnes an interactor as “an entity that interacts
as a cohesive whole with its environment in such a way that
this interaction causes replication [ie, recurrence] to be
differential” (p. 408; italics in the original; bracketed ma-
terial added). But how large a unit can interact as a
“cohesive whole”? Group selection has been treated with
skepticism among evolutionary biologists, because it
should normally be too weak to have much effect on gene
frequencies. To work, it would require that gene ﬂow into
the group be negligible. That might be true of colonies of
eusocial insects, for example (Seeley, 1989), but it would
be unlikely for most groups, because of immigration of new
members into the group.
In cultural evolution, group
cohesion is more likely, because imitation and instruction
maintain a high degree of conformity within the group,
even if new members join (Boyd and Richerson, 1992). In
cultural group selection, groups with certain practices (eg, a

type of food cultivation or cooperation in obtaining re-
sources) may out-compete other groups. The advantaged
group may increase in frequency if it reproduces by ﬁssion
and if competing groups tend to dissolve.

In evolution of individual operant behavior, where the
distinction between replicators and interactors disappears,
the analog to group selection is the temporally extended
contingency. Extended contingencies are often discussed in
terms of delays of reinforcement. The more temporally
extended the behavioral pattern,
the more delayed the
consequences. Alternatively, one may consider delay to be
incidental and the crucial aspect of extended patterns to be
their cohesiveness. Extended behavioral patterns, such as
eating a good diet, are notoriously difﬁcult to maintain.
Rachlin (1995) argues that good extended patterns (often
called “self-control”) have a greater long-term payoff than
short-term patterns (called “impulsiveness” or “defections”
from the larger pattern). A defection from eating a good
dietdeating an ice cream sundaedhas an immediate
payoff, but poorer consequences in the long run than eating
a good diet (Baum, 2016). Selection on extended patterns is
weak for the same reason that group selection on genes is
weak. The boundaries of the group or of the extended
pattern tend to be permeabledto immigration or
to
defectiondthe greater the permeability, the weaker is se-
lection. This may be overcome in behavioral evolution by
introducing relatively short-term contingencies that main-
tain the extended pattern intact (eg, reminders about one’s
diet).

Why not Phenotypic Plasticity?

to another,

To explain the variation of culture or behavior from one
environment
the alternative to selection is
phenotypic plasticity. Cosmides and Tooby (1992) and
Tooby and Cosmides (1992), for example, put forward the
idea that
the human brain contains a large number of
“modules,” “algorithms,” or “mechanisms” that produce
behavior depending on environmental conditions. They
contend, “If human thought falls into recurrent patterns
from place to place and from time to time, this is because it
is the expression of, and anchored in, universal psycho-
logical mechanisms” (p. 216). They refer to such patterns
as “evoked culture.” The conception has been compared to
a jukebox containing recordings that can be played when-
ever called upon (Wilson, 1999). When food availability is
highly variable, the “social contract algorithm” plays out
food sharing; when food availability is stable, the jukebox
plays keeping food within the family. Such explanations
fail on two grounds. First,
they are implausible. They
exaggerate what
that genes constrain
evolution of cultural practices and of individual behavior,
to make a claim that would skip over the obvious effects
of consequences on behavior. Instead of sensitivity to

is probably true,

Behavior and Darwinian Evolutionary Processes Chapter | 24 405

they substitute inputeoutput

rules; given a
feedback,
certain environmental
input, the mechanism produces a
certain output. Such a view fails to explain an obvious fact:
that culture evolves even if the environment remains con-
stant. Second, alternative explanations are more plausible.
If human behavior “falls into recurrent patterns,” that may
be because of convergent cultural or behavioral evolution.
Similar contingencies select similar behavior.

that

Price’s Equation
George Price (1970, 1972) derived an equation, using
straightforward algebra,
expresses precisely the
meaning of natural selection. Imagine a population or group
of N members at two time periods or “generations.” A trait
or property of these members x varies among them. The
trait could be the presence (x ¼ 1) or absence (x ¼ 0) of a
particular allele (x ¼ 0, 0.5, or 1.0 for diploidy), or a
quantitative trait like body size or coloration. At Time 1,
the mean of x across individuals is x. Each individual i
contributes wi surviving offspring to the population at Time
2di’s ﬁtness or recurrence. Deﬁne a variable vi that equals
wi=w, the relative ﬁtness of i. Each vi is a weight; their sum
equals N and their mean equals 1.0. The mean of x at Time
2 x

0

equals: X

X

vixi=N þ

viDxi=N;

i

i

P

where Dxi is the change in xi for member i from Time 1 to
Time 2 due to imperfect ﬁdelity of recurrence. Using the


, and taking
deﬁnition of covariance
0   x leads to the simplest form of
the difference, Dx ¼ x
the Price equation (see Price (1970) and McElreath and
Boyd (2007, Chapter 6) for more detail):
Dx ¼ covðvi; xiÞ þ EvðDxiÞ.

i vixi=N   vx

(24.1)

Eq. (24.1) says that the mean change in x equals the
dependence of relative ﬁtness on xi plus an expected value
that gives the mean change in x apart from the covariance.
The covariance represents selection; if relative ﬁtness varies
positively with xi, Dx is positive, and the trait increases in
the population. If the covariance is negative, the trait de-
creases, and if the covariance is zero, the trait remains
stable. The second term on the right, which expresses the
tendency of x to change as it recurs from Time 1 to Time 2
due to factors usually rare or negligible (eg, mutation or
meiotic drive), may be considered close to zero for genetic
evolution.

Put

in more general

terms, Eq. (24.1) says that

if
recurrence is differential with respect to various levels of a
trait and ﬁdelity of recurrence is high, then the trait recurs
increasingly (positive covariance) or recurs decreasingly
(negative covariance) in the population. Since the equation

is an identity, it describes rather than predicts, but it is a
valuable analytical tool for thinking about selectiondfor
example, group selection.

Suppose that the group under consideration is one group
among many, because the population is structured into
groups. Since Eq. (24.1) does not depend on the sort of
individuals, Eq. (24.1) would also apply to selection among
groups. For the sake of clarity, we index groups with the
subscript g and apply Eq. (24.1) to get an expression
deﬁning Dxg the change in average ﬁtness of the group. The
equation says that if the covariance between levels of xg
and relative ﬁtness vg is positive, a group with a higher
mean of x increases in x and grows in size relative to other
groups. For example, if darker coloration is advantageous
in avoiding predators, a group with darker coloration will
grow and become darker.
In applying Eq. (24.1) to group selection, however, the
second term on the right, EvðDxgÞ, is no longer negligible,
because the change in xg apart from group selection in-
cludes changes in individual members due to selection at
the level of individual members. Recognizing that xg is a
mean across members in the group that may change from
Time 1 to Time 2, we treat Dxg the same way we treated Dx
 
and arrive at:
Dx ¼ cov vg; xg
where the subscript ig indicates member i in group g (see
Henrich (2004) and McElreath and Boyd (2007, Chapter
6) for more detail).

 þ Eg cov vig; xig

 þ Ev Dxig

(24.2)


;

 



 



The right-hand side of Eq. (24.2) has two components:
one for selection between groups and one for selection
between members within groups, the expected value term.
For genetic evolution, we may ignore the expected value of
Dxig in Eq. (24.2) as we did the expected value of Dxi in Eq.
(24.1), because the change would be due to rare or negli-
gible factors such as meiotic drive and mutation. Eq. (24.2)
then simpliﬁes to the sum of a covariance for between-
group selection and expected value of covariance for
within-group selection.

 



An alternative form of the Price equation that uses the
algebraic relation between covariance and the regression
coefﬁcient b may further clarify understanding of group
selection (see Henrich (2004) and McElreath and Boyd
(2007, Chapter 6) for more detail):
 
Dx ¼ b vg; xg
Eq. (24.3) makes clear that the dependence (b) between
v and x and the variance in x must both be greater than zero
for selection to occur. Each term on the right implies a role
for each of the three ingredients of evolution: variation
(var(x)), selection (b), and recurrence (v).

   þ E b vig; xig

var xig

var xg

(24.3)





 





:

When applied to genetic evolution, Eq. (24.3) clariﬁes
why genes for altruistic and cooperative behavior are un-
likely to be selected by genetic evolution on its own. Some

406 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

traits may have both between-group and within-group
components that act in concertdboth have positive bd
such as body size (helpful in intergroup combat) or ten-
dency to stay close to the rest of the group (avoiding
predators). Genes for altruism or cooperation, however,
though helpful for the group, tend to reduce the ﬁtness of
individuals that behave so. Thus, b is positive for between-
group selection, but negative for within-group selection.
Since variance across groups var(xg) in particular is low-
ered by migration between groups, the groups have to be
practically completely isolated for group selection to
overcome negative individual selection. Since negative b is
likely to be high for any individual incurring an immediate
cost for helping or cooperating with strangers, and within-
group variance var(xig) is unlikely to be zero, even a small
amount of migration between groups will ensure that
between-group selection is smaller than the within-group
selection, making Dx negative.

Eqs. (24.1)e(24.3) may be applied to cultural evolution,
too, with suitable changes in deﬁnition. A cultural practice
that might be considered all or none (eg, allowing marriage
between ﬁrst cousins or not, eating pork or not, and pri-
mogeniture or not) would take the place of an allele that is
present or not. As with genetic evolution, however, quan-
titative variation in a practice (eg, a ritual performed daily
or less often, for longer or shorter duration, with more or
less of some ingredient, etc.) would do just as well for the
variable x.

Recurrence of a practice from Time 1 and Time 2 goes,
not just vertically as in genetic evolution, but obliquely and
horizontally also (Boyd and Richerson, 1985; Richerson
et al., 2016). Teachers, coaches, ministers, and peers both
model practices and instruct practices that have proven
successful
in gaining the proximate tokens of ultimate
ﬁtness (reinforcers and avoidance of punishers). Particu-
larly if these inﬂuential people are prestigious and display
the trappings of success, this modeling and instructing spur
the recurrence of the practice at Time 2, denoted, as before,
wi. As before, too, vi is relative recurrence, wi=w, and if
covariance between vi and xi
the practice
spreads. The second term on the right might be considered
nonnegligible if one wished to incorporate errors on the
part of recipients, but usually may be considered negligible
because errors would likely be insigniﬁcant compared with
selection (see El Mouden et al.
(2014; supplemental
Document S1) for a detailed derivation of Eq. (24.1) for
culture and further discussion).

is positive,

Eq. (24.1) would be about the spread of a practice
through a cultural group. If we think of cultural groups as
parts of a larger population, they may compete with one
another for resources and members. Eqs. (24.2) and (24.3)
will apply, with the same changes in meaning of the vari-
ables. Eq. (24.2) contains the same two components of
intergroup selection and within-group selection (El

Mouden et al., 2014; Henrich, 2004). If a cultural practice
beneﬁts the group, and the more members practice it, or the
more members’ increased xg increases the prevalence of xg
in the group (vg), the more positive is the ﬁrst term in Eq.
(24.2). Whether the covariance in the second term is pos-
itive or negative depends on whether it is beneﬁcial or
harmful to the individual who engages in the practice.

To understand how an altruistic or cooperative practice
can spread in a population, Eq. (24.3) shows what happens
if the within-group covariance for members is negative. As
with genetic group selection,
the variances var(xg) and
var(xig) are crucial. In cultural group selection, biases in
imitation and instruction (“transmission biases”) that pro-
mote conformity lower var(xig) to near zero, even in the
face of considerable immigration between groups. For
example, if immigrants into a group tend to adopt the
practice that is most frequent or above average in the group
or tend to adopt the practice of prestigious or successful
group members, their conformity will keep var(xig) low
(Henrich, 2004). Thus, the cost to the individual repre-
sented by the negative covariance of the second term may
be offset by the positive covariance for the group, and
altruistic and cooperative practices can spread in the pop-
ulation. The group in which members sacriﬁce for the
group will gain more resources than other groups and will
increase in numbers at
the expense of other groups
(Henrich, 2004).

Eq. (24.2) represents “multilevel” selection, but just at
two levelsdgroups and individuals (McElreath and Boyd,
2007, Chapter 6). A practice may have many parts, and
some of these parts may change without the practice taking
on a new identity. For example, a manufacturing process
or a ritual may drop or add elements; the American Pledge
of Allegiance after many years changed to include the
words “under God,” but it is still the Pledge of Allegiance,
and process improvement constantly upgrades manufac-
ture of automobiles, but the practice remains the manu-
facture of automobiles (Baum, 2002). When practices
change in their parts, one might consider a third level of
selection: within-practice selection. In Eq. (24.2), Dxig
may be treated as change due to competition among
alternative parts within the practice and expanded as
before to result in a three-term Price equation (McElreath
and Boyd, 2007, Chapter 6).

As far as I know, no one has applied Price’s equation to
behavioral evolution. The entities that may vary would no
longer be individual organisms, because we are dealing
with the behavior of a single organism. The varying entities
are time samples within a larger time interval that consti-
tutes the populationdseconds within a minute, minutes
within an hour, hours within a day, weeks within a year,
and so on (Baum, 1973, 2012). The variable xi that differs
across time samples may be occurrence or not of an ac-
tivity, if the time samples are short, or rate or time taken up

Behavior and Darwinian Evolutionary Processes Chapter | 24 407

by the activity, if the time samples are longer, or any other
quantitative aspect of an activity. The mechanism of
recurrence is induction, which for operant activities is
based on positive covariance with reinforcers and negative
covariance with punishers (Baum, 2012). Eq. (24.1) applied
to behavioral evolution means that if time samples (indexed
by i) including more of an activity in Time Interval 1
correspond to relatively more such time samples in Time
Interval 2 (ie, positive covariance with vi in Eq. (24.1)),
then the activity ðxÞ increases from Time Interval 1 (Pop-
ulation 1) to Time Interval 2 (Population 2)dDx is posi-
tive. In a laboratory example, if a rat’s rate of lever pressing
is measured in 2 min intervals, the rate varies and may
increase from 1 h to the next (Baum, 2012, Fig. 17). If a
person’s life changes by having children, spending more
time with family daily in a period (population) of a month
may vary positively with relative recurrence vi in the next
month, and the amount of time spent with family increases
from month to month.

As with cultural group selection, Eqs. (24.2) and (24.3)
apply to operant activities at a level or time scale of se-
lection that may include selection at a lower level or shorter
time scale. Cultural practices are, after all, operant activ-
ities. In an ontological perspective, operant activities and
cultural practices are individuals with parts that work
together to serve a function (Baum, 2002; Ghiselin, 1997).
The analog to group selection is selection of whole activ-
ities extended in time, like playing tennis well or poorly
and relating to one’s spouse well or poorly. The analog of
within-group selection is the selection of parts referred to
earlier, because every activity is composed of parts that are
themselves activities on a smaller time scale (Baum, 2002,
2012; Baum and Davison, 2004). Thus, the second term in
Eq. (24.2) for behavioral evolution represents selection
among parts of an activity. A tennis player’s serve may
improve when the ball is thrown up in a new way, and that
variant may be selected. Active listening may improve
one’s relationship with one’s spouse and be selected to
replace a passive stance.

Eq. (24.3) for behavioral evolution illuminates prob-
lems in self-control, including altruism and cooperation.
The conﬂict between impulsivity and self-control trans-
lates into a positive ﬁrst term on the right (self-control)
and a negative second term (impulsivity). Avoiding a bad
habit or cultivating a good habit (eg, refusing a drink or a
piece of cake or visiting the dentist) entails the cost of
forgoing immediate enjoyment or of immediate discom-
fort, whereas the extended pattern (xg; sobriety, dieting, or
good health) has positive b, but the positive b must sufﬁce
to offset the negative b of the second term (for xig). This
offsetting may occur if var(xig) is reduced to zero by
following a rule that enforces good behavior (refusal of
the drink or cake; doing the right thing) on particular
occasions. Seen this way, altruism and cooperation are

examples of good habits with immediate cost and long-
term beneﬁt (Baum, 2016; Rachlin, 1995, 2002).

Price’s equation is incomplete or limited in two ways.
First, it relies on linear regression (Price, 1970). The full-
range relation between xi and vi may be nonlinear; often
it will approach an asymptote, because a stable level of x in
a population, due to dominance or frequency-dependent
selection, will go along with reduced variance in vi.
When the population reaches equilibrium, the covariance
between vi and xi disappears. Thus, Price’s equation only
has meaning when a population is in the process of
evolving and we consider a limited range of xi over which
the relation between vi and xi is approximately linear. It
doesn’t apply to the whole process of change toward
equilibrium. Second, by focusing on one particular allele,
trait, or variable, the equation ignores the fate of other,
competing variants. In all three evolutionary processes, if
one variant
increases, usually others must decrease.
Competition implies a limitdcarrying capacity for genetic
evolution, ﬁxed or slowly growing population for cultural
evolution, and ﬁxed time interval for behavioral evolution.
A complete picture requires considering the fates of all the
substitutable, competing, variants.

EVOLUTIONARY EXPLANATIONS OF
BEHAVIOR
Mayr (1961) distinguished between proximate and ultimate
explanations of behavior. Alcock (1993) incorporated the
distinction into a textbook on animal behavior. According
to Alcock, proximate explanations explain “how mecha-
nisms within an animal operate, enabling the creature to
behave in a certain way” (p. 2; emphasis in the original).
Ultimate explanations explain how those mechanisms
evolved as a result of selection. Proximate explanations
refer to physiology and development. Ultimate explana-
tions refer to history and reproductive success.

Genetic Proximate and Ultimate
Explanations
individual organisms,
Proximate explanations are about
whereas ultimate explanations are about populations. The
question, “Why do beavers build dams?” may be answered
in two different ways. In one interpretation, the account
would refer to stimuli from water and trees, the structure of
the nervous system, hormones, and so on. It would explain
how the cluster of genes that make for dam building ex-
press themselves in physiology and interact with the envi-
ronment to ensure that Beaver X, alive today, builds a dam.
That would be a proximate explanation. The ultimate
explanation,
in contrast, would make no reference to
Beaver X, but would be about beavers as a species or about
a population of beavers or about
the gene pool of a

408 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

population of beavers, to which Beaver X or its genes
might belong. It would refer to the adaptive consequences
of building dams, variation within populations long ago,
and increase in the frequency of alleles promoting dam
building. It would explain how those alleles became com-
mon in the gene pool. Proximate explanations are silent
about where the mechanisms for dam building came from.
Ultimate explanations are silent about Beaver X, except to
say that Beaver X builds a dam because it is the nature of
beavers to build dams, and then to explain where that na-
ture came from. So to speak, ultimate explanations are
about the forest, whereas proximate explanations are about
the trees.

Proximate explanations explain the behavior of indi-
vidual organisms in terms of present mechanisms, whereas
ultimate explanations explain patterns of frequency within a
pool, such as those shown in Fig. 24.1, in terms of a process
of differential success. Proximate explanations refer to
causes in the present, whereas ultimate explanations rely on
processes that may be called historical, because they extend
in time (Baum and Heath, 1992). Evolutionary change re-
sults from continual operation of the process of selection
over a period of time. That it takes time may be incidental,
because it is a process of adjustment with a beginning in a
disturbance (in the environment or in the population) and
an end in a stabilized population. It is understood as a
whole; at any point in-between, it is incomplete. Suppose
the shaded bars in the middle panel of Fig. 24.1 represent
the relative rates of success (recurrence) from one time
period (eg, generation) to the next. Although variant A is
lowest in frequency, it has the highest rate of recurrence.
Given this pattern, we expect the frequency of variant A to
increase, and the frequencies of B, C, and D to decrease. If
relative recurrence is independent of frequency, the process
will be incomplete until A dominates. (If relative recurrence
is frequency dependent, a different equilibrium results, but
that in no way affects this discussion.) Suppose the curve in
the lower panel of Fig. 24.1 shows relative recurrence for
the continuous case. The situation is essentially the same;
we expect the frequency distribution to shift to the right.
Eventually, we expect its maximum to coincide with the
maximum of the curve; then the distribution stabilizes, and
selection acts to keep it stable.

Cultural Proximate and Ultimate
Explanations
Since every evolutionary process includes the distinction
between the mechanism that produces the advantageous
behavior and the history of advantage for that behavior,
cultural evolution and behavioral evolution also admit of
the distinction between proximate and ultimate explana-
tions (Alessi, 1992). In cultural evolution, the mechanism
by which a custom is transmitted explains why it persists

(ie, why it recurs), whereas the prevalence of the custom
ultimately lies in a history of competition and selection. As
with the question, “Why do beavers build dams?” the
question, “Why does this tribe adorn themselves with tat-
toos?” may be interpreted and answered in two different
ways. In the proximate interpretation, the question might be
reworded as, “Why do the members of the Hell’s Angels
motorcycle club wear the club’s tattoos?” Alternatively,
“Why does Tom, who belongs to Hell’s Angels, wear the
tattoos?” Three or more mechanisms of transmission might
be involved. Tom might imitate other members of the tribe.
Other members might instruct Tom: “If you want to be
accepted, you should get the tattoos.” Once Tom began
getting tattoos, reinforcement from tribe members might
lead to getting more tattoos. In the ultimate interpretation,
the question might be reworded as, “How did it come about
that the Hell’s Angels wear those tattoos?” The answer
would refer to the history of selection in the culture pool.
Tattooing may have competed with other forms of adorn-
ment, such as wearing black jackets, wearing hair in a
ponytail, or speaking in a certain dialect. One or two
members may have gotten tattoos. Other members who saw
them frequently may have imitated them as a result. Boyd
and Richerson (1985) call this frequency-dependent bias.
The ﬁrst members with tattoos may have been imitated by
the other members or may have been able to instruct the
other members because they held high status in the club.
Boyd and Richerson (1985) call this tendency to imitate
success indirect bias. Tattooing may have worked better to
identify members because other groups might wear black
jackets or ponytails and because dialects vary from region
to region; tattoos are permanent and unambiguous. Boyd
and Richerson (1985) would call reinforcement of a custom
by such an environmental effect direct bias. Any combi-
nation of indirect bias, frequency-dependent bias, and direct
bias would result in an increase in the frequency of wearing
tattoos among the tribe, until the wearing of tattoos became
virtually universal.

Nesting of Evolutionary Processes
Genetic evolution may be thought of as an overlay on
cultural evolution. Ultimate and proximate genetic expla-
nations may be constructed for the question, “Why do the
Hell’s Angels wear tattoos?” They would be analogous to
the explanations of dam building in beavers. The proximate
rewording of the question would be, “Why did Tom get
himself tattooed?” As with Beaver X, the explanation refers
to stimuli (eg, from the behavior of other members), re-
inforcers (eg, from the other members), development (eg,
early exposure to Hell’s Angels), and physiology (eg, brain
mechanisms)dall of which might be traced to gene
expression. The genetic ultimate explanation rewords the
question as, “How is the wearing of tattoos beneﬁcial to the

Behavior and Darwinian Evolutionary Processes Chapter | 24 409

members of the tribe?” The answer might be that it con-
stitutes symbolic marking of the group, distinguishing it
and promoting cohesion within it, which in turn promotes
group selection for various forms of cooperation, which
enhance the success of the group and thus boost
the
members’ reproductive success. It would include also the
advantages to alleles that make for frequency-dependent
bias, indirect bias, and direct bias in competition with al-
leles that do not (Boyd and Richerson, 1985; Richerson and
Boyd, 2000). Other stories might be told, but they would all
end with the same reference to reproductive success,
because in a genetic ultimate explanation genes must be
selected. The biasing effects of genes ensure that any
custom that decreases reproductive success, even if com-
mon for a time, is likely to disappear eventually.

The General Evolutionary Process
Fig. 24.2A diagrams an evolutionary process in general
terms and shows the different focuses of proximate and
ultimate explanations. Each of the variables, V, F, E, or R,
may be thought of either as a pool of variants, as a fre-
quency distribution across variants, or as a frequency of a
particular variant relative to all others. In the parlance of
cybernetics, they are operands and transforms, whereas the
rectangles represent processes (transformations) that pro-
duce transforms from operands (Ashby, 1956). A pool of
variants (process) results in V, a distribution of substitutable
variants or relative frequency of a particular variant relative
to all its competitors. A process of expression transforms V
into F, a distribution of interactors (or vehicles) or fre-
quency of one type of interactor relative to all others. The
expression process receives input from the environment,
omitted from Fig. 24.2 in the interest of simplicity. The
input is represented by levels of variable N (N1eN6) in
Fig. 24.3, which illustrates the various transformations in
Fig. 24.2A. The top line of Fig. 24.3 shows Vi composed
of three variants, A, B, and C, having equal frequencies.
The different levels of the environmental variable N affect
the outcomes in Fi; so that B coupled with N2 goes to a, the
same outcome as A coupled with N1, whereas B coupled
with N3 goes to b, and C transforms to b, g, or d, depending
on N. In this illustration, the variation in N results in a
distribution Fi that has more variety than Vi.

A set of external standards or contingencies, which
might be characterized as a set of if-then rules, transforms F
into E, a distribution of external effects. These are shown in
Fig. 24.3 as levels of W, X, Y, and Z, just to emphasize that
they are transforms of the elements of Fi: W goes with a, X
with b, Y with g, and Z with d. They may be thought of as
levels of successdeg, reinforcer rates or numbers of mat-
ings. E feeds back to a recurrence process, which results in
Ri, a distribution of recurrence rates or a relative recurrence
rate. Following the example in Fig. 24.3, if the elements of

(A)

Proximate Explanation 

Pool 

V 

Expression 

F 

R 

Recurrence
Process  

E 

External
Standard

(B)

Ultimate Explanation 

Proximate Explanation 

Gene Pool 

V 

Ontogeny
(Culture)

F 

R 

Reproduction

(Gene Copying)  

E 

Environmental
Contingencies

Ultimate Explanation 

FIGURE 24.2 (A) The general evolutionary process as a ﬂow chart. A
distribution of substitutable variants, V, is transformed by expression into
a distribution of interactors, F, which an external standard transforms
into a distribution of effects, E, which recurrence transforms into a
distribution of recurrences, R, which enters or replaces the pool
to
produce a new transform V. (B) The general evolutionary process chart
applied to genetic evolution. A distribution of alleles (V) is transformed
by ontogeny (eg, culture) into a distribution of phenotypes (F), which
environmental contingencies transform into a distribution of environ-
mental effects (E), which gene copying transforms into a distribution
of recurrences (R), which updates the gene pool and produces a new
distribution of alleles.

E associated with A (W1eW4) have a collective weight of
10 (6 þ 3 þ 1), those associated with B have a collective
weight of 6, and those associated with C have a collective
weight of 8 (entirely due to the fortunate occurrence of N6,
which resulted in transform d in Fi), then the frequencies in
Ri reﬂect these collective success rates. The appearance of
variant D, however, has nothing to do with these success
rates, but rather represents some kind of accident: a muta-
tion, copying error, or external force. Ri closes the loop by
entering the pooling process to result in the new distribu-
tion of variants Viþ1.

If this system is disturbed by a change in the pool (eg,
mutation or immigration) or in the external standards (eg, a
change in climate), resulting in disequilibrium like that
depicted in Fig. 24.1, it will tend to move back toward
equilibrium, because iterations of the feedback loop cause

410 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

Transformations in an Evolutionary Process 

Vi: A A A A  B B B B  C C C C 
N: N1 N1 N1 N1 N1 N3
N4 N5 N5 N6

N3

N3

Fi:  α α α α α β

β

β

β

γ

γ

δ

Ei:  W1  W2 W3  W4 W5 X1  X2  X3 X4  Y1  Y2  Z1

e.g.:  6 

3 

0 

1 

0 

0 

2 

4 

0 

0 

0 

8 

Ri:  A  A  A  A  A  B  B  B  C  C  C  D 

Vi+1:  A  A  A  A  A  B  B  B  C  C  C  D 

FIGURE 24.3 Illustration of the transformations of Fig. 24.2. In gen-
eration i, distribution V contains three substitutable variants, A, B, and C,
with equal frequencies. The input N has six levels, N1eN6, which enter the
transformation to F, a distribution of interactors that contains four different
interactors, a, b, g, and d, in unequal frequencies. This is transformed to a
distribution of effects, labeled W, X, Y, and Z to correspond with a, b, g,
and d. In the example, the effects for A, W1eW4, sum to 10, the effects for
B, W5eX3, sum to 6, and the effects for C, X4eZ1, sum to 8. These sums
determine the frequencies in the distribution of recurrences R. A new
variant (accident), D, also arises in R. In this example, the recurrence
distribution for generation i becomes the distribution of substitutable
variants for generation i þ 1.

the composition of the pool to change until it comes into
accord with the external standardsdie, to an optimal ﬁt.

Fig. 24.2A also illuminates the roles of proximate and
ultimate explanations (braces). The links from the pool to
the external standardsdie, from V to Fdconstitute the
focus of proximate explanations. They pose the question,
“By what mechanisms does a distribution of variants result
in a distribution of interactors?” The links from the external
standards to the pool constitute the focus of ultimate ex-
planations. They pose the question, “How does the distri-
bution of external effects change the composition of the
pool?” That is a question about selection. The diagram
omits any explicit
indication of the iterative nature of
evolutionary change; that must be taken for granted. The
reason that both proximate and ultimate explanations are
necessary for a full understanding is that the two explana-
tions address different parts of a whole processd
mechanical connection and feedback, immediate causation,
and history.

Genetic Evolutionary Process
Fig. 24.2B shows the general diagram applied to genetic
evolution. The gene pool offers a distribution (V) of

genotypes. Ontogeny or development transforms V into a
distribution (F) of phenotypes. Environmental contin-
gencies specify a distribution (E) of environmental effects,
such as rates of obtaining resources, of predation, or of
mating. Reproduction, which may be thought of as gene
copying, depends on E. Sometimes it is thought of as
simple transmission of genes from parents to offspring, but
it may also be complex, because it may be the locus of
other forms of selection besides natural selectiondeg,
sexual selection. Its outcome R, the distribution of copying
rates (ﬁtnesses), in turn changes or maintains the compo-
sition of the gene pool. Proximate explanations focus on
processes of ontogeny and development. Ultimate expla-
nations focus on the feedback, the way the environmental
contingencies and reproduction achieve selection among
genotypes.

is,

transmitted from member

As an example, we may apply Fig. 24.2B to the evo-
lution of culturedthat is, the transition from a noncultural
species to a cultural species as a result of genetic evolution
(as opposed to cultural evolution, our second process).
Ontogeny converted the distribution of genotypes V into a
distribution of phenotypes (F) that varied in ability and
propensity for culturedthat
in the mechanisms that
cause a group of people to have a culture (group-level
behavior
to member). Else-
where I have argued that three mechanisms would sufﬁce:
sensory specializations,
imitation, and social reinforcers
(Baum, 2000, 2005). Whether or not these are the answer,
they suggest the sort of mechanisms that would constitute a
proximate explanation for the development of culture in
children and newcomers to a group. The distribution F
might be called “variations on culture.” A highly variable
environment made culture beneﬁcial to the hominids that
possessed even its rudiments (Boyd and Richerson, 1985;
Richerson and Boyd, 2000). It would, for example, solve
many problems related to the obtaining of resources and
mates. Those variants favored in the distribution of envi-
ronmental effects (E) would be more represented in distri-
bution R, with the result that the genes underlying the
mechanisms for culture would increase in the gene pool.
That feedback would be the ultimate explanation for the
existence of culture.

Nesting Cultural Evolution Within Genetic
Evolution
Fig. 24.4 diagrams the relationship between genetic evo-
lution and cultural evolution and the different focuses of
their proximate and ultimate explanations. It shows two
feedback loops: an outer loop symbolizing genetic evolu-
tion and an inner loop (enclosed in the box) symbolizing
cultural evolution (cf. Burgos, 1997). The inner loop takes
the place of ontogeny in Fig. 24.2B or expression in
Fig. 24.2A. The culture pool may be thought of as all the

Behavior and Darwinian Evolutionary Processes Chapter | 24 411

Genetic Proximate 

Explanation 

Cultural Proximate 

Explanation

Gene 
Pool 

V 

Culture 
Pool 

V’ 

Modeling + 
Rule-Giving

F’

F 

R’ 

Transmission 

E’

Social 
Contin- 
gencies 

R 

Reproduction 
(Gene Copying) 

E 

Environmental 
Contingencies 

Genetic Ultimate Explanation 

0

0

FIGURE 24.4 The cultural evolutionary process as an example of the
general process (Fig. 24.2A) and as nested within the genetic evolutionary
process. The rectangle of broken lines demarcates the cultural process. A
distribution of all cultural variants (practices) available V
is transformed
0
into a distribution of actually occurring variants F
by induction (eg,
modeling) and rule-giving (“instruction”). The distribution F
comes into
contact with social contingencies, which transform it into a distribution of
. The distribution of ef-
social effects (reinforcement and punishment), E
fects is transformed by transmission into a distribution of recurrences of
the practices R
. The distribution of genetic variants that interact with
culture V enters the culture pool as input, thus affecting V
. The distribution
corresponds also to the distribution F that
of actually occurring practices F
is the operand for environmental contingencies that form the context for
the cultural process. The braces indicate the focuses of the different
proximate and ultimate explanations.

0

0

0

0

0

0

0
into a distribution F

in the groupdthe potential variants,
customs present
resulting in a distribution V
. One might be tempted to think
0
of V
as a distribution of memes. Our ignorance of the
workings of the brain suggests that
temptation is best
resisted (Baum, 2000; Simon and Baum, 2011). The
labeled “Modeling þ Rule-
mechanism of expression,
Giving,” embodies the vagaries of the social environment
that transform V
of actual cultural
variants (customs). Models and rules are stimuli that may
induce imitation and rule-following, behavior that may be
reinforced or punished by group members (Baum, 2000).
Alternatively, one might
think of the culture pool as
0
directly producing F
could also represent
the relative frequency of a particular custom.) The structure
of the social environment, particularly social contingencies,
0
results in a distribution E
of social consequences. For
example, food sharing might result in approval, whereas
food hoarding might result in disapproval or aggression.
0
From E
of re-
currences that
feeds back to change or maintain the
composition of the culture pool. The means of transmission
are imitation and instruction (Baum, 2000, 2005). They
constitute the locus where Boyd and Richerson’s (1985)
indirect and frequency-dependent biases operate.

0
, transmission results in a distribution R

0
. (As before, F

0

Fig. 24.4 depicts the way in which cultural evolution
in-
and genetic evolution may interact. The distribution F
teracts as F in the external loop (genetic evolution) with
environmental contingencies to produce distribution Ed
that
is, cultural practices may affect genetic evolution
(Boyd and Richerson, 1985).
for example, group
members who shared food were more likely to marry, then
any genes that promoted tendency to share food would be
selected.

If,

The braces in Fig. 24.4 indicate the different focuses of
proximate and ultimate explanations in genetic and cultural
evolution. Genetic proximate explanation focuses on the
mechanisms by which genetic variants (distribution V;
shown as input to the cultural pooling process) affect cul-
tural evolution. Cultural proximate explanation focuses on
the mechanisms (possibly in the nervous system, but spe-
ciﬁcally related to behavior in groups) by which cultural
0
variants (distribution F
) are expressed. Modeling and
exhortation, for example, might induce food sharing. Cul-
tural ultimate explanation focuses on the iterative feedback
from social consequences that shapes the culture pool over
time. Once induced, for example, food sharing might be
reinforced by approval, status, or reciprocation. Genetic
ultimate explanation focuses on the feedback from envi-
ronmental consequences of culture on the composition of
the gene pool. It represents the feedback of culture on genes
that prompts Boyd and Richerson (1985) to speak of “gene-
culture co-evolution.” Failure to keep these four different
types of explanation distinct is likely to result in confusion.
For example, development
(genetic proximate expla-
nation) might account for the presence of imitation and
instruction, which underlie cultural ultimate explanation of
cultural change over time. Cosmides and Tooby’s (1992)
idea that cultural variation can be explained by genetic
expression probably arises from confusing these two types
of explanation.

Proximate and Ultimate Operant
Explanations
In behavioral evolution (ie, shaping), the distinction be-
tween proximate and ultimate explanations is the distinc-
tion between physiological mechanism and history of
reinforcement. Advantageous behavior is deﬁned by rein-
forcement and punishment. Explaining the occurrence of
advantageous behavior may refer to events in the nervous
system or to the history of advantage. As with the other two
evolutionary processes, a question like, “Why does Liz
brush her teeth before she goes to bed?” has two in-
terpretations. The proximate interpretation focuses on the
mechanism: “On any particular night, what causes Liz’s
tooth brushing?” The proximate explanation would focus
on stimuli that regularly precede going to bed and tooth
brushing and events in the nervous system that result from

412 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

these stimuli and cause tooth brushing at that time. The
ultimate interpretation focuses on a history of selection:
“How did it come about that Liz brushes her teeth before
bed?” or “What advantage has Liz derived for brushing her
teeth?” The ultimate explanation focuses on the differential
consequences of tooth brushing in Liz’s life that selected
tooth brushing at bedtime over other behavior that might
have occurred at bedtime. It would refer to bedtimes in
Liz’s childhood, her father’s exhortations, reprimands, and
approval, and the later incorporation of tooth brushing into
the pattern of behavior surrounding bedtime combined with
events at the dentist’s ofﬁce. Different stories might be told,
but they would all refer to the advantages of tooth brushing
over time.

Nesting of Behavioral Evolution Within
Cultural Evolution
Fig. 24.5 parallels Fig. 24.4, depicting the relationship
between behavioral evolution and cultural evolution. The
inner loop, behavioral evolution, contains the same ele-
It stands in the place of
ments as in Fig. 24.2A.

Cultural Proximate 

Explanation 

Behavioral Proximate 

Explanation

Culture 
Pool 

V’

Behavior 

Pool 

V’’

Stimulus 
Control + 
Induction 

F’’

F’ 

R’’

Habit 

E’’

Rft. Contin- 
gencies 

Behavioral Ultimate Explanation 

R’

Transmission 

E’

Social 

Contingencies 

00

00

FIGURE 24.5 The operant (behavioral) evolutionary process as an
example of the general process (Fig. 24.2A) and as nested within the
cultural evolutionary process. The rectangle of broken lines demarcates the
operant process. A distribution of all behavioral variants available V
is
transformed into a distribution of actually occurring variants F
by stim-
00
ulus control and induction (eg, by releasers). The distribution F
comes
into contact with reinforcement contingencies, which transform it into a
distribution of effects (reinforcement and punishment), E
. The distribu-
tion of effects is transformed by habit (ie, physiological mechanisms) into
a distribution of recurrences of the behavioral variants R
. The distribution
0
of cultural variants that interact with individual behavior V
enters the
behavior pool as input, thus affecting V
. The distribution of actually
00
occurring behavior F
that is the
operand for social contingencies that form the context for the individual
process. The braces indicate the focuses of the different proximate and
ultimate explanations.

corresponds also to the distribution F

00

00

00

0

0

00

00

00

00

00

00

into a distribution E

“Modeling þ Rule-Giving” in Fig. 24.4 or “Expression”
in Fig. 24.2A. The behavior pool consists of all the in-
dividual’s potential behaviordspecies-speciﬁc behavior
plus all the behavior ever expressed in this individual. It
results in a distribution V
of behavioral variants. The
culture pool adds to the individual’s behavior pool via the
distribution V
. The mechanisms of stimulus control,
including induction, transform V
into a distribution (or
relative frequency) F
of presently occurring behavior.
Those mechanisms correspond to what Staddon and
Simmelhag (1971) called “principles of variation.” The
structure of the environment, in the form of contingencies
of reinforcement and punishment (or reinforcement and
feedback functions; Baum, 1973, 1989,
punishment
2012), converts F
of environmental
effects, or consequences. These reinforcers and punishers
constitute the relatively immediate tokens of ultimate
reproductive success discussed earlier. Distributed differ-
entially over behavioral variants, they result via mecha-
nisms in the body, particularly in the nervous system,
labeled “habit” in Fig. 24.5, in a distribution R
of (rela-
tive) recurrences, which in turn changes or maintains the
composition of the behavior pool. The behavioral proxi-
mate explanation focuses on the stimuli and physiological
mechanisms that cause the behavior on particular occa-
sions. The behavioral ultimate explanation refers to the
selective effect that the token consequences have on the
mechanism and behavior over time. A proximate expla-
nation of sharing meat with other group members would
point to the occasion of returning to one’s village with a
captured animal. The ultimate explanation would point to
the history of exhortation in favor of sharing, social
reinforcement for sharing, and punishment of hoarding.
The effect of differential consequences on individuals’
behavior provides the means for the cultural effects that
Boyd and Richerson (1985) call guided variation and
direct bias. Guided variation names the contribution of
individual innovation to the culture pool. For example, the
individual who makes a better arrowhead may catch more
food personally, but the method also may be incorporated
into the culture pool by imitation and instruction. As we
have already seen, direct bias is the effect of the token
consequences on transmission of practices. The method of
making the better arrowhead personally beneﬁts anyone
who uses it. The effect of behavioral evolution on cultural
evolution is symbolized by the output of distribution F
as
0
, the
to cultural contingencies, which in turn produce E
F
distribution of social consequences.

00

0

Taken together, Figs. 24.4 and 24.5 suggest two levels
of nesting. Evolution of individual operant behavior is
nested within cultural evolution, which is nested within
genetic evolution. To understand human behavior, one
needs to attend to all three levels and to all the various
proximate and ultimate explanations they imply.

Behavior and Darwinian Evolutionary Processes Chapter | 24 413

In a noncultural species, the behavioral inner loop is
directly nested within the genetic outer loop (cf. Burgos,
1997). In that situation, gene expression affects the mech-
anism that causes the behavior and is sensitive to feedback
from the token consequences. As in cultural evolution, the
token consequences affect gene copying, which feeds back
on the composition of the gene pool, favoring alleles that
promote the mechanism that allows behavioral evolution in
the ﬁrst place. If we ask why a laboratory rat presses a lever
in an operant chamber, the answer might begin with an
explanation of why the rat is so constructed that a contin-
gency between presses and food pellets affects
its
behaviordie, the advantages of learning by reinforcement
(Baum, 2005; Donahoe, 1999; Zeiler, 1999).

An Example: Self-Control
Behavior analysts have progressed on the problem of un-
derstanding self-control. Initially,
it was analyzed as a
conﬂict between deferred and immediate consequences
(Ainslie, 1974). Self-control consists of choosing behavior
that pays off in the long run over impulsiveness, which is
behavior that pays off in the short run. For an alcoholic,
acceptance of a drink is immediately reinforced, whereas
abstinence, though it has a greater reward, is reinforced
only at a great delay. The question remains, however, as to
how the deferred consequences ever overcome the inﬂu-
ence of the relatively immediate ones. How does self-
control ever predominate? Rachlin and Green (1972)
suggested one possibility: commitment. If one acts at an
early time to prevent choosing impulsiveness (eg, having
part of one’s salary deposited directly to a savings account
before one can spend it), then self-control becomes more
likely when the choice arises. Most situations calling for
self-control, however, offer no opportunity for commit-
ment, because occasions for impulsiveness are frequent and
unpredictable. Some alcoholics take drugs that produce
noxious effects when alcohol is in the bloodstream, and
some dieters have their jaws wired shut, but most people
rely on other means.

Rachlin (1995) argued that self-control might be better
understood if it were seen as a pattern of choices extended
over time. Occasional impulsiveness (“defection” from the
overall pattern) might occur without necessarily disrupting
the extended pattern of “doing the right
thing.” The
temporally extended pattern we call eating a healthy diet
constitutes self-control even if it is peppered with minor
defections like having an ice cream cone. The extended
pattern, Rachlin argued, has a higher valuedie, produces
greater reinforcementdthan any defection. Those greater
and temporally extended consequences explain the persis-
tence of the pattern.

Rachlin’s

stops, however, at an
awkward place. Although it helps to frame the initial

(1995) account

question, it leaves the question unanswered: how does the
pattern of self-control ever emerge and persist in the face of
frequent opportunities for gaining immediate reinforcement
for impulsiveness? In comparison with the contingencies
favoring impulsivenessdpowerful because of the relative
immediacy of the reinforcementdthe contingencies fa-
voring self-control are weak and vulnerable because of their
temporal extendedness, as in our comparison to group se-
lection. How could the weak selection ever prevail?

That question raises at least two others: (1) why would
an individual care about eating a healthy diet in the ﬁrst
place?; and (2) why would such a concern spread and
persist among many members of a society? On the surface,
the answers might seem obvious: quality of
life and
longevity. Quality of life, however, is a social construct,
requiring explanation itself, and death cannot punish nor
can longevity reinforce any subsequent operant behavior.
Instead, the two questions may be interpreted as being
about cultural and genetic evolution: (1) why do other
members of a group promote and enforce eating a healthy
diet?; and (2) how are genes selected that support acqui-
sition and maintenance of behavior like eating a healthy
diet? The answer to the ﬁrst question requires identifying
self-interest on the part of one member in other members’
health. Such is near at hand, because practices concerning
medicine and public health in advanced societies today are
costly for the entire group (taxpayers, at least). The con-
tingencies involved may be compared to those involved in
so-called “altruism.” We sacriﬁce to beneﬁt others if greater
beneﬁt accrues to us eventually. The sacriﬁcial behavior is
dangerous, however, because of
the possibility of
cheatingdie, someone’s reaping beneﬁts without paying
the cost. When most members contribute to the cost of
maintaining health in all, poor health is analogous to
cheating. Customs promoting and enforcing health-
enhancing behavior are selected in such a social setting
(see “social contingencies” in Figs. 24.4 and 24.5). The
whole extended pattern of healthy eating is selected, in
analogy to group selection, as in Eq. (24.2).

A possible way that genes might be selected that sup-
port eating a healthy diet would be in response to variability
in foods available from one environment to another. The
advantages to imitation and easy instruction discussed
earlier would apply to dietary habits. If you are an immi-
grant or child newly arrived in a group, the diet eaten by
those around you is more likely to promote health than one
you choose for yourself. Genes favoring imitation and easy
instruction would be selected.

These suggested explanations are incomplete and may
be incorrect, but they illustrate the sort of ultimate operant,
cultural, and genetic explanations that an understanding of
self-control
the ideas are open to
empirical study. They point to directions in research on
behavior within an evolutionary framework.

requires. Many of

414 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

CONCLUSION
Viewed from a sufﬁciently general perspective, such as
diagrammed in Fig. 24.2A, genetic, cultural, and behavioral
evolution all may be seen as examples of the same sort of
evolutionary process. Since all three allow the distinction
between immediate causation of behavior and the historical
origin of the causes, all three allow both proximate and
ultimate explanations. Indeed, full understanding requires
both proximate and ultimate explanations. The nesting of
the three processes in the way suggested in Figs. 24.4 and
24.5 means that the study of culture needs not only to take
account of cultural evolution, but to be aware of the con-
straints imposed by genetic evolution and the contributions
of operant behavior and its evolution to cultural evolution.
Similarly, the study of human behavior needs to take ac-
count of the constraints imposed by both cultural evolution
and genetic evolution. A complete explanation of a
behavioral pattern needs to go beyond the processes that
govern individual behavior. It needs to specify the prove-
nance of behavior in cultural customs and in genetic effects
on development and to explain the origins of effective
stimuli and consequences in cultural and genetic evolution.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank M. Ghiselin, S. Glenn, K. Panchnathan, P. Richerson, and H.
Rachlin for helpful comments on an earlier draft.

REFERENCES

Ainslie, G.W., 1974. Impulse control in pigeons. Journal of Experimental

Analysis of Behavior 21, 485e489.

Alcock, J., 1993. Animal Behavior, ﬁfth ed. Sinauer Associates, Sunder-

land, MA.

Alessi, G., 1992. Models of proximate and ultimate causation in psy-

chology. American Psychologist 47, 1359e1370.

Ashby, W.R., 1956. An Introduction to Cybernetics. Methuen, London.
Baum, W.M., 1973. The correlation-based law of effect. Journal of

Experimental Analysis of Behavior 20, 137e153.

Baum, W.M., 1976. Time-based and count-based measurement of pref-

erence. Journal of Experimental Analysis of Behavior 26, 27e35.

Baum, W.M., 1989. Quantitative prediction and molar description of the

environment. Behavior Analysis 12, 167e176.

Baum, W.M., 1995a. Introduction to molar behavior analysis. Mexican

Journal of Behavior Analysis 21, 7e25.

Baum, W.M., 1995b. Rules, culture, and ﬁtness. Behavior Analysis 18,

1e21.

Baum, W.M., 1997. The trouble with time. In: Hayes, L.J., Ghezzi, P.M.
(Eds.), Investigations in Behavioral Epistemology. Context Press,
Reno, NV, pp. 47e59.

Baum, W.M., 2000. Being concrete about culture and cultural evolution.
In: Thompson, N., Tonneau, F. (Eds.), Perspectives in Ethology, vol.
13. Kluwer Academic/Plenum, New York, pp. 181e212.

Baum, W.M., 2001. Two stumbling blocks to a general account of
selection: replication and information. Behavioral and Brain Sciences
24, 528.

Baum, W.M., 2002. From molecular to molar: a paradigm shift in behavior
analysis. Journal of Experimental Analysis of Behavior 78, 95e116.
Baum, W.M., 2004. Molar and molecular views of choice. Behavioural

Processes 66, 349e359.

Baum, W.M., 2005. Understanding Behaviorism: Behavior, Culture, and

Evolution, second ed. Blackwell, Malden, MA.

Baum, W.M., 2012. Rethinking reinforcement: allocation, induction, and
contingency. Journal of Experimental Analysis of Behavior 97,
101e124.

Baum, W.M., 2013. What counts as behavior: the molar multiscale view.

The Behavior Analyst 36, 283e293.

Baum, W.M., 2016. Driven by consequences: the multiscale molar view of

choice. Managerial and Decision Economics (in press).

Baum, W.M., Davison, M., 2004. Choice in a variable environment: visit
patterns in the dynamics of choice. Journal of Experimental Analysis
of Behavior 81, 85e127.

Baum, W.M., Heath, J.L., 1992. Behavioral explanations and intentional
explanations in psychology. American Psychologist 47, 1312e1317.
Baum, W.M., Rachlin, H.C., 1969. Choice as time allocation. Journal of

Experimental Analysis of Behavior 12, 861e874.

Benedict, R., 1934. Patterns of Culture. New American Library, New York.
Boyd, R., Richerson, P.J., 1985. Culture and the Evolutionary Process.

University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Boyd, R., Richerson, P.J., 1992. Punishment allows the evolution of
cooperation (or anything else) in sizable groups. Ethology and So-
ciobiology 13, 171e195.

Burgos, J.E., 1997. Evolving artiﬁcial neural networks in Pavlovian en-
vironments. In: Donahoe, J.W., Dorsel, V.P. (Eds.), Neural-Networks
Models of Cognition. Elsevier Science, New York, pp. 58e79.

Campbell, D.T., 1965. Variation and selective retention in socio-cultural
evolution. In: Barringer, H.R., Blanksten, G.I., Mack, R.W. (Eds.),
Social Change in Developing Areas: A Reinterpretation of Evolu-
tionary Theory. Schenkman, Cambridge, MA, pp. 19e49.

Cosmides, L., Tooby, J., 1992. Cognitive adaptations for social exchange.
In: Barkow, J.H., Cosmides, L., Tooby, J. (Eds.), The Adapted Mind:
Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture. Oxford
University Press, New York, pp. 163e228.

Dawkins, R., 1989a. The Extended Phenotype: The Long Reach of the

Gene. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Dawkins, R., 1989b. The Selﬁsh Gene, new ed. Oxford University Press,

Oxford.

Diamond, J.M., 1992. Diabetes running wild. Nature 357, 362e363.
Donahoe, J.W., 1999. Edward L. Thorndike: the selectionist connectionist.

Journal of Experimental Analysis of Behavior 72, 451e454.

El Mouden, C., André, J.eB., Morin, O., Nettle, D., 2014. Cultural
transmission and the evolution of human behaviour: a general
approach based on the Price equation. Journal of Evolutionary
Biology 27, 231e241.

Ghiselin, M.T., 1997. Metaphysics and the Origin of Species. State Uni-

versity of New York Press, Albany, NY.

Gilbert, R.M., 1970. Psychology and biology. Canadian Psychologist 11,

221e238.

Glenn, S.S., Ellis, J., Greenspoon, J., 1992. On the revolutionary nature of
the operant as a unit of behavioral selection. American Psychologist
47, 1329e1336.

Guerin, B., 1997. How things get done: socially, non-socially; with
words, without words. In: Hayes, L.J., Ghezzi, P.M. (Eds.), In-
vestigations in Behavioral Epistemology. Context Press, Reno, NV,
pp. 219e235.

Behavior and Darwinian Evolutionary Processes Chapter | 24 415

Henrich, J., 2004. Cultural group selection, coevolutionary processes and
large-scale cooperation. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organi-
zation 53, 3e35.

Hull, D.L., 1988. Science as a Process: An Evolutionary Account of
the Social and Conceptual Development of Science. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.

Hull, D.L., Langman, R.E., Glenn, S.S., 2001. A general account of se-
lection: biology, immunology, and behavior. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 24, 511e573.

Mayr, E., 1959. Darwin and the evolutionary theory in biology. In:
Meggers, B.J. (Ed.), Evolution and Anthropology: A Centennial
Appraisal. Anthropological Society of Washington, Washington, D.
C, pp. 1e10.

Mayr, E., 1961. Cause and effect in biology. Science 134, 1501e1506.
Mayr, E., 1970. Populations, Species, and Evolution. Harvard University

Ringen, J., 1999. Radical behaviorism: B.F. Skinner’s philosophy of sci-
(Eds.), Handbook of

In: O’Donohue, W., Kitchener, R.

ence.
Behaviorism. Academic Press, New York, pp. 160e178.

Seeley, T.D., 1989. The honey bee colony as a superorganism. American

Scientist 77, 546e553.

Simon, C., Baum, W.M., 2011. Expelling the meme-ghost from the ma-
chine: an evolutionary explanation for the spread of cultural practices.
Behavior and Philosophy 39/40, 127e144.

Simon, H.A., 1990. A mechanism for social selection and successful

altruism. Science 250, 1665e1668.

Skinner, B.F., 1938. Behavior of Organisms. Appleton-Century-Crofts,

New York.

Skinner, B.F., 1953. Science and Human Behavior. Macmillan, New York.
Skinner, B.F., 1957. Verbal Behavior. Appleton-Century-Crofts, New

York.

Press, Cambridge, MA.

McElreath, R., Boyd, R., 2007. Mathematical Models of Social Evolution:

A Guide for the Perplexed. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Skinner, B.F., 1969. The phylogeny and ontogeny of behavior. In: Con-
tingencies of Reinforcement: A Theoretical Analysis. Appleton-
Century-Crofts, New York, pp. 172e217.

Price, G.R., 1970. Selection and covariance. Nature 227, 520e521.
Price, G.R., 1972. Extension of covariance selection mathematics. Annals

Skinner, B.F., 1981. Selection by consequences. Science 213, 501e504.
Staddon, J.E.R., 1973. On the notion of cause, with applications to

of Human Genetics 35, 485e490.

behaviorism. Behaviorism 1 (2), 25e63.

Rachlin, H., 1994. Behavior and Mind: The Roots of Modern Psychology.

Oxford University Press, New York.

Rachlin, H., 1995. Self-control: beyond commitment. Behavioral and

Brain Sciences 18, 109e159.

Rachlin, H., 2002. Altruism and selﬁshness. Behavioral and Brain Sci-

ences 25, 239e296.

Rachlin, H., Green, L., 1972. Commitment, choice, and self-control.

Journal of Experimental Analysis of Behavior 17, 15e22.

Richerson, P.J., Boyd, R., 2000. Built for speed: Pleistocene climate
variation and the origin of human culture.
In: Thompson, N.,
Tonneau, F. (Eds.), Perspectives in Ethology, vol. 13. Kluwer Aca-
demic/Plenum, New York, pp. 1e45.

Richerson, P.J., Baldini, R., Bell, A., Demps, K., Frost, K., Hillis, V.,
Mathew, S., Narr, N., Newson, L., Newton, E., Ross, C., Smaldino, P.,
Waring, T., Zefferman, M.R., 2016. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 39.

Staddon, J.E.R., Simmelhag, V., 1971. The “superstition” experiment: a
re-examination of its implications for the principles of adaptive
behavior. Psychological Review 78, 3e43.

Tooby, J., Cosmides, L., 1992. The psychological foundations of culture.
In: Barkow, J.H., Cosmides, L., Tooby, J. (Eds.), The Adapted Mind:
Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, pp. 19e136.

Wilson, D.S., 1999. Evolutionary psychology: the new science of the
mind, by David M. Buss. Evolution and Human Behavior 20,
279e287.

Zeiler, M.D., 1999. An odyssey through learning and evolution. Mexican

Journal of Behavior Analysis 25, 259e272.

Chapter 25

A Psychoanalyst Views the Self Across
Civilizations

A. Roland
National Psychological Association for Psychoanalysis, New York, NY, United States

PROLOGUE

As important as it is to delineate the profound differences in
the self across civilizations, it is also of considerable value
to describe the journey a third generation, Jewish-American
psychoanalyst had to undertake to understand the psy-
chology of persons from different civilizations. There is
much to learn from both. My interest in Asian cultures
stemmed from my time at Antioch College in the early
1950s after I was already involved in Indian philosophy.
Since all freshmen and transfer students were required to
write a Life Aims Paper, I wrote rather grandiosely that I
wanted to make an EasteWest comparison in a number of
areas, such as philosophy, religion, literature, art, anthro-
pology, sociology, and such. Over 25 years later, when I
received an American Institute of Indian Studies grant to do
clinical
having
completely forgotten my Life Aims Paper, I found that was
exactly what I had to do to begin to understand the Indian
and then the Japanese psyche as a psychoanalyst. It is
something that psychoanalysts and psychologists very
rarely do.

psychoanalytic

India,

research

in

My psychoanalytic journey actually started in New
York City, when one evening in February in the early
1970s, after teaching a class on Identity, Identiﬁcation, and
Self-Image at The New School, a gaunt looking, intense
Indian man, Ashis, in his early 40s, a graduate student in
the arts at Columbia University, accosted me. He noticed
from the catalog that I had already been to India, and he
asked if I could see him in therapy since he felt his identity
was deeply fragmented. From the ﬁrst session on, I was
struck by his enthusiasm and lack of ambivalence or doubt
on beginning therapy, rather unusual for a man who had
never been in therapy. I soon learned that in December his

wife and mother had gone to the Brighu Temple in the
Punjab, bringing the exact minute of his birth with them. A
priest brought out a palm leaf manuscript written over
350 years ago that predicted in February (when he started
therapy) he would embark on a new course that would help
him signiﬁcantly. I later encountered a similar prediction
written over 1500 years ago with another Indian patient. In
sessions, his mind worked in a very different way from any
of my Euro-American patients, for which my study of
Indian culture in college had not prepared me. He would
frequently associate to three major Indian ﬁgures, Mahatma
Gandhi, Rabindranath Tagore, and Ananda Coomer-
aswami, each standing for a different form of yoga, which
he was trying to follow: Gandhi for karma yoga, Tagore for
bhakti yoga, and Coomeraswami for jnana yoga. He further
connected his somatic symptoms to his emotional distress,
which I thought was from awareness of psychosomatic
medicine. Instead, I found that in Hindu thought the mind
and body are seen as being on a continuum rather than as a
duality as in Western thought.

I soon learned of the enormous impact British colo-
nialism had on his self through his father having a major
post in the Indian Civil Service, where everything Indian
was denigrated and all things British were idealized; then I
learned of his sudden U-turn in early adulthood to a Hindu
way through the teachings of the Arya Samaj. Suddenly,
after two months of therapy, he decided to terminate just
after having a dream with associations that revealed that his
father committed suicide after being involved in a scandal.
All of this was puzzling until I saw him several years later
in Bombay for a longer period of therapy. I learned that his
father had closely identiﬁed with the British and treated
those under him in a stern, British hierarchical way. At the

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00025-9
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

417

418 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

time of Indian Independence in the late 1940s, his un-
derlings brought him up on minor charges because they
were highly irritated with his not treating them in the more
Indian style of a nurturing hierarchical relationship. He was
arrested and then committed suicide. I further learned the
central importance to Indians of the family, and particularly
of family reputation, which serves as an important self-
object for self-esteem in Indians. Even his closest friends
did not know of his father’s suicide.

Before seeing Ashis, my wife and I had been to India in
1964 and had then decided to return for a year’s research.
In 1977, on the basis of my work with Ashis, I applied for
and received an American Institute of Indian Studies grant
for clinical psychoanalytic research on the effects of
colonialism, Westernization, and modernization on urban
educated Indians. In effect, it was to see the psychological
effects of social change, something usually ignored across
the board both in psychoanalysis and psychology with but a
few rare exceptions. Then, I was to appraise differences in
the Indian self from the self of my New York City Euro-
American patients, and to see to what extent psychoana-
lytic theory needs to be amended. My wife received a
Fulbright grant as a historian to study the Indian Jews of
Bombay.
I later decided to do similar psychoanalytic
research in Japan, as I found that the only psychological
comparisons were between India and the West (Kakar,
1978) and Japan and the West (Doi, 1973), and none on
inter-Asian psychological comparisons.

I presented a paper at

In the fall of 1978, after returning to New York City
from India,
the International
Psychoanalytic Association’s annual conference, “The
Familial Self, the Individualized Self, and the Spiritual Self:
Psychoanalytic Reﬂections on India.” The Chair of the
Panel was Dr. Nishizono, an important psychoanalyst in
Kyushu, Japan. He asked to have lunch with me before the
panel because he saw many similarities between the Indian
and Japanese familial self. This spurred me to go to Japan,
which I did the summer of 1982 with a psychoanalytic
group in Hiroshima run by Dr. Mikihachiro Tatara.

When I returned home to New York City in the late
1970s and early 1980s from India and Japan, it was evident
that my understanding of the Indian and Japanese psyches
necessitated a deep knowledge of their culture, social
relationships, and child-rearing. I therefore thought it wise
to begin delving into the culture of modern Western indi-
vidualism, not only for a greater understanding of my Euro-
American patients but equally so for a reevaluation of
psychoanalytic theory and therapy, and also for a better
understanding of Indian and other Asian Americans who
develop a bicultural self. It was much the same road that the
French anthropologist Louis Dumont
traveled on: ﬁrst
doing an anthropological study of Indian hierarchical re-
lationships in 1970, then delving into the modern Western
culture of individualism in 1986. His latter book became

enormously helpful to me. I began to see that psycho-
analysis has been in a dialectical dialog with the Western
culture of individualism: gradually critiquing its rationality
and basic assumption of the self-contained individual,
while unreﬂectingly assuming some of its core values, such
as the values of independence and autonomy, authenticity,
the self-creation of one’s identity, ﬁrm outer ego bound-
aries, self-reliance, a consistent superego, and predominant
verbal communication, among others.

Clinically, I began to investigate and reﬂect on the
sociocultural backgrounds of all of my American patients,
and I became much more sensitive to how it affects their
psyches (Roland, 1996). Indeed, we all come from a
particular sociocultural background with its predominant
kinds of cultural values and assumptions, social relation-
ships, and child-rearing. It has made me far more sensitive
to these issues of diversity in what is usually thought of as a
relatively non-diverse population than I used to be, and
more so than many other psychoanalytic therapists. Over a
period of more than 35 years from frequent visits to India
and Japan, and working with Asian and Asian-American
patients (Indians, Japanese, South Koreans, Chinese, and
Vietnamese) in New York City,
I wrote three books
(Roland, 1988, 1996, and 2011), as well as numerous ar-
ticles, chapters for other books, and such.

THE SOCIAL AND CULTURAL CONTEXTS
OF THE FAMILIAL SELF

Once I arrived in India in 1977 to do my clinical psycho-
analytic research, I found that empathy was insufﬁcient to
understand the Indian self. I learned often to use patients to
ascertain what was usual and normal or skewed in
the normalitye
their relationships, as it appeared that
psychopathology continuum was different. I also learned a
great deal from other psychoanalytic therapists to help me
understand puzzling scenarios, as well as from child
development and cultural psychologists, from psychiatrists,
anthropologists, literary persons, philosophers, and such.
Without them I would have been clueless and would have
begun to view the Indian self through a Western, colonial
lens, as has so often happened.

An example of a most helpful informant was Professor
Anandalakshmi, at that time director of the postgraduate
program in child development at Lady Irwin College in
New Delhi. She was the foremost child development psy-
chologist in India, who was trained in the United States but
upon returning to India realized that Indian child-rearing
and development are signiﬁcantly different from what she
had learned in America. This was unique as Indian psy-
chology tended to follow either the American or British
models. Almost a decade before Takeo Doi’s important
book, Anatomy of Self (1986), detailing the Japanese dual
self structure, she told me about
the Indian dual self

A Psychoanalyst Views the Self Across Civilizations Chapter | 25 419

structure where the social presentation of self meets the
expected social etiquette of the formal hierarchical re-
lationships, while a highly private self keeps all kinds of
feelings, fantasies, and thoughts to oneself, only revealing
them to someone who is experienced as being receptive.
Authenticity in social
relationships is not particularly
valued as it tends to be in Western countries. Further,
because Indians have a much more permeable outer ego
boundary between self and others in their hierarchical in-
timacy relationships, the private self with its strong inner
ego boundary protects them from feeling engulfed.

Doi (1986) commented that a balance must be kept be-
tween the two selves. If persons go too much by their social
self in meeting the social etiquette of hierarchical relation-
ships, they may become out of touch with their private self.
On the other hand, if persons are unduly oriented toward
implementing their private self, they soon create consider-
able disturbance in the hierarchical relationships.

I soon came upon this dual self structure in my clinical
work. I began working with an Indian woman psychologist,
Shakuntala, who with the other psychologists and social
workers in their psychoanalytically oriented mental health
clinic were required to be in psychoanalytic therapy. She had
been in twice-a-week psychoanalytic therapy with a Bombay
therapist who then left for further training in England shortly
before I arrived. In a year and a half of twice-a-week ther-
apy, she apparently had never voiced her two most salient,
preoccupying conﬂicts: whether to continue an affair with a
married man versus having an arranged marriage that her
mother was pressuring her to have; and whether or not to
leave Bombay, the affair, and her work to go to her aunt’s
ashram in Hardwar to become a guru, as her aunt, a well-
regarded guru there, thought she was capable of becoming
one. She felt her former therapist would not be receptive to
either conﬂict. I do not know of any American patient I have
worked with who could keep these preoccupying thoughts
and emotions totally private for well over a year’s time.
They would either voice them or leave.

Another example was working with one of the social
workers at the Indian Council of Mental Hygiene in psy-
choanalytic therapy, and observing her at a work situation
at an elementary school. There, she was exceedingly
gracious and compliant with her superior but in session
excoriated him for the way he conducted himself. Then,
another telling situation was with our 5½-year-old son, who
after a month in Bombay began having nightmares. He
gradually moved the fort he had been building with blocks
in the middle of his bedroom to the corner of his room, as if
his back was up against the wall. That he had enormous
anxiety was evident, but we had no idea what it stemmed
from. It was only when we took a two-day vacation away
from our ayah (maid or nanny), Natalie, that our children
revealed that Natalie was constantly hugging him, as were
the teenage girls across the hall from us. It was only after I

told both Natalie and the girls in as tactful a way as I could
muster not to touch him, that American children were not
used to being hugged all of the time, that his nightmares
went away. An Indian psychoanalyst explained to me that
an Indian child would have a much more private self with
much ﬁrmer inner ego boundaries, so that he would not feel
engulfed by the normal constant hugging as our son
apparently was.

Another instance of gaining a major insight into the
Japanese and Indian selves that I could not have arrived at
by myself came from Dr. Moses Burg in Tokyo. He is an
American psychoanalytic therapist who had a high level
position in the occupation of Japan in the 1940s, married a
Japanese woman, and stayed on. He pointed out that in
Japanese insider relationships, the dependency, and asking
of another, what Doi
(1973) highlights as amae and
amaeru, is actually a form of giving. It establishes the other
as a hierarchical superior, whose esteem is considerably
enhanced by being able to give. I later conﬁrmed that this is
equally present in Indians in a conversation with Dr. B.K.
Ramanujam. However, it is totally at odds with American
style relationships.

An example of this was cited in a case by a Japanese
woman in training in psychoanalytic therapy. An adopted
son of a wealthy business man grew up and had a difﬁcult
relationship with his father, whom he felt did not treat him
well. Unlike his sisters who asked the father for new cars,
refrigerators, and such, he refused to ask his father for
anything. This was an angry way to get even with his father
whose esteem could not be enhanced by his gift giving.

Still another instance when I was thoroughly perplexed
and needed assistance was going with one or another social
worker or psychologist to counseling sessions with groups
of 17- to 18-year-old college girls. I found that sooner or
later in these sessions, one or another girl would talk about
using Ouija boards to contact the spirit world. I asked an
accompanying psychologist what this was all about. She
explained that in a couple of years these girls would have
an arranged marriage with no say about whom they would
be married to and what family they would be married into.
They, therefore, wanted to know what is in store for them in
their future marriage. In no way was there a denial of the
presence of the spirit world by the psychologist, also later
conﬁrmed by one of the Bombay psychoanalysts, only a
psychological explanation of the college girls’ motivation
in contacting the spirit world. A caveat was added that too
much contact with the spirit world could bring about
undesirable effects on one’s life.

In still another scenario, I told Anandalakshmi of our
puzzling experience in a Chinese restaurant at Kemps Corner
in Bombay. While our 5½-year-old son and 7-year-old
daughter became restless toward the end of the meal and
began to explore the restaurant, I noticed that young children
in two Indian families were sitting very quietly and well

420 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

behaved throughout the entire meal until the family left. She
replied that if the Indian children misbehaved, the parents
and/or grandparents would have said to them, “What will
auntie or uncle over there think of us?” Preserving family
reputation is paramount.

To understand the familial self, it is ﬁrst important to
take into account four major sociocultural dimensions: (1)
the three psychosocial dimensions of hierarchical relation-
ships; (2) insider/outsider relationships; (3) family structure
and relationships; and (4) child-rearing. I learned a great
deal about these from reading the work of anthropologists,
and also from the astute comments of Dr. B.K. Ramanujam
in India and Dr. Tatara in Japan. The former came from a
traditional Brahmin joint family, but then after becoming a
doctor, he trained in psychoanalytic psychiatry at
the
Menninger Foundation in the United States, and then at
Moseley Hospital in London, becoming the clinical director
of the then leading psychoanalytic clinic in India, the B.M.
Institute for Mental Health in Ahmedabhad. Dr. Tatara was
trained in the William Alanson White Institute in New
York City and was later an Erikson Scholar at Austen Riggs
in Stockbridge, Massachusetts.

The ﬁrst psychosocial dimension of hierarchical re-
lationships is the formal hierarchy, a reciprocal relationship
based on age and gender, something anthropologists have
studied at length. The subordinate is expected to be deferent
and respectful to the superior, obedient, to look for guid-
ance, and to fulﬁll expectations. In return, the superior is
expected to be responsible and nurturing, and to convey
expectations and guidance. Each supports the esteem of the
other, a central psychological value both in India and Japan,
as well as in other Asian countries, the subordinate through
being nurtured by the superior; the latter through fulﬁlling
his or her role as the nurturing superior gains considerable
esteem. These expectations of subordinate and superior are
obviously sometimes not met; when they are not, there can
be considerable anger. In Hindu India, the expectations are
very much tied into dharma, the highly contextual ethic
that governs all roles in Indian life. In Japan, the expecta-
tions are very much related to Confucian contextual norms
for the different life roles.

My distinct impression with the Japanese is that the
social etiquette of their hierarchical relationships is more
rigorous than in India, and must be more carefully
observed. While Indians may verbally assent to the ex-
pectations of the superior, if they do not want to do it, they
will not. Whereas Japanese, once agreeing to something the
superior wants, feel absolutely obligated to do it no matter
how angry it makes them feel. As one patient put it, “It
can’t be helped.” The rigorousness of the social etiquette of
Japanese formal hierarchical
in part
expressed through language. The respect language, which
very few foreigners have mastered, has different words for
the same object according to the nature of the hierarchical

relationships

is

relationship. It is so complex that Japanese who are abroad
for several years have difﬁculty mastering it upon returning
home. Thus, for most Japanese, one is either in Japanese
society or out of it. It is difﬁcult going back and forth,
which is not at all true of Indians.

It is clear that this kind of hierarchical relationship is
very different from the Western one of contractual re-
lationships with its rights and obligations. Both Indians and
other East Asians in the United States have conveyed to me
their hurt and level of upset by the usual forthright criticism
and lack of nurturance from American superiors, both at
work and in the university. In another instance, I was struck
in session by the response of an Indian woman doctor in a
residency who was grossly overworked, far more than her
contractual agreement called for. While I felt anger at the
chair of her department for his abrogating the contractual
agreement, she kept repeating, “He doesn’t respect me. He
doesn’t respect me.”

Westerners can sometimes be totally unaware of the
importance of formal hierarchical relationships and the
stability they provide. When I returned to India in 1991
after 11 years, I was shocked to ﬁnd the Bombay Psycho-
analytic Society in disarray after being dynamic and
growing in the late 1970s. I did a thorough inquiry and
found the following causes. A highly respected English
psychoanalyst, an important member of the International
Psychoanalytic Association (IPA), who had been to Bom-
bay a few times to give seminars and supervision, decided
she would improve the Bombay Psychoanalytic Society by
bringing in Western values. She believed that competency
should be the key to important training positions within the
Society rather than formal hierarchical relationships by
seniority. She ﬁrst arranged through the IPA that for a
Bombay trainee to become a full-ﬂedged psychoanalyst, he
or she did not have to obtain the approval of the Calcutta
Psychoanalytic Society, as had been the case for decades.
This removed one layer of formal hierarchical relationships.
Then, she decided that the training analysts should only
be the most competent ones, thereby demoting some senior
members and elevating a few junior members to that
position. This led to two untoward results: (1) the senior
members who were demoted tended to withdraw from the
society; and (2) this led to a junior member, with the
assistance of a couple of junior colleagues, forcing out of
the society a much more capable junior member, and then
taking over the society and preventing any new trainees for
a number of years. He was able to do this because the
senior membership had been severely decimated by the
English psychoanalyst.

I had noticed this same kind of occurrence in a man in
his early 40s who came to me for therapy in Bombay in the
1990s with a debilitating depression. He was the oldest son
in a business family with a good ongoing business his fa-
ther had run. The father had sent him to an elite boarding

A Psychoanalyst Views the Self Across Civilizations Chapter | 25 421

school, then to England for an engineering degree, and
arranged a marriage for him with a woman from a well-
to-do, highly cultured family. None of this could the
father afford to do for the two younger brothers and sister.
When he came back from England, he helped the family
ﬁrm develop signiﬁcantly, making much more money for
everyone. However, when his father became seriously ill
and incapacitated, the younger brothers out of envy rose up
and forced him out of the business, nor would they
compensate him with even a rupee, even though he had
been an equal partner and a leader in the business. His
mother sided with the younger brothers. He then went to his
mother’s house and there went on a hunger strike to death
unless he was fairly compensated. Only then, after several
days of his hunger strike were efforts made to give him his
due, although I learned a couple of years later that they only
gave him partial restitution. Thus, once the senior member,
the father became ill and incapacitated,
the younger
brothers took over and forced him out, which resulted in the
business signiﬁcantly declining. Similar to the Bombay
Psychoanalytic Society, it was only with the presence of the
senior hierarchy, the father, did the ﬁssures and rivalry
between the brothers remain under control.

The second psychosocial dimension of hierarchical re-
lationships is hierarchical intimacy relationships. While it is
present among men, it is stronger among women (personal
communication, Nandita Chaudhari).
In this intimacy
relationship, there is considerable warmth and closeness, a
great deal of empathic nonverbal communication, outer ego
boundaries that are quite permeable, and a strong wishing,
wanting self. This can sometimes be observed over time of
young women who marry and live in her husband’s family.
There, the relationship with her mother-in-law often starts
out as a formal hierarchical relationship, sometimes quite
stressful for the daughter-in-law. But once she has a baby,
she and the mother-in-law often become much closer.
While the relationship still has elements of a formal hier-
archy,
intimacy relationship can often
predominate.

the hierarchical

I had one woman patient in Bombay who lived in her
in-laws’ house by prior agreement to getting married, and
she frequently bitterly complained that her mother-in-law
was very difﬁcult and not at all understanding of her pro-
fessional duties. Eleven years later, I returned to Bombay
and found that she and her husband had been encouraged to
move to a separate apartment for certain ﬁnancial reasons.
She was then very upset that her mother-in-law would not
visit and stay overnight to be with her and her grand-
children. We worked on a psychological understanding of
her mother-in-law’s early trauma of her mother dying when
she was only 4 years old, and then how to deal with her so
that she would visit and stay over.

In both India and Japan, one must take into account
intimacy

both the formal hierarchy and hierarchical

relationships. All relationships are a combination in one
way or another of both. I was told that the bowing in Japan,
how many and how deeply the bow, is a combination of
where one is at in the formal hierarchical relationship with
the other, and the degree of intimacy one has with the other.
If one is out of the country for too long, it apparently
becomes difﬁcult to assess this.

The third psychosocial dimension is hierarchy by the
qualities of the person. In a silent way, Indians, Japanese,
and other Asians gauge the personal qualities of others,
whether or not the person has superior qualities. A person
with such qualities may or may not be the superior in the
formal hierarchy. It could well be a younger brother, a wife,
a sister, or even a servant. While the superior in the formal
hierarchy is deferred to and respected, the person with
superior qualities tends to be venerated. One wants to be as
close as possible to this person to absorb their qualities.
This can also lead to a younger man in an organization or
family with superior qualities being given greater
re-
sponsibilities than others higher in the formal hierarchy,
while simultaneously,
the younger member relates in a
respectful and deferent way to those superiors. I have seen
this happen in the late 1970s in the Bombay Psychoanalytic
Society when a younger, gifted member was given much
greater responsibilities than usual and a leadership role,
while still relating appropriately to his superiors.

When I was in Bangalore in 1980, I was invited to attend
a meeting with Dr. Murthy who was visiting, a former Chair
of the Psychology Department at the National Institute of
Mental Health and Neuro Sciences (NIMHANS), currently
living in the Aurobindo Ashram in Pondicherry. The
meeting was held in the relatively small ofﬁces of the
Psychology Department. When he appeared, suddenly all of
the doors opened in the Psychology Department, and every
psychologist as well as many others came to attend, unlike
other meetings I had been to. Many sat on the ﬂoor literally
at his feet. It was clear he was a revered spiritual person, and
everyone wanted to be as close as possible to share in his
presence.

The second major dimension that must be taken into
account is insider/outsider relationships, something again
that Takeo Doi (1986) has written about with regard to the
Japanese. Insider relations refer in India primarily to the
family, to a certain extent to the community, and to close
friends. It is one’s own people and others. Hierarchical
intimacy relationships are primarily related to the insider
relationships of the family in India and Japan. Outsider
relationships in India are generally not to be trusted unless
someone you know well has a relationship with that person
or business. There is also a tendency to take advantage of
those in outsider relationships. On the other hand, if one
develops a good relationship to an outsider in India, the
strong tendency is to bring them home to the extended
family so that they become an insider. One can then express

422 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

all kinds of wishes and desires to be fulﬁlled by the newly
minted insider. I experienced this with my Bombay patients
who sooner or later would invite me home to have tea or a
meal with them, thus having me become an insider as part
of the family.

I have also found the difference in insider/outsider
relationships between Indians and Japanese in personal
relationships. With Indians, if you are on more or less the
same wave length, I have found one can make a close
connection within a half hour. With Japanese on the other
hand, I have found it takes several visits to establish the
relationships and become more of an insider. An American
physicist who had a fellowship to do research in a lab in
Japan found that they would not even tell him where the
test tubes were until a relationship was established, which
took some time.

When I returned to New York City in the late 1970s, I
was struck by the overwhelming reactions of my Euro-
American friends and colleagues that they felt much more
positively toward those from East Asian countries such as
Japan or China, than to Indians. I spent a long time trying to
ﬁgure this out, and I ﬁnally came to the conclusion that it
had a lot to do with the differences in their insider and
outsider relationships. Indians, as I have mentioned, try to
convert any signiﬁcant outsider relationship to an insider
one. They often do this by asking for a lot, on the
assumption that the other will have a signiﬁcant increase in
their self-esteem by fulﬁlling the dependency wishes of the
former in an unstated hierarchical relationship. This mode
of relating is totally foreign to Euro-Americans, and it is
experienced as infringing on their autonomy. Japanese and
other East Asians, on the other hand, with a Confucian
ethic, keep outsider relationships as outsider relationships
for a very long time. Whatever they may ask for in an
outsider relationship is experienced as an obligation to
reciprocate sooner or later; although in their insider re-
lationships they function very similarly as Indians. Thus, it
is very easy to visit an Indian family but extremely difﬁcult
to be invited into a Japanese family. Che Nakane (1970), a
Japanese anthropologist who worked in India, has written
at length about this. Since Japanese and other East Asians
keep a much greater distance than Indians in their outsider
relationships, Euro-Americans are more welcoming to
them.

An example of this is an Indian student who asked my
wife if he could take the ﬁnal exam a few days earlier as his
family was returning on a visit to India before ﬁnals. My
wife agreed. The next day he returned to her saying that he
approached his two other professors for the same request
but they refused. Could my wife please persuade them to
give him the ﬁnal earlier. Most other professors would be
incensed being asked to do this. But my wife had realized
that by agreeing to give him the ﬁnal earlier, she had
become an insider familial ﬁgure, and therefore could be

asked for anything. She, of course, politely refused his
request.

In India, the family is the psychological and emotional
center of life, which also includes men. With exceptions, of
course, the work place does not have the same gravity and
pull that it has in Japan, or even in the United States. Efforts
have been made by consultants to have organizations
incorporate some of the same modes of caring and relating
that are present in the family to make it a more satisfactory
place.

Even when the family is living as a unitary one with
father, mother, and children, it is nevertheless an extended
family. Important decisions by the elders of the family,
even from another town or village, may shape the direction
of the unitary family. Cousins are referred to as cousin
brothers and cousin sisters, and relatives are free to visit
and stay over. In a very traditional community, the children
will only have relationships and play with those from their
community. Further, the family has ties to other families,
both of distant relatives and others, in their community or
subcaste, which is the source of marriage partners either in
a traditionally arranged marriage or an arranged marriage
by introduction. This is so that the values and customs are
quite similar. The marriage is considered to be between
families as much as between the husband and wife. Wed-
dings customarily consist of anywhere from over 300 per-
sons to over 700.

The ethics for relating in the extended family are based
on the model of the joint family, where three generations
live together with the possibility of aunts and uncles and
their children as well. Formal hierarchical relationships of
age and gender prevail, with a contextual ethic and mo-
rality, dharma, generally deﬁning the roles each is to play.
However, in contrast to Western morality, dharma deﬁnes
proper behavior as varying with the time, place, nature of
the particular hierarchical relationship, and the natures of
the persons involved. It is a highly contextual ethic, similar
to Confucianism. One can easily observe Indians saying
different things on the same subject to different people. To
be consistent as one would expect in a Western context, is
to be considered immoral. Thus, the Western ethic, “do
unto others as you would have them do unto you” is
changed to, “do not do unto others as you would have them
do unto you because your natures may be different.”
Adding to the complexity of the formal hierarchical re-
lationships are the natures and abilities of the different
family members, so that a younger son for instance may
assume greater responsibilities and have more of a voice
than an older one; or a wife while being deferent to her
husband may nevertheless be more respected by him and
others.

It is further assumed that not only parents but also older
siblings will
responsibilities and care for
younger siblings. I have had more than one woman patient

fulﬁll

their

A Psychoanalyst Views the Self Across Civilizations Chapter | 25 423

complain about her older brother not fulﬁlling his re-
sponsibilities for her. Veena, for instance, had an excellent
position in one of the national ministries and was ﬁnishing
her doctoral studies at Columbia University, but she was
unmarried in her early 30s. This was in the 1980s when this
was highly unusual, and her age was considered detri-
mental to her getting married. She had asked her father to
postpone an arranged marriage when she was in her early
20s so she could undertake an important postgraduate
program to advance her chances for a career. The father
agreed, but soon after she ﬁnished, he suddenly died. It was
then in her older brother’s hands, and he did nothing. She
had intense bitter feelings toward him. What kept her going
were astrological predictions that she would have a very
late but excellent marriage. In spite of great efforts to search
for a suitable husband through the Indian newspaper in
New York City, nothing worked. A couple of years later,
after she had stopped coming for therapy, I ran into her at
Columbia University. She was indeed married to a man
who met her rigorous standards that he be able to socialize
in her ongoing, high-level community, related to the min-
istry she worked for in New Delhi, and he had to have gone
to one of the elite boarding schools in India, and then either
to Oxford or Cambridge. She simply met him when he was
sitting next to her on a ﬂight to an upstate New York City.
intimacy relationships or the caring or
concern for each other with considerable warmth are the
important norms for Indian families, although not always
fulﬁlled. As mentioned earlier, rivalry among brothers is
kept in check by the senior male(s) of the family, but they
may surface later in intense law suits when the father has
died. As alluded to before, family reputation is central, how
the family reﬂects on each of its members, and how each
contributes to the reputation of the family.

Hierarchical

Some years ago, a very capable woman psychoanalyst
from our institute referred to me an Indian man in his late
20s, as she had become enraged at his male chauvinism,
wanting to divorce his American wife although they got
along very well. What emerged in sessions is that he
graduated from a good college in North India in the 1980s
but was unable to ﬁnd a job for a couple of years. He then
came to New York City on an H1 Visa to work for an
uncle, who thoroughly exploited him, making him work
long hours for less than the minimum wage. If he quit
working for his uncle, he would lose the H1 Visa and have
to return to India to face further unemployment. He met and
then married a divorced American woman with a child, was
able to get a Green Card and leave his uncle’s employment
to set up a business of his own. He worked long hours, was
very successful, and was able to send signiﬁcant amounts
of money home to his parents. This boosted his and the
family’s reputation considerably in the community. He was
the star of the family, but there was just one problem.
Coming from a high-caste family, being married to a

divorced woman with a child was considered to be an
enormous blot on the family reputation. Although he was
still in love with his wife and appreciated that through his
marriage he was able to make an excellent
living and
contribute greatly to his family’s reputation, he nevertheless
was still seriously considering divorcing her to remove the
blot.

The Japanese family is structured differently from the
Indian family, with the eldest son being brought into the
family business or occupation, generally living with his
parents, and the younger sons having to leave the family
and frequently go into a different occupation. The daugh-
ters, as in India, leave the family for the husband’s family.
Until recent years, women and men were to have one career
only, with child-rearing being considered a career. Now,
there are a number of professionally trained women who
also marry and have children.

Indian and Japanese child-rearing from earliest infancy
differs signiﬁcantly from the norms of American child-
rearing. There is greater physical closeness with the in-
fant and young child sleeping next to the mother at night.
When another child is born, the older one will then sleep
with an older sibling or someone else in the family, if it is at
all possible. To sleep alone in a separate bedroom, the ideal
of American child-rearing, is considered dire punishment. I
have had a few Indian patients, usually the youngest of
their siblings, sleep next to the mother until they were 10 or
12 years old. One social worker said she went from her
mother’s bed to her husband’s bed at age 19.

There

is multiple mothering in Indian families,
including the mother-in-law in North India, the mother in
South India, sisters-in-law, aunts, older female cousins,
servants, and neighbors, while the mother remains central,
although deferent to her mother-in-law or mother. The ﬁrst
few years of childhood are considered to be very indulgent
from a Western perspective. When the toddler does
something that the mothering person considers inappro-
priate or dangerous, she does not set ﬁrm limits or say,
“no,” as is done in the United States. Rather, she distracts
the child with something else.

One time after a seminar at the South Asian Institute at
Columbia University, I overheard a conversation between
an older American woman, the wife of the former director
of the Institute who had spent substantial time in India with
her husband, and a much younger Indian woman, a well-
known writer, who had a toddler. The former exclaimed,
“How can you not say ’no’ to your child? Suppose he is
about to run into the street with cars coming!” The former
retorted, “I can never say ’no’ to him,” thereby causing
considerable consternation in the American woman. What
she did not add is that she would distract her child with
something else.

In another instance, a patient, Meena, who was in a
doctoral clinical psychology program, came into session

424 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

one day exclaiming she was a terrible mother. All of her
psychology books assert the importance of mothers setting
ﬁrm limits on their young children, something which she
felt totally incapable of doing. She, herself, had come to the
United States with her parents when she was 5 years old,
leaving a large joint family in North India. I asked her if she
had any memories of how she was raised, whether ﬁrm
limits were set for her, or whether they simply distracted
her when they felt she was doing something potentially
harmful. She thought for a moment and then conﬁrmed it
was the latter.

A couple of years later as she began to realize the dif-
ferences in child-rearing, she related the following incident.
She was called in by the teacher of her 4-year-old daugh-
ter’s nursery school class for a conference. The teacher
praised her daughter endlessly; she was such a delight to
have in class, but there was just one problem. Her daughter
kept hugging the other children, who did not like it. Could
she get her daughter to stop this inappropriate behavior?
When she came home, she told her daughter that it is
perfectly ﬁne to hug other children when they are with their
Indian friends but not to do it with American children who
are not used to it. Thus, she contextualized the situation for
her daughter without reprimanding her in the least.

In the 1990s, a research video was shown at the mid-
winter meeting of the American Psychoanalytic Associa-
tion in New York City on Japanese and American mothers
with their 18e24-month-old toddlers. Dr. Calvin Settledge, a
highly regarded child psychoanalyst with a Japanese
American student in training, had set up a research project in
which one by one Japanese mothers and American mothers
with their toddlers were in a playroom. The mother would
ﬁrst be interrupted by a phone call, a little later by someone
visiting, and still later, she would be asked to leave the room
for a short while, leaving the toddler with a visitor. The aim
was to show how the mother and her child reacted to the
interruptions. Dr. Settledge, noted for his work in Margaret
Mahler’s
and
separation-individuation, was astounded by the results. The
American mothers, when interrupted by a phone call or by a
visitor, simply encouraged her child to play with toys in the
playroom while she spoke with the other. When she was
asked to leave the room, she willingly did. Not so the
Japanese mothers. When interrupted by the phone call or
visitor, she never took her eyes off of her child, and when the
child came back to her, rather than encouraging her toddler
to go play with the toys, she simply scooped him or her up
on her lap and held them. Nor did any of the Japanese
women leave the room. The closeness between mother and
child was never interrupted.

early childhood symbiosis

theory of

If the early years from infancy through age 4 are ones of
continual closeness and gratiﬁcation, what I have originally
to Western
termed “symbiotic reciprocity” in contrast
“separation-individuation,” after ages 3 or 4,
there is

widespread agreement that there is a crackdown for proper
behavior to observe the social etiquette of the hierarchical
relationships of the family. This crackdown continues
through adolescence, sometimes with physical punish-
ments, or being yelled at, or being shamed. In India, this is
ﬁrst implemented by the women of the family, then by the
men. The mother welcomes the help of her mother-in-law
and others when the child is an infant, while overtly
deferring to her mother-in-law. However, as the child be-
comes older, she more and more assumes a central role in
guiding the child, and she becomes a mediator between the
children and their father. In North India, while daughters
marry out into their husband’s family, sons, especially the
oldest, may stay at home and help their parents. In any case,
sons never lose their privileged closeness to their mothers,
bringing about a different reading of the Oedipus complex.
In Indian mythology, it is not the sons killing their fathers
but rather more the reverse. In actuality, sons deeply need
their fathers to offset engulfment by their mothers and other
woman of the family.

Another matter of signiﬁcance in Indian child-rearing is
that while there is a clampdown for proper behavior for
meeting the social etiquette of hierarchical relationships,
there is also a great respect for a child’s idiosyncracies, much
more than in Western countries. The Indian assumption is
that the child is born after having multiple past lives with an
accumulation of experiences. Therefore, these past experi-
ences and tendencies will show up in his or her nature.

THE FAMILIAL SELF

it

theories,

When we speak of the self in the United States, or for that
matter most of Europe, and in our psychoanalytic and
psychological
is taken for granted without
reﬂection that it is an I-self. It is not that we do not have
important relationships, but it is from one I-self to another.
This is not the case in both India and Japan, where there is a
we-self deeply enmeshed in familial relationships in both
countries, and for men in Japan in group relationships as
well. In these we-self relationships, the person experiences
themselves as being quite different from one relationship to
another. Consistency is not valued, and in fact, two Indian
women exclaimed against being consistent. Veena, a pa-
tient, could not understand American women’s struggle
with both having a career and a family. She is a painter who
also teaches in a college, saying that she values having
different selves, one as a painter, another as a professor,
another as a wife, and still another as a mother. She would
hate having to be the same. Nandita Chaudhari, a professor
in the postgraduate child development program at Lady
Irwin College in New Delhi, similarly voiced her abhor-
rence of having to be the same in all situations. This
experiential, changing self in social situations is balanced
by the stability of the private self.

A Psychoanalyst Views the Self Across Civilizations Chapter | 25 425

While self-esteem is an important aspect of the self
universally, I ﬁnd that it is signiﬁcantly more valued in
Asian societies such as India and Japan than in the United
States. In fact, it only entered the psychoanalytic ﬁeld in a
major way in the 1970s with the formulation of Self
Psychology by Heinz Kohut (1971). He spelled out the
foundations of self-esteem as residing in different kinds of
self-objects, that is, persons who can empathize with you,
or are objects of idealization, or are engaged in the same
activity with you. During a weekend day in Hiroshima
devoted to discussing Self Psychology, I was asked why it
had taken hold in the United States. They had read Kohut’s
books but could not understand their signiﬁcance. I thought
for a while and then asked if they had ever seen the
paintings of Edward Hopper. Marvelously, Dr. Tatara, who
had trained in New York City, had taken slide pictures of a
Hopper exhibit at the Whitney Museum, and he showed
them after lunch. It became very apparent that the people in
the paintings were hardly engaged with one another, similar
to the painting of “Christina’s World” by Andrew Wyeth.
The paintings express an isolated, lonely feeling. It was
then easy to say that Kohut’s emphasis on adult’s empathy
with each other and their children, also serving as objects
for idealization, and alter ego objects for doing tasks of one
kind or another with each other, is very relevant in the
United States, where by and large relationships are rela-
tively fragile. In Japan as in India, there is a much stronger
emphasis on omoiari or concerned empathy. It smooths
relationships in the family and in groups. Further,
in
these hierarchical societies, there is always someone to
idealize, if not living then deceased. In India, you also have
the gods and goddesses, and holy men and women. In my
clinical work in both countries,
found while self-
psychology was very pertinent,
there was signiﬁcantly
less deprivation of missing self-objects than in my patients
in New York City.

I

In India and Japan, one must speak of we-self-esteem,
as the experiential self is different. In general, I found that
there are unusually high levels of we-self-esteem, and
threats to that is what is to be avoided. At conferences, the
majority of people there may not be that interested in the
subject but want to support the person speaking, whom they
know. Further, there will be far less criticism or challenges
to the speaker than at a conference in the United States. In
1977, I attended the International Association of Child
Psychiatrists in Ahmedabad, India. I asked one of the
American psychoanalysts how this conference went when it
was in Israel two years previous as compared to then. He
replied that there is no comparison, that in Israel there was
constant questioning, criticism, and disagreements, but here
everything is peaceful and friendly. I knew, however, that
hidden from view there were major disagreements among
some of the Indian psychiatrists, but nothing was aired so
that they would not be criticized or embarrassed in public.

Maintaining each other’s esteem was more important than
the truth of any given matter.

This surfaced in session when an American patient, an
important scientist
in his ﬁeld, was negotiating with a
Japanese company. He met one of the Japanese scientists
who told him of a theory he had formulated. The American
then spoke with another Japanese scientist and told him that
the theory he was told was totally wrong according to a
great deal of evidence. Since the ﬁrst Japanese scientist was
a well-known person in his ﬁeld, the second one simply
said, “Well, you never can tell.”

As mentioned earlier, the Indian conscience is oriented
around dharma, and the Japanese one is around Confucian
values. Both are highly contextual, depending on the nature
of the relationship, the hierarchy, the setting, the natures of
the persons involved and such. It is much more oriented
toward the ego ideal of how one should be in a number of
different situations and relationships rather than a more
universal ethic.

Japanese appear to have a much more rigorous ego ideal
than Indians, or for that matter Euro-Americans; everything
must be done to perfection from human relationships to
skills and tasks. One Japanese analyst conﬁded to me that
in spite of several years of his own psychoanalysis, he still
feels beset by the inner pressure to do everything perfectly.
One Japanese patient spoke almost with contempt about
American inefﬁciency.

This high bar of doing everything extremely well is
inculcated by the Japanese mother, later implemented by
the father as well. In 1977, when we were in New Delhi, I
asked the director of The Playhouse School, a progressive
nursery school and kindergarten with roots in the Merrill
Palmer School in Detroit, if she noticed any differences in
the different groups of children, ages 3e5 years old,
attending the school. Most were sons and daughter of
diplomats from various countries. She observed that the
children with the most independent initiative are from the
United States; those with the most skills are Japanese; and
those with the most interpersonal sensitivity are Indians.

Communication also varies considerably among In-
dians, Japanese, and Euro-Americans. Indian forms of
communication also relate to the dual self structure. When I
ﬁrst began to work at the Indian Council of Mental Hy-
giene, the senior psychiatrist, a well-liked and respected
woman in charge of the seven or eight mental health
workers there, suggested that I give a seminar one evening
a week; she chose the topic, and we all agreed on the time
and place where we would have the meeting. They all
seemed to wholeheartedly agree on everything. I showed
up on time, but I was the only one who came. The
following Saturday at our meeting I asked the psychologists
and social workers what topic they would like to discuss.
Enthusiastically, they all wanted to talk about dreams and
how to analyze them. This time they all showed up.

426 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

I have found that

Indians communicate on three
different levels, which may or may not be in synchroni-
zation with each other. In the formal hierarchical relation-
ships with a superior, there is almost always verbal assent
to what the superior wants. On another level, there are a
number of nonverbal gestures as well as moods to which
others are usually ﬁnely attuned. Then on the third level,
there are the actual behaviors, which may or may not be in
agreement with what the person has verbally agreed to.
Thus, the social workers at the Indian Council had clearly
verbally assented to what their superior, the psychiatrist,
wanted. But they showed by their behavior that they really
did not agree with the topic she had chosen for the seminar.
In another instance, we asked a woman who was taking
care of our children during the day while we worked if she
would sit with them that evening as we had just learned of
a lecture we wanted to go to. She said, “Yes, I can,” but the
look on her face was morose. I then asked her if she had
other plans that evening, which she instantly conﬁrmed.
Again, she observed the proper social etiquette by assent-
ing to be available, but she clearly conveyed her unhap-
piness through her facial expression. I have found even
Indians have sometimes expressed difﬁculty in reading
someone’s mind as to what they really want or are moti-
vated to do since verbal agreement is only one mode of
communication.

communication is

While Western communication is predominantly verbal,
with the nonverbal often being dissociated, Indian and
Japanese
considerably consciously
nonverbal. M. Nasir Ilahi, a Pakistani psychoanalyst who
trained in London, was initially disconcerted working with
English and American patients when he found their
communication to be overwhelmingly verbal, something he
was not used to. While Indian verbal communication may
at times be circuitous, Japanese is overwhelmingly by in-
nuendo. A Japanese pianist who performs both in the
United States and Japan stated that he had to learn to be
very direct in America, otherwise no one understood him,
but to speak by innuendo in Japan; otherwise, they would
experience his directness as being insulting.

While Indians do sense each other’s moods and such, in
Japan it borders for an American on mind reading. In
Hiroshima, I was listening to case notes of a Japanese
psychoanalyst, Dr. Yoshiko Idei, trained at the William
Alanson White Institute in New York City, of her year and
a half work with a woman from a very traditional back-
ground. I could well understand the psychodynamics of the
case and how the woman greatly improved. However, in
the length of the whole analytic therapy, there were only
two interpretations. Further, Dr. Idei picked up things that
were only verbally expressed by the patient 6 months later.
When I pointed this out, Dr. Tatara, who headed the group,
asked me what I made of it. I stated that it seemed as
though Dr. Idei had read the patients mind, and in turn, the

patient had read her mind. Another Japanese analyst trained
at the White Institute chimed in that this also happened to
him when he presented a case there.

In one of the most insightful papers I have come across,
A.K. Ramanujan (1990), the late professor of literature and
folklore at University of Chicago and the foremost poet in
India in English, detailed how Indian thinking is different
from that of those in the West. He basically emphasized the
contextual, the metonymic, and the monistic in contrast to
the European and American emphasis on dualism and
universalism. The contextual I have already discussed in
relation to the Indian and Japanese conscience. An example
of the metonymic is when a statue of a goddess or god is
not seen as a symbolic representation of it as in Western
thought, but rather as an actual partial manifestation of the
god or goddess.

The monistic thinking interconnects everything so that
not only mind and body are on a continuum, but the cosmos
and individual are too, which is the underlying basis of
astrology. This can also be seen in mythic thinking or
consciousness. In the broad psychoanalytic ﬁeld, Jungian
psychology tries to get in touch with mythic themes mainly
through dreams. However, traditional Indians, especially
women, can use mythic characters and themes in everyday
life. I once asked the Chair of the Psychology Department
and her assistant at NIMHANS in Bangalore if they ever
used Indian mythology in their everyday thinking. They
looked at each other, hesitated for a minute, and then said,
“all of the time”; they gave examples how the various
personnel at NIMHANS ﬁtted into their mythic schema,
oriented around the characters of the Ramayana and the
Mahabharata, the two great epic mythologies of India.

Ego boundaries and the dual self structure are key
components of the familial self in both India and Japan,
which I have discussed earlier. I would now like to turn to
the issue of individuality and individualism, as I believe
there is a great deal of misinformation in this area. Euro-
Americans in the modern Western culture of individualism
tend to express their individuality in social relationships, in
work, in dress, and how they talk and think. In the anthro-
pological literature, they view Asians as having a collective
self, implying that they have little individuality. This is not
so, expressed two Indian women, Dr. Madhu Sarin, a psy-
choanalyst, and Dr. Rashmi Jaipal, a psychologist, who have
spent years in the New York City area. They claim that their
Indian friends, whether in the United States or in India, have
more individuality than their American friends. If one ac-
cepts the formulations of Self Psychology, then the constant
empathic mirroring from childhood on, with many models
for idealization, in addition to accepting a child’s idiosync-
racies as recognition of a nature inﬂuenced by past lives, can
well develop a strong sense of individuality, while the
person is still emotionally enmeshed in insider intimacy
relationships. In Japan, individuality on the whole is much

A Psychoanalyst Views the Self Across Civilizations Chapter | 25 427

more kept in the private self. Dr. Akahisa Kondo, a Japanese
psychoanalyst
the Karen Horney Institute in
New York City in the early 1950s, once told me, “Our
individuality lies in what we do not say.”

trained at

THE MAGIC COSMIC AND SPIRITUAL
SELF

In India, as well as in other Asian countries inﬂuenced by
Buddhism, there is a fundamental assumption that everyone
has his or her own personal destiny, a continuation of ex-
periences from past lives. Further, their personal destiny
can be known through astrology, palmistry, psychics,
dreams, and such. In their monistic thinking the cosmos is
integrated with the personal. And if there is an untoward
prediction,
there are certain rituals or pil-
grimages to be done to offset the bad effects. In the West
with its strong rational tradition, this is seen as superstition.
I have found that even in some American South Asian
specialists, although they accept the religious and spiritual
traditions of India, they shy away from the magic cosmic. It
is mainly in the counter culture in the West that these
elements tend to exist, in good part fed by movements such
as theosophy and anthroposophy.

traditionally,

I have already cited the prediction for Ashis, my ﬁrst
Indian patient, made on a palm leaf manuscript from his
minute of birth over 350 years ago at the Brighu Temple in
the Punjab, that his fortunes would take a decided turn for
the better when he began seeing me in therapy in February.
Another example is an Indian woman doctor, Sarita, who
came to me because her husband was extremely verbally
abusive to both her and her daughter. She sent the minute of
her and her husband’s births to a trusted cousin in South
India to go to the best astrologer he could ﬁnd to ﬁnd out
what the astrologer had to tell him about the marriage,
directing him not to reveal anything to the astrologer about
their marriage. He reported back that the astrologer said to
him in effect: Who the hell arranged this marriage? He is a
very disturbed man; further, she should leave him imme-
diately as he has something growing behind his right eye,
and as it gets worse and he becomes incapacitated, it will be
more difﬁcult for her to leave. They already knew he had a
brain tumor growing behind his right eye.

Still another example is another Indian woman physi-
cian in her late 20s who came to therapy because of
entering into what seemed to be an excellent marriage but
was extremely unhappy. After going to college and medical
school in the United States, she met a man from her own
South Indian Brahmin subcaste, who was very successful in
his work and came from a prominent family, all of the
markings of a highly appropriate marriage. The only
problem is that once married, they did not get along. Her
mother then requested her to send a thumb print, which her
mother brought to a particular South Indian temple where

predictions were written over 1500 years ago. When the
priest brought out three different palm leaf manuscripts
where the thumbprint seemed to match what was on the
manuscript, he would ﬁrst ask the mother to identify the
current family makeup. It was only when he said, “Is this
the family with an older daughter who went abroad to
medical school, and with two younger brothers,” which her
mother conﬁrmed, that he told her the contents of the
manuscript. It described when she would make up her
mind, what had caused the current marital difﬁculty from
events in a past life, and what her future life would be like.
One can assert that psychologically Indians, in partic-
ular, seem to have a more horizontal and vertical self than
most Americans. By horizontal, I mean a we-self more
intimately connected to others in the family and commu-
nity, and in Japan, to others in the family and work groups.
By vertical, I mean there is an assumption of connection to
past lives in particular and to the cosmos in general.

I have observed that Westerners are now far more open
and public about their spiritual practices than Indians who
keep this very private. On my psychoanalytic research grant
in 1977, I was ﬁrst attached to the Centre for Developing
Societies in New Delhi, a major social science and psy-
chological think tank. At their daily luncheons, which all of
the fellows attended, I once asked to what extent is the
meditative tradition still alive. The answer was, “You don’t
know. Even your closest friend may be involved in some
meditative practice, but you won’t necessarily know about
it.” Contrast that to an experience in New York a few years
later when I was invited to give a presentation. Someone
came up to me beforehand and directly asked, “Dr. Roland,
do you meditate?”

Among Euro-Americans,

the self-creation of one’s
identity is a fundamental characteristic (Erikson, 1950;
Menaker and Menaker, 1965; Menaker, 1982). Thus, for
Euro-Americans, being involved in one or another spiritual
practice such as meditation becomes an integral part of
one’s identity. And what is one’s identity inevitably be-
comes public. Whereas for
Indians, spiritual practices
become part of the private self, usually only to be revealed
to like-minded, receptive persons. It enables them to gain
some distance and be more evenhanded in their highly
emotionally enmeshed relationships.

I have worked psychoanalytically with close to 20
American and Indian patients seriously involved in spiritual
practices. My American patients ranged from the majority
being involved in one or another kind of Buddhist medi-
tation, primarily Zen Buddhism and Vipassana. Others
were involved in Hassidism, Catholicism, and Suﬁsm, the
last being a Suﬁ meditation instructor. What had been an
area that was strongly put down within the Freudian
tradition for many decades is now being seriously dis-
cussed, since for the past 20 or so years there have been
increasing numbers of psychoanalytic therapists who are

428 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

personally involved in one or another meditation or prayer
tradition. Patients involved in spiritual practices seem to
handle the anxiety better that is aroused in the therapy
process, while simultaneously the analysis helps them in
their spiritual practices.

SOCIAL AND CULTURAL CONTEXTS OF
WESTERN INDIVIDUALISM

After my experiences in India and Japan, from having to
learn the social and cultural contexts of the familial self, I
took another journey while home to learn the social and
cultural contexts of Western individualism. Paradoxically,
this might well have been the most difﬁcult psychological
exploration of all. Since everything is so familiar and so
silently woven into the fabric of our own psyches and
seems so evidently universal, it is difﬁcult to see just how
much our own selves are embedded within a whole cultural
and historical context. And this pertains to psychoanalysis
and other psychological
theories as well, all of which
appear to be careful, universal scientiﬁc statements.

In Western society since the Reformation, the individual
has been considered inviolate, the supreme value in and of
itself, with each person having his or her own rights and
obligations, and each equal to the other. The needs of so-
ciety are seen as essentially subordinate to the needs of
individuals, who are governed by rationality and their own
self-interest
in mutually consenting contractual relation-
ships. The individual is assumed to be self-contained with
considerable social privacy being granted. These cultural
valuations of the autonomous individual have come to
underlie all of modern European American economic, po-
litical,
legal, and educational approaches (Allen, 1991;
Dumont, 1986), as well as social and psychological theories
including psychoanalysis.

Since the Enlightenment, the rational, thinking person
has been seen as the most valued, and as intrinsically su-
perior to the person ruled by emotions. Scientiﬁc modes of
thought that explore causal, logical relationships are seen as
primary. The world and cosmos are viewed as essentially
secular, that is, knowable through science. All other ways
of perceiving reality are discredited as superstition or are
demystiﬁed, as in the case of religion, magic, and ritual. I
detail the historical roots of the culture of Western indi-
vidualism in Roland, 1996, pp. 4e6.

Psychoanalysis has been in a dialectical dialog with the
culture and psychology of individualism, although it is
rarely if ever recognized to be embedded in a historical
sociocultural context. The critiques today of “the myth of
the individual mind” and of a “one-person psychology” are
simply not recognized as having their roots in the funda-
mental Western conception of the self-contained individual.
While emphasizing the unconscious and emotions by
Freud, and intersubjective and relational theories today,

challenging both rationality and the self-contained indi-
vidual, psychoanalysis in the West still assumes some of
the cardinal values of Western individualism: the autonomy
of the individual, the self-creation of one’s identity, moral
values in the conscience to be applied consistently in all
situations, relative authenticity in human relations, pri-
marily verbal communication, self-reliance, a relatively
consistent I-self, ﬁrm outer ego boundaries between self
and other, and such.

Whenever anyone emigrates to the United States from a
radically different culture, they gradually develop a bicul-
tural self. And even their children, caught between parents
from a very different background and American culture and
social relations, also develop a bicultural self. On the sur-
face,
this can evoke considerable conﬂict and unease,
which can be further augmented by unresolved familial
issues.

An example of this is a Japanese woman, Nobuko, who
came to therapy for difﬁcult problems she was having in
her American company. She had come to the United States
a few years previously after attending an elite college in
Japan, went through 3 years of graduate studies here, and
had a happy marriage to an American. At her work, how-
ever, she encountered very upsetting problems that would
prevent her from sleeping a few nights in a row. She had
decided to work for an American ﬁrm, as she felt she could
not stand the degree of subordination needed to work in a
Japanese trading company. She was expected to deal with
her clients in a very direct, forthright way. This was very
difﬁcult for her, and when her supervisor directly criticized
her for this or one of the very few mistakes she made, far
fewer than the other workers, she would become uncon-
trollably upset. I ﬁrst pointed out
to her the cultural
differences between Japanese communication by innuendo
and direct American communication, and that she would
have to make a decision to what extent she did or did not
want to adopt American ways. I also recognized the dif-
ferences to her between direct criticism from her superior
and a more nurturing attitude in the work place at home. As
she began putting together a workable bicultural self, what
complicated the situation was a powerful grandmother who
ruled the roost of her samurai family. Nobuko mentioned
that as a teenager she won a National Haiku poetry content.
When her grandmother stated, “Of course you won. I write
Haiku poetry,” Nobuko never wrote another verse. Thus,
the clash between cultures within her was greatly intensi-
ﬁed by the supervisor’s criticisms resonating with the
difﬁcult, dominating grandmother.

In the area of diversity, culture is not conﬁned to the
different races or radically different cultures. It is much
closer to home. One patient, Malcolm, besides having some
serious emotional problems due to a father slowly dying of
cancer during his teens and his mother then becoming drug
addicted, also had a compulsion that we did not understand

A Psychoanalyst Views the Self Across Civilizations Chapter | 25 429

for a long time. As a graduate school architectural student
with very limited funds, Malcolm would compulsively buy
secondhand architectural books at the secondhand book
stores in Manhattan. His wife would complain because he
never could stop, and it was depleting needed family funds.
It was only after more than 2 years of psychoanalytic
therapy that I asked for his mother’s background. I knew
she was Puerto Rican, his father was of German descent,
and I assumed she was from one of those Puerto Rican
families of not great means that immigrated to the United
States in the middle of the 20th century. Instead, he
exclaimed that on 14th Street, not far from my ofﬁce, were
stores with Puerto Rican books. He said many of the books
of poetry in the windows were written by his elder relatives,
that the family was descended from the same family as one
of the famous Spanish Catholic saints, that other elder
relatives were judges, professors, and such. It then became
clear that before his mother had collapsed because of his
father’s slow decline and death, she had instilled in him as a
boy her desire that he grow into a great intellectual. With
this realization the compulsion to buy these books greatly
subsided.

EPILOGUE

I have wondered over the years why psychoanalysts, with
but a few exceptions, as well as psychologists and psy-
chiatrists, have rarely taken into account the sociocultural
backgrounds of their patients in seeing the sometimes stark
differences in the self, especially across radically different
cultures. I found two main reasons.

I ﬁrst thought that the major reason was the obvious
difference between the modern Western culture of indi-
vidualism dating from the Reformation in the 16th century
and the Eastern cultures, which emphasize being enmeshed
in extended families and communities or the work group,
and the unreﬂective views of analysts and others that
Western norms were both universal and superior. It is clear,
for instance, that many of the main concepts and norms of
psychoanalysis are oriented toward individualism:
for
example, separation-individuation, ﬁrmly set ego bound-
aries between self and other, a relatively consistent super-
ego in one’s relationships, and overwhelmingly verbal
communication. If one were to use the norms and contents
of the self across civilizations based on Western values as
universal,
then one ends up with colonial attitudes of
superiority.

In more recent years, after reading a book by Celia
Brickman (2003), I came upon another major reason for
discounting the cultural and social differences that are
deeply internalized. It has rarely been reﬂected upon that
Freud formulated his theories at the height of the colonial
era when the prevailing theory was Social Evolutionism. It

posited that reason, science, and technology were the
markers of the highest social evolution in societies, and that
everyone else was inferior, primitive, or savage. Thus, while
northern European and North American countries were
considered at the height of social evolution, southern Eu-
ropeans, Slavs, and Jews were seen as inferior, with Asians,
Africans, and others being labeled either primitive or sav-
age. Freud reacted by positing psychological universalism,
the psychic unity of mankind, thus doing away with this
superiorityeinferiority continuum. While it was a major
advance over Social Evolutionism,
it nevertheless dis-
counted the profound variations of persons from different
cultures. I have found from being on panels with psycho-
analysts from radically different cultures who have been
trained in Europe or the United States, that they also adhere
to the dogma of the psychic unity of mankind, that culture
and social relationships do not have any effect on the inner
psychological makeup of their patients. They have, in effect,
taken on the identity of their Euro-American colleagues.

REFERENCES

Allen, D., 1991. The social construction of self: some Asian, Marxist, and
feminist critiques of dominant Western views of sef. In: Allen, D.
(Ed.), Culture and Self: Philosophical and Religious Perspectives
East and West. Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado, pp. 3e26.

Brickman, C., 2003. Aboriginal Populations in the Mind: Race and
Primitivity in Psychoanalysis. Columbia University Press, New York.
Doi, T., 1973. The Anatomy of Dependence. Kodansha International

Limited, Tokyo, New York, and San Francisco.

Doi, T., 1986. The Anatomy of Self: The Individual Versus Society.

Kodansha International Ltd, Tokyo, New York, and San Francisco.

Dumont, L., 1970. Homo Hierarchicus. University of Chicago Press,

Chicago.

Dumont, L., 1986. Essays on Individualism. University of Chicago Press,

Chicago.

Erikson, E., 1950. Childhood and Society. W. W. Norton, New York.
Kakar, S., 1978. The Inner World: A Psychoanalytic Study of Childhood

and Society in India. Oxford University Press, New Delhi.

Kohut, H., 1971. Analysis of the Self. International Universities Press,

New York.

Menaker, E., 1982. Otto Rank a Rediscovered Legacy. Columbia

University Press, New York.

Menaker, E., Menaker, W., 1965. Ego in Evolution. Grove Press, New

York.

Nakane, C., 1970. Japanese Society. University of California Press,

Berkeley and Los Angeles.

Ramanujan, A.K., 1990. Is there an Indian way of thinking?: An informal
essay. In: Marriott, McK. (Ed.), India Through Hindu Categories.
Sage Publications, New Delhi and London, pp. 41e58.

Roland, A., 1988. In Search of Self in India and Japan: Toward a

Cross-cultural Psychology. Princeton University Press, Princeton.

Roland, A., 1996. Cultural Pluralism and Psychoanalysis: The Asian and

North American Experience. Routlege, New York and London.

Roland, A., 2011. Journeys to Foreign Selves: Asians and Asian
Americans in a Global Era. Oxford University Press, New Delhi,
London, and New York.

Chapter 26

Biological and Social Causation
of Serious Mental Illness

K. McKenzie1,2,3
1University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; 2Center for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON, Canada; 3CEO Wellesley Institute, Toronto,
ON, Canada

The most effective health systems are built on an evaluation
of the needs of the population, scientiﬁc understanding of
the illnesses that are to be treated, and the development of a
balanced set of interventions in health promotion, illness
prevention, and evidence-based, or evidence-informed,
treatment.

Fundamental

to the development of effective in-
terventions is an understanding of the cause of an illness.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has amassed an
impressive array of evidence-based strategies for preven-
tion (Hosman et al., 2005) based on an understanding of
causation. This mirrors effective treatments across medi-
cine where, similarly, the best health service responses are
built on an understanding of etiology. Interventions built on
a solid understanding of the factors that increase the risk of
an illness and the pathological processes that allow the
illness to develop are most likely to be successful. Whether
the interventions are to treat a problem, to prevent relapse,
or to decrease the risk of other problems that an illness can
cause, understanding why a person has the illness and how
it impacts on the body give the best chance of success.

Psychiatry has found it more difﬁcult than many other
areas of medicine to identify the causes of illnesses. This
may reﬂect the way that mental illnesses are diagnosed, turf
battles between researchers as to whether the causation is
biological or social, and our ability to understand the hu-
man brain and the mind.

Psychiatry is making signiﬁcant progress on all of these
fronts. We are at an exciting time where, from an etiolog-
ical perspective, many of the elements are in place that
could revolutionize the way we think about mental illness
and our ability to treat and prevent it.

The research is being undertaken by different groups
around the world. It has rarely been collated, but it is

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00026-0
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

agreed that pulling this disparate research into one place
helps us to see the possibilities. Our understanding of the
causation of the most severe mental
illnesses, schizo-
phrenia, and the other psychoses, and the importance of
both the biological and social
factors involved has
increased. Our understanding of the biological mecha-
nisms that link individual and societal risk to actual psy-
chosis are clearer than ever. However, it may be that the
development of a simpler way to present what is quite
complex theory may help to improve our ability to move
from theory to change.

DIAGNOSING MENTAL ILLNESS
Understanding how mental
important for understanding its etiology.

illnesses are diagnosed is

There are three dominant systems of diagnosis that are
used worldwide: the International Classiﬁcation of Dis-
ease (ICD) published by World Health Organization
(2015), the Diagnostic Statistical Manual (DSM), pub-
lished by the American Psychiatric Association (2015),
and since the late 1970s, China has developed its own
diagnostic system (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinese_
Classiﬁcation_of_Mental_Disorders).

Diagnosis of mental health problems is strategic and
political. In physical health, all countries use the same
WHO diagnoses, but in mental health the United States and
China continue to use and reﬁne their own systems.

The ICD is used by more people in more countries
worldwide. The DSM is used in the United States and in
various countries across the world, but in fewer places than
the ICD. The manuals take different strategies for identi-
fying mental illness. The ICD offers guidance but leaves
much to the discretion of clinicians, whereas the DSM is

431

432 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

very rule based. In the DSM world, you have a particular
diagnosis if you have certain symptoms. Not surprisingly,
the DSM is often preferred by researchers, pharmaceutical
companies, regulating bodies, and health insurers.

Over time the diagnoses have become more elaborate.
The ﬁrst diagnostic system had one diagnosis, and this was
rarely used. The current version of the DSM has over 300
diagnoses, and about 26% of the United States population
would have some sort of psychological disorder
(see
McKenzie, 2013).

The history of the DSM offers an insight

into the
changing perceptions of what mental illnesses are. It also
gives an indication of how difﬁcult it is to identify the
causes of mental
illness based on current diagnostic
systems.

Initial attempts at diagnostic systems in the United
States were driven by need and were pragmatic. One of the
ﬁrst ofﬁcial attempts at developing a classiﬁcation system
in the United States was the 1840 census. The need was
part of a general trend of governments worldwide starting
to take responsibility for the mentally ill. States were
building huge hospitals, so getting a handle on the possible
volume and cost of this enterprise was important. There
were two categories in the New York State system: sane or
“idiocy/insanity.n The government was not interested in
complex ideas of the psyche or symptoms of depression.
They were interested in which people could not function in
society and may need the government to support them.

By 1917 with mental hospitals full,

From the etiological perspective, “idiocy/insanity” is
such a broad concept that it is likely to include many
different illnesses and disease processes. It is also linked to
the ability of a person to function and because of this to the
context a person lives in. Trying to identify the cause of
such a broad concept, which is likely to include a variety of
illnesses, would be obviously be challenging, if not fool
hardy. This is clear when the system is basic, but the dif-
ﬁculty remains when diagnostic systems are more complex.
the National
Committee of Mental Hygiene and members of what was
to become the American Psychiatric Association (APA)
decided it might be useful to have more than one diagnosis
because they noted differences between the patients who
were in their institutions. Based on the belief that pro-
ducing a number of different categories of patientsdor
diagnosesdwould help them develop better treatments for
those who were institutionalized,
they developed the
“Standard” a statistical manual for use by institutions.
There were 22 diagnoses.

Diagnoses in the Standard were based on descriptions of
symptoms. As such the categorization was based on how an
individual presented their problems. There was little
attempt to consider how problems came about, and there
was little understanding of
the pathological processes
involved. Given that very different mental illnesses can

have similar symptoms and signs, basing diagnosis on
symptoms alone would make identifying cause difﬁcult,
even if there were more sophisticated ways of investigating
the brain than were available 100 years ago.

The evolution of diagnosis in the United States
continued;
the American military produced their own
diagnostic system, Medical 203, in 1943, to help identify
those at risk of problems in war. But the diagnostic game
changer came in 1949, and the impetus came from outside
the United States.

WHO had for years been publishing the ICD. The ICD
categorizes all physical illnesses. For their sixth version,
they included a section on mental disorders. But unlike
physical disorders, this was not accepted by the United
States.

Post-WWII, the United States was in the ascendancy,
and the new war was a war of hearts and minds. United
States ideas and the export of the American dream were
central to the new political landscape. Rather than accept
the ICD classiﬁcation, the United States decided it needed
to deﬁne the mind for itself. In 1952 the APA produced an
adapted version of the Standard and Medical 203 and sent it
to 10% of its membership for approval. The agreed docu-
ment, DSMI, was 130 pages long and listed 106 mental
disorders. DSM II was published 16 years later. It was 134
pages and listed 182 disorders.

Both DSMI and DSMII produced diagnoses based on
cause. The theories of causation were based on the theories
of Freud and other psychodynamic therapists.
It was
discursive rather than descriptive. It was based on a theory
that had been built on observation. It relied heavily on the
clinician. Disorders were not detailed but were considered
reﬂections of broad underlying conﬂicts or maladaptive
reactions to life problems. Diagnoses were subjective.

Despite the fact that Freud was a neurologist, there was
little attempt to identify any physical substrate of an illness.
The causes of different mental illnesses were considered to
be psychological and were linked to a variety of problems
in the development of the psyche and the regulation of
basic human drives by our consciences. The theory was that
the cause of mental health problems lay in attempts by
society to socialize us.

Psychodynamic theories of causation try to investigate
the interaction between the individual and their environ-
ment. Whether or not they have eventually been considered
a useful basis for diagnosis, the fact that they are an elegant
attempt to link the individual, their context, their environ-
ment, and their history as a way of conceptualizing cate-
gories of illness is light years ahead of some of the more
reductionist approaches that have followed. Whether, you
agree with their formulation of causation or not, they are
trying to include most of the important elements that we
know lead to mental health problems into one conceptual
framework.

Biological and Social Causation of Serious Mental Illness Chapter | 26 433

The aim of the DSM system was to make it easier to
identify speciﬁc problems, to ensure that diagnoses were
made in a standardized way across the United States, and
like other systems to help those who were trying to un-
derstand which treatments work for whom and what the
likely outcome was of a particular set of symptoms. Un-
fortunately, DSMI and DSMII were difﬁcult to use. There
was signiﬁcant variability between psychiatrists in how
people with similar symptoms would be diagnosed, and
there were added issues, such as the fact that homosexuality
was classed as an illness. It was not clear that they were
useful for deciding on treatment. Change was needed (see
McKenzie, 2013).

DSMIII was published in 1974 to improve the unifor-
mity and validity of psychiatric diagnosis. Psychodynamic
theories of pathology were abandoned. The group used a
more scientiﬁc approach to deﬁne psychopathology and
identify patterns of disease through their chronology and
outcome. Diagnoses were constructed using symptom
clusters. Cause was not a major consideration in developing
diagnostic groups. There was also no need for the symp-
toms to be causing a problem. If you had the symptoms,
you had the illness.

DSMIII was 494 pages and listed 265 diagnostic cate-
gories. It is of note that the chair of the committee that
wrote DSMIII later criticized his own work saying it led to
the medicalization of 20e30% of the population who may
not have had any serious mental problems. A revision,
DSMIIIR, was published in 1987: 567 pages and 292 di-
agnoses. And in 1994, DSMIV was published: 886 pages
and 297 diagnoses. The latest iteration is DSM5: 987 pages
and an extra 15 diagnoses on top of DSMIV.

Each has tried to improve the repeatability of the
diagnostic process and the utility of the manual. For
instance, because of criticisms of DSMIII, that symptoms
alone did not necessarily mean there was a need for treat-
ment, in DSMIV having symptoms alone was not sufﬁcient
for a diagnosis. Symptoms or diagnoses had to cause
“clinically signiﬁcant distress or impairment
in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning” for
them to be relevant.

A shift like this may be clinically appropriate, but it
leads to problems for those trying to identify the cause of an
illness. This is because whether you function or not de-
pends on what you are asked to do or need to do. Two
people with the same symptoms (presumably the same
illness and the same cause) may get different diagnoses
based on whether they can function or not. For instance, if
symptoms impeded a person’s ability to work, whether this
is a problem with functioning would depend on whether
they needed to work or not. A person who does not need to
work may be less likely to be given a diagnosis than a
person who needs to work to survive. And there are similar
problems with the impact of social norms on the integrity of

a diagnosis. If norms change over time, then the expecta-
tions on an individual may also change. People with the
same difﬁculties but who live in different decades or cen-
turies may be given different diagnoses.

DSMV tried to ﬁx this. It characterizes a mental dis-

order as follows:

a clinically signiﬁcant behavior or psychological syndrome
or pattern that occurs in an individual (which) is associated
with present distress. or disability. or with a signiﬁcant
increased risk of suffering.

APA, 2013.

There are many possible critiques of this, but the central
difﬁculty is that current psychiatric diagnoses are based on
a system of description of symptoms, chronology, and
epidemiology. There are no physical tests to support them.
They are groups of symptoms that are linked together by
statistical associations and theory.

Unlike physical illnesses where there is often general
agreement, the three mental illness manuals have similar-
ities and signiﬁcant differences. Like the DSM system, they
have changed over time.

Because mental illnesses are based on symptoms rather
than clear physical pathology, it may be that each symptom
cluster could contain a number of different problems with
different causes. It would depend on how speciﬁc the
symptoms were. Using an example from physical medicine,
a common symptom like a headache may be caused by
many different
illnesses: from muscle tension through
vascular issues and intracranial hemorrhage to tumors.
Each of these problems has a different cause. Of course, on
the other hand, there are clinical histories and particular
symptoms that we know are characteristic of speciﬁc ill-
nesses. We know that from laboratory tests and autopsies.
The problem for psychiatry is that in the absence of clear
biological substrates it is difﬁcult to know which symptoms
signify a group of problems and which are pathognomic.
It could be argued that an added problem for trying to
identify the causes of current mental illnesses is the fact that
diagnoses are linked to context and societal norms
(McKenzie, 2013). But as we discuss newer ways of
thinking about etiology, this inclusion of context may be
seen as a virtue. But what is important to consider when
thinking about the cause of many mental illnesses is that
they are syndromes (collections of symptoms) rather than
illnesses. Because of this, they may have multiple causes.

THEORIES OF ETIOLOGY
The history of theories of etiology of mental illness are
reﬂected in the way we make diagnoses. We have moved
from psychodynamic theories, through theories based on
place, and more recently to more biological theories. When

434 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

I started psychiatry 25 years ago, there was a clear schism
between those who consider mental health problems to be
neurological diseases and those who think of them as so-
ciological. These lines of demarcation remain for many. I
will outline how we got to this dichotomy and how new
ways of thinking will lead us out of it. However, to un-
derstand the problem, one has to understand theories of
causation in general and then causation in mental illness
speciﬁcally.

A brief history of causation: Theories of causation have
changed over time. Prior to the current theories of modern
medicine, the cause of disease was attributed to spiritual or
mechanical causes. Illnesses were thought to be due to the
elements, humors, or miasma (bad air arising out of dirt and
decaying organic matter) (Susser and Susser, 1996a).

The theories that evolved in early public health medi-
cine in high-income countries were built on these theories.
Initial theories of causation were place-based. Poor areas,
rather than people being poor, were considered to be the
cause of many illnesses. Increased rates of illness were
because of where you lived rather than who you were. In
this way, early public health was environmental and
ecological. They focused on urban areas and aimed to
improve and sanitize the slums.

Their ideas led to an improvement in living standards
and life expectancy that is unparalleled. Their ideas were
not based on a sound understanding of what exactly was
causing illness; nevertheless, they had a profound impact
on our lives. They helped to ensure that there was clean
water, sewage systems, safe food, and improved living
conditions. The sanitary movement had a more profound
impact than many subsequent health interventions (Susser
and Susser, 1996a).

in Soho, London, England

Early public health theories were changed by the dis-
covery of viruses and bacteria. Based on current theories of
the importance of place, John Snow, considered the father
of modern epidemiology, was trying to map the cholera
outbreak
(http://www.
johnsnowsociety.org/). He found a small group of people
who were outliers; they lived in Hampstead, North London,
6 miles from where most other cases of cholera were. He
discovered that these North Londoners liked the taste of the
water from Soho, and so got it brought to them. He was
then able to identify a speciﬁc water pump in Soho that they
sent their staff to: it was at the epicenter of the outbreak.
Removal of the handle of the Broad Street pump did not
only stop the outbreak and save lives,
it also led to
increased momentum for scientists trying to identify what
was in vectors such as water that made people sick.

The discovery of infectious agents has been one of the
triumphs of medical science. However, germ theory, based
on the discovery of viruses and bacteria, in some ways
initially led to a simpliﬁcation of theories of causation.

There were two issues initially believed by some:
whether you got a particular disease depended simply on

whether you were infected by a particular germ, and intense
study of germs moved the focus of the study of causation
out of the ﬁeld and the environment and into the laboratory.
In some ways,
initially more disconnected theories of
causation based on laboratory ﬁndings were developed.

Over time, it became clear that mono-causal germ the-
ory had its problems. Some of the most profound were the
fact that exposure did not always lead to illness. Exposure
to a particular germ was necessary for a particular illness,
but it was not always sufﬁcient. Because of this, other
factors needed to be taken into consideration. In addition,
exposure depended on how you lived and where you lived.
The epidemiological triangle approach built on germ
theory (Mausner and Kramer, 1985). It asserted that disease
was a product of an interaction between the agent (the
germ), the host (the person), and the environment. The host
and the environment determined both the levels of exposure
and or susceptibility to the actions of the particular germ. If
you wanted to understand the etiology of a speciﬁc illness,
you needed to understand the germ, the environment, and
the person. Lab-based investigation was important but so
was the study of the environment.

With the introduction of penicillin and immunization to
importance of infections in high-income countries started to
diminish. In their place, chronic diseases started to be seen
as more signiﬁcant public health issues. The epidemiolog-
ical
its utility di-
minishes when trying to produce etiological theories for
chronic diseases such as diabetes or schizophrenia or
degenerative disease. This is in part because these illnesses
are characterized by the lack of a single speciﬁc agent.

triangle is useful for infections, but

A different approach is often used. The web of causa-
tion theory argues that for many chronic illnesses there is
no speciﬁc agent. There are many different exposures, over
time, which produce complex interactions of many factors.
These different
risks and exposures form interlocking
events. Essentially, a person has a number of exposures (or
agents), and each has a context (environment). Each person,
exposure, and context triad forms an epidemiological tri-
angle. For chronic diseases, there are multiple exposures
that are part of the creation of a disease process. Each of
these exposures forms an epidemiological triangle. Each of
these triangles link to another to form the web of causation
for a particular disease (Susser and Susser, 1996a).

It is rare, in chronic diseases, that any particular expo-
sure by itself leads directly to an illness. Generally expo-
sures change the risk of developing an illness and change
the risk of exposure to other risk factors. Increased risk can
be directly linked to a particular exposure but can also be
indirect through the impact that one epidemiological tri-
angle has on others in the web of causation. Just like a
spider’s web, if you move one corner, you have an impact
on the integrity of the whole.
There have been other

this etiological
journey. Germ theory, the epidemiological triangle, and the

impacts of

Biological and Social Causation of Serious Mental Illness Chapter | 26 435

web of causation have changed the focus from the solely
ecological (area) toward the individual (whether it is their
vulnerability or their exposure to a germ or a risk factor),
and the environment (what
in a particular area makes
people sick).

A particular development is that the agent in chronic
disease can be a behavior or a lifestyle choice rather than an
external agent such as a bacteria. Because of this, the risk of
an illness is linked very closely to what a person chooses to
do and who they are. The environment is included, but
often the environment is linked to the individual.

One problem this produces is that individual approaches
by themselves may not do justice to the ecological nature of
health disparities. This theory has led to some criticism and
some alternative approaches. One group are the general
theories of susceptibility. These do not identify single or
multiple risk factors associated with speciﬁc disorders but
seek to understand why some social groups are more at risk
than others.

The assertion is that because some groups are at
generally greater risk to multiple disorders there needs to be
a theory to explain this at a group level rather than an in-
dividual
these theories try to
answer is this: is there something about what is happening
to the group or at the group level that could be causing
differences in rates of illness and therefore differences in
risk of illness for an individual?

level. The question that

The theory of fundamental social causes is a good
example of a general theory of susceptibility. It neatly links
the various theories of disease etiology together and comes
full circle to reinvigorate ecological perspectives (Phelan
et al., 2010).

Considering health disparities is an accessible way of
introducing and considering the challenges of the funda-
mental social causes theory. In high-income countries,
100 years ago, disparities in life expectancy between rich
and poor were mainly because of infectious diseases. Put
simply, the poor lived in situations such as the rat infested,
overcrowded slums of cities where they were more likely to
be exposed to and to contract infectious diseases. In addi-
tion, they were less likely to get effective treatment.

The impact of infectious diseases and the disparities in
life expectancy because of them have been decreased with
the advent of modern sewage systems, clean water, vacci-
nation, and the development of antibiotics. However, dis-
parities such as the difference in morbidity and mortality
between rich and poor in high-income countries have
remained.

Instead of differences in life span and rates of illness
being because of infectious diseases, they are now linked to
chronic diseases, such as diabetes, high blood pressure,
cardiac problems, and cancer.

The fundamental social causes theory of etiology states
that disparities between rich and poor are due to social
factors such as power, money, and access to information.

Increased rates of speciﬁc diseases linked to the action of
speciﬁc agents, behaviors,
lifestyles, or exposures are
because of the action of these fundamental social causes
rather than because of the speciﬁc agents, be they germs or
the behaviors or choices of individuals.

One of the utilities of the concept of fundamental social
causes as a driver of disparities is that it allows a focus on
what needs to be done at a group level to decrease the rates
of illness. The risk of an individual can be modeled as
being because of who they are and what they do, but who
they are and what they do is determined in part by the
structure of society.

A further, important issue that ﬂows from this theory is
that ignoring the fundamental social causes leads to inef-
fective intervention. It is possible to produce successful
interventions against the diseases currently linked to dis-
parities, but over time, there may be little impact on dis-
parities between groups. There are many reasons for this;
one is that many public health interventions (ie, screening
tests and preventive medicine) are more likely to be taken
up by those with power, money, and access to information.
Another issue is that the fundamental social causes will ﬁnd
another avenue through which to express themselves.
Treating current problems may decrease the impact of that
particular illness, but new problems may ensure that dis-
parities continue, such as happened when chronic diseases
took over from infections as the main cause of differences
in life expectancy in high-income countries.

General theories of susceptibility are useful, but the
most successful etiological theories seem to have been to
build on previous theories. Rather than producing theories
that are in opposition to each other, producing a new theory
that encompasses previous theories has proved more prof-
itable. For instance, early public health theories of causa-
tion were built on prior place-based theories, and it could be
argued that the web of causation was built on the epide-
miological triangle. Given this, linking theories that focus
on the individual and theories that focus on the group or
ecological level could be a useful way of better under-
standing causation in a complex world.

An elegant

theory that pulls these different strands
together is the Chinese Box or Russian Doll model of
causation (Susser and Susser, 1996b).

This theory posits that rather than being a group of
epidemiological triangles or risks at the same level, a dis-
ease is caused by interconnected but separate levels of
causation. Each of
these levels of causation can be
considered a Russian Doll.

The theory in its essence is that, rather than being a
single web of causation,
there are a number of webs
working at different levels. Each of these levels can be
thought of as a Russian Doll. Each ﬁts inside the other.
Levels move from lower, more internal levels such as our
molecular biology, and they can be considered at a number
of different
levels (eg, genes, organs, organ systems,

436 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

individuals, the interpersonal space, and higher levels such
as societal factors). These levels have different sciences and
are investigated in different ways: using methods in mo-
lecular genetics to investigate urban policy decisions may
not prove that fruitful. In general, the amount of variance at
a lower level is constrained by the level of variance in the
level above it. So, though there are some diseases in which
the individual genetic risk outweighs most other factors, for
chronic diseases with complex etiologies, the impact of the
environment and context on the rates of illness are often
greater than biological processes.

Because of the way scientists tend to work, our under-
standing how the different levels interact is underdevel-
oped. This is partly because there are difﬁculties in getting
different sciences to speak to each other but also because
understanding how different types of science interact is
challenging.

A further nuance to the Russian Doll theory comes from
the four dimensions model (Shah et al., 2011). This model
understands that for practical purposes it may be worth
thinking of the different levels of the Russian Doll model
into two: individual and ecological. It
then speciﬁcally
acknowledges and includes the possibility that ecological
inﬂuences such as fundamental social causes can have an
impact on individual causes. And then,
includes the
concept of
time. The four dimensions are individual,
ecological, interactions, and time.

it

The simpliﬁcation aims to focus discussion on the
different elements of an etiological process and to pro-
duce an architecture for
investigation as well as a
simpliﬁed model that may help intervention. It aims to be
practical.

Different levels of causation have been discussed earlier
when outlining the Russian Doll theory. The fact that levels
may interact may be obvious, but speciﬁcally allowing for
it aims to ensure that it is not forgotten. Time is considered
important because different processes may have different
chronologies: for instance, there may be sensitive periods in
which people or groups of people are particularly sensitive
to certain environmental exposures (eg, when you are
young or when you are old), there may be different lengths
of exposure needed to cause a problem, there may be a lag
time between exposure and the development of an illness,
and of course, different process at different levels may have
different “time spans.i The understanding of causation may
in part be helped by understanding how these different
chronologies overlap. Moreover, there may be times when
the environment is particularly sensitive to the actions of
people and that may change the risk of illness. The current
impacts of human on global warming are more acute now
than they previously were. Similarly, the impact of the
actions of humans on the social environment changes at
different times in the history of a country.

In summary, the history has been that public health was
“ecological” in its origins; the advent of germ theory led to

a uni-causal theory of disease. Initially, environment as a
whole was considered,
then speciﬁc factors within the
environment that promoted illness. There had been a pro-
gressive individualization of risk: a perpetuation of the idea
that risk is individually determined and a dissociation of
risk from social contexts. Modern theories have tried to
balance individual risk factor analysis with ecological an-
alyses of causation. Including time allows for a deeper
understanding of the multilevel causation of illness in an
environmental and historical context.

MENTAL ILLNESS AND BIOLOGY
AND ENVIRONMENT
A deeper understanding of etiology is important when
trying to investigate the causes of mental illness. For many
mental illnesses the idea that there are biological, psycho-
logical, and social factors that contribute is not considered
contentious.

Most people are happy to accept that more common
mental illnesses such as depression and anxiety may run in
a family. This would imply a genetic contribution. Most
people would also likely agree that certain drugs might
cause depression and that hormonal changes, for instance at
puberty or at the menopause, can also spark a depression.
Few would have a problem with the idea that you can
become depressed because of a physical illness. The list of
agreed biological causes is long and not contentious.

Similarly the list of social factors that are considered
possible causes of depression is extensive. They are
essentially “loss” events and include being ﬁred from work,
being evicted, being imprisoned, breaking up with your
partner, loss of other family members, etc.

Other theories suggest that there can be a mindset that
promotes depression. The idea of negative thinking is one
populous iteration of a number of possible psychological
processes that may increase vulnerability to depression.

If asked to reﬂect, I would imagine that many would
have little problem with the assertion that depression and
anxiety can be caused by a complex array of biological,
social, and psychological factors. This is well reﬂected in
the Wikipedia page on the causes of mental illness (https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Causes_of_mental_disorders).

There is less agreement on the contribution of biolog-
ical, psychological, and social factors to mental illnesses
that are often more persistent and severe such as schizo-
phrenia and other psychoses. Again, this disagreement is
well reﬂected in the Wikipedia page (https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Causes_of_schizophrenia).

However, surprisingly, understanding the current sci-
entiﬁc directions and ﬁndings of the causation of schizo-
phrenia and other psychoses gives an exciting lens to the
way that social factors get under the skin and allows the
exploration of how the newer models of causation work in
the real world.

Biological and Social Causation of Serious Mental Illness Chapter | 26 437

Schizophrenia
Schizophrenia and other psychoses are substantial public
health problems that impose a profound impact on national
economies, health and social systems, affected individuals,
and their families and caretakers.

Schizophrenia is a chronic illness with a 0.5e1% risk in
lifetime. Its huge costs to society are often linked to
healthcare and welfare costs, but the major impact is on
individuals and families.

However, schizophrenia is as much a concept or syn-
drome as an illness. There are no medical
tests for
schizophrenia or other psychoses. The diagnosis is based
on the symptoms that are presented and the lack of a
physical cause for
the problems. The symptoms of
schizophrenia can be caused by many other medical ill-
nesses: from brain tumors to serious infections. They can
also be caused by intoxication by drugs. But when char-
acteristic symptoms are present and no other cause can be
discovered, the diagnosis of schizophrenia is made.

thought,

illnesses

The symptoms vary:

they include delusions, hallu-
cinations, problems with control of
social
withdrawal, cognitive impairment, and depression. There
are a number of other
that have similar
symptoms but not all the symptoms that are required for
a diagnosis of schizophrenia. Over time, many people
whose symptoms fall short of being diagnosable for
schizophrenia eventually present with enough symptoms
for a diagnosis to be made. Because of this, some re-
searchers feel it is better to consider schizophrenia and
other psychoses as one group of illnesses. Of interest,
others still, such as the past head of the National In-
stitutes of Mental Health in the United States, believe
that diagnoses are not accurate for research and have
suggested that
individual
symptoms may be a better approach (Insel, 2015).

looking at

the cause of

Schizophrenia and the other psychoses are considered a
more severe form of mental illness because, during acute
presentations, individuals may seem to have lost touch with
reality. They may be hearing voices when no one is there,
they may be responding to thoughts that have little clear
basis in reality, and they may have difﬁculty knowing
where they begin and end. For instance, some people may
think during a severe episode that other people can read
their mind or place thoughts into their head. The problems
often start in the teenage years, and there is only 30% full
symptomatic recovery; for some, there is a gradual decline
in their ability to advance themselves in the world. Many
people with a diagnosis of schizophrenia do not work,
though this is as much because of stigma as their capabil-
ities. On average, in high-income countries, the life ex-
pectancy of a person diagnosed with schizophrenia is
decreased by 20 years because of comorbidities such as
smoking, poor diet, the impacts on medication to control
symptoms on the metabolism, and suicide. The risk of

suicide in schizophrenia is higher than the risk of suicide in
depression.

The diagnosis of mental

illness and the treatment
offered is based not only on the symptoms present but also
on the impact that those symptoms have on an individual
and the community. Generally, there is a need for symp-
toms to lead to suffering or problems in function for them
to be considered a mental illness.

The treatment of schizophrenia and other psychoses in-
cludes medication, psychotherapy, family therapy, social
interventions such as work and appropriate housing, and
interventions to counter any cognitive decline, if there is any.
The treatments for psychoses are good, but even with
excellent medical care the prognosis for many is not good.
Interventions do not aim to cure psychoses; they aim to
treat symptoms and support individuals. Long-term medi-
cation may help to prevent relapse, but
there are side
effects.

In such cases, an ounce of prevention may be a better
approach. The best prevention strategies are based on an
understanding of the etiology of an illness.

The idea that schizophrenia and other psychoses could
be preventable may be surprising to some. This is in part
because WHO’s International Pilot Study of Schizophrenia
in the 1970s suggested that the rates of schizophrenia were
essentially the same across the world (Sartorius et al.,
1974). However, more recent attempts to investigate and
collate incidence rates of schizophrenia using standard
measures have reported signiﬁcant differences between
and within countries (McGrath et al., 2008). If you can
identify the reasons for differences in rates between
groups, there is a possibility that you can ﬁnd a strategy for
prevention.

As with many chronic illnesses the causes are complex
and work at many different levels. Recent advances in our
understanding of the pathophysiology of psychoses such as
schizophrenia have focused on the brain mechanisms that
underlie particular symptoms in the search for improved
pharmacological treatments. This may have inadvertently
supported the perception that psychoses are “brain dis-
eases” and that the impact of social determinants may not
be relevant. But the borders between the brain and the
environment are being eroded by newer evidence on
causation.

Balancing the development of our biological un-
derstandings, there is a growing literature outlining the
associations between a number of social or societal vari-
ables and the onset, course, and outcome of psychosis
(Morgan et al., 2008).

Rather than use these two sciences to better understand
the etiology, at times, it seems like studies and the papers
written from them have fueled an etiological arms race,
with biologists and social scientists building their arsenals
of knowledge in the battle for superiority and, presumably,
grant funding.

438 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

The understanding of the etiology of schizophrenia and
other psychoses may beneﬁt from the approach in medicine
in general where etiological ideas have built on each other
over time and the focus has been on the unique contribution
of different types of risk and etiological pathways rather
than which is more important than the other.

The dichotomy between those who focus on the brain
and those who focus on the environment produces con-
ceptual difﬁculties because mental illness straddles both.

Biological Risk Factors
Biological theory of the development of schizophrenia is
that the symptoms of schizophrenia are a consequence of a
fault in the brain’s neurotransmitter systems. An imbalance
of speciﬁc neurotransmitters in speciﬁc regions leads to
psychotic symptoms.

Dopamine, glutamate, serotonin, and other neurotrans-
mitters have widespread impact on the activity of brain
cells in various parts of the brain, including the limbic
system and part of the prefrontal cortex of the brain, which
have been linked to emotions and thought. A number of
ﬁndings including increased dopamine synthesis in speciﬁc
brain regions, increased dopamine release in the response to
every day stimuli, and increased dopamine in the synapses
between nerve cells have been linked with the development
of psychotic symptoms. Other neurotransmitter pathways
are also involved. It is believed that these other systems
diminish may regulate the impact of dopamine dysfunction.
They regulate the brain response to new stimuli but also
decrease the suppression of activation in response to
repeated stimuli, thus potentiating the action of dopamine
in causing symptoms (van Os and Kapur, 2009).

There is a signiﬁcant and compelling array of evidence
to support the biological processes that are involved in
psychosis. They conﬁrm that the symptoms are linked to
dopamine. Imaging studies have demonstrated that there is
overactivity of dopamine in the limbic system and pre-
frontal cortex in people with acute psychotic symptoms;
studies have been able to replicate psychotic symptoms
using drugs that increase the amount of dopamine in the
brain; and drugs that block the dopamine and other neu-
rotransmitters have been found to decrease the severity of
psychotic symptoms.

However, how the disruption of the neurotransmitter
system comes about is less well delineated. Epidemiolog-
ical studies have linked the development of psychotic
symptoms to acute medical problems. Psychotic symptoms
can be seen in a number of physical medical conditions
including stroke, brain infections such as encephalitis, brain
tumors, and in intoxication or withdrawal from drugs. It can
also result from other direct insults to the brain. However,
there is also evidence that the psychosis can be the result of
an insult to the developing brain. This leads to aberrant

development of the neurotransmitter systems, which in-
creases its vulnerability to malfunctioning in later life.

How, exactly these impacts lead to psychosis is not
clear. Much of the work at this stage has been in assessing
which factors increase the risk of psychosis.

There are many biological risk factors linked to the
development of psychosis. The aim here is not
to
comprehensively catalog all of the risk factors but to give
an indication of some of the main areas of research to help
in the understanding of theories of biological causation
(van Os and Kapur, 2009; van Os et al., 2010 for reviews).
Genes: There is a clear genetic vulnerability to psy-
chosis. Essentially, the literature shows that the more genes
you share with a person who is diagnosed with schizo-
phrenia, the more likely you are to be diagnosed yourself.
This work has been used to argue that schizophrenia and
other psychoses are, at least in part, biological in nature.
Studies are clear: the risk of schizophrenia in the identical
twin of someone with a diagnosis of schizophrenia is 50%.
As the proportion of shared genes with a person who has
developed schizophrenia diminish, so does the risk: 17%
chance for a non-identical twin, 9% for a sibling, down to
2% for ﬁrst cousins. The search for a speciﬁc gene for
schizophrenia has been long and not that fruitful. There are
groups with speciﬁc single gene problems that have a high
risk of developing psychosis, but this is the exception
rather than the rule. Though a family history of schizo-
phrenia and other psychoses increases the risk of devel-
oping a psychosis,
in clinical practice the majority of
people who are diagnosed have no clear relative with a
similar diagnosis. Some geneticists will claim that the vast
majority of psychosis is genetic and that this is due to new
genetic mutations, but given that genes modulate our
biological processes,
is not clear whether they are
referring to the cause of psychosis or the mechanisms. It is
also not clear what causes these mutations. What is clear is
that there are multiple genes involved. Given the fact the
identical
twin or someone with a diagnosis of schizo-
phrenia will have very similar genes but only 50% chance
of developing schizophrenia, some would argue that this is
a genetic problem of incomplete expression. In many ge-
netic problems, genotype (what genes you have) and
phenotype (how the genes are expressed) are not 100%.
The expression of the genotype may depend on a number
of different things.

it

An easy way to think of this is in tanning. Whether your
skin tans or not in the sun depends in part on your genes
(your genotype for tanning), but whether your genotype is
expressed as a phenotype (whether you have a tan) may
depend on your exposure to the sun.

Obstetric complications: Another biological risk factor
is obstetric complications. Studies have reported that babies
who suffer obstetric complications such as prolonged labor
or periods of hypoxia during birth have an increased risk.

Biological and Social Causation of Serious Mental Illness Chapter | 26 439

One theory is that hypoxia may impact brain development
and that the pathways that are involved in the development
of psychosis are particularly sensitive to hypoxia. Hypoxia
decreases the resilience of the neurotransmitter pathways
and so makes them vulnerable to the development of psy-
chotic symptoms in later life.

That damage to the brains of children and young people
increases the risk of later diagnoses of schizophrenia and
other psychoses has been demonstrated in epidemiological
studies. A number of different types of injury including
head injuries in childhood, encephalitis, and meningitis
have all been linked to increased rates of schizophrenia in
adult life. They have been linked to an increased risk of
dysregulation of your dopamine pathways,
thus an
increased risk of developing schizophrenia.

Seasonality: One intriguing line of investigation has
come from reports of differences in risk of developing later
schizophrenia linked to the season of month of birth. In the
northern hemisphere, those born in spring have the highest
risk of developing schizophrenia, and those born in autumn
have the lowest risk of developing schizophrenia. The risk
months are inverted in the southern hemisphere; northern
hemisphere high-risk times are southern hemisphere low-
risk months.

Seasonality has also been reported in other medical
conditions. These have been linked to environmental fac-
tors that change with the seasons. For instance, there are
many infectious diseases such as inﬂuenza that are more
likely in winter, and some affective disorders are linked to
light, thereby increasing when days get shorter.

Though differences in risk have been demonstrated for
schizophrenia, how this links to seasons is not clear. It
could be that similar environmental risk factors lead to
increasing rates of psychosis and also increased rates of
other illnesses such as inﬂuenza. However, it may also be
that the increased incidence of other seasonal illnesses in
some way increases the risk of schizophrenia and other
psychoses.

Researchers have investigated viruses with patterns of
seasonality, such as inﬂuenza, and found variable associa-
tions with schizophrenia. Some studies have claimed to
demonstrate this link, while other studies have not. The
theory linking infections to schizophrenia is that in utero
exposure could have impacts on the developing brain
leading to increased rates of subsequent schizophrenia and
other psychoses in later life. However, the theory is difﬁcult
to research because it is not clear at which point in brain
development exposure to inﬂuenza would lead to a higher
risk of schizophrenia. In addition, a serious infection at or
around birth potentially could also increase the risk of the
development of vulnerable neurotransmitter pathways. A
further complication is that other less well-investigated
viruses that occur with similar seasonality as inﬂuenza
may also be important.

Vitamin D: Other researchers have considered other
biological factors such as the availability of vitamin D as
potential reasons for the seasonality. Interestingly these
researchers link vitamin D to inﬂuenza. They hypothesize
that viruses during pregnancy may lead to vulnerabilities in
brain development, or lack of vitamin D may also make
individuals more prone to neuronal system malfunction in
response to other stimuli. They further link this to the
higher
reported rates of psychosis in darker skinned
immigrant groups in more northern countries. They argue
that these groups are vitamin D deﬁcient and so would be at
increased risk of psychoses in places with signiﬁcant
seasonality.

Cannabis: A major literature has developed on the
impact of cannabis on the risk of psychosis. For over
100 years, there have been concerns that cannabis may lead
to mental health problems. This work has crossed the
world. This is in part because it was a major concern of the
British Colonies;
there were major studies in the 19th
century in India, South Africa, and the United Kingdom
summarized in the Indian Hemp Commission Report of
1894
(http://www.druglibrary.org/schaffer/library/effects.
htm). More modern discussion has followed Andreasen’s
study of 1987. In early adult life, all Swedes are enrolled in
military or community service. They all undergo an
extensive medical exam at entry. This medical exam in-
cludes questions about drug misuse. In particular, it asks
about whether cannabis has been used and how many
times. Andreasen linked this screening data to health ser-
vice usage data throughout a person’s life. Through this, the
study was able to identify all people who were subse-
quently diagnosed with schizophrenia. The study demon-
strated that Swedish conscripts who used cannabis more
than 10 times before the age of 18 were at higher risk of
developing schizophrenia than those who had not. There
was a stepwise increase in risk, so those who had used
cannabis 50 times before the age of 18 were at signiﬁcantly
higher risk for developing schizophrenia than others.

There could be a criticism about whether the study
demonstrates cause and effect. For instance, a critique
could be that studies have shown that differences between
people who develop schizophrenia and those who do not
can be seen in childhood. In addition, there is a clear pro-
dromal period that can last months to years in which a
person may have odd psychological symptoms that are not
sufﬁciently robust to attract a diagnosis of schizophrenia. It
may be that people with these troubling prodromal symp-
toms may be more likely to use cannabis. In this way,
cannabis would indicate increased risk but would not cause
schizophrenia.

However, there have now been many studies investi-
gating the association between cannabis and psychosis.
More recent studies have shown that newer forms of
cannabis that are more potent are more likely to increase the

440 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

risk of schizophrenia (Di Forti et al., 2009). Unpublished
Canadian work has suggested that the correlation between
cannabis use and later psychosis is greater than the corre-
lation between any other drug of abuse and psychosis.
These two pieces of evidence lead to the conclusion that
cannabis itself has some impact on the risk of psychosis
because higher concentrations increase risk. And, because
no other drug of abuse (neither ones that calm or ones that
excite the brain) is as highly correlated, it is difﬁcult to
conclude that the link is simply because people are self-
medicating prodromal symptoms.

The best analyses to date conclude that cannabis dou-

bles the risk of psychosis (van Os et al., 2009).

However, smart analyses trying to understand cannabis’
contribution to the population’s increased risk of schizo-
phrenia concluded that elimination of cannabis would
decrease the population incidence of psychosis by only 8%.
Moreover, as we will see later, the literature also concludes
that,
is
neither sufﬁcient or necessary for the development of
psychosis. The impact of cannabis on the risk of psychosis
is larger the earlier cannabis is used.

though cannabis increases the risk, by itself it

Though the work of groups looking at seasonality,
cannabis, obstetric complications, and other biological
factors has been at the level of demonstrating associations
and to trying to identify what puts people or groups at
increased risk, the theories of causation that they have
spurned have been complex. They have included environ-
mental factors, multiple other biological factors, and social
factors.

Similarly, when associations have been identiﬁed be-
tween social factors and psychosis, often they have been
linked to biological mechanisms when trying to determine
possible causation.

The dichotomy between researchers who look at bio-
logical and those who look at social or psychological fac-
tors may be a ﬁction (van Os and Kapur, 2009; van Os
et al., 2010).

Social Risk Factors
Stress and psychosis: The basis of the social theory has
been stress. Stress is a concept that everyone understands
but is rarely properly described. Stress is a physiological
response to a perception. When we encounter a threat, our
stress reaction kicks in, and there are a number of acute
changes that aim to improve the ability of the body to either
think, ﬁght, or run away. Among other things, attention is
increased, blood is diverted to the muscles and away from
nonvital
cooling
systemdsweatdis triggered to ensure we do not overheat,
and extra sugar is made so that we have more fuel available
if we need it. Once we have dealt with the threat, our stress
response switches off.

such as digestion, our

functions

This approach works well when we are faced with a
clear threat such as a predator because it allows us to act

immediately and quickly to diminish the problem. It works
less well in the complex world where we live; the threats
we have to deal with tend to be psychological, diffuse, and
are difﬁcult to run away from. Even speciﬁc life events
such as losing a job may have an initial impact, but then
searching for a reason, searching for a job, and the possible
economic and social impacts are more long-term. Such
events turn on our physiological stress mechanisms but
often last longer and sometimes do not turn off.

Our bodies are not developed to cope with the impacts
of prolonged triggering of our physiological stress mecha-
nisms, and over time,
they may harm us. In addition,
changes in the body to cope with what
thinks are
continual threats may lead to issues. For instance, mobili-
zation of stores to keep the blood sugar level up may harm
the adrenal glands and be linked to an increased risk of
diabetes. There are numerous other physical illnesses that
are linked to continued stress such as hypertension.

it

There is more detail to the vulnerability-stress model of
mental
illness (Nuechterlein and Dawson, 1984; Myin-
Germeys and van Os, 2008). In general, it posits that ge-
netic or developmental vulnerabilities interact with social
adversity to inﬂuence a common pathway leading to stress-
related effects that may culminate in psychosis.

Genetic, biochemical, and neurological evidence sup-
the link between stress and psychosis (Jones and

port
Fernyhough, 2007).

The biology of the stress response is that perceived
stress activates the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis,
which plays a pivotal role in governing our response to
threat. The hypothalamus releases corticotropin-releasing
hormone, which stimulates the secretion of adrenocortico-
tropic hormone (ACTH) from the pituitary gland into the
bloodstream. ACTH, in turn, stimulates the production and
release of cortisol from the adrenal cortex, which binds to
receptors across the brain and other organs in the body. The
binding modulates brain function, immune responses, and
cardiovascular function, as well as other processes impor-
tant in the stress response (Walker et al., 2008).

But if acquired vulnerabilities such as genetic vulnera-
bility, obstetric complications, or social adversity or
cannabis misuse are present, the stress response may not
work properly. Down modulation of the response may be
impacted. The lack of down modulation of the stress
response may be linked to the development of psychosis.
Vulnerabilities such as a reduced size of the hippocampus in
the brain have been found in those at risk or who have
psychosis. The hippocampus makes sure that the stress
response damps down after it occurs (Fusar-Poli et al., 2007).
In addition, pathways in the brain, which are involved
in the transmission of dopamine, are sensitive to stress;
exposure to moderate levels of stress can lead to sensiti-
zation in individuals, or an enhanced and persistent dopa-
mine response. People who live in stressful environments
may be at particular risk of developing a psychotic illness
(van Os and Kapur, 2009; van Os et al., 2009).

Biological and Social Causation of Serious Mental Illness Chapter | 26 441

Life events and daily hassles: Researchers attempting to
identify the causes of psychosis have tended to report as-
sociations and have mainly investigated risk factors.

In the psychosis literature, initially, there were attempts
to understand whether speciﬁc life events such as losing a
job or other traumas were associated with an increased rate
of psychosis. The results of studies have varied but have
been presented as demonstrating life events are linked to
psychosis risk. The difﬁculty in this literature may in part
reﬂect
the complex nature of the impact of major life
events. More recently, studies have investigated a different
way that the social environment gets under the skin. Rather
than look at rare stressful life events, they have looked at
smaller daily hassles.
such as problems
commuting, noise, difﬁculty paying bills, or with local
authorities, have the ability to trigger the stress system and
have been more consistently shown to increase the risk of
schizophrenia.

Irritations,

Studies have reported that living in stressful neighbor-
hoods where there is social disorganization increases the
risk of developing schizophrenia. This may explain, in part,
the reports of
increased rates of psychosis in urban
environments.

Green space: There is a wealth of evidence about the
impact of the physical environment on health, as well as a
growing literature on its impact on mental health. There is
evidence that the level of noise, light, and the quality of the
fabric of the built environment are important determinants
of health (Cooper et al., 2008). In addition, seeing nature,
having access to green space, and taking part in activities
such as community gardens are generally beneﬁcial for
mental health across all age groups. Thus, planting trees in
urban areas, making sure that there are parks, and main-
taining lawns all have the potential to improve mental well-
being, decrease stress, and increase effective management
of major life issues.

Studies report that children exposed to nature and green
space have improved ability to learn, better memory, and
better attention (Cooper et al., 2008). At a community level,
green space is associated with higher levels of perceived
social connectedness to the community and decreased
levels of violence (Cooper et al., 2008).

Although there may be beneﬁcial effects from contact
with nature, on a global basis, people are increasingly
moving to cities. According to the most recent version of
the United Nation’s World Urbanization Prospects study,
“over half of the world’s population (54%) lives in urban
areas.” This ﬁgure is expected to increase to 67% in 2050,
based on an estimated increase in world population to
9.3 billion (rev.; United Nations, 2014). Because of this
trend, work on psychosis has focused mainly on the impact
of urban living rather than on the possible beneﬁt of
exposure to green spaces.

Cities: A major branch of investigation into the social
etiology of psychotic illness began in 1939 with Faris and

Dunham’s work on the urban environment. Since then,
researchers have been investigating the link between living
in a city and the risk of schizophrenia. There is evidence
that the larger the urban environment the higher the risk of
schizophrenia and other psychoses. Initial studies argued
that this was because of a drift into cities of people who
were more at risk of developing schizophrenia. That does
happen, but even when that is accounted for there remains
an increased risk of schizophrenia in those who are born or
brought up in a city. The longer you live in the city, the
higher the risk. The exact reasons for this are unknown.
There has not been good work that has been able to
disaggregate what the impacts of the city may be. But the
city, whatever that may be, is the biggest risk factor for
schizophrenia and other psychoses at a population level
(Boydell and McKenzie, 2008).

types of exposures,

Living in an urban environment is associated with a
number of different
including the
fragmentation of community bonds and economic dispar-
ities. Allardyce et al. (2005) found that, after adjusting for
social fragmentation and deprivation,
there was only a
nonsigniﬁcant trend toward an association between urban-
icity and schizophrenia. Other factors may be important for
the association between place and psychosis. For instance,
Silver et al. (2002) documented that
the proportion of
people moving in and out of an area is associated with
higher rates of schizophrenia.

Another pilot study reported that

increased social
cohesion and social efﬁcacy in areas in London were
associated with a reduced incidence of psychosis (Boydell
et al., 2001); and after controlling for individual depriva-
tion, Boydell et al. (2004) found the rate of schizophrenia
correlated with increasing neighborhood inequality, but
only in more deprived areas.

socioeconomic

Many of the beneﬁts of social bonds and community
relations have been captured in the notion of “social cap-
ital,” which is associated with better mental health
(McKenzie and Harpham, 2006). In a study with data from
the United Kingdom, Kirkbride et al. (2007) used multi-
level Poisson regression to model
the simultaneous
effects of individual- and neighborhood-level factors. They
found that 23% of the incidence of schizophrenia could be
risk factors,
attributed to neighborhood-level
including
turnout
(a proxy for social capital), ethnic fragmentation (proxy for
segregation), and ethnic density (95% conﬁdence interval
9.9e42.2). One percent
increases in voter turnout and
ethnic segregation were both independently associated
with a reduced incidence of schizophrenia of 5%, inde-
pendent of age, sex, ethnicity, deprivation, and population
density (Kirkbride et al., 2007). Of course, there are a
number of different mechanisms through which such social
ecological factors could have their impact on psychosis.
Stress may be just one of a number of mediators (Susser
et al., 2008).

social

deprivation,

voter

442 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

The neural processes that could mediate the association
between urban environments and mental illness have only
recently begun to be documented. Increased levels of stress
linked to urban residence are considered important, as are
models of psychological appraisal and neurocognitive
development. There is some evidence that urban upbring-
ing and city living change social evaluative stress pro-
cessing in humans.

Those who live in a city have increased amygdala
activity, and being brought up in a city affects the peri-
genual anterior cingulate cortex, a key region for regula-
tion of negative affect and stress. Because different parts
of the social brain may have different critical develop-
mental periods and social impacts may exert their effects
at different times, research ﬁndings indicate that brain
regions differ in their vulnerability and reactions to city
living across the lifespan (Lederbogen et al., 2011; Meyer-
Lindenberg, 2010).

the higher

Childhood adversity: Childhood social adversity is
linked to increased rates of schizophrenia in adult life. The
more social adversity present,
the risk of
developing schizophrenia. Social adversity has been
measured in a variety of ways, from bullying and other
forms of psychological
trauma to material deprivation.
Separation from one or both parents for more than a year
before the age of 15 has been found to be a powerful risk
factor. This is again thought
to be linked to
increased rates of stress.

in part

Immigrant groups: Groups who are under stress have
been demonstrated to be particularly at risk. Studies of
immigrant groups have
reported increased risks of
psychosis. Immigration doubles the risk of psychosis in
ﬁrst-generation migrants, and the risk increases in second-
generation migrants. Migrants who come from countries
where the population is predominantly black and go to a
country that is predominantly white have a fourfold in-
crease in risk. However, a study in Ontario was able to
compare rates of new psychosis in a variety of immigrant
groups. It found that there was signiﬁcant variability in the
risk of developing psychosis for different ethnic groups,
with East Asian origin groups having lower rates of psy-
chosis and those of Caribbean origin having higher rates of
psychosis. Refugee groups had higher rates of psychosis,
irrespective of their place of origin.

Some have argued that a speciﬁc possible cause for the
differences in rates is the impact of racism on different
communities. At an individual level, perceived racism has
been linked to increased risk of schizophrenia. Racism has
its impact on health through stress but also through be-
haviors or lifestyles that have an impact on health such as
diet and substance use, as well as needing to work two jobs
or taking risks to try to improve one’s socioeconomic se-
curity. Others have argued that social stress through being a
minority group thwarted aspirations of the group, or pre-

migration trauma or post-immigration problems could be
to blame.

Whatever the cause of stress, the bottom-line is that
studies report that cumulative exposure to traumatic life
events, or the number of life events experienced, is asso-
ciated with an increased risk for psychosis (van Os et al.,
2009), and the British National Psychiatric Morbidity
Survey has reported that adverse life events are associated
with subsequent psychotic experiences in the general
population (Johns et al., 2004). In addition to traumatic
major life events, the accumulation of minor events or
“daily hassles” has also been linked to psychotic illness
(Myin-Germeys and van Os, 2007). But it is not just the
number of life events that is important. A life event such as
bullying in childhood could lead to a chain of events
because of reactions to that or changes in school or changes
in self-esteem, which increase the chance of other stress-
inducing environmental
associated with
psychosis.

risk factors

The social model of causation argues that schizophrenia
is the result of trauma or stress. The more social stress, the
more impacts on neurotransmitter mechanisms, the higher
is the risk. But in response to social adversity, there are
often psychological processes that are triggered, either to
decrease and normalize the perception of stress or to make
sense of it. Others suggest that stress may be linked to
psychosis not through biological mechanisms but through
psychological ones.

of

and

considering

understanding what

Psychological Risks and Models
A more psychological model argues that adversity may
lead to negative self-esteem or an increased chance that
you will blame others for your situation. Being able to
appraise situations and having a number of different
ways
is
happening help people to feel
in control. Children
develop social maps through interactions with their par-
ents initially and then with others. Children in houses
that are under strain may have less face-to-face time and
may on average have fewer schema to help make de-
cisions. Research shows that they may be less able to
understand other people’s intensions and to understand
their agency. Partly because of this, social interactions
provoke anxiety. Avoidance of anxiety-provoking situa-
tions in childhood can mean that
the psychological
mechanisms that are needed to deal with ambiguity are
not well developed. When stress arises,
the triggered
coping style is more likely to be social withdrawal and
suspicion of the actions of others. This increases the risk
of developing paranoid ideation.

Literature outlining the association between childhood
trauma and psychosis describes both psychological and
neurobiological mechanisms, linking adverse experiences

Biological and Social Causation of Serious Mental Illness Chapter | 26 443

to psychosis (vanWinkel et al., 2013). These processes
have neural correlates: sensitization of the mesolimbic
dopamine system, which produces a heightened response to
low-level stressors; changes in the immune system; and
concomitant changes in the size and function of stress-
related brain structures, such as the hippocampus and the
amygdala.

These mechanisms also interact, as exempliﬁed by the
hypothesis that chronic exposure to social defeat may lead
to sensitization of the mesolimbic dopaminergic system and
increased risk of schizophrenia (Selten and Cantor-Graae,
2005).

According to the hypothesis, social defeat

is “the
risk
common denominator” for several environmental
factors,
including childhood trauma, urban upbringing,
migration, and drug use. Despite the identiﬁcation of pu-
tative neural mechanisms, it appears that the genes under
consideration in much of the current research are not
speciﬁcally involved in the genesis of psychosis, but more
generally in regulating mood (eg, the serotonin transporter
gene), neuroplasticity (brain-derived neurotrophic factor;
BDNF), and the stress-response system (the FKBP5 gene).
Moreover, researchers studying families with a strong
genetic predisposition for schizophrenia have found that a
cumulative adversity indexdwhich includes childhood
illness, family instability, and cannabis usedis signiﬁ-
cantly associated with the risk of schizophrenia and that
this is independent of genetic risk (Husted et al., 2012).
Genetic variants and environmental exposures can also
interact in ways that are protective and not just harmful.
Instead of focusing on “vulnerability genes” that confer
increased risk in the presence of certain environments,
therefore, Belsky et al. (2009) call for an appreciation of
“plasticity genes” that confer a nuanced differential sus-
ceptibility:
increased risk in some environments and
decreased risk in others.

Physiologically and cognitively, exposure to early
developmental stressors (such as childhood trauma) may
act by sensitizing people to later adverse events, major or
minor. Such exposures may increase the likelihood of
adverse events, for instance, by shaping the capacity of
individuals to form relationships (Myin-Germeys and van
Os, 2008). Alternately, they may interface with a person’s
attributional style, potentially making them more prone to
psychotic thinking (Bentall et al., 1994).

New Thinking and New Science
In industry, trade-offs are considered pivotal moments. The
most successful manufacturers see trade-offs as an oppor-
tunity for innovation. Some argue that prior to the emer-
gence of the Japanese car industry as a major exporter,
world markets were dominated by a dichotomous model.
The choice for many consumers was between high cost,

reliable cars and low cost, less reliable cars. The industry
trade-off was cost versus reliability. With signiﬁcant in-
vestment in technology, Japanese car manufacturers were
able to side step this trade-off. They were able to produce
low-cost reliable cars. This gave them an entry into the
market, and their superior fuel efﬁciency meant that they
became more popular during the 1970s oil embargo. They
now dominate the market.

Trade-offs are an opportunity for ingenuity and prog-
ress. The spurious trade-off between biological or social as
the “cause” of schizophrenia can be seen as an opportunity
for improvement in our science and our thinking about
etiology. Researchers have already started to think differ-
ently and to move outside their speciﬁc ﬁeld of exploration.
Social researchers are explaining their results using
biological concepts, and biological researchers are trying to
develop models of etiology based on their understanding of
social and environmental risks.

A variety of ﬁndings in both the social and biological
literature demonstrate that
the two are linked and that
maintaining a dichotomy between the two is increasingly
difﬁcult.

it

is clear that

For instance,

the urban environment
changes the exposure that a person or group has to biological
risk factors. For example, there is some work that suggests
that malnutrition in utero is linked to increased risk of psy-
chosis in later life. Rates of malnutrition are increased in
urban settings. Similarly, in many countries, access to and
use of cannabis is linked to place of residence.

More fundamental

interactions between biological,
environmental, and social are found in the links between
genetic predisposition and risk of illness. The vulnerability
to developing schizophrenia in people with family mem-
bers with the illness is inﬂuenced by urban residence. The
increased risk of schizophrenia linked to being born or
brought up in a city is mainly because of increased rates of
schizophrenia in those who have familial risk. Studies have
shown that the impact of urbanicity of psychotic symptoms
is signiﬁcantly greater in those who have a family history of
psychosis, and the impact of cities on rates and risk in this
groups is increasing.

Genetic risk also potentiates other biological risks.
When people are given the active ingredient in cannabis,
some develop psychotic symptoms, but most do not. The
group that develop psychotic
are over-
whelmingly people with a family history of psychosis.
Similarly, imaging studies have reported that the active
ingredient in cannabis can have a direct toxic effect on the
brain, leading to decreased brain volume. However, this
toxic effect is only seen in people with a family history of
schizophrenia. It is not seen in those without a family
history (van Os et al., 2010).

symptoms

Social factors also interact with each other. Social
cohesion is linked to the rate of schizophrenia in an area.

444 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

However, the impact of social cohesion on schizophrenia
risk is only present on ethnic minority groups and those
from lower socioeconomic groups.

These and other ﬁndings argue that the different risk
factors may potentiate or decrease the impact of each other
on overall risk. Different types of risk factors may interact,
and the actions of speciﬁc risk factors to increase the rates
of illness may be dependent on other risk factors being
present.

levels,

sciences at different

There is a complex web of causation, but there are
different
individual and
ecological, involved. Moreover, both the biological litera-
ture (cannabis and seasonality), the psychological literature
(development of concepts of self and schema), and the
social (childhood social adversity) all point to the action of
speciﬁc risk factors being exquisitely linked to speciﬁc time
periods when the brain is maturing.

However, there is one factor that has been missing and
ushers in a new way of thinking. This is social context.
Distress or problems with functioning, which are important
facets of psychiatric diagnoses, are context related. They
speak to an individual’s interaction with society,
their
reﬂection of their own being, and their interaction with the
environment.

To understand psychosis, it is important to understand

these interactions.

One way of thinking about mental illness is that it can
be considered a reﬂection of the biological and psycho-
logical mechanisms we use to adapt to the environment.
The symptoms that we see and the behaviors or thoughts
are the person trying to rise to challenges that are faced.

The psychological and social schema that we build to
help us understand the world are there to maximize our
ability to live in such a complex environment. Like our
these are adaptive mechanisms. Our
stress response,
response to social difﬁculties,
life events, or everyday
hassles is to use our psychological and social resources to
be able better to understand the situation, predict what is
going to happen, and be in control. We adapt our actions
and thoughts based on our schema, so we minimize the risk
to ourselves and maximize the beneﬁt.

If our schema are in line with others, our adaptations to
life’s challenges are considered reasonable. If they are
considered logical but unlawful, they are dealt with legally.
But if they are considered illogical, they may be dealt with
by mental health professionals. In discussion with people
with psychosis, there is usually a reason for their actions.
They are usually dealing with stressful situations or battling
personal psychological
require action to
decrease anxiety.

issues

that

Whether these adaptations are considered illnesses or
not depends on the differential acceptance by society to
speciﬁc types of behaviors and thoughts. For instance, if
you hear the voice of God in a charismatic church when

you are looking to decrease your stress through worship of
a higher being, that is not considered a symptom. But if you
hear the voice of God while sitting in your ofﬁce, and act
on it, your coworkers may be troubled by it.

Context

is enshrined in diagnoses and the building
blocks of diagnosis, psychiatric symptoms. Diagnoses
change over time. The ICD, DSM, and Chinese systems
evolve with the social context, and when they are too far
out of step with social norms, they tend to modify them-
selves. A recent debate has been about the changes in the
diagnosis of depression during grief. Thirty years ago
psychiatrists only diagnosed depression during a period of
grief after 6 months. Depression before this time was
considered a normal part of the process. Two decades ago,
guidance changed, and if the symptoms were serious,
enough depression was diagnosed after 2 months.
In
DSM5, the diagnosis of depression is possible 2 weeks into
a period of grief (APA, 2013).

Though there has been some consternation about this,
and about what this means for us as a human race, prag-
matists argue that people are expected to function 2 weeks
after they have lost a loved one, and that most people can
(McKenzie, 2013). Allowing psychiatrists to diagnoses and
treat depression in the minority of people who are severely
affected and cannot function 2 weeks after a bereavement
aligns with societal expectations in some high-income
countries. This would of course be viewed with horror by
other cultures where there are clear expectations for deﬁned
periods of grief for relatives, almost all of which last longer
than 2 weeks.

Similarly, with regard to symptoms, the deﬁnition of a
delusion is not simply that a person has an unshakable
thought that is not based on fact and is erroneous, but the
thought needs to be outside the realm of normality for a
person’s social circle.

Our psychology is in a constant state of adaptation.
Through the stress mechanism and through other neuro-
transmitter systems such as dopamine, our physiology is
also adapting to maximize our ability to live in society.

in response

it also develops

However, there is a further complication; from a bio-
logical perspective, the brain helps us adapt to the envi-
ronment, but
to the
environment. Some environmental factors promote healthy
brain development, and some impede it, but many have a
variable impact depending on context. Whether environ-
mental events contribute to individual vulnerability or
resiliency depends on many factors, including the previous
history of environmental exposures. Individuals who have
been exposed to more positive environmental inﬂuences,
that is, fewer social risk factors, tend to be more resilient.
For these individuals, exposure to indeterminate social
factors leads to the development of a more resilient coping
style, and they are more likely to be able to meet new
challenges. However, if a person has been exposed to more

Biological and Social Causation of Serious Mental Illness Chapter | 26 445

social risk factors for mental illness, some environmental
factors are more likely to be experienced as burdensome,
and this may further undermine the development of
resilience.

inﬂuences. van Os et al.

These processes have neurodevelopmental parallels:
both the structure and function of the brain are linked to
environmental
(2010) have
detailed the development of brain architecture, as well as
neurocognition, affected regulation, and social cognition
throughout childhood. They reviewed the associations be-
tween speciﬁc factors in the social environment and neu-
rocognitive
in
neurocognitive development during childhood to a later
increased risk of schizophrenia (van Os et al., 2010).

development

and

linked

problems

then mental

If mental illnesses are disorders of adaptation, and the
way the brain adapts is in part a response to social and
environmental contexts,
illness lies in the
interaction between brain and environment. The brain is
married to the environment, and it is in that relationship that
we see mental illnesses. Trying to understand the marriage
by looking at only one partner is unlikely to give an ac-
curate picture. Investigating one without
the other re-
sembles attempts to understand and repair a marriage
without both parties present. It may give a distorted view of
what is happening and may not offer the best basis for
treatment.

This leads to a movement away from research that fo-
cuses entirely on biology or social factors toward in-
vestigations that focus on the interactions between the two,
as well as the mechanisms underlying those interactions,
and it is a crucial development in the ﬁeld (van Os et al.,
2010).

From this, it follows that we are less likely to ﬁnd the
causes of mental illness in the brain or in the social envi-
ronment. We are more likely to ﬁnd causes in the processes
through which the brain adapts to the environment.

These processes can be considered not only at an in-
dividual level but also at ecological and interactional levels.
Because they are adaptations, we should consider them
over time, but we should also consider how the ability to
adapt may change over time.

Part of the new thinking of the causes of schizophrenia
and other psychoses is to move toward investigation of
neurogenesis, epigenetics, and inﬂammation. These are all
dynamic ways in which the brain adapts itself to optimize
the way the body reacts to the environment.

Neurogenesis is the study of growth of nerve cells.
There is a growing literature on the possibility of stimu-
lating growth in the hippocampus and other brain areas that
are affected by schizophrenia and other psychoses. Less
work to date has attempted to consider why there is cell
death and how to stop it. The concept is a revolution in
genetics. Scientists have found that genes can be turned on
and off, and they may or may not express themselves

depending on environmental and other stimuli. Rather than
natural selection slowly altering the gene pool, epigenetic
effects can be quick and can be inherited. If schizophrenia
is in part due to new gene expression, these new expres-
sions may be genes being turned on an off rather than new
mutations. Understanding how to turn genes off in response
to triggers or understanding how to modulate the triggers
may help to decrease the risk of psychosis.

Inﬂammation is the body’s way of dealing with un-
wanted invasion, whether this is due to internal processes
gone wrong or external such as infections. Inﬂammatory
processes have been identiﬁed in many major mental ill-
nesses, including schizophrenia, and further understanding
of why these happen and what they mean is underway.

At the level of geneeenvironment interaction, it has
been suggested that even minor life events and daily hassles
interact with polymorphisms known to be involved in
dopamine neurotransmission to cause differential stress
reactivity and psychotic experiences (van Winkel et al.,
2008). Of note, the same polymorphism has been shown to
correlate with differential risk for psychosis in individuals
who use cannabis (Caspi et al., 2005), further highlighting
the complex interplay between multiple biological and
environmental risk factors. Similarly, at a structural level,
neuroplasticity may be important.

From Complexity to Utility
Using these understandings to produce interventions is still
some way off. Though, self-regulation of adaptation
through learning and other psychological processes is
increasingly being seen as a possible promising avenue for
the treatment, if not the cure of some of the symptoms of
schizophrenia; at a policy and ecological level, the orga-
nization of our interpersonal safety net in response to the
threat that make us stressed and the way we develop our
communities and cities is likely to be a vital route to
prevention.

There is clearly now a deeper understanding of the
etiology of schizophrenia and other psychoses than there
was previously.

I will use the four dimensions model of causation to
summarize our current understanding. I use this in part
because it mixes biological, social, and psychological
mechanisms at an individual level and also similar mech-
anisms at the ecological level. In addition to identifying
interactions between individual and ecological levels, it
also recognizes interactions between risk factors within the
different levels.

At an individual level, our understanding is similar to
that of heart disease in that there is an inherited risk, but
whether one develops a heart attack or not depends on other
risk, protective, and health-promoting factors that are
encountered.

446 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

The risk of developing a psychosis for any individual
depends on inherited vulnerabilities, but in addition, it rests
on the balance of exposures to factors that either increase
risk for illness or enhance mental health.

This chapter has detailed the genetic and other biolog-
ical risk factors for schizophrenia and other psychoses.
Social risk factors could include the use of certain drugs
(especially cannabis), racial discrimination, and childhood
experiences inﬂuencing development, such as bullying and
psychological trauma, separation from parents, and other
childhood adversities (Boydell et al., 2004).

The number and severity of exposures as well as their
interactions may all contribute to the risk of developing a
psychotic illness. Previous work has shown that the greater
the number of risk factors, the higher the risk of psychosis.
Unfortunately, there has been less work on protective fac-
tors than risk factors.

At the ecological level, societal factors may change the
amount and type of environmental exposures that a group
are exposed to. Though this means it may change the risk
proﬁle for a whole population or increase the vulnerability
of speciﬁc socially demarcated groups.

The model here is similar to that of diabetes, where
changes in the availability and quality of certain types of
food and cultural changes in activity with increasingly
sedentary lifestyles have led to markedly increased rates of
the illness.

Groups with similar individual-level risk proﬁles may
have different rates of illness dependent on the ecological
environment. In addition to factors like diet and exposure to
infectious diseases that inﬂuence early neurodevelopment,
environmental risk factors that may contribute to the risk of
psychosis include city birth and city living, social cohesion,
social fragmentation, being a member of a minority group
living in areas with low population densities of one’s
group, and migrants from countries that are predominantly
black living in countries that are predominantly white.

Of course, individual and ecological risks interact. For
example ecological factors may decrease the rates of illness
by decreasing the impact of individual risk factors. The
social safety net, for instance, may decrease the impact of
certain life events on the risk for increasing the rate of
schizophrenia at a population level. Whereas, other
ecological factors could interact with individual-level fac-
tors to increase risk. Social disorganization may decrease
the capacity to cope with social risk factors such as family
discord or unemployment. There is some evidence that the
impact of minority group membership on psychosis risk is
linked to the density of that minority group in a geographic
region or neighborhood. The incidence of schizophrenia in
minority groups is higher in those who live in areas where
there are fewer other people from minority groups. On the
other hand, institutional racism is likely to increase the
impact of individual level racism on mental illness.

Individual and ecological factors may not simply be
independent variables acting in concert, but
they may
interact in ways that amplify or dampen each other’s ef-
fects. A further example would be cannabis use, and this
demonstrates how interactions can produce a chain of
events.

level,

Cannabis use may increase a person’s risk of devel-
oping a psychotic illness. At an ecological
the
availability of cannabis in the community could increase
the risk of cannabis use in the ﬁrst place. Moreover,
depending on social context, regular cannabis use may offer
access to a subculture, or a different environment, charac-
terized by an increase in daily hassles and life events, which
increases the risk of exposure to other social factors asso-
ciated with psychosis. Exposure to more life events and
daily hassles may lead to higher levels of perceived stress
and thereby increase cannabis use, thus further increasing
the risk of psychosis. The link between individual and
ecological processes in this example may trigger a chain of
events resulting in further interactions among social risk
factors.

Social factors also may alter biological risk in multiple
ways. For example, sociocultural factors at an ecological
level, such as the trend toward older paternal age at
conception, may change psychosis risk in offspring at a
population level by increasing the rate of children with
genetic vulnerability (March and Susser, 2006). New evi-
dence is rapidly emerging in this ﬁeld. Binbay et al. (2012),
for instance, have reported that the association between
familial liability to severe mental illness and the expression
of illnesses within the psychotic spectrum is stronger in
more deprived neighborhoods,
in high unemployment
neighborhoods, and in neighborhoods high in social
control.

Further complexity is introduced by work on child brain
development. This work has shown that the same exposure
to an individual-level social determinant may have negative
or positive impacts on the developing brain depending on
the individual’s previous history of exposure to social de-
terminants. If the balance of exposures has been negative,
then an otherwise neutral factor may be experienced as
negative. Alternatively, if the balance of exposures has
been positive, some challenges may actually enhance brain
development (Knudsen et al., 2006). Through this means,
context may actually change the nature of an exposure from
positive to negative.

This also underlines the importance of “time,” an in-
dividual’s history and the possibility that the sequence of
exposure may be important.

Time is important in several other ways. First, sufﬁcient
exposure to an individual-level or ecological risk factor
may only occur over time. Second, time may be needed for
the interaction between individual and ecological risk fac-
tors to amplify. Third, there are sensitive periods in brain

Biological and Social Causation of Serious Mental Illness Chapter | 26 447

development during which exposure to certain risk factors
may be more important.

For instance, being born and brought up in a city is
etiologically more signiﬁcant in schizophrenia than living
in a city per se (Lederbogenet et al., 2013; Marcelis et al.,
1999; Pedersen and Mortensen, 2001). Other risk factors
such as separation from parents may be more important in
childhood than adult life. Fourth, there may be a delay in
time between the exposure to a risk factor and the
development of psychosis. For instance, the impact of
maternal malnutrition on psychosis risk may only be
evident when offspring reach early adulthood (Susser
et al., 2008). Last, the impact that a social factor has on an
individual may be determined in part by the cumulative or
profound effect of previous
life experiences. These
include the history of prior exposures linked to sensiti-
zation or resilience and the way that history may change
our perception of our environment. A 10-year follow-up
study on a population sample of 3021 people in
Germany recently reported that early adversity may
impact later expression of psychosis by increasing expo-
sure to later adversity and/or by rendering individuals
more sensitive to later adversity if these early experiences
are severe (Lataster et al., 2012).

That there are mechanisms at an individual level such as
neurogenesis,
inﬂammation, and epigenetics that offer
plausible explanations for how the social world gets under
the skin to cause schizophrenia and other psychoses is
exciting. Similarly, the psychological mechanisms for the
production of psychosis offer avenues for treatment.

However, psychosis can ruin individuals and families.
Acute psychosis is a dangerous condition that may lead to
suicide and certainly can scar an individual’s life and that of
their family and friends. Minimizing the impact through
effective treatment is one goal, but prevention is the one
that I ﬁnd more attractive.

Using our models of causation, we can think through
possible intervention not just at the individual level but also
at the ecological and interactive levels. For example, we
could use it
to estimate whether decreasing access to
cannabis, decriminalizing it so that we de-link use from
social harm, or whether we push hard for use after the age
of 18 would be the most efﬁcient for protecting the public.
We can investigate whether population-based measures
would be best or whether we should target speciﬁc groups,
such as those with a family history of psychosis. We may
want to investigate the links between the urban environ-
ment, the urban brain, and the risk of psychosis. Under-
standing how our environment programs our brain may be
an important and vital area of research in the future,
especially with the rise of the mega city in China, India, and
Central and South America. We are set to transcend the
nature or nurture debate with our understanding that for

psychosis nature is nurture, and our minds are a reﬂection
of our adaptation to our environment.

These are exciting but early days in etiological research
into psychosis based on a multilevel understanding. We
have not resolved the difﬁculty that schizophrenia and other
psychoses are syndromes rather than speciﬁc illnesses, and
so there may be many causes. But I believe that trying to
understand the multiple possible pathways through which
these psychoses are produced and allowing for a variety in
mechanisms is useful. In some ways,
it forces us to
consider what etiology is rather than focusing on the eti-
ology of what.

I believe the tension between the biological and the
social led to a trade-off that has sparked ingenuity. Whether
we use this to move to another level has yet to be seen, but
all the elements are there for a revolution in our under-
standing of mental illness based on the work on the etiol-
ogy of psychosis.

REFERENCES

Allardyce, J., et al., 2005. Social fragmentation, deprivation and urban-
icity: relation to ﬁrst-admission rates for psychoses. British Journal of
Psychiatry 187, 401e406.

American Psychiatric Association, 2015. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders, ﬁfth ed. American Psychiatric Association,
Arlington, USA.

Andréasson, S., Allebeck, P., Engström, A., Rydberg, U., December 26,
1987. Cannabis and schizophrenia. A longitudinal study of Swedish
conscripts. Lancet 2 (8574), 1483e1486.

Belsky, J., et al., 2009. Vulnerability genes or plasticity genes? Molecular

Psychiatry 14, 746e754.

Bentall, R.P., Kinderman, P., Kaney, S., 1994. The self, attributional
processes and abnormal beliefs: towards a model of persecutory de-
lusions. Behaviour Research and Therapy 32 (3), 331e341.

Binbay, T., Drukker, M., Alptekin, K., et al., December 2012. Evidence that
the wider social environment moderates the association between familial
liability and psychosis spectrum outcome. Psychological Medicine 42
(12), 2499e2510. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0033291712000700.

Boydell, J., et al., 2001. Incidence of schizophrenia in ethnic minorities in
London: ecological study into interactions with environment. BMJ
323 (7325), 1336e1338.

Boydell, J., et al., 2004. The association of inequality with the incidence of
schizophreniaean ecological study. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric
Epidemiology 39 (8), 597e599.

Boydell, J., McKenzie, K., 2008. Society, place and space. In: Morgan, C.,
McKenzie, K., Fearon, P. (Eds.), Society and Psychosis. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, pp. 77e94.

Caspi, A., et al., 2005. Moderation of the effect of adolescent-onset
cannabis use on adult psychosis by a functional polymorphism in
the catechol-O-methyltransferase gene: longitudinal evidence of a
gene X environment
interaction. Biological Psychiatry 57 (10),
1117e1127.

Cooper, R., Boyko, C., Codinhoto, R., 2008. State-of-science review: SR-
DR2 the effect of the physical environment on mental wellbeing. In:

448 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

Mental Capital and Well Being: Making the Most of Ourselves in the
21st Century. HaCIRIC/University of Salford. http://www.bis.gov.uk/
assets/foresight/docs/mental-capital/sr-dr2_mcw.pdf.

Di Forti, M., Morgan, C., Dazzan, P., et al., November 2009. High-potency
cannabis and the risk of psychosis. British Journal of Psychiatry 195 (6),
488e491. http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjp.bp.109.064220.

McGrath, J., Saha, S., Chant, D., Welham, J., 2008. Schizophrenia: a
concise overview of incidence, prevalence, and mortality. Epidemio-
logic Reviews 30, 67e76. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/epirev/mxn001.
McKenzie, K., 2013. Mind Games the Walrus. http://thewalrus.ca/mind-

games/.

Mckenzie, K., Harpham, T., 2006. Social Capital and Mental Illness.

Faris, R., Dunham, H., 1939. Mental Disorders in Urban Areas. University

Jessica Kinglsey Publications, London, UK.

of Chicago Press, Chicago, p. 3535.

Morgan, C., McKenzie, K., Fearon, P., 2008. Society and Psychosis.

Fusar-Poli, P., et al., 2007. Neurofunctional correlates of vulnerability to
psychosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Neuroscience &
Biobehavioral Reviews 31 (4), 465e484.

Hosman, C., Jane Llopis, E., 2005. The evidence for effective mental
health promotion. In: Herman, H., Saxzena, S., Moodie, R. (Eds.),
Promoting Mental Health, Concepts, Emerging Evidence, Practice.
Geneva World Health organization, pp. 169e188.

Husted, J.A., Ahmed, R., Chow, E.W., Brzustowicz, L.M., Bassett, A.S.,
May 2012. Early environmental exposures inﬂuence schizophrenia
expression even in the presence of strong genetic predisposition.
Schizophrenia Research 137 (1e3), 166e168. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.schres.2012.02.009. Epub 2012 Mar 3.

Insel, T., 2015. http://blogs.scientiﬁcamerican.com/mind-guest-blog/

rethinking-how-we-diagnose-psychosis/.

Johns, L.C., et al., 2004. Prevalence and correlates of self-reported psy-
chotic symptoms in the British population. British Journal of Psy-
chiatry 185, 298e305.

Jones, S.R., Fernyhough, C., 2007. A new look at

the neural
diathesisestress model of schizophrenia:
the primacy of social-
evaluative and uncontrollable situations. Schizophrenia Bulletin 33
(5), 1171e1177.

Kirkbride, J.B., Boydell, K., Ploubidis, G.B., Morgan, C., Dazzan, P.,
McKenzie, K, Murray, R.M., 2007. Testing the association between
the incidence of schizophrenia and social capital in an urban area
(PDF Download Available). Psychological Medicine, Page 1 of 12.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0033291707002085.

Knudsen, E.I., Heckman, J.J., Cameron, J.L., Schonkoff, J.P., 2006. Eco-
nomic, neurobiological and behavioural perspectives on building Amer-
icas future workforce. www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas0600888103.
Lataster, J., Myin-Germeys, I., Lieb, R., Wittchen, H.U., van Os, J.,
May 2012. Adversity and psychosis: a 10-year prospective study
investigating synergism between early and recent adversity in psy-
chosis. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica 125 (5), 388e399. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0447.2011.01805.x. Epub 2011 Nov 30.

Lederbogen, F., Kirsch, P., et al., 2011. City living and urban upbringing
affect neural social stress processing in humans. Nature 474 (7352),
498e501.

Lederbogen, F., Haddad, L., Meyer-Lindenberg, A., December 2013.
Urban social stress e risk factor for mental disorders. The case of
schizophrenia. Environmental Pollution 183, 2e6. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.envpol.2013.05.046.

March, D., Susser, E., 2006. Invited commentary: taking the search for
causes of schizophrenia to a different level. American Journal of
Epidemiology 163 (11), 979e981.

Mausner, J.S., Kramer, S., 1985. Mausner & Bahn Epidemiology: An

Introductory Text. W.B. Saunders Company, Philadelphia.

Marcelis, M., Takei, N., van Os, J., 1999. Urbanization and risk for
schizophrenia: does the effect operate before or around the time of
illness onset? Psychological Medicine 29 (5), 1197e1203.

Cambridge University press, London, England.

Meyer-Lindenberg, A., November 11, 2010. From maps to mechanisms
through neuroimaging of schizophrenia. Nature 468 (7321), 194e202.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature09569.

Myin-Germeys, I., van Os, J., 2007. Stress-reactivity in psychosis: evi-
dence for an affective pathway to psychosis. Clinical Psychology
Review 27 (4), 409e424.

Myin-Germeys, I., van Os, J., 2008. Adult adversity: do early environment
and genotype create lasting vulnerabilities for adult social adversity
in psychosis? In: Morgan, C., McKenzie, K., Fearon, P. (Eds.),
Society and Psychosis. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
pp. 127e142.

Nuechterlein, K.H., Dawson, M.E., 1984. A heuristic vulnerability/stress
model of schizophrenic episodes. Schizophrenia Bulletin 10 (2),
300e312.

van Os, J., Kenis, G., Rutten, B., 2009. Schizophrenia and the environ-

ment. Nature 468, 203e212, 2010.

van Os, J., Kenis, G., Rutten, B.P., 2010. The environment and schizophrenia.

Nature 468 (7321), 203e212. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature09563.

van Os, J., Kapur, S., 2009. Schizophrenia. Lancet 374 (9690), 635e645, 22.
Pedersen, C.B., Mortensen, P.B., November 2001. Evidence of a dose-
response
upbringing
and schizophrenia risk. Archives of General Psychiatry 58 (11),
1039e1046.

relationship

between

urbanicity

during

Phelan, J.C., Link, B.G., Tehranifar, P., 2010. Social conditions as
fundamental causes of health inequalities:
theory, evidence, and
policy implications. Journal of Health and Social Behavior 51,
S28eS40.

Sartorius, N., Shapiro, R., Jablensky, A., 1974. The international pilot
study of schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin 1 (11), 21e34. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1093/schbul/1.11.2.

Selten, J.P., Cantor-Graae, E., 2005. Social defeat: risk factor for schizo-

phrenia? British Journal of Psychiatry 187, 101e102.

Shah, J., Mizrahi, R., McKenzie, K., July 2011. The Four dimensions
model for the social aetiology of psychosis. British Journal of Psy-
chiatry 199 (1), 11e14.

Silver, E., Mulvey, E., Swanson, J., 2002. Neighbourhood structural
characteristics and mental disorder: Faris and Dunham revisited. So-
cial Science & Medicine 55 (8), 1457e1470.

Susser, E., St Calir, D., He, L., 2008. Latent effects of prenatal malnu-
trition on adult health the example of schizophrenia. Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences 1136, 185e192.

Susser, M., Susser, E., 1996a. Choosing a future for epidemiology: I. Eras
and paradigms. American Journal of Public Health 86 (5), 668e673.
Susser, M., Susser, E., 1996b. Choosing a future for epidemiology: II.
From Black Box to Chinese Boxes and eco- epidemiology. American
Journal of Public Health 86 (5), 674e677.

van Winkel, R., van Nierop, M., Myin-Germeys, I., van Os, J., January
2013. Childhood trauma as a cause of psychosis: linking genes,

Biological and Social Causation of Serious Mental Illness Chapter | 26 449

psychology, and biology. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry 58 (1),
44e51.

van Winkel, R., et al., 2008. Evidence that

the COMT(Val158Met)
polymorphism moderates sensitivity to stress in psychosis: an
experience-sampling study. American Journal of Medical Genetics
Part B: Neuropsychiatric Genetics 147B (1), 10e17.

Walker, E., Mittal, V., Tessner, K., 2008. Stress and the hypothalamic
pituitary adrenal axis in the developmental course of schizophrenia.
Annual Review of Clinical Psychology 4, 189e216.

World Health Organization, 2015. International Classiﬁcation of Disease.

http://www.who.int/classiﬁcations/icd/en/.

Landecker, H., Panofsky, A., 2013. From social structure to gene regula-
tion, and back: a critical introduction to environmental epigenetics for
sociology. Annual Review of Sociology 39 (1), 333e357.

Lieberman, J., et al., 2001. Longitudinal study of brain morphology in ﬁrst

episode schizophrenia. Biological Psychiatry 49 (6), 487e499.

Leuner, B., Glasper, E.R., et al., 2010. Parenting and plasticity. Trends in

Neurosciences 33 (10), 465e473.

Mason, O., et al., 2004. Risk factors for transition to ﬁrst episode psychosis
among individuals with ’at-risk mental states’. Schizophr. Res. 71
(2e3), 227e237.

March, D., Hatch, S.L., et al., 2008a. Psychosis and place. Epidemiologic

FURTHER READING

Brenner, N., Schmid, C., 2015. Towards a new epistemology of the urban?

City 19 (2e3), 151e182.

Canguilhem, G., 2008 [1965]. Knowledge and Life. Fordham University

Press, New York.

Caspi, A., McClay, J., et al., 2002. Role of genotype in the cycle of

violence in maltreated children. Science 297 (5582), 851e854.

Caspi, A., Mofﬁtt, T.E., 2006. Geneeenvironment interactions in psy-
chiatry: joining forces with neuroscience. Nature Reviews Neurosci-
ence 7, 583e590.

Galea, S., Uddin, M., et al., 2011. The urban environment and mental

disorders. Epigenetics 6 (4), 400e404.

Geuze, E., Vermetten, E., Bremner, J.D., 2005. MR-based in vivo hip-
pocampal volumetrics: 2. Findings in neuropsychiatric disorders.
Molecular Psychiatry 10 (2), 160e184.

Goldmann, E., Aiello, A., et al., 2011. Pervasive exposure to violence and
posttraumatic stress disorder in a predominantly African American
urban community: the detroit neighborhood health study. Journal of
Traumatic Stress 24 (6), 747e751.

Gould, E., Reeves, A.J., et al., 1999. Neurogenesis in the neocortex of

adult primates. Science 286 (5439), 548e552.

Kelly, B.D., O’Callaghan, E., Waddington, J.L., Feeney, L., Browne, S.,
Scully, P.J., Clarke, M., Quinn, J.F., McTigue, O., Morgan, M.G.,
Kinsella, A., Larkin, C., January 2010. Schizophrenia and the city: a
review of literature and prospective study of psychosis and urbanicity
in Ireland. Schizophrenia Research 116 (1), 75e89. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.schres.2009.10.015.

Kirkbride, J.B., 2014. Hitting the ﬂoor: understanding migration patterns
following the ﬁrst episode of psychosis. Health & Place 28 (0), 150e152.
Kirkbride, J.B., Boydell, J., et al., 2008. Testing the association between
the incidence of schizophrenia and social capital in an urban area.
Psychological Medicine 38 (08), 1083e1094.

Reviews 30 (1), 84e100.

March, D., et al., 2008b. Conceptualising the social world. In: Morgan, C.,
McKenzie, K., Fearon, P. (Eds.), Society and Psychosis. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.

McGowan, P.O., Sasaki, A., et al., 2008. Promoter-wide hypermethylation
of the ribosomal RNA gene promoter in the suicide brain. PLoS One 3
(5), e2085.

Mirescu, C., Peters, J.D., et al., 2004. Early life experience alters
response of adult neurogenesis to stress. Nature Neuroscience 7 (8),
841e846.

Miller, P., et al., 2001. Genetic liability, illicit drug use, life stress and
psychotic symptoms: preliminary ﬁndings from the Edinburgh study
of people at high risk for schizophrenia. Social Psychiatry and Psy-
chiatric Epidemiology 36 (7), 338e342.

van Os, J., et al., 2001. Prevalence of psychotic disorder and community
level of psychotic symptoms: an urban-rural comparison. Archives of
General Psychiatry 58 (7), 663e668.

Papadopoulos, D., 2011. The imaginary of plasticity: neural embodi-
ment, epigenetics and ecomorphs. Sociological Review 59 (3),
432e456.

Ryan, M.C., et al., 2004. Evidence of basal pituitary-adrenal overactivity
in ﬁrst episode, drug naive patients with schizophrenia. Psychoneur-
oendocrinology 29 (8), 1065e1070.

Shevlin, M., et al., 2008. Cumulative traumas and psychosis: an analysis of
the national comorbidity survey and the British Psychiatric Morbidity
Survey. Schizophrenia Bulletin 34 (1), 193e199.

Spauwen, J., van Os, J., 2006. The psychosis proneness: psychosis
persistence model as an explanation for the association between
urbanicity and psychosis. Epidemiologia e Psichiatria Sociale 15 (4),
252e257.
Soares, J.C.,

Innis, R.B., 1999. Neurochemical brain imaging in-
vestigations of schizophrenia. Biological Psychiatry 46 (5), 600e615.
Walker, E.F., Diforio, D., 1997. Schizophrenia: a neural diathesis-stress

model. Psychological Review 104 (4), 667e685.

Chapter 27

The Flexible Psychological Concept
of Normality

J. Murphy
Ulster University, Derry, Northern Ireland

Our reality engine constructs everything we see.

Donald Hoffman

Our earliest attempts to unpack evolutionary theory for
humanity framed some of our earliest conceptions of
psychological normality. Unfortunately, but unavoidably it
seems, such attempts too were responsible for fueling our
pursuit of and fear of psychological abnormality. While a
language and science of abnormality reigned and while
normality existed unchallenged and uncontested in the
background, our repeated attempts to contain psychological
abnormality, to classify it and to dissect it, temporarily
moved both constructs beyond our reach. Fortunately,
evolutionary theory also however eloquently revealed the
adaptive nature of much that we had considered to be
psychologically abnormal and reminded us that perceived
abnormality may often appear impressively normal when
the demands of the environment and our innate adaptive
biases are acknowledged.

This chapter considers the ﬂexibility of normality
from two very different perspectives. Part one attributes
normality’s ﬂexibility to a history that reveals how we
impulsively and perilously promoted the pursuit of
psychological
abnormality and obdurately created a
disease-based model to account for atypical psychological
functioning. The ﬂexibility of normality from this
perspective is attributable primarily to our failed and failing
attempts to contain abnormality. Speciﬁcally, our failure to
successfully distinguish between normal psychological
functioning and abnormal psychological functioning and
our failure to reveal a physiological basis for much that we
have judged to be psychologically atypical have continued
not only to compound our confusion, but more importantly,
have distracted our attention from the evolutionary context

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00027-2
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

of human psychology and the likelihood that “abnormal”
may often be something to be valued and protected.

Having considered our recent history with ab/normality,
part two considers the construct within a much broader
timeline. Normality’s ﬂexibility from this perspective is
attributable to a perceived reality that is governed by our
innate ethnocentrism and most primitive adaptive biases.
Ab/normality from this evolutionary perspective is con-
structed. What we perceive and believe to be ab/normal
is informed directly by our reaction and attraction to what is
safe, ﬁt, and beneﬁcial and our avoidance of what
is
harmful, dangerous, or threatening. From this perspective,
many experiences
that cause suffering, distress, and
reduced quality of life need not always indicate pathology
or malfunction. Such experiences instead may often be
symptomatic, not of disease, but of adaptation, defense, and
ﬁtness.

While our belief and investment in normality and ab-
normality has far outweighed our ability to scientiﬁcally
operationalize either concept, or our ability to empirically
distinguish between the two, it is precisely this blind in-
vestment that may help us to appreciate why ab/normality
exists and why we have found it so difﬁcult to contain.

PART ONE
Because of how normality was originally framed, and by
whom, our conﬁdence in its existence and our convictions
about its discriminatory status were always likely to be
somewhat exaggerated and misplaced. The history of our
pursuit of normality has revealed much about the concept
itself, and it is to this history that we ﬁrst turn to appreciate
how our current models of psychological ab/normality were
originally conceived, investigated, and established. From
eugenicist
translations of

confusion in the

earliest

451

452 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

Darwinian Theory for humanity to the medicalization of
psychological distress by psychiatry and the race to reveal
the genetic architecture of the many alleged diseases of the
mind, normality was quickly relegated to the periphery,
while abnormality moved center stage.

A number of esteemed authors have offered detailed
and eloquent historical accounts of our precarious pursuit
of abnormality and have offered some of the most valuable
and insightful chronologies of its evolution as a concept
(see Whitaker, 2002; Read et al., 2004; Bentall, 2009;
Bartlett, 2011; Frances, 2013; Whitaker and Cosgrove,
2015). Some of the most notable moments and individuals
from these historical accounts have been selected here to
help capture the genesis of normality and to reveal the
beginnings of society’s investment in, and fear of, abnor-
mality. While it is acknowledged that moments in history
can often be selectively pieced together to manufacture
support for a given perspective, the following narrative
attempts only to demonstrate that
the ﬂexibility of
normality, from a psychological standpoint, may be partly
attributable to beginnings that favored the identiﬁcation and
measurement of abnormality and that the motivations for
doing so may have compromised our attempts to under-
stand these concepts ever since.

Eugenics’ Normality

Why do we preserve these useless and harmful beings? The
abnormal prevent the development of the normal.

Alexis Carrel

From the outset, our attempts to capture and contain
normality were articulated within an evolutionary frame-
work: a survival of the ﬁttest mind-set. Normality it seemed
was something to be identiﬁed, protected, and incubated:
the ultimate strain that needed to be preserved. Ten years
after Darwin’s On the Origin of Species, Francis Galton
authored Hereditary Genius (1869). Greatly inﬂuenced by
his cousins’ revelations, Galton (Darwin’s cousin and one
of the ﬁrst to explore Gaussian distributions of human traits
and behaviors in the general population) was determined to
reveal evolution’s intended road map for humanity. In
Hereditary Genius, Galton proposed that intelligence and
social dominance were heritable traits. Sampling nearly a
thousand prominent ﬁgures from English high society,
Galton concluded that a small number of English families
possessed superior “germ plasm” and that this germ plasm
was the heritable foundation of their advanced intellect and
subsequent status in society.

From the beginning, it seemed normality was explicitly
evident in society. It was there for everyone to see. Power,
wealth, intellect, and status were the most obvious signs
and signals of ﬁtness in Victorian times, and given that

to invest

these characteristics were identiﬁable and consistent
across generations and within families, society now knew
what
in to ensure the future success and
advancement of the species. Unfortunately, recognizing
this ﬁtness was only the beginning. It also needed to be
preserved and to do that society needed to ensure that the
germ plasm of the ﬁt was, at all costs, protected from the
unﬁt. Normality it seemed had truly arrived but so too had
its greatest threat.

The identiﬁcation, classiﬁcation, and segregation of
abnormality fast became society’s most pressing challenge.
Galton’s writings (and those of many other eugenicists of
the time) were quickly politicized, and European and US
ruling classes set about legislating to improve the human
stock. Eugenics (meaning “well-born”) became the scien-
tiﬁc justiﬁcation not only for the classiﬁcation of the normal
ideal but for demarcating the ﬁrst boundaries between
normality and abnormality and importantly for introducing
a genetic and physiological basis for its division. From a
eugenics perspective the mentally distressed and disabled
of society represented the most obvious and most extreme
deviation from this normal ideal. Prominent psychiatrists of
the time speculatively referred to “degenerate heredity” and
“ﬂawed germ plasm” passed from one generation to the
next. While the mentally distressed were believed to be the
recipients of the most defective germ plasm,
inherited
gradually over many generations of poor breeding, other
groups also clearly exhibited abnormality, simply by virtue
of their identity as ethnic, racial, or religious minorities or
their status as criminals or social outcasts. Abnormality it
seemed was as easily identiﬁable as normality. These
groups, visibly distinct
if
permitted, would continue to spread their defective germ
plasm. Insanity and poverty quickly approximated low
ﬁtness, and existing democratic principles advocating fra-
ternity, equality, and social programs of education and
health for all soon it seemed felt the burden of a scientiﬁc
revolution that could clearly evidence man’s costly inter-
ference with natural selection.

from the ﬁttest

in society,

In the early 1890s, leading eugenicists were calling for
the mass sterilization of the insane, poor, criminal, and the
unﬁt. It seemed that high society had quickly acquired the
capacity for identifying and classifying ﬁtness (normality)
and that afﬂuence and social status correlated almost
perfectly with whatever this classiﬁcation was. While such
proposals were initially only entertained among the scien-
tiﬁc community, by 1896 the State of Connecticut
in
America introduced legislation prohibiting the insane from
marrying, and by 1933, marriage prohibition for the insane
was enacted across North America. In 1907 the State of
Indiana introduced the United States’ ﬁrst sterilization law,
justifying it on the basis that heredity had been scientiﬁ-
cally evidenced to be central to the transmission of crime,
idiocy, and imbecility. Those eligible for sterilization

The Flexible Psychological Concept of Normality Chapter | 27 453

included criminals, idiots, the feeble-minded,
imbeciles,
lunatics, drunkards, drug ﬁends, epileptics, syphilitics,
moral and sexual perverts, and those deemed diseased and
degenerate (Whitaker, 2002). Europe also followed suit,
and in 1933, Ernst Rüdin, who worked at the German
Research Institute of Psychiatry, helped to introduce
legislation in Germany for the compulsory sterilization of
all psychiatric patients. Some seven years later, Germany
would begin to dispose of abnormality. Inspired by a
eugenics-based classiﬁcation of ﬁtness, approximately
70,000 psychiatric patients across Europe would be gassed
during WWII.

Charles Davenport,

the inﬂuence of gene expression.

The scientiﬁc and political elite across Europe and the
United States of America it seemed had discovered the
boundaries of normality and had underpinned their new
discovery with a robust body of scientiﬁc evidence. Two
notable individuals who pioneered the scientiﬁc demarca-
tion of abnormality and facilitated the enactment of
eugenics inspired laws of sterilization are worth noting:
Charles Davenport and Aaron Rosanoff. Theirs is a
history that exempliﬁes the ways and means by which we
ﬁrst began to differentiate normal
form and function
from abnormal and by which we socially, politically, and
scientiﬁcally constructed our normal and abnormal ideals.
a Harvard-educated biologist,
inﬂuenced by Gregor Mendel’s revelations about genetic
transmission and the dominant and recessive traits of pea
plants, decided to demonstrate that human traits were also
under
Importantly,
however, Davenport was an ardent eugenicist and given the
scientiﬁc and socio-political views of the day biasedly
hypothesized that immigrants and social degenerates were
genetically inferior to the native population. Speciﬁcally, he
proposed that the presence of immigrant germ plasm in the
general population introduced risk for a wide range of
criminal and delinquent behaviors such as crimes of
larceny, kidnapping, assault, murder, rape, and sexual
immorality (Davenport, 1911). Conﬁdent in his observa-
tions, Davenport set about rearticulating this genetic risk
for society in economic terms. In 1910, he founded the
Eugenics Record Ofﬁce, a team of ﬁeld workers who set
about recording the family histories (ie, immigrant status)
of asylum, prison, and poorhouse residents. Davenport had
recognized that many of societies “abnormals” and “de-
fectives” would likely have already been identiﬁed and
incarcerated and as such would be easily accessible for data
collection. However, he also sent his team to survey
members of
to
discover the level of societal risk attributable to those not
yet incarcerated (risk of abnormality, it seemed, resided in
the community also, among the healthy, among those
considered normal). Davenport estimated that the annual
cost of supporting these cacogenics (poorly born) was over
$100 million (taxpayer dollars). Abnormality now it

the general population in an attempt

seemed had a cost and importantly this was to be borne, not
by those who were affected, but by those unaffected (ie,
those who were normal).

The data underpinning Davenport’s assertions was in
part provided by his Eugenics Record Ofﬁce survey team.
However, Aaron Rosanoff, a doctor at King’s Park State
Hospital in New York provided one of the ﬁrst empirical
tests conﬁrming Davenport’s assertions regarding the
heritability of deviancy, degeneracy, and insanity. Rosanoff
traced the family histories of 72 insane patients. His
hypothesis was that, according to Mendelian principles of
genetic transmission, 33% of the tested relatives of these
patients should have a documented history of mental
illness. Initial testing, however, indicated that only 4% of
family members met the criteria for mental illness, therefore
failing to support the hypothesis. However, Rosanoff found
that if the existing classiﬁcation of insanity/mental illness
was relaxed somewhat for these relatives then the 33%
heritability prediction could be supported. In subsequent
analyses, Rosanoff expanded manic-depressive illness to
include more general family behaviors (ie, not speciﬁc to
the assumed illness) such as being highly strung, excitable,
dictatorial, abnormally selﬁsh, awfully tempered, or blue
and expanded schizophrenia to include relatives who were
cranky, stubborn, nervous, queer, suspicious of friends
and family, and who worried over nothing. This broader
spectrum of abnormality that now encroached on normality
and migrated beyond the walls of the asylums and poor-
houses was termed “neuropathy.” Now, armed with this
new taxonomy, Rosanoff concluded that “the hereditary
transmission of the neuropathic constitution as a recessive
trait,
in accordance with the Mendelian theory, may
be regarded as deﬁnitely established” (Rosanoff and
Orr, 1911).

that

their

declared

These earliest proponents of Darwinian Theory,

it
seems, conﬁdently assumed responsibility for demar-
cating the boundaries of normality and abnormality and
for imposing this dichotomy on the public at large. They
conﬁdently
propositions were
empirically evidenced and grounded in theory and that
theirs was a morally and scientiﬁcally justiﬁed interpre-
tation of social variation. They were among the ﬁrst to
speculate about the biological basis and the heritability of
abnormality. They were among the ﬁrst to advocate ac-
tion to identify and contain abnormality and to preserve
normality. Importantly, they were among the ﬁrst also
(but certainly not
the last) to broaden and relax their
boundaries of abnormality, encroaching on normality
(whatever
scientiﬁc
assumptions.

this was),

satisfy

to

their

Our attempts to understand our evolutionary past, it
seems, quickly inﬂuenced action to secure our “ﬁttest”
possible future, and while this confused, elitist, and
misguided interpretation of
evolutionary theory for

454 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

humanity set the scene for fearing abnormality, another
ﬁeld had already begun to package abnormality and to
speculate about its likely underlying pathophysiology.

Psychiatry’s Normality

Every normal person,
is only normal on the
average. His ego approximates to that of the psychotic in
some part or other and to a greater or lesser extent.

in fact,

Sigmund Freud

While eugenicists’ impulsive and erroneous translations of
Darwinian theory guaranteed long term confusion over the
existence and boundaries of ab/normality, psychiatry
further compounded societal misunderstanding through
their repeated attempts to identify and contain abnormal-
ity. A turbulent history of endorsing and promoting
competing philosophies on the form and origins of ab-
normality ensured that normality and abnormality soon
became deeply confused and often indistinguishable
constructs. More importantly, psychiatry’s ultimate deci-
sion to adopt a disease-based model of psychopathology
and their obstinate axiomatic stance on the biological basis
of abnormal psychological functioning ensured that both
normality and abnormality would not only remain a
mystery to society, but would remain beyond psychiatry’s
reach also.

Long before Galton’s proclamations regarding the
preservation of the ﬁttest in society, psychiatry had begun
to speculate about the physiological basis of the mind (the
abnormal mind). In 1812, Benjamin Rush, considered to
be the founding father of psychiatry, authored Medical
Inquiries and Observations upon the Diseases of the Mind.
Psychiatry, to begin, adopted a biomedical model of hu-
man psychology and conﬁdently referred to diseases of the
mind when evaluating the unusual, anomalous, and
abnormal behaviors of those in their care. Rush specula-
tively proposed that insanity was located in the blood and
that manipulation of blood ﬂow would alleviate the
observable
for
example, mania and delusion (too much blood) and
indolence and apathy (too little blood). However, while
psychiatrists from the outset conjectured about the poten-
tial physiological basis of that which they investigated,
they were entirely and frustratingly reliant upon observa-
tion of overt human behavior alone. In 1844, the Associ-
ation of Medical Superintendents of American Institutions
for the Insane (which would later become the American-
Medico Psychological Association and then ultimately
the American Psychiatric Association) declared that in-
sanity was something that was easily recognized and
distinguishable from normal functioning but not easily
classiﬁed (Grob, 1991).

psychological

distressing

states

of,

A major problem for psychiatry early on was that their
asylums housed a diverse array of
individuals who
exhibited and were characterized by a diverse array of
unusual experiences. While insanity was commonly
referred to and documented in the medical literature, those
labelled insane were often very different from one another.
Moreover, psychiatrists also encountered and were charged
with treating cases of syphilis, alcoholism, senility, and
mental/intellectual disability. Abnormality, as it existed in
these asylums, it seemed, was a complex, convoluted mix
of behaviors that did not lend itself easily to coherent
classiﬁcation.

One of the earliest taxonomies of insanity was pro-
posed in 1885 whereupon eight separate categories were
identiﬁed. In an attempt to impose some order on the wide
range of unusual experiences expressed by those inhab-
iting the asylums of the day, psychiatrists attempted to
diagnostically group behaviors into those that character-
ized mania, melancholia, monomania (a form of partial
insanity conceived as single pathological preoccupation in
an otherwise sound mind), dementia, general paralysis of
the insane (caused by late stage syphilis), epilepsy, toxic
insanity, and congenital mental deﬁciency (intellectual
disability). While most of these disease categories could
be evidenced over time to be physiological
in nature,
those that could not offered little by way of physical ev-
idence to support
traditional disease-based hypotheses.
Psychological abnormality was identiﬁable and recog-
nizable at a behavioral level only, and until empirical
evidence suggested otherwise, these particular categories
of abnormality would remain elusive. Early on, it seems,
those in pursuit of a classiﬁcation system of abnormal
psychological functioning acknowledged that they were
“forced to fall back upon the symptoms of the diseased
the apparent mental condition, as judged from the outward
manifestations” (Grob, 1991). Recognizing the severe
limitations of a medical discipline responsible for medi-
cally treating abnormality, but with restricted ability to
medically identify and classify it, psychiatry had to ﬁnd a
way to reliably navigate the construct.

While a language of disease seemed momentarily to
predominate, psychiatry, bereft of the necessary anatomical
and biochemical evidence needed to sustain their early
disease-based assumptions, deviated and stressed instead
the importance of the environment and our subconscious
capacity for defense. Sigmund Freud’s psychoanalysis
arrived, dominated psychiatric practice and began to in-
ﬂuence many of psychiatry’s new formulations of abnormal
psychological functioning. Psychiatry now began to prior-
itize the psychology,
than the physiology of
abnormal and atypical behavior. With the introduction of
psychoanalysis, psychiatry’s more traditional, physiologi-
cally based divisions between normality and abnormality
had suddenly become a little less clear.

rather

The Flexible Psychological Concept of Normality Chapter | 27 455

However, while Freud’s teachings dominated, others in
psychiatry were more resistant and ardently worked to
reestablish a disease-based model of psychopathology. In
1883, a German psychiatrist, Emil Kraeplin, attempted to
classify some of the most perplexing behaviors and expe-
riences encountered by psychiatrists. Authoring A Com-
pendium of Psychiatry (later to become A textbook of
psychiatry for physicians and students), Kraeplin dismissed
Freud’s psychoanalytic approach to psychological distress
and abnormal functioning as subjective and unscientiﬁc and
instead advocated the long-term observation of patients and
their expressed symptomologies.

Kraeplin proposed that symptoms which emerged
together and changed uniformly with one another over time
offered the most plausible basis upon which to identify
discrete disease entities and importantly to explore their
underlying etiologies and likely disease courses. He
distinguished between two separate and distinct symptom
proﬁles, manic-depression and dementia praecox. Kraeplin
observed that patients whose symptomologies were largely
characterized by affect (ﬂuctuations in mood from deep
depression to manic elation) seemed to recover over time
and that
their prognosis was often reasonably benign.
Others, however, seemed to exhibit a distinct lack or loss of
affect and experienced impaired motor functioning. These
individuals also, however, would experience a much more
malign outcome and eventually become chronically ill and
senile (dementia praecox ¼ senility of the young). Kraeplin
was the ﬁrst to attempt to achieve both reliability (the ac-
curate identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of psychological
disease) and validity (the accurate prediction of disease
course and outcome) in the pursuit of meaningful diag-
nosis. Importantly, he also proposed that while his original
classiﬁcation system was symptom based only, the under-
lying physiological/neurological basis of these diseases
would ultimately be identiﬁed in time (now that psychiatry
knew where to look).

Psychiatry now proposed two competing causal phi-
losophies on the origins of psychological abnormality.
From a Freudian perspective, psychological abnormality
was assumed to be consequential to internal conﬂict that
arose from understandable reactions to one’s past and
environment, whereas Kraeplinian teachings proposed that
psychological abnormality was physiologically distin-
guishable from normal functioning and that it ultimately
signaled disease. Regardless, proponents of both positions
struggled to adequately make sense of the multiple con-
stellations of supposed symptoms that those in their care
were manifesting.

In an attempt to contain and describe abnormal func-
tioning more coherently and comprehensively, psychiatry
introduced the Statistical Manual for the Use of Institutions
for the Insane in 1918. This manual identiﬁed 22 separate
groups of psychiatric disorders. Notably,
the manual

distinguished between disorders that were biological
in
nature (20 groups of disorder) and those that were without
an identiﬁable underlying biology (2 groups of disorder).
These latter two groups of disorder were intended primarily
to discriminate between psychologically distressed patients
who exhibited psychosis and those whose symptom pre-
sentations were devoid of psychosis. Importantly, however,
this earliest of classiﬁcations proposed that certain psy-
chologically abnormal states and behaviors were distin-
guishable from others on the basis of a recognizable and
measureable underlying pathophysiology. That which was
manifested psychologically therefore often had a detectable
physiological cause, but often much that was manifested
psychologically revealed no obvious biology. Biology, it
seems, had been and would continue to be the basis upon
which the battle lines for psychological abnormality would
be drawn.

this

Until

time, psychological abnormality mostly
resided and was treated in the asylums of the day. However,
given the popularity of Freud’s teachings, it was soon to
become evident that people in the community could also
beneﬁt from psychiatric care. In 1946, psychiatry moved
beyond the walls of the asylums and hospitals and began
treating the psychologically distressed in the community.
William Menninger, for example, noting the transient and
temporary nature of
the often extreme psychological
distress experienced by many who returned home from the
Second World War, in 1946 established the Group for the
Advancement of Psychiatry. Menninger, a US military
psychiatrist, proposed that many in the general population
would beneﬁt from psychiatric assistance to help them to
deal with the many daily stresses and traumas of life.
Championing the psychological treatment of the general
public, Menninger helped moved psychiatry into the com-
munity,
and with this, psychiatry now publically
acknowledged that psychological abnormality was in fact
often quite common, and often recoverable. The distinction
between psychological normality and abnormality had now
become even more ambiguous. Those in receipt of psy-
chiatric care in the community were now recognized to be
psychologically distressed; they were not, it seemed, to be
considered abnormal (insane) in the traditional asylum
sense of the word.

Psychiatry introduced the ﬁrst edition of its Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual (DSM-I) in 1950. Notably, this ﬁrst
manual, similar to the Statistical Manual for the Use of
Institutions for the Insane published in 1918 and consistent
with the psychoanalytic climate of the time, distinguished
between mental disturbances that were organic in nature
(eg, abnormal psychological behavior as a consequence of
infections, poisoning, intoxication, circulatory and meta-
bolic problems, brain cancers, multiple sclerosis, etc.) and
those that seemed to be related to an individual’s adjust-
ment to their environment. In an attempt to order and make

456 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

sense of this nonorganic abnormality, the DSM subdivided
patient experiences
into psychotic (manic-depressive;
paranoid; and schizophrenic reactions) and psycho-neurotic
disorders (anxiety; obsessions and compulsions; depres-
sion; emotional instability). Importantly, once again, anxi-
ety, depression, and psychosis according to this manual
were not attributable to an underlying physiological disease
but instead reﬂected emotional distress attributable to in-
ternal conﬂicts, adjustments to environmental stressors, and
traumatic/stressful
life histories. Psychotic and psycho-
neurotic disorders, while visibly distinct from normal psy-
chological functioning, were now, however, also ﬁrmly
recognized as distinct
from the many organic-based
psychopathologies.

It

that

early

seems

therefore

on much

of
psychiatry could not discriminate between normal and
abnormal psychological functioning at a physical level and
so instead viewed abnormal psychological functioning as
behavior that was consequential
to life adjustment and
understandable reactivity to the environment. This, unsur-
prisingly,
largely complicated the distinction between
normality and abnormality. As Whitaker and Cosgrove put
it “there was no longer a clear line that divided the mentally
well from the mentally ill, and if anything, it seemed that
unresolved psychological conﬂicts probably plagued most
people, at
to some degree [and at some time]”
(2015; p. 13).

least

Still

Freudian

principles,

advocating

psychiatry
continued to attempt to contain and package abnormality,
reconﬁguring and reﬁning diagnoses in an attempt
to
accurately describe the many forms of mental disturbance
they encountered. Psychotic disorders were repeatedly
revised: from Kraeplin’s dementia praecox, to Bleuler’s
schizophrenia, to Schneider’s ﬁrst rank symptoms of hal-
lucinations and delusions. Klaus Leonhard’s bipolar
disorder
replaced manic-depressive disorder, and the
psycho-neurotic disorders soon evolved into the anxiety
disorders
(phobias, generalized anxiety disorder, and
obsessive compulsive disorder) and nonpsychotic depres-
sion. Psychiatry had constructed many identities for these
nonorganic disorders of abnormal psychological
func-
tioning; however, their inability to reliably classify these
constructs was about to come under heavy ﬁre.

Continued revisions of the DSM (DSM-II was intro-
duced in 1968), based predominantly on clinical observa-
tion, soon began to falter as researchers began to challenge
the reliability and utility of the new diagnoses. Many re-
searchers speciﬁcally challenged the symptom composition
and discriminatory power of the diagnoses and questions
also began to arise regarding diagnostic consensus among
psychiatrists and consistency in diagnosis from country to
country. In 1962, Aaron Beck, for example, reviewed a
series of studies that had evaluated the reliability of psy-
chiatry’s nonorganic disorders contained within the DSM

and found that diagnostic agreement among psychiatrists
ranged from only 32e42%. In 1968, Donald Bannister
drew attention to the growing confusion and misunder-
standing surrounding DSM classiﬁcation stating that “We
diagnose one person as schizophrenic because he manifests
characteristics A and B and diagnose a second person as
schizophrenic because he manifests characteristics C, D,
and E. The two people are now ﬁrmly grouped in the same
category while not speciﬁcally possessing any common
characteristic..Disjunctive categories are logically too
primitive for scientiﬁc use” (Bannister, 1968).

Notably, researchers had also begun to reveal grave
discrepancies in diagnoses between psychiatrists from
different countries. For example, Copeland et al. (1971)
revealed that when 134 US and 194 British psychiatrists
were given a description of a patient, 69% of the US psy-
chiatrists diagnosed “schizophrenia,” but only 2% of the
British Psychiatrists did so. Cooper (1972), moreover,
documented that psychiatrists in Great Britain and the
United States were twice as likely as psychiatrists in Russia
to diagnose the disorder. Diagnosis was not working, and
clinicians were not arriving at the same conclusions when
evaluating their patients. Diagnostic
reliability and
consensus among those administering the diagnoses was
proving problematic. Nonorganic psychological abnormal-
ity it seems, was not easily contained after all, and if
discriminating between their different constructions of ab-
normality was proving problematic, psychiatry (and soci-
ety) was
something much more
challenging.

soon to confront

Rosenhan’s Normality

We now know that we cannot distinguish insanity from
sanity.

David Rosenhan

In 1973, psychiatry confronted and diagnosed normality.
In a landmark study entitled “On being sane in insane
places,” David Rosenhan, a Stanford University psychol-
ogist, along with eight associates (a psychology graduate
student, three psychologists, a pediatrician, a psychiatrist, a
painter, and a housewife), none of whom had a history of
mental illness, attempted to gain admission to 12 different
psychiatric hospitals across the United States. The 12
hospitals were located in ﬁve different states on the East
and West coasts of the United States. Some were old and
shabby, some were quite new, some had good staff-patient
ratios, and others were quite understaffed. One was a
reputable private hospital. Each “pseudopatient” claimed
that
they heard voices that seemed to say the words
“empty,” “hollow,” and “thud.” No other psychiatric
symptoms were reported.

The Flexible Psychological Concept of Normality Chapter | 27 457

All eight pseudopatients successfully gained admission
to their respective hospitals, and all but one were diagnosed
with schizophrenia (one was diagnosed with manic-
depressive psychosis). Each was instructed to “act nor-
mally” once admitted and to report that they felt ﬁne and no
longer heard voices. Despite constantly and openly taking
extensive notes on the behavior of the staff and other pa-
tients, none of the pseudopatients were identiﬁed as im-
postors by the hospital staff, although many of the other
psychiatric patients seemed to be able to correctly identify
them as impostors. In the ﬁrst three hospitalizations, 30%
of the patients expressed a suspicion that the pseudopatients
were sane, with some suggesting that the patients were
researchers or journalists investigating the hospitals. Hos-
pital notes obtained after the experiment indicated that all
pseudopatients were characterized as friendly and cooper-
ative by staff. However, records also indicated that staff
interpreted much of the pseudopatients’ behavior in terms
of their diagnoses. For example, one nurse labelled the
note-taking of one pseudopatient as “writing behavior” and
considered it pathological (Rosenhan, 1973).

Their stays ranged from 7 to 52 days, and the average
stay was 19 days. All were discharged with a diagnosis of
schizophrenia “in remission.” Rosenhan noted that “The
label ‘in remission’ should in no way be dismissed as a
formality, for at no time during any hospitalization had any
question been raised about any pseudopatient’s simulation.
Nor are there any indications in the hospital records that the
pseudopatient’s status was suspect. Rather, the evidence is
strong that, once labelled schizophrenic, the pseudopatient
was stuck with that label. If the pseudopatient was to be
discharged, he must naturally be ‘in remission’; but he was
not sane, nor, in the institution’s view, had he ever been
sane” (1973; p. 257).

In a follow-up study, Rosenhan approached a well-
known research and teaching hospital, whose staff had
heard of the results of the initial study but claimed that
similar errors could not be made at their institution. Rose-
nhan therefore invited the hospital to participate in a new
study. Hospital staff were informed that one or more
pseudopatients would attempt to gain admission to their
hospital within a 3-month period. The staff were asked to
rate every incoming patient and to assess the “legitimacy”
of their symptom presentations. After the 3-month period
the hospital reported that 21% of those assessed (193 in
total) were pseudopatients, while a further 22% were
considered suspect. In reality, however, Rosenhan had sent
no pseudopatients, and all patients suspected as impostors
were ordinary patients. This led to a conclusion that “any
diagnostic process that lends itself too readily to massive
errors of this sort cannot be a very reliable one.”

Rosenhan concluded, “It

that we cannot
distinguish the sane from the insane in psychiatric hospi-
tals,” and he suggested that the use of community mental

is clear

health facilities that concentrated on speciﬁc problems and
behaviors rather than psychiatric labels might be a more
meaningful way forward for psychiatry. While for decades
psychiatry had been struggling to demarcate the bound-
aries between multiple constructs of abnormality, Rose-
nhan’s studies suddenly and dramatically revealed to
society that the boundaries between normality and abnor-
mality were every bit as challenging to establish, if not
more so.

Rosenhan, however, was not alone in challenging the
status quo. Challenges also came from psychiatrists like
Thomas Szasz (1960), who argued that mental illness was a
myth, used to disguise moral conﬂicts. Sociologists such as
Erving Goffman (1968) argued that mental
illness was
merely another example of how society labels and controls
nonconformists. Moreover, behavioral psychologists chal-
lenged psychiatry’s fundamental reliance on unobservable
phenomena, and gay rights activists criticized the APA’s
listing of homosexuality as a mental disorder.

DSM’s Normality

Despite extensive ﬁeld testing of the DSM-III diagnostic
criteria before their ofﬁcial adoption, experience with them
since their publication had revealed, as expected, many
instances in which the criteria were not entirely clear, were
inconsistent across categories, or were even contradictory.

APA (1987: xvii)

In the aftermath of Rosenhan’s revelations and as a
response to the growing evidence base challenging the
reliability of psychiatric diagnoses, those responsible for
the DSM sought to revise their classiﬁcation systems once
more. Initially the impetus was to make the DSM nomen-
clature consistent with the International Statistical Classi-
ﬁcation of Diseases
and Related Health Problems,
published by the World Health Organization (ICD is used
more widely in Europe and other parts of the world and ﬁrst
documented mental disorder in its sixth revision in 1949
around the time of DSM-I). On this occasion, psychiatry
and the APA would attempt
to minimize disagreement
between clinicians, both domestically in the United States
and internationally, by imposing strict symptom checklist
criteria. Hoping to remove clinician subjectivity and spec-
ulation about symptom presentation and diagnosis, the third
revision of
introduced in 1980)
instructed clinicians explicitly on symptom classiﬁcation.
Clinicians now received clear guidance regarding the
appropriate diagnostic allocation of symptoms. Moreover,
in addition to these symptom checklists, clinicians were
also explicitly instructed on how to question their patients.
Structured clinical interview schedules were introduced to
ensure that clinicians conformed and adhered to a common,

the DSM (DSM-III

458 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

shared formulation process. Diagnosis, now it seemed,
would become consistent, diagnosis now ﬁnally would
become reliable.

The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual continued to be
revised and updated, and in the years following DSM-III,
four subsequent editions emerged. DSM-III-R (Revised
DSM-III, 1987), DSM-IV (1994), DSM-IV-TR (Text
Revision, 2000) and DSM-5 (2013) would each succes-
sively repackage psychological abnormality to ensure that
signs and signals of atypical psychological functioning
(symptoms) were carefully grouped and classiﬁed to
discriminate one assumed disorder from another. However,
while increased reliability continued to satisfy the admin-
istrative objectives of classiﬁcation, diagnostic validity
failed to be established. As a consequence today and
entirely because of this validity crisis, we know of no
diagnosis-speciﬁc causative agents and no disease-speciﬁc
cures for common types of mental disorders.

The diagnostic manuals are replete with serious
limitations. The most recent classiﬁcations (DSM-5 and
ICD-11), for instance, list several hundreds of diagnostic
categories; however, evidence shows that most of these
are rarely used (Moller et al., 2007; Munk-Jorgensen
et al., 2010). Moreover, despite the wide variety and
selection of diagnoses available, many who seek and need
clinical assistance fail to qualify for a speciﬁc diagnosis,
while many others often require more than one diagnosis
to adequately describe their problems. Psychiatry’s
attempts to contain abnormality since DSM-III therefore
introduced a wide array of new classiﬁcation problems
that continued to keep the construct(s) of ab/normality out
of reach.

This continued confusion with diagnostic classiﬁcation
has been evidenced most clearly by ﬁndings from large-
scale epidemiological studies. These studies have been
designed to evaluate the presence and variation of psychi-
atric symptoms and diagnoses in the general population and
have been conducted worldwide. The ﬁndings from these
studies have revealed that mental disorders, as deﬁned in
DSM and ICD classiﬁcation manuals, are surprisingly
common and that most
individuals who qualify for a
diagnosis actually qualify for multiple diagnoses. Accord-
ing to these studies, abnormality seems to be widespread,
and those who are afﬂicted are likely to suffer from a range
of supposedly discrete disorders. For example,
recent
analytic ﬁndings based on the National Comorbidity
SurveydReplication (NCS-R; a nationally representative
community household survey of over 9000 US citizens)
revealed that 57% of those surveyed had a lifetime diag-
nosis of at least one mental disorder. Moreover, those with
a diagnosis were likely on average to have three separate
diagnoses (Harvard School of Medicine, 2005). Such
ﬁndings are consistent with those from other epidemio-
logical surveys conducted in Australia (eg, Andrews et al.,

2001), New Zealand (eg, Newman et al., 1996), and across
Europe (eg, Germany, Jacobi et al., 2004).

However, surprisingly, such cross-sectional ﬁndings are
believed to be underestimates. Other
researchers have
demonstrated that if individuals are analyzed prospectively,
that is over time, then it is likely that the majority of people
in the general population will actually be evidenced to
suffer from a diagnosable mental disorder at some point in
their lives (Copeland et al., 2011; Mofﬁtt et al., 2011).
Incidentally, many more individuals in these studies have
been evidenced to experience a wide array of supposed
symptoms but do not meet the strict diagnostic “cut-off”
criteria required for diagnosis. Such variation has led many
researchers to suggest that many supposed disorders may
actually reﬂect extremes of continuously distributed
phenomena throughout the population. From this perspec-
tive, even the most severe psychological experiences can be
evidenced to exist at low, moderate, and clinical levels
(Murphy et al., 2009, 2012). While psychiatric nosologies
therefore such as the DSM and ICD are predicated on the
view that mental disorders are categorically distinct, these
epidemiological ﬁndings indicate that it is often far more
common to ﬁnd multiple rather
than single discrete
diagnoses
(Hasin and Kilcoyne, 2012; Kreuger and
Markon, 2011). According to Uher and Rutter (2012), “this
‘everything predicts everything’ result suggests that it is
unlikely that
the various disorders represent separate
entities or that major causative factors could be speciﬁc to
[any] particular diagnosis” (p. 592).

Researchers recently have begun to focus more atten-
tion on assessing whether this high degree of observed co-
occurrence (comorbidity) between supposed disorders and
symptoms can be explained by more broad, overarching
constructs (called factors or dimensions). This approach is
similar
to the popular psychological personality trait
theories whereby a number of superordinate latent per-
sonality dimensions
(eg, openness, conscientiousness,
agreeableness, extraversion, neuroticism, and psychoti-
cism) were hypothesized to explain the high degree of
association between speciﬁc observable personality traits/
characteristics (Costa and McCrae, 1992; Eysenck and
Eysenck, 1976). Krueger et al.
for example,
hypothesized that adult psychological problems could be
explained in terms of two superordinate psychopathology
factors: internalizing and externalizing. The internalizing
factor/dimension is proposed to comprise problems of
negative emotion and includes distressing psychological
experiences
such as depression, generalized anxiety,
phobias, posttraumatic stress, and panic. The externalizing
factor/dimension, on the other hand,
is proposed to
comprise difﬁculties in behavioral inhibition and includes
distressing psychological experiences such as substance
dependence and abuse, conduct problems, and antisocial
behavior. Since the initial study by Krueger et al. (1998),

(1998),

The Flexible Psychological Concept of Normality Chapter | 27 459

multiple studies within different adult populations have
revealed this two-factor model of psychological distress
(eg, Forbush and Watson, 2013; Kendler et al., 2003;
Kreuger and Markon, 2011).

However, researchers have also suggested the presence
of a third superordinate factor, psychosis. The suggestion of
a psychosis dimension is based on a large body of evidence
indicating that psychotic experiences exist along a contin-
uum in the general population (van Os et al., 2009) and are
commonly observed alongside other nonpsychotic experi-
ences (Murphy et al., 2012). This dimension is character-
ized by perceptual anomalies and delusional beliefs and
includes assumed disorders such as schizophrenia, bipolar
disorder,
thought disorders, and obsessive compulsive
disorder. For example, in a study of 469 participants from
the Suffolk Mental Health Project, Kotov et al. (2010)
found evidence to support
three underlying factors,
labelling them internalizing, externalizing, and schizo-
phrenia. In a follow-up study, utilizing a larger sample
(N ¼ 2900) from the Improved Diagnostic Assessment and
Service project, Kotov et al. (2011) replicated their ﬁnd-
ings, once again identifying the three dimensions. More
recently, Fleming et al. (2014) analyzed the National
Comorbidity Survey data (N ¼ 5877) from the United
States, using both exploratory factor analysis and conﬁr-
matory factor analysis, and again found support for three
correlated factors of
internalizing, externalizing, and
psychosis.

(2)

(3)

the samples

While a large body of evidence now supports a
dimensional representation of psychopathology, consensus
regarding the precise number of dimensions and their
hierarchical structure has yet to be reached. To date, wide-
scale variation in dimensional representations of psycho-
pathology has been evidenced. This variation often has
been attributable to factors such as (1) the number and type
of disorders being modelled,
from
which the data has been derived (eg, whether they have
been clinical or nonclinical samples),
the rating
instruments used, (4) the phase of illness experienced by
the samples, and/or (5) the statistical procedures applied to
the data. Moreover, while various discrete dimensions
have been evidenced to adequately account
the
co-occurrence of abnormal psychological phenomena,
recent bi-factor models seem to suggest the presence of a
more dominant underlying general dimension (eg, Caspi
et al., 2014). This general dimension seems to account for
the co-occurrence of disorders that regularly occur across
discrete dimensions. It seems therefore that while latent
dimensional models have advanced representations of
psychological
abnormality from discrete overlapping
diagnoses to more general dimensions of co-occurrence on
the one hand, they have on the other also created an equally
perplexing common factor to contend with. Somewhat
unexpectedly therefore, while dimensionality has clariﬁed

for

much of our confusion regarding the erroneous and
spurious diagnosis of atypical psychological functioning, it
has also reminded us of the often extreme variation and
ﬂexibility of human experience.

Attempting to apply biomedical principles to the
classiﬁcation and treatment of psychological and emotional
distress, psychiatry it seems, relentlessly pursued a disease-
based model of psychological functioning without
the
requisite physiological and biochemical evidence that other
branches of medicine so fundamentally relied upon. In
doing so, psychiatry assumed an axiomatic stance on the
biological origins of psychological
abnormality and
committed itself to a ﬁxed and inﬂexible framework of
investigation. Atypical psychological functionning accord-
ing to the profession reﬂected disease, biological break-
down, and malfunction, and if the available evidence of the
day did not support
the underlying
biology, it was maintained, would reveal itself in time. The
absence of this evidence and the wide-scale prevalence of
abnormality in the general population has
seriously
undermined this classiﬁcation system but has also raised
important questions regarding the assumed boundaries
between sanity and insanity and between normality and
abnormality.

this assumption,

PART TWO
According to this brief history, normality’s ﬂexibility as a
psychological construct seemed to be attributable to a
number of factors. First, we crudely dissected humanity and
society based on impulsive and erroneous translations of
Darwinian theory. Second, we seemed to assimilate much
of what we believed to be socially atypical
into our
conceptions of abnormality. Criminality, severe intellectual
disability, homosexuality, poverty, and psychological and
emotional distress all seemed to be acceptable candidates.
Third,
from our earliest attempts to measure human
psychology following Darwin’s revelations about the origin
of species, it seems we sidestepped normality and instead
persisted in and prioritized the scientiﬁc investigation of
psychological disease
and compromised inheritance.
Moreover, we did this in spite of a continued lack of
evidence to support such a direction. Fourth, normality’s
ﬂexibility often seemed attributable to our
frequent
deviation from and neglect of the scientiﬁc method when
investigating behaviors deemed by society to be atypical.
Accepted scientiﬁc principles of systematic observation and
measurement and the formulation, testing, and modiﬁcation
of hypotheses were repeatedly relaxed and often violated in
our pursuit of ab/normality. Fifth, from the very beginning,
we seemed to achieve an unspoken, undocumented
consensus regarding what abnormality was, and more
importantly regarding who exhibited it. Abnormality,
however, was then, and still remains, socially determined.

460 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

sound,

achieved a

We never
evidence-based and
scientiﬁcally validated conceptualization of the construct.
Instead, when it came to our contemplation of ab/normality,
we seemed simply to remain satisﬁed with “a sense of
familiar recognition and false familiarity” (Frances, 2013).
This last reason is a particularly pertinent one. As a
species, we seem to simply “know” abnormality when we
encounter it, and we are quite happy to entertain proposals
of defective inheritance and broken neurology to account
for it. This false familiarity and resigned investment in
perceived ab/normality suggests that our perception and
detection of ab/normality may be a fundamental part of
who we are.

Ethnocentrism’s Normality

But then with me, the horrid doubt always arises whether
the convictions of man’s mind, which has been developed
from the mind of the lower animals, are of any value or at
all trustworthy.

Charles Darwin

Man’s mind, while certainly evolved from the lower ani-
mals, is still subservient to many of the same evolutionary
forces that maintain and enhance “ﬁtness” for all animals.
Investment in mate choice, kin support, and social rank, etc.,
much like other species, underpin much of what we do and
who we are as a species. However, our articulation of human
form and function has too rarely acknowledged these ubiq-
uitous and most primitive goals. Instead, we have elected to
articulate human form and function based on only recently
acquired cognition, that is, our perception and interpretation
of overt, observable traits, beliefs, and behaviors. We have
elected to package and classify human form and function
based on our evaluative perceptions of what is familiar or
different, common or uncommon, expected or unexpected.
For too long, we have neglected to realize that all that we
perceive, experience, and attempt
to classify is dictated
ultimately by these latent primitive drives.

Normality and abnormality seem intuitively recogniz-
able and understandable. Furthermore both constructs seem
woven into our daily perceptions,
judgements, and de-
cisions. In psychology, for example, everyday expositions
of normal make reference to that which is perceived to be
conventional, standard, ordinary, and regular. Importantly,
such expositions also make reference to that which is
common, familiar, and expected. Moreover, we seem to
have an innate preference for normal. However, as we have
seen, psychological expositions of normality have also
often been articulated through a language of abnormality.
That which is perceived to be aberrant, anomalous,
atypical, and bizarre is also likely to be that which is both
uncommon and unexpected, and we seem certainly to have

an aversion to this. Interestingly, this explicit language of
evaluative perception, couched in a context of expectation
and familiarity,
the concept of
ab/normality itself.

reveals much about

in turn,

From an ethnocentric perspective, our current formu-
lations and articulations of ab/normality resonate with
much of what evolutionary theorists have revealed to us
about human nature. That which enhances our ﬁtness as a
species largely dictates what we perceive and experience,
and these perceptions and experiences,
largely
dictate our value judgements and decisions (ie, what we
perceive and experience to be normal or abnormal). Donald
Hoffman’s (2012) fascinating visual perception experi-
ments provide a wonderful demonstration of the import of
ﬁtness in our perceptions of the world and our creation of
reality. Hoffman has eloquently shown that we as a species,
rather than perceiving reality, actually instead perceive
ﬁtness. Perceived ﬁtness therefore offers an alternative
vantage point from which to view these social conceptions
of normality and abnormality. However, rather than arbi-
trarily segregating one concept
this
approach distinguishes instead between the primitive un-
derlying adaptive context of human behavior and the
advanced and sophisticated neurological hardware that
permits humans to attempt to make sense of this behavior.
From this perspective, perceived normality and abnormality
are essentially manufactured cognitions that aid us in our
social navigation of our space and of one another. How-
ever, this neurological representation of the world often
also disguises and hides the rudiments of our basic drives,
to survive and reproduce.

from the other,

Normality’s Bias

Evolution cares little about logic.

Paul Gilbert

for

Neurological sophistication is that which truly distinguishes
our species from others. Speciﬁcally, the evolution of the
prefrontal cortex and its affordances
logic and
reasoning, which has permitted humans to differentiate
between conﬂicting thoughts, to determine the difference
between what is “good” and “bad,” better and best, same
and different, seems to have dramatically enhanced human
ﬁtness and has enhanced proﬁciency in pursuing a range of
biosocial goals (such as mating, establishing social status,
it seems,
and caring for offspring). The environment,
for humans, has favored logic. However,
importantly,
when it comes to the human capacity for contemplation,
for conceptualizing, and entertaining the existence of
ambiguous and confusing constructs such as normality, or
questioning the very nature of our own existence, evolution
cares little about logic. What evolution does favor is bias.

The Flexible Psychological Concept of Normality Chapter | 27 461

What we perceive and experience, how we perceive and
experience it, and why we perceive and experience what we
do is dictated by multiple, primitive, self-serving and group
biases. Gilbert (1998) notes that biases are an integral part
of our information processing systems that tune attention to
certain cues, calculate risks and beneﬁts to certain signals,
and select strategies. Importantly, Gilbert also reminds us
that these biases are not rooted in logic. While we may
experience preferential and aversive thoughts and emotions
in relation to our environment and those that inhabit it, we
need not necessarily have direct conscious access to the
source of these preferences and aversions. Our observations
of others’ behaviors therefore and our subsequent evalua-
tions are often dichotomized on the basis of familiarity and
unfamiliarity.

For example, in-group/out-group biases (the tendency
to distinguish self and others on the basis of group mem-
bership) have long been evidenced to show that once in-
dividuals have identiﬁed with a particular group they tend
to invest solely in that group and see it as superior to others
(van der Dennen, 1987). Evidence indicates that groups
may seek to dominate other groups, defend their own in-
terests, and attempt to limit subordinate groups’ access to
resources (Pratto et al., 1994). In the context of aberrant,
anomalous, atypical, and bizarre behavior, we as a species
have likely imposed our own in/out status and have acted/
reacted accordingly (ie, engaged or avoided). This ethno-
centric proﬁle of human interaction has often been
observed and evidenced in the context of societal reaction
to and (in)tolerance of abnormal psychological behavior
(ie, mental illness) (Watson et al., 2003; Ottati et al., 2005).
Interestingly, some authors argue that the importance of
markers that are both easily visible and difﬁcult to imitate
may mean that physical/biological characteristics are
preferred to cultural traits as a basis for group differentia-
tion (see van den Berghe, 1996; cited in Axelrod and
Hammond, 2003).

Therefore, it is possible that our early investment in a
disease-based model of abnormal psychology has facili-
tated group differentiation between the psychologically
well and the unwell simply by suggesting that unusual
psychological traits and characteristics are neuropatholog-
ical in nature. Notably, Read et al. found that individuals in
the general population who believed in a biological basis of
mental disorder held more stigmatizing views toward those
who possessed a psychiatric diagnosis. Contrary to the
assumptions on which most de-stigmatization programs
have been based, Reads ﬁndings demonstrated that
biological and genetic causal beliefs in the population were
related to negative attitudes,
including perceptions that
“mental patients” were dangerous, antisocial, and unpre-
dictable (Read and Harré, 2001; Read et al., 2006).
Multiple other biases (eg, biases in care provision and care
seeking, biases in intersexual and intrasexual attraction,

competitive biases, and reciprocal exchange biases) have
also been evidenced to underpin our perceptions, experi-
ences, and evaluations of what is normal and what is not.
From this perspective, it seems most likely that, as
humans, we were always destined to construct and
perceive ab/normality. Many evolutionary theorists have
contributed greatly to this ﬁeld and have offered insightful
and valuable reminders of the role of these biases in
evolved and evolving behavior and cognition. This work
offers a rich account of the landscape of perceived ab/
normality, and the many biases evidenced to underlie
human behavior and cognition provide a useful
lens
through which to inspect
the construct. While innate
ethnocentrism therefore may have accounted for our
receptiveness to and our investment in such an ambiguous
and illusive construct as ab/normality, one factor seems to
be responsible for sustaining confusion in the construct
more than any other, and that is our erroneous belief that
the adaptive goal of normal functioning is to be happy and
to be without suffering and distress (Gilbert, 1998; Bateson
et al., 2011).

Suffering, distress, and reduced quality of life need not
always indicate pathology or malfunction, and this fact
more than any challenges the very foundations of what we
have believed psychological normality and abnormality to
mean. An absence of detectable chemical or anatomical
dysfunction certainly suggests that human psychology that
appears abnormal and atypical must therefore be different
from the norm or the typical for some other reason.
Evolutionary psychology offered one possible explanation,
and it centered on our adaptive nature and our ability to
respond to our complex social environments.

Evolution’s Normality

We must, however, acknowledge, as it seems to me, that
man with all his noble qualities. still bears in his bodily
frame the indelible stamp of his lowly origin.

Charles Darwin

Evolutionary explanations and theories have been proposed
for many alleged “pathologies” of the mind including mood
disorders (see Nettle and Bateson, 2012), psychosis (see
Kelleher et al., 2010), social anxiety (see Gilbert, 2001) and
phobias and anxiety (see Bateson et al., 2011). What many
of these theories offer is an alternative explanation of what
we perceive abnormality to be. Rather than viewing atyp-
ical psychological functioning and behavior as a signal of
probable brain pathology, evolutionary models instead
consider the evolved, adaptive responsivity of behavior to
challenging and ever changing environmental demands.
Abnormality from this perspective, importantly, becomes
anchored to and silhouetted by an evolutionary context, and

462 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

as a consequence, many behaviors that might once have
seemed unusual, strange, or aberrant instead appear resil-
ient and adaptive and, given the context,
impressively
normal.

A substantial and growing literature now informs our
understanding of the potential adaptive nature of many
behaviors and cognitions long believed to reﬂect disease,
nonadaptive error, or malfunction. While for decades dis-
orders such as depression, anxiety, and psychosis have each
remained the focus of distinct and often separate lines of
investigation (from, eg, neurobiological, genetic, and psy-
chosocial research perspectives), each has also been care-
fully considered from an evolutionary perspective. The
emerging evidence from these evolutionary lines of inves-
tigation suggests that normality’s ﬂexibility actually often
more accurately reﬂects our adaptability and that what we
often perceive to be abnormal is actually behavior that re-
ﬂects, for example, energy/resource conservation, social
competition, attachment, avoidance of social
risk and
exclusion,
submission, vigilance and
hypervigilance, isolation, and creativity.

social defense,

The Normality of Resource Conservation

A number of esteemed authors have eloquently described
depression and anxiety from the perspective of energy and
resource conservation. Seligman (1975), for instance, pro-
posed an animal model of how learned helplessness may
manifest itself as depression and anxiety. According to
Seligman, “Learned helplessness is a behavior in which an
organism forced to endure aversive, painful or otherwise
unpleasant stimuli, becomes unable or unwilling to avoid
subsequent encounters with those stimuli, even if they are
escapable. Presumably, the organism has learned that it
cannot control the situation and therefore does not take
action to avoid the negative stimulus. Learned helplessness
theory [therefore] is the view that clinical depression and
related mental
from a perceived
absence of control over the outcome of a situation. Or-
ganisms [therefore] that have been ineffective and less
sensitive in determining the consequences of their behavior
are deﬁned as having acquired learned helplessness”
(Carlson, 2010, p. 409).

illnesses may result

Focusing speciﬁcally on depression, Leahy (1997)
proposed an investment model of depressive resistance
[where] “depressed individuals believe they have few pre-
sent and future resources and low utility of gain in a market
that is volatile and downward sloping. Depression [from
this perspective] is viewed as a strategy to avoid further
loss, resulting in active attempts to resist change as evi-
denced in motivated negative cognition. Depressives
[therefore according to Leahy] take a risk-averse strategy to
minimize loss, utilizing high stop-loss criteria and rejecting
optimism as a high exposure position. Unlike optimistic

individuals who believe that there are many replications
over a long duration to obtain gain, depressives [according
to Leahy] have low diversiﬁcation, high information
demands, and utilize hedging, waiting, hiding and other
tactics to minimize risk” (p. 3).

Also considering depression from a point of resource
conservation, Nesse (2000) noted that “many functions
have been suggested for low mood or depression, including
communicating a need for help, signalling yielding in a
hierarchy conﬂict, fostering disengagement from commit-
ments to unreachable goals, and regulating patterns of
investment. A more comprehensive evolutionary explana-
tion [according to Nesse] may emerge from attempts to
identify how the characteristics of low mood increase an
organism’s ability to cope with the adaptive challenges
characteristic of unpropitious situations in which effort to
pursue a major goal will likely result in danger, loss, bodily
damage, or wasted effort. In such situations, pessimism and
lack of motivation may give a ﬁtness advantage by
inhibiting certain actions, especially futile or dangerous
challenges to dominant ﬁgures, actions in the absence of a
crucial resource or a viable plan, efforts that would damage
the body, and actions that would disrupt a currently
unsatisfactory major life enterprise when it might recover
or the alternative is likely to be even worse” (p. 14).

The Normality of Skewed Fitness

Nesse also considered the evolutionary status of psychosis
and suggested that “strong recent selection for social
cognition may well explain the persistence of genes that
predispose to schizophrenia. [From this perspective] the
speciﬁc mechanism responsible may be a skewed ﬁtness
function in which selection pushes the mean for advanta-
geous mental
traits perilously close to a “ﬁtness cliff”
where the system fails catastrophically in some individu-
als. strong tendencies to use metarepresentation and ToM
[Theory of Mind] increase the ability to predict other
people’s behaviors, how they might be inﬂuenced, and how
they might be trying to manipulate you. [According to
Nesse] it is only one step further, over the cliff’s edge of
psychotic cognition, as it were, to ﬁnding secret meanings
and evidence for conspiracies in other people’s most casual
gestures, to believing idiosyncratic grand theories and re-
ligions, and to thinking that others are controlling your
thoughts” (2004; p. 862).

The Normality of Social Competition

John Price was the ﬁrst to promote the idea of social
competition to account for many of the expressed forms of
abnormal psychological
In a 1967 paper
entitled “The dominance hierarchy and the evolution of
mental illness,” Price noted that “In our evolution, we
passed through a stage in which small social groups were

functioning.

The Flexible Psychological Concept of Normality Chapter | 27 463

regulated by strict dominance hierarchy. For their sta-
bility, hierarchies require certain behavior patterns from
their members: irritability toward inferiors, anxiety toward
superiors, elation on going up the hierarchy and depression
on going down. Because of the great survival advantage to
the group which a well-functioning hierarchy provides,
these behavior patterns have been strongly selected for.
Equilibrium was reached when the advantage they pro-
vided was balanced by the disadvantage of excess of such
behavior. These excesses are manifested as mental illness;
excesses of stable dominance hierarchy behavior as the
chronic illnesses such as anxiety neurosis, schizophrenia,
and aggressive personality; and excesses of the behavior
associated with changes in the hierarchy as the phasic
mental illnesses such as mania and depressive psychosis.
The main prediction from [Price’s] hypothesis is that
factors which increase or reduce dominance hierarchy
behavior will have malignant or beneﬁcial effects on
mental illness” (p. 243).

The Normality of Attachment

Attachment was also proposed as an evolutionary basis
upon which to consider abnormal psychological func-
tioning. Allen and Badcock (2006) noted that “some
[researchers], for example, have suggested that depression
inhibits exploratory or risk-laden activities in the absence of
secure attachment bonds, and instigates appeasement-
related behaviors designed to maintain relationships
(Gilbert, 2014). Others have argued that the depressive
response serves as a distress call (Frijda, 1994), provokes a
search for the lost relationship (Averill, 1968), or motivates
the sufferer to avoid further deterioration of preexisting
bonds (Ingram et al., 1998)” (p. 817).

The Normality of Social Risk and Fear
of Exclusion

Extremes in social risk assessment and fear of social
exclusion have also been proposed to account for abnormal
psychological functioning. Gilbert (2001) noted that “If
human social anxiety is not predominately about the fear of
physical injury or attack, as it is in other animals, then, to
understand human social anxiety (ie, fear of evaluation), it
is necessary to consider why certain types of relationships
are so important. Why do humans need to court the good
feelings of others and fear not doing so? And why, when
people wish to appear attractive to others (eg, to make
friends, date a desired sexual partner, or give a good
presentation), do some people become so overwhelmed
with anxiety that they behave submissively and fearfully
(which can be seen as unattractive) or are avoidant?” In his
article entitled “Evolution and social anxiety: The role of
attraction,
social competition, and social hierarchies”
(p. 723). Gilbert suggested “that humans have evolved to

in social

compete for attractiveness to make good impressions
because these are related to eliciting important social re-
sources and investments from others. These, in turn, have
been linked to inclusive ﬁtness and have physiological
regulating effects. Being allocated a low social rank or
[being] ostracized carries many negative consequences for
controlling social resources and physiological regulation.
Social anxiety, such as shame, [according to Gilbert] can be
adaptive to the extent that it helps people to ‘stay on track’
with what is socially acceptable and what is not and could
result
sanction and exclusion. However,
dysfunctional social anxiety is the result of activation of
basic defensive mechanisms (and modules for) for threat
detection and response (eg, inhibition, eye-gaze avoidance,
ﬂight, or submission) that can be recruited rapidly for
dealing with immediate threats, override conscious wishes,
and interfere with being seen as a ‘useful associate’.”
Gilbert has also suggested that “socially anxious people are
highly attuned to the competitive dynamics of trying to
elicit approval and investment from others but that they
perceive themselves to start from an inferior (ie, low-rank)
position and, because of this, activate submissive de-
fensives when attempting to present themselves as conﬁ-
dent, able, and attractive to others. These submissive
defences (which evolved to inhibit animals in low-rank
positions from making claims on resources or up-rank
bids) interfere with conﬁdent performance, leading to a
failure cycle. If social anxiety (and disorders associated
with it) are increasing in the modern age, one reason may
be invigorated competition for social prestige, attractive-
ness, and resources” (p. 723).

Similarly, according to Bateson et al. (2011), “the
function of the human anxiety response, and homologues in
other species, is to prepare the individual to detect and deal
with threats.” Bateson also noted importantly that “a
mechanism is working functionally in the evolutionary
sense if it has a level of responsiveness that will, averaged
across all individuals and the environments in which they
live, maximize survival and reproduction. This is a very
different criterion from those used to demarcate clinical
boundaries in psychiatry, which are mainly based on level
of suffering and quality of life. If a mechanism is producing
distress or impairing quality of life, this does not neces-
sarily mean that it is malfunctioning in the evolutionary
sense. For many adaptations, such as the pain system, it is
part of their design that they cause subjectively unpleasant
states, and individuals’ viability would be reduced if they
did not do so under the appropriate circumstances. Thus,
while undoubtedly some cases of anxiety disorder are
pathological, in that the control mechanisms regulating the
anxiety response have become dysregulated,
is also
possible that some cases represent appropriate adaptive
responses to the situation in which the person currently
ﬁnds him or herself” (p. 708).

it

464 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

Normality?

There are no norms. All people are exceptions to a rule that
doesn’t exist.

Fernando Pessoa

Whatever the concept of normality may be, in psychology
it is certainly a questionable concept with a somewhat
questionable history. While it may be difﬁcult to concep-
tualize or to ﬁnd or agree on an acceptable or accurate
deﬁnition, we can acknowledge with some degree of con-
ﬁdence that it is a concept that has often revealed our in-
dividual and collective arrogance and ignorance, and often
shamefully our most prejudicial nature as a species. To
acknowledge that it is a ﬂexible concept is to acknowledge,
in part, that it has been a fragile, unstable, and illusive one.
Speciﬁcally, its perceived ﬂexibility likely reveals much
about our inability as a species to objectively model and
measure our own behavior and to recognize our own biases
in our attempts to do so. Its perceived ﬂexibility is also
likely to be a consequence of our often exaggerated, eval-
uative, context-blind interpretations of crude statistical
means, medians, and modes of normally distributed popu-
lation data. Importantly, normality’s ﬂexibility likely also
reveals much about its evolution as a concept, from its
dubious beginnings as the moral and ethical standard of a
19th-century eugenics-based class system to its multiple,
more sanitized legal, educational, and psychiatric in-
carnations as the demarcation between what is socially
acceptable and what is not.

Paradoxically, normality’s ﬂexibility as a psychological
concept is probably most likely to be a consequence of its
inherent tautological status, that is, our most accessible
deﬁnition of the concept usually requires an invocation of
an equally beguiling and perplexing concept: abnormality.
Most notably, psychological expositions of normality, often
articulated through a language of abnormality, have resul-
ted in complex taxonomies of behavioral and cognitive
pathology. These taxonomies have packaged human form
and function in an attempt
to distinguish healthy and
adaptive behaviors and cognitions from those that are
deemed unhealthy, maladaptive, and diseased. However,
this packaging has been based on very broad assumptions
that detectable biological and genetic markers ultimately
underlie abnormal behavior and that said abnormality is
biologically distinct from whatever remains. More often
than not, however, this has rarely been shown to be the
case, and in the absence of the necessary physiological and
genetic evidence, we have been left in somewhat of a
quandary. If much of that which we perceive and judge to
be psychologically abnormal is chemically, anatomically,
and genetically indistinct from that which we perceive and
judge to be normal, then upon what do we attribute our
discrimination?

In actuality, as a psychological construct “normality”
(or rather our perception of it) probably most accurately and
most simply reﬂects innate ethnocentrism. Rather than
anything to do with stereotypically assumed variations in
wellbeing or social conformity, much of what we believe to
be normal, from a psychological perspective, is most likely
an illusion, a by-product of our adaptive biases as a highly
social species to perceive and to seek out difference.
Perceived normality from this perspective is the most likely
representation of reality for members of a species that
possess the neural capacity to consider their own experi-
ences/existence. Biases in care provision and care seeking,
biases in intersexual and intrasexual attraction, competitive
biases, reciprocal exchange biases, and in-group/out-group
biases both maintain and enhance ﬁtness but also, impor-
tantly, dictate functioning and frame cognition and
emotion.

Our perception and recognition of what we perceive and
believe to be normal therefore is informed directly by our
reaction and attraction to what is safe, ﬁt, and beneﬁcial and
our avoidance of what is harmful, dangerous, or unfamiliar.
Our re-articulation of these perceptions as judgements of
normality or abnormality, moreover, may simply reveal
innate and extremely primitive preferences and biases
communicated in a context of social norms and cultural
beliefs. Importantly, therefore, our perception and recog-
nition of what we perceive and believe to be psycholog-
ically abnormal too can be plausibly understood in this
context of evolved and evolving bias.

REFERENCES

Allen, N.B., Badcock, P.B., 2006. Darwinian models of depression: a
review of evolutionary accounts of mood and mood disorders. Prog-
ress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry 30 (5),
815e826.

American Psychiatric Association (APA), 1987. Diagnostic and Statistical

Manual, third ed. revised. APA, Washington, DC.

Andrews, G., Henderson, S., Hall, W., 2001. Prevalence, comorbidity,
disability and service utilisation overview of the Australian National
Mental Health Survey. The British Journal of Psychiatry 178 (2),
145e153.

Averill, J.R., 1968. Grief:

its nature and signiﬁcance. Psychological

Bulletin 70 (6), 721.

Axelrod, R., Hammond, R.A., April 2003. The evolution of ethnocentric

behavior. In: Midwest Political Science Convention, pp. 2e30.

Bannister, D., 1968. The logical requirements of research into schizo-
phrenia. The British Journal of Psychiatry 114 (507), 181e188 cited
in Read, J., Mosher, L.R., Bentall, R.P., 2004. Models of madness:
psychological, social and biological approaches to schizophrenia.
Psychology Press.

Bartlett, S.J., 2011. Normality Does Not Equal Mental Health: The Need to
Look Elsewhere for Good Standards of Good Psychological Health.
Praeger, California.

Bateson, M., Brilot, B., Nettle, D., 2011. Anxiety: an evolutionary

approach. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry 56 (12), 707e714.

The Flexible Psychological Concept of Normality Chapter | 27 465

Beck, A., 1962. Reliability of psychiatric diagnoses. American Journal of

Psychiatry 119, 351e357.

Bentall, R.P., 2009. Doctoring the Mind: Why Psychiatric Treatments Fail.

Penguin Books, London.

Hasin, D., Kilcoyne, B., 2012. Comorbidity of psychiatric and substance
use disorders in the United States: current issues and ﬁndings from the
NESARC. Current Opinion in Psychiatry 25, 165e171.

Hoffman, D.D., 2012. The construction of visual reality. In: Hallucina-

Carlson, N.R., 2010. Psychology the Science of Behaviour. Pearson,

tions. Springer, New York, pp. 7e15.

Canada.

Caspi, A., Houts, R.M., Belsky, D.W., Goldman-Mellor, S.J.,
Harrington, H., Israel, S., Mofﬁtt, T.E., 2014. The p factor one general
psychopathology factor in the structure of psychiatric disorders?
Clinical Psychological Science 2 (2), 119e137.

Cooper, J.E., 1972. Psychiatric Diagnosis in New York and London: A

Comparative Study of Mental Hospital Admissions.

Copeland, J.R.M., Cooper, J.E., Kendell, R.E., Gourlay, A.J., 1971. Dif-
ferences in usage of diagnostic labels amongst psychiatrists in the
British Isles. The British Journal of Psychiatry 118 (547), 629e640
cited in Read, J., Mosher, L.R., Bentall, R.P., 2004. Models of
madness: psychological, social and biological approaches to schizo-
phrenia. Psychology Press.

Copeland, W., Shanahan, L., Costello, E.J., Angold, A., 2011. Cumulative
prevalence of psychiatric disorders by young adulthood: a prospective
cohort analysis from the Great Smoky Mountains Study. Journal of the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 50, 252e261.
Costa Jr., P.T., McCrae, R.R., 1992. Revised NEO Personality Inventory
(NEO-PI-R) and NEO Five-factor Inventory (NEO-FFI) Manual.
Psychological Assessment Resources, Odessa, FL.

Davenport, C.B., 1911. Heredity in Relation to Eugenics, vol. 5. H. Holt
cited in Whitaker, R., 2002. Mad in America: Bad Science, Bad
Medicine, and the Enduring Mistreatment of the Mentally Ill. Basic
Books.

Eysenck, H.J., Eysenck, S.B.G., 1976. Psychoticism as a Dimension of

Personality. Hodder & Stoughton, London.

Fleming, S., Shevlin, M., Murphy, J., Joseph, S., 2014. Psychosis within
dimensional and categorical models of mental illness. Psychosis 6 (1),
4e15.

Ingram, R.E., Miranda, J., Segal, Z.V., 1998. Cognitive Vulnerability to

Depression. Guilford Press.

Jacobi, F., Wittchen, H.U., Hölting, C., Höﬂer, M., Pﬁster, H., Müller, N.,
Lieb, R., 2004. Prevalence, co-morbidity and correlates of mental
disorders in the general population: results from the German Health
Interview and Examination Survey (GHS). Psychological Medicine
34 (04), 597e611.

Kelleher, I., Jenner, J.A., Cannon, M., 2010. Psychotic symptoms in the
general populationean evolutionary perspective. The British Journal
of Psychiatry 197 (3), 167e169.

Kendler, K.S., Prescott, C.A., Myers, J., Neale, M.C., 2003. The structure
of genetic and environmental risk factors for common psychiatric and
substance use disorders in men and women. Archives of General
Psychiatry 60, 929e937.

Kotov, R., Chang, S.W., Fochtmann, L.J., Mojtabai, R., Carlson, G.A.,
Sedler, M.J., Bromet, E.J., 2010. Schizophrenia in the internalizing-
externalizing framework: a third dimension? Schizophrenia Bulletin
37, 1168e1178.

Kotov, R., Ruggero, C.J., Krueger, R.F., Watson, D., Yuan, Q.,
Zimmerman, M., 2011. New dimensions in the quantitative classiﬁ-
cation of mental
illness. Archives of General Psychiatry 68,
1003e1011.

Krueger, R.F., Markon, K.E., 2011. A dimensional-spectrum model of
psychopathology: progress and opportunities. Archives of General
Psychiatry 68, 10e11.

Krueger, R.F., Caspi, A., Mofﬁtt, T.E., Silva, P.A., 1998. The structure
and stability of common mental disorders (DSM III-R): a longitudinal-
epidemiological
Journal of Abnormal Psychology 107,
216e227.

study.

Forbush, K.T., Watson, D., 2013. The structure of common and uncom-

Leahy, R.L., 1997. Depression and resistance: an investment model of

mon mental disorders. Psychological Medicine 43, 97e108.

decision-making. Behaviour Therapist 20, 3e5.

Frances, A., 2013. Saving Normal: An Insider’s Revolt against Out-of-
control Psychiatric Diagnosis, DSM-5, Big Pharma, and the Medi-
calization of Ordinary Life. Harper Collins Publishers.

Frijda, N.H., 1994. Emotions are functional, most of the time. The Nature

of Emotions: Fundamental Questions 197e202.

Galton, F., 1869. Hereditary Genius. Macmillan and Company.
Gilbert, P., 1998. Evolutionary psychopathology: why isn’t

the mind
designed better than it is? British Journal of Medical Psychology 71
(4), 353e373.

Gilbert, P., 2001. Evolution and social anxiety: the role of attraction, social
competition, and social hierarchies. Psychiatric Clinics of North
America 24 (4), 723e751.

Gilbert, P., 2014. Depression: The Evolution of Powerlessness. Psychol-

ogy Press.

Goffman, E., 1968. Asylums: Essays on the Social Situation of Mental

Patients and Other Inmates. Aldine Transaction.

Grob, G.N., 1991. Origins of DSM-I: a study in appearance and reality.
American Journal of Psychiatry 148 (4), 421e431 cited in Whitaker, R.,
Cosgrove, L., 2015. Psychiatry under the inﬂuence: Institutional cor-
ruption, social injury, and prescriptions for reform. Palgrave MacMillan.
Harvard School of Medicine, 2005. National Comorbidity Survey-

Mofﬁtt, T.E., Arseneault, L., Belsky, D., Dickson, N., Hancox, R.J.,
Harrington, H., Caspi, A., 2011. A gradient of childhood self-control
predicts health, wealth, and public safety. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 108,
2693e2698.

Moller, L.R., Sorensen, M.J., Thomsen, P.H., 2007. ICD-10 classiﬁcation
in Danish child and adolescent psychiatry e have diagnoses changed
after the introduction of ICD-10? Nordic Journal of Psychiatry 61,
71e78.

Munk-Jorgensen, P., Najarraq, L.M., Bertelsen, A., 2010. Use of ICD-10
in

hospital-based

psychiatric

diagnoses
2001e2007. World Psychiatry 9, 183e184.

in Danish

services

Murphy, J., Shevlin, M., Adamson, G., Houston, J., 2009. Positive psy-
chosis symptom structure in the general population: assessing dimen-
sional consistency and continuity from ‘pathology’ to ‘normality’.
Psychosis: Psychological, Social and Integrative Approaches 2,
199e209.

Murphy, J., Shevlin, M., Houston, J., Adamson, G., 2012. A population
based analysis of subclinical psychosis and help-seeking behavior.
Schizophrenia Bulletin 38, 360e367.

Nesse, R.M., 2000. Is depression an adaptation? Archives of General

Replication. http://www.hcp.med.harvard.edu/ncs/.

Psychiatry 57 (1), 14e20.

466 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

Nesse, R.M., 2004. Cliff-edged ﬁtness functions and the persistence of

schizophrenia. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 27 (06), 862e863.

Nettle, D., Bateson, M., 2012. The evolutionary origins of mood and its

disorders. Current Biology 22 (17), R712eR721.

Newman, D.L., Mofﬁtt, T.E., Caspi, A., Magdol, L., Silva, P.A.,
Stanton, W.R., 1996. Psychiatric disorder in a birth cohort of young
adults: prevalence, comorbidity, clinical signiﬁcance, and new case
incidence from ages 11 to 21. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology 64 (3), 552.

221e261 cited in Whitaker, R., 2002. Mad in America: Bad Science,
Bad Medicine, and the Enduring Mistreatment of the Mentally Ill.
Basic Books.

Rosenhan, D.L., 1973. On being sane in insane places. Science 179

(4070), 250e258.

Seligman, M.E., 1975. Helplessness: On Depression, Development, and

Death. WH Freeman/Times Books/Henry Holt & Co.

Szasz, T.S., 1960. The myth of mental illness. American Psychologist 15

(2), 113.

Ottati, V., Bodenhausen, G.V., Newman, L.S., 2005. Social psychological
models of mental illness stigma. On the Stigma of Mental Illness:
Practical Strategies for Research and Social Change 99e128.

Uher, R., Rutter, M., 2012. Basing psychiatric classiﬁcation on scientiﬁc
foundation: problems and prospects. International Review of Psychi-
atry 24 (6), 591e605.

Pratto, F., Sidanius, J., Stallworth, L.M., Malle, B.F., 1994. Social
dominance orientation: a personality variable predicting social and
political attitudes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 67
(4), 741.

Price, J., 1967. The dominance hierarchy and the evolution of mental

illness. The Lancet 290 (7509), 243e246.

Read, J., Harré, N., 2001. The role of biological and genetic causal beliefs
in the stigmatisation of ‘mental patients’. Journal of Mental Health
10 (2), 223e235.

van den Berghe, P., 1996. Does race matter? In: Hutchinson, J.,

Smith, A.D. (Eds.), Ethnicity. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

van den Dennen, J., 1987. Ethnocentrism and in-group/out-group differ-

entiation. The Sociobiology of Ethnocentrism (London), p. 1e47.

van Os,

J., Linscott, R.J., Myin-Germeys,

I., Delespaul, P.,
Krabbendam, L., 2009. A systematic review and meta-analysis of the
psychosis continuum: evidence for a psychosis proneness-persistence-
impairment model of psychotic disorder. Psychological Medicine 39,
179e195.

Read, J., Mosher, L.R., Bentall, R.P., 2004. Models of Madness: Psy-
chological, Social and Biological Approaches to Schizophrenia. Psy-
chology Press.

Watson, A.C., Ottati, V., Corrigan, P., 2003. From whence comes mental
illness stigma? International Journal of Social Psychiatry 49 (2),
142e157.

Read, J., Haslam, N., Sayce, L., Davies, E., 2006. Prejudice and schizophrenia:
a review of the ‘mental illness is an illness like any other’approach. Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica 114 (5), 303e318.

Whitaker, R., Cosgrove, L., 2015. Psychiatry Under the Inﬂuence: Insti-
tutional Corruption, Social Injury, and Prescriptions for Reform.
Palgrave MacMillan.

Rosanoff, A.J., Orr, F.I., 1911. A study of heredity in insanity in the light
of the Mendelian theory. American Journal of Psychiatry 68 (2),

Whitaker, R., 2002. Mad in America: Bad Science, Bad Medicine, and the

Enduring Mistreatment of the Mentally Ill. Basic Books.

Chapter 28

Diversity and Hierarchy in the Evolution
of Mental Mechanisms

H.C. Barrett
UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States

INTRODUCTION

Readers of a volume about human nature might be sur-
prised to discover not only that there remains enormous
controversy over what human nature is, but also about
whether it even exists. Well into the 21st century, philos-
ophers, biologists, anthropologists, and others continue to
call into question the very idea that there is something,
anything,
that makes humans human (Buller, 2005;
Downes and Machery, 2013; Ehrlich, 2000; Hull, 1986;
Ingold, 2006; Richerson, 2015). Certainly, the concept it-
self is ancient, well predating modern science, and therefore
perhaps it is time for it to be retired. Is there anything about
the concept of human nature worth keeping?

On the one hand, there is much about folk concepts of
human nature that is probably wrong. Essentialist notions
of human nature, for example, hold that the identity of
members of a species is tied to some invariant, unchanging,
underlying “essence.” As biologists, psychologists, and
philosophers have pointed out, essentialist thinking might
be a useful heuristic for navigating a world of natural kinds,
but it cannot be scientiﬁcally correct (Hull, 1986; Mayr,
1963). That is, while it might be useful for us to think of a
sparrow as being a variant of the same underlying type as
other sparrows, there is not in fact an underlying, universal,
and unchangeable essence that makes a sparrow a sparrow
(Barrett, 2001; Gelman, 2003). Even particular DNA se-
quences will not do: many members of a given species,
such as humans, carry rare mutations in genes that most of
the species carry, and yet they are still human. Moreover,
the genome changes over time, with some regions changing
rapidly because of arms races against diseases, the spread
of agriculture, and other environmental changes; surely this
does not mean that we are now a different species than we
were a few thousand years ago.

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00028-4
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

On the other hand, discarding altogether the idea of a
human nature of some kind might be going too far. After
all, even biologists, while aware of
the problems of
essentialism, are able to refer to biological species and other
taxa typically without undue difﬁculty. A primatologist, for
example, might describe himself as a specialist in chim-
panzee behavior without excessive anxiety about whether
or not chimpanzee behavior, as an object of study, exists.
Similarly, it seems we should have a notion of human na-
ture that recognizes that people can study human behavior,
the human brain, and the human capacity for culture
without those terms being semantically empty.

Any scientiﬁc notion of human nature, however, must
be biologically correct. To the extent that folk concepts of
human nature are ﬂawed, we should explicitly avoid them
in constructing a scientiﬁcally valid notion of human na-
ture. Moreover, any notion of human nature that we wish to
endorse scientiﬁcally must grapple with the messy com-
plexities of those biological clouds of organisms we call
species. In particular, it must confront the facts of descent
with modiﬁcation, which leads to distributions of traits
within and across taxa that defy simple ideas of each spe-
cies having a unique, sui generis nature.

Here, I will focus in particular on the human brain and
behavior, and I will explore what careful biological
thinking might tell us about human psychological nature.
What I will suggest is that the human brain and mind are
likely to be a complex evolutionary mosaic of parts and
processes with diverse evolutionary histories and relation-
ships between them. Recent human evolution has been, of
course, a process of genetic and developmental tinkering
with the brain that was present in the chimpanzee-human
common ancestor. This implies, as is the case for all phe-
notypes, that the human brain is a complex mix of ancient

467

468 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

and derived traits without a single simple linear pathway
describing their evolution. Recognizing the implications of
this will help us to better understand human nature, what-
ever it might ultimately prove to be.

EVO-DEVO AND DESCENT WITH
MODIFICATION IN THE BRAIN

When the high degree of genetic similarity between
humans and chimpanzees was ﬁrst revealed, many com-
mentators assumed that the implications for human nature
were stark. If human nature is equated with uniquely
derived characteristics in the human lineage,
then the
massive genetic overlap between humans and chimpanzees
suggests that human nature must be tiny indeed. For brain
architecture, the two main choices appeared to be either that
the main innovation in human brains was an increase in
sizedan ape brain inﬂateddor that there were a small
number of brain mechanisms, which, when added to an ape
brain, produced human behavior: mechanisms of language,
for example, or cultural learning.

A more careful look at the ways in which evolutionary
change occurs in complex organisms suggests that these are
not the only two options. Research in evolutionary devel-
opmental biology (evo-devo) suggests that much evolu-
tionary change occurs
through modiﬁcation in the
regulatory systems that build developing organisms, lead-
ing to evolutionary changes in phenotypes and associated
functional properties that can be both disproportional to the
overall amount of genetic changes and mosaic in nature,
with different types and amount of change for different
aspects of the phenotype (Carroll et al., 2005). Comparative
work on brain development, architecture, and genomics
suggests that this nonlinear, mosaic picture of brain evo-
lution applies within the brain as well. Mammalian brains
evolve, as do the rest of our bodies, through descent with
modiﬁcation of the brains of our ancestors. However, the
genetic regulatory systems that control brain development
are
complex, orchestrating cascades of ﬁne-grained
morphological differentiation across space and time as the
brain develops, in interaction with internal crosstalk and
external inputs (Krubitzer and Huffman, 2000). Tweaking
of the developmental knobs of these systems can allow, in
principle,
for many more ﬁnely grained evolutionary
changes than either the “inﬂated ape brain” or the “ape
brain plus extra modules” views imply. And there is
empirical evidence that evolutionary changes in the human
brain have indeed occurred in a mosaic fashion, as has the
evolution of mammalian brains more generally (Barton and
Harvey, 2000; Preuss, 2004; Striedter, 2005).

The move to an evolutionary developmental view of
human brain evolution has implications for how we think of
the organization and evolved design of human psychology,

as well as for how we think about human nature. Most
basically, because the brain develops during ontogeny via a
process of serial differentiation and specialization of tis-
sues, evolutionary change occurs via modiﬁcation of these
developmental processes. This means that both brain
development and brain evolution are likely to show a hi-
erarchical pattern in which brain structures are related to
each other through processes of descent with modiﬁcation.
The brain is a mix of ancient and newer structures, with the
new derived from, and drawing on the functional properties
of, the old. In structures such as the cortexdof particular
facultiesd
interest
relationships of homology from common ancestral struc-
there are likely to be widely shared
tures suggest
properties
sub-
specializations nested within these shared properties. As
elsewhere in biology, “new” brain functions are thus likely
to evolve from older ones via descent with modiﬁcation,
and thus to share large amounts of basic functional orga-
nization, modiﬁed either phylogenetically or ontogeneti-
cally, or both, for speciﬁc tasks, some of which may be
novel in humans (eg, language, cooperation, tool use). This
hierarchical view of brain organization diverges sharply
from older, classically “modular” views of brain architec-
ture, and it paints a different picture of human nature as
well (Barrett, 2012).

organization, with

functional

that

for

so-called “higher”

cognitive

of

CLASSICAL VERSUS HIERARCHICAL
MODULARITY

The classical view of modularity, associated most closely
with philosopher Jerry Fodor’s book, The Modularity of
Mind (1983), divides brain mechanisms into two types,
modular and non-modular (or “peripheral” and “central,” in
Fodor’s formulation). Cognitive modules, in this view, are
narrow, isolated, reﬂex-like information processors, char-
acterized by a checklist of
features including domain
speciﬁcity, informational encapsulation, obligatory ﬁring,
fast speed, shallow outputs, limited accessibility, charac-
teristic ontogeny, and ﬁxed neural architecture. In contrast,
non-modular processes were deemed by Fodor to be open-
ended, general-purpose, and lacking internal structure.

From a biological point of view, however, there is no
reason to suppose either that the brain consists of a strict
two-layer architecture, nor that functional “modules” need
consist only of reﬂex-like peripheral systems in perception
and motor control.
Instead, mounting evidence from
neuroscience supports a model of complex cognition as
resulting from the orchestration of complex assemblages of
networks that are modular at multiple levels, with smaller
modular units nested within larger ones (Meunier et al.,
2009). Functionally specialized cognition,
in this view,
emerges from coordinated division of labor between many

specialized processes, but these processes are neither fully
isolated from each other, as the classical view would have
it, nor simply automatic reﬂexes that operate identically
independently of context.

Evolutionarily, the neocortex of mammals appears to
have evolved through successive expansion and func-
tional sub-differentiation from the smaller and simpler
cortex of ancestral reptiles (Kaas, 2006). This suggests
that different mechanisms and regions of the human cor-
tex are likely to exhibit hierarchical patterns of properties,
with many basic developmental and computational prop-
erties shared across the entire cortex, but with differences
in ﬁne-tuning in different cortical areas as a result of both
descent with modiﬁcation as well as differences in inputs
to these regions during development (Barrett, 2012). It
makes sense that at one level the cortex acts as a unit, in
that complex cognitive processes entail patterns of acti-
vation across the cortex in combination with subcortical
structures, but
large-scale activity reﬂects
orchestrated division of labor between many functionally
differentiated subprocesses.
large-scale
cognitive activity in the brain is hierarchical in nature
(Bullmore and Sporns, 2009).

In this sense,

that

this

What “diversity” means in this context is that the brain
is composed of many types of mechanisms, with diverse
functions and evolutionary histories. What “hierarchy”
means is that many of these mechanisms are likely related
to each other through patterns of descent with modiﬁcation,
that is, homology. As brains increased in size in primates,
apes, and the hominin lineages, expansion of the brain led
to increasing complexity through several routes, including
sub-differentiation of cortical regions, partial reorganization
of existing brain structures and, perhaps, the evolution of
some genuinely new structures and connections (Allman,
2000; Kaas, 2000; Preuss, 2004; Striedter, 2005). However,
because newer mechanisms evolve from older ones, even
derived structures in human brains inherit much of the
functional architecture of older structures, modiﬁed for new
purposes, and they can participate in processing cascades in
which newer and older mechanisms interact
through
computational division of labor.

Central to the hierarchical view of human brain archi-
tecture is the tension, present everywhere in evolution,
between what is old and what is new. At some level, all
features of the brain derive from the ancient nervous sys-
tems of our vertebrate ancestors and so, if one goes far back
enough, all structures and mechanisms in the brain are
homologous at a deep level, and brain mechanisms across
vertebrates exhibit
relationships of homology as well
(though untangling the exact nature of these homologies is
not trivial; Striedter and Northcutt, 1991). However, if one
is interested in uniquely derived features of the human
lineagedautapomorphiesdthen one must examine not just
relationships of homology, or descent, but patterns of

Diversity and Hierarchy Chapter | 28 469

modiﬁcation, or derived features, as well. Everything new
is a modiﬁed version of something old. Hence, while
humans undoubtedly possess many unique psychological
capacities, such as spoken language, large-scale coopera-
tion, and sophisticated skills of cultural transmission, every
one of these is based on some combination of brain
mechanisms that are modiﬁcations of older mechanisms
present in other primates.

With the advent of methods for ﬁne-grained mapping of
the genome and patterns of gene expression during devel-
opment, we are beginning to get a glimpse of the modiﬁ-
cations in genes and genetic regulatory elements that have
produced the modiﬁed homologies we see in the human
brain, and that support uniquely human aspects of cognition
and behavior (Cáceres et al., 2003; Enard et al., 2002). We
are still only at the beginning of a long pathway to un-
derstanding exactly how differences in gene sequences
produce the psychological and behavioral differences in
phenotype we observe between humans and the other great
apes. However, the hierarchical view of brain evolution
carries several important implications for how we theorize
human nature, scientiﬁcally.

MOST OF HUMAN NATURE IS NOT
HUMAN SPECIFIC

It might seem natural to treat all and only uniquely derived
features in humans, or autapomorphies, as the sum total of
human nature. This approach, however, raises at least two
problems. First, it is difﬁcult to shave off just the unique
bits, built as they are on top of shared homologies. For
example, while much of uniquely human cognition prob-
ably derives from modiﬁcations to the cortex, this does not
necessarily mean genuinely new cortical regions; indeed,
there is little or no evidence for major new brain regions in
humans (Preuss, 2004). However, while it is perhaps sur-
prising that our uniquely derived cognitive abilities, such as
language, appear to depend on brain regions and networks
that are homologous to those present in other primates, this
does not preclude the possibility of substantial reorgani-
zation and partial repurposing of brain structures. For
example, while it appears that Broca’s area, crucial for
speech in humans, is homologous with cortical areas 44 and
45 in nonhuman primates, it is likely that evolutionary
changes occurred both within the region itself and in its
connections with other brain networks in the evolution of
human speech (Preuss, 2000; Rizzolatti and Arbib, 1998;
Striedter, 2005). Certainly, this implies that there must be
uniquely derived features of these areas in humans, but
language abilities presumably depend on aspects of these
brain regions that are not unique to humans. Moreover, new
cognitive abilities may sometimes come from partial
ontogenetic repurposing of cortical areas present in other
primates (Anderson, 2010).

470 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

for example, kinship and parental care,

Second, even if we could partition off just the uniquely
derived features of humans, it is not clear that a concept of
human nature based only on these features would serve the
purposes for which such a concept is typically invoked.
Take,
two
frequently cited human universals (Brown, 1991). While
there is substantial cultural diversity in how kinship is
organized, most anthropologists would agree that kinship
and family relationships are central to the organization of
all human societies (Chapais, 2009). And yet, kinship itself
is of course not unique to humans, nor is parental care.
Aspects of kinship and parental care, including the impor-
tance of extended families and biparental care (care of
offspring by both the mother and the father), might be
unique to humans. But who would want to say that a fa-
ther’s love of his children, perhaps uniquely derived in
humans, is part of human nature, while a mother’s love of
her children, shared with other primates, is not?

A phylogenetic view of species allows us to say with
conﬁdence that humans, chimpanzees, bonobos, gorillas,
and orangutans are different biological species, because
they are now distinct lineages. Thus, there is a gorilla na-
ture, a human nature, and so on. The phylogenetic method
also allows us, in some cases, to determine which traits are
uniquely derived in each lineage. However, the facts of
homology suggest that the “nature” of each species in-
cludes many elements that predate its separation from other
lineages. Gorilla nature and human nature heavily overlap.
So do human nature and mouse nature, and even, for some
purposes, human nature and ﬁsh nature. Maternal care of
offspring, for example, is a mammalian trait, and therefore
part of the nature of all primates. Similarly, many aspects of
our health and physiology are shared with other apes, other
mammals, and beyond (Natterson-Horowitz and Bowers,
2012). Psychologically, the same is undoubtedly true. For
example, many human emotions, such as fear, are not
uniquely human. While these emotions might have been
modiﬁed and manifest
themselves in unique ways in
humans, emotional responses involve the complex interplay
between many mechanisms, including phylogenetically old
ones, and it would be functionally odd to partition off just
the human parts.

MUCH OF HUMAN UNIQUENESS ARISES
IN PART FROM NON-UNIQUELY
HUMAN MECHANISMS

The facts of homology suggest
that even aspects of
humans that might be uniquely derived probably depend
heavily on aspects that are not. This is simply a fact of the
interactive nature of functional wholes. To use an analogy
from technology, technological advancements such as the
jet engine that were called “new” when they appeared

nevertheless make use of many older technologies in their
operation, and so are not entirely new. Similarly, while it
is unclear whether humans possess any completely new
brain regions relative to other apes or monkeys, there is
evidence that homologous brain regions have been
modiﬁed in humans relative to our ancestors. Moreover,
there is evidence that brain modiﬁcations in humans have
occurred differentially across different brain regions, and
that
they are not, as is commonly assumed, restricted
merely to the neocortex or even more narrowly to the
frontal cortex. For example, humans appear
to have
derived modiﬁcations in the architecture of one of the
layers of primary visual cortex, V1, one of the more
phylogenetically ancient areas of mammalian cortex
(Preuss, 2004). These modiﬁcations in V1 do not mean, of
course, that our vision operates in entirely different ways
that the vision of, for example, macaques. Instead, human
vision is likely to make use of principles of neural orga-
nization and computation that are phylogenetically wide-
spread, but that exhibit some unique modiﬁcations in our
lineage. Instead of thinking of modular architectures as
ﬁxed and composed of unchanging, non-interactive ele-
ments, it is better to think of them as composed of func-
tional parts that can be tweaked and rearranged to produce
new computational designs out of older parts.

The same pointdthat new cognitive abilities come from
making evolutionary modiﬁcations within hierarchies of
existing partsd is likely to be true even for abilities that
seem qualitatively different from those seen in other spe-
cies, such as human abilities of social cognition. Some
social skills in humans, such as “mindreading,” the ability
to make inferences about the mental states of others, seem
so far removed even from chimpanzees that some scholars
have claimed that the difference challenges the very idea of
interspecies psychological continuity (Penn et al., 2008).
However, just as visual perception involves the hierarchical
interaction of multiple mechanisms, some old and some
new, social perception is likely to as well. Simple forms of
mindreading, such as the use of gaze to make predictive
decisions about how to respond to the behavior of other
organisms, are phylogenetically widespread (Emery, 2000).
Human mindreading,
too, makes heavy use of gaze
perception, as well as perception of posture, body move-
ment, and other low-level cues (Johnson and Shiffrar,
2013). There is every reason to think that phylogenetically
ancient mechanisms of social perception, such as gaze and
motion perception, have homologs in humans that have
been evolutionarily preserved, though perhaps in modiﬁed
form, and that participate in a hierarchical fashion in more
sophisticated forms of mindreading, such as tracking false
beliefs.

Indeed, “higher level” forms of mindreading, such as
tracking other individuals’ intentions and knowledge states,
have been found to exist
taxa such as

in other social

corvids, canids, and apes (Clayton et al., 2007; Hare et al.,
2001, 2002). While some of these cases might represent
cases of convergent evolutiondfor example, corvids and
canidsdothers, in particular apes, probably represent cases
of mechanisms that are homologous with those seen in
humans. Indeed, the only form of higher level mindreading
for which evidence remains categorically absent in any
other species than humans is the tracking of false beliefs
(Call and Tomasello, 2008).

Sophisticated and apparently uniquely derived cogni-
tive abilities in humans, then, probably make extensive
use of more basic and more phylogenetically widespread
mechanisms that are still present in humans. What appears
to be a single, seamless ability such as the ability to track
and make inferences based on another’s false beliefs about
the world is likely to be the result of multiple mechanisms
interacting, some old and some new. For example, ver-
sions of the false belief task (Wellman et al., 2001) that
require inferring an agent’s false representation of the
location of an object usually make use of mechanisms for
computing what an agent has or has not seen, which are
probably present across primates, and perhaps even more
widely (Emery, 2000). However, this does not mean that
any other species than humans, so far as we know, can
compute an individual’s false belief about an object’s
location based on computing what the agent has previ-
ously seen, even though the latter computation, itself, is
something of which other species are capable. Thus, the
uniquely human ability to form a representation of an
agent’s false belief based on what the agent has seen de-
pends on mechanisms that are not uniquely human, such
as gaze tracking.

Most complex cognitive tasks probably make use of
hierarchical cascades of mechanisms, building up complex
representations and inferences from simpler ones. If so,
there may be many complex skills whose sum total is
unique to humans, but for which most of the participating
components are not. This is likely to be true of many
uniquely human abilities, including mindreading, language
processing, large-scale cooperation, moral cognition, and
cultural transmission (Barrett, 2015).

PART OF HUMAN UNIQUENESS MUST
LIE IN UNIQUELY MODIFIED
INTERACTIONS

The most intuitive source of evolutionary innovation in a
species is the addition of new mechanisms or modiﬁcation
of older mechanisms to give them new properties. But as
the example of gaze processing in false belief tracking
shows, new cognitive skills can be produced in part
through the modiﬁcation of interactions between mecha-
nisms, including mechanisms that already existed. The

Diversity and Hierarchy Chapter | 28 471

ability to create and manipulate tools,
for example,
probably makes use at least in part of visual and motor
abilities that are present in other species. Indeed, both
observation and execution of tool use in humans recruit
brain areas with homologies in nonhuman primates,
including regions of temporal, parietal, and premotor
cortex (Johnson-Frey, 2004). However, human capacities
to conceptualize, manufacture, and learn about
tools
appear to differ from those of even of our closest primate
including our abilities to
relatives in several ways,
conceptualize tool
the in-
tentions and goals of those using tools, and to quickly
acquire culturally normative tool conventions (Csibra and
Gergely, 2009; German and Barrett, 2005; Kemler-Nelson
et al., 2000; Lyons et al., 2007; Povinelli, 2000; Rakoczy
and Schmidt, 2013). Thus, human tool use seems to draw
heavily on capacities and brain mechanisms present in
nonhuman primates, but the behavioral data suggest that
these capacities must have been modiﬁed and/or recom-
bined in unique ways to produce our uniquely human
abilities of artifact cognition.

to rapidly infer

functions,

rather,

As already mentioned, human language abilities, while
unique to humans, appear to make use of brain areas that
are not unique to humans (Preuss, 2000). However, human
language abilities are not the result of activity in a single
brain region, but
involve interactions between
perception, motor, and conceptual areas of the brain. The
evolution of language, then, might have involved not just
modiﬁcations to regions such as Broca’s area, but modiﬁed
interactions between brain areas, creating new computa-
tional synergies that were not present before. Consistent
with this, it appears that white matter pathways involved in
human language abilities have been expanded in the human
lineage. A particular white matter pathway, the arcuate
fasciculus, appears to have evolved projections in humans
that link regions involved in lexical-semantic and syntactic
processing, perhaps creating new processing connections
between areas that existed, but were not similarly con-
nected, in other primates (Rilling et al., 2008).

Of course, the creation of new pathways of interaction
between brain regions can modify those regions both
ontogenetically, due to the plastic nature of cortical
development, but also over evolutionary time, as new
connections will generate phenotypic variation between
individuals in psychological capacities that can then
be further acted on by selection. Research on reading in
the brain provides a provocative example of how cortical
tissue can take on new functions given novel but
regular input and consistent task demands, suggesting that
in human environmentsd
the addition of changes
including social and cultural environmentsdmight pro-
vide knock-on effects to changes in brain size and wiring
patterns, leading to radically new phenotypic outcomes
(Dehaene, 2009).

472 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

EVOLUTIONARY FEEDBACK AS A
MISSING INGREDIENT

It is commonly acknowledged that a description of the
environment in which adaptations evolved (their EEA, or
environment of evolutionary adaptedness) is crucial for
understanding why adaptations take the form they do, and
that both environment and genes matter in determining how
phenotypes develop. However, it is becoming increasingly
clear that the bidirectional nature of evolutionary causation,
with changes in phenotypes leading to changes in the
environment and vice-versa, has been particularly impor-
tant in human evolution (Laland et al., 2001; Richerson and
Boyd, 2005). Evolutionary feedback cascades of this kind
are likely to have been important in the evolution of social
intelligence, language, artifacts, and mechanisms of cultural
transmission. In each case, gradual changes in cognitive
capacities in turn changed the environment of selection in a
positive self-feeding loop. Runaway processes such as this
were likely important in the rapid expansion in brain size
seen in the genus Homo, and in modiﬁcations to brain re-
gions involved in language, tool use, and social cognition.
Thus, a complete understanding of human nature requires
an understanding of how humans modiﬁed their own en-
vironments of selection in ways that have left their signa-
tures on modern brains and behavior.

The evolution of tool use, and of human-made artifacts
more generally, provides a good case study of how
evolutionary feedback has shaped human nature. Because
modern-day chimpanzees and humans both manufacture
and use tools (as do some other nonhuman primates as
well), it is likely that the common ancestor of chimps and
humans did too. Thus, as for mindreading, it is likely that
human artifact cognition evolved through modiﬁcation of
evolutionarily older mechanisms that are not unique to our
lineage. However, artifact cognition in nonhuman pri-
mates is profoundly different from that of humans in
several ways. For one, the complexity and diversity of
tools made by nonhuman primates are orders of magnitude
lower than those made by humans; we make computers;
they make termite-ﬁshing sticks. Second, the processes of
cultural transmission of tool use in nonhuman primates are
quite different than in humans: for example, capuchin
monkeys can learn to use stones to crack nuts, but the skill
can take years to learn, and is acquired via a painfully slow
trial-and-error process (Dindo et al., 2008). Third,
the
complexity of human artifacts themselves evolves via a
ratcheting process of cultural evolution, something that is
not known to occur for the artifacts of any other species
(Tennie et al., 2009).

What these facts suggest is that at some point in human
evolutionary history, probably after humans began to modify
stone tools by ﬂaking, a positive evolutionary feedback loop
began in which increasingly sophisticated tools led to

appears

artifacts

accelerating ﬁtness beneﬁts, exerting strong selection on
brain regions involved in learning to make and use tools.
These included regions involved in both conceptualizing
tools, and in producing and using them, each of which in
turn involves multiple subprocesses (Johnson-Frey, 2004).
Conceptual knowledge of tools involves not only recogni-
tion and naming of the tool, but also knowledge of its
functions and associated actions. From early childhood,
human learning about
categorically
different from that of other primates. Apes, for example,
seem to learn about tools largely through their affordances,
whereas children early on classify tools based on their
culturally normative proper function (Kemler Nelson et al.,
2000). Corollaries of this include “functional ﬁxedness,” in
which humans have difﬁculty conceptualizing uses for a tool
other than that for which it was designed (German and
Barrett, 2005), and “over-imitation,” in which humans, but
not other primates, consistently copy others’ intentional
actions with respect to tools even when these actions have no
instrumental function (Lyons et al., 2007). These phenomena
suggest that for humans, tools are a fundamentally different
kind of thing than they are for other primates: a special
category of object classiﬁed by function, and tied to speciﬁc
motor routines for use. In addition, the ability of humans to
represent and make extremely complex artifacts, with mul-
tiple functional parts, suggested that the mechanisms that
represent artifacts in the brain must have undergone modi-
ﬁcations of some kind as well.

Although the earliest human-made artifacts were hand-
held tools, increasing complexity of human capacities to
conceptualize and manufacture functional artifacts led to
the evolution of new kinds of human-made object such as
clothing, shelter, body ornamentation, and later vehicles,
roads, and other features of the built environment. Clearly,
these changes altered human environments in ways that fed
back on our own biology: for example, changes in clothing,
shelter, energy processing and food technology led to
peopling of regions of the globe that would otherwise have
been inaccessible to savanna-dwelling apes. Research on
how literacy alters brain architecture provides a good
example of how a particular kind of human-made artifact,
writing, profoundly alters human physical and social en-
vironments in ways that alter the development of cognition
and the brain (Dehaene, 2009). Similarly, there is evidence
that changes in human food technologies associated with
artifact use, such as cooking, dairying, and agriculture,
have altered the human genome (Hardy et al., 2015; Perry
et al., 2007; Tishkoff et al., 2007). In this sense, then, hu-
man nature is partly the product of humans themselves. We
are currently only beginning to understand the nature of the
self-feeding evolutionary cascades that have resulted in
human dominance of the globe, and our anthropogenic
inﬂuence on it (Steffen et al., 2007). Exploring such feed-
back processes, including those involved in the evolution of

language, cultural transmission, and large-scale social or-
ganization, will be necessary for a complete understanding
of human nature.

CONCLUSION

Human nature is not monolithic. While humans do have
distinguishing psychological and behavioral traits such as
language, the ability to cooperate in large social groups,
and tool use, each of these is the product of many inter-
acting mechanisms within the brain, some phylogenetically
old and some new. As brain size increased in the hominin
lineage, particularly in our genus, Homo, it is likely that
brain complexity increased as well. While expansion in
brain size undoubtedly increased the behavioral repertoire
in humansdpresumably leading to the ﬁtness advantages
that outweighed the metabolic and developmental costs of
larger brainsdthe added behavioral complexity afforded by
large brains did not simply appear de novo, but rather
through the modiﬁcation and elaboration of previously
existing brain mechanisms and regions. Thus, human na-
ture is built out of, and rests upon, a foundation of phylo-
genetically older mechanisms. Human nature is nested
within ape nature, which is nested within primate nature,
mammal nature, vertebrate nature, and so on.

What this means is that the search for human nature
should embrace the parts of usdthe majority of our parts,
in factdthat are not exclusively human. Our most mundane
daily activities, such as conversation, both draw upon
abilities that no other species possesses, such as the ability
to parse grammatical constructions, and upon abilities that
are not unique to us, such as sensitivity to others’ emotional
signals. It is not in individual psychological mechanisms
that human nature is to be found, but in how the operation
of these mechanisms is combined uniquely in us. The
search for human nature, then, should embrace the idea of a
multi-modular mind: one that is likely to have evolved in a
complex series of modiﬁcations, each of which might have
been modest in itself, but which interacted to produce the
enormous changes in cognition and behavior that have
enabled us to become, for better or worse, one of the most
successful species on earth.

REFERENCES

Diversity and Hierarchy Chapter | 28 473

Barrett, H.C., 2015. The Shape of Thought: How Mental Adaptations

Evolve. Oxford University Press, New York, NY.

Barton, R.A., Harvey, P.H., 2000. Mosaic evolution of brain structure in

mammals. Nature 405, 1055e1058.

Brown, D.E., 1991. Human Universals. McGraw-Hill, New York, NY.
Buller, D., 2005. Adapting Minds: Evolutionary Psychology and the

Persistent Quest for Human Nature. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Bullmore, E., Sporns, O., 2009. Complex brain networks: graph theoretical
analysis of structural and functional systems. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience 10, 186e198.

Cáceres, M., Lachuer, J., Zapala, M.A., Redmond, J.C., Kudo, L.,
Geschwind, D.H., Lockhart, D.J., Preuss, T.M., Barlow, C., 2003.
Elevated gene expression levels distinguish human from non-human
primate brains. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 100, 13030e13035.

Call, J., Tomasello, M., 2008. Does the chimpanzee have a theory of

mind? 30 years later. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 12, 187e192.

Carroll, S.B., Grenier, J.K., Weatherbee, S.D., 2005. From DNA to Di-
versity: Molecular Genetics and the Evolution of Animal Design,
second ed. Blackwell, Oxford, UK.

Chapais, B., 2009. Primeval Kinship: How Pair-bonding Gave Birth to

Human Society. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Clayton, N.S., Dally, J.M., Emery, N.J., 2007. Social cognition by food-
caching corvids:
the western scrub-jay as a natural psychologist.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sci-
ences 362, 507e522.

Csibra, G., Gergely, G., 2009. Natural pedagogy. Trends in Cognitive

Sciences 13, 148e153.

Dehaene, S., 2009. Reading in the Brain: The Science and Evolution of a

Human Invention. Viking, New York, NY.

Dindo, M., Thierry, B., Whiten, A., 2008. Social diffusion of novel
foraging methods in brown capuchin monkeys (Cebus apella).
Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 275,
187e193.

Downes, S.M., Machery, E., 2013. Arguing About Human Nature:

Contemporary Debates. Routledge, New York.

Ehrlich, P.R., 2000. Human Natures: Genes, Cultures, and the Human

Prospect. Island Press, Washington, DC.

Emery, N.J., 2000. The eyes have it: the neuroethology, function and
evolution of social gaze. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 24,
581e604.

Enard, W., Khaitovich, P., Klose,

J., Zöllner, S., Heissig, F.,
Giavalisco, P., Nieselt-Struwe, K., Muchmore, E., Varki, A.,
Ravid, R., Doxiadis, G.M., Bontrop, R.E., Pääbo, S., 2002. Intra- and
interspeciﬁc variation in primate gene expression patterns. Science
296, 340e343.

Fodor, J., 1983. The Modularity of Mind. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Gelman, S.A., 2003. The Essential Child: Origins of Essentialism in

Everyday Thought. Oxford University Press, New York, NY.

Allman, J.M., 2000. Evolving Brains. Scientiﬁc American Library, New

German, T.P., Barrett, H.C., 2005. Functional ﬁxedness in a technologi-

York, NY.

Anderson, M.L., 2010. Neural reuse: a fundamental organizational prin-

ciple of the brain. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 33, 245e266.

Barrett, H.C., 2001. On the functional origins of essentialism. Mind and

Society 3, 1e30.

Barrett, H.C., 2012. A hierarchical model of the evolution of human brain
specializations. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 109, 10733e10740.

cally sparse culture. Psychological Science 10, 1e5.

Hardy, K., Brand-Miller, J., Brown, K.D., Thomas, M.G., Copeland, L.,
2015. The importance of dietary carbohydrate in human evolution.
Quarterly Review of Biology 90, 251e268.

Hare, B., Call, J., Tomasello, M., 2001. Do chimpanzees know what

conspeciﬁcs know? Animal Behaviour 61, 139e151.

Hare, B., Brown, M., Williamson, C., Tomasello, M., 2002. The domes-

tication of social cognition in dogs. Science 298, 1634e1636.

474 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

Hull, D.L., 1986. On human nature. In: Proceedings of the Biennial
Meeting of the Philosophy of Science Association. Volume Two:
Symposia and Invited Papers, vol. 1986. Philosophy of Science As-
sociation, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, pp. 3e13.

Lee, C., Stone, A.C., 2007. Diet and the evolution of human amylase
gene copy number variation. Nature Genetics 39, 1256e1260.

Povinelli, D.J., 2000. Folk Physics for Apes: The Chimpanzee’s Theory of

How the World Works. Oxford University Press, New York, NY.

Ingold, T., 2006. Against human nature. In: Aerts, D., Gontier, N., Van
Bendegem, J.P. (Eds.), Evolutionary Epistemology, Language and
Culture. Springer, Dordrecht, pp. 259e281.

Preuss, T.M., 2000. What’s human about

the human brain? In:
Gazzaniga, M. (Ed.), The New Cognitive Neurosciences, second ed.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Johnson, K., Shiffrar, M. (Eds.), 2013. People Watching: Social, Percep-
tual, and Neurophysiological Studies of Body Perception. Oxford
University Press, New York, NY.

Preuss, T., 2004. What is it like to be a human? In: Gazzaniga, M.S. (Ed.),
The Cognitive Neurosciences, third ed. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
pp. 5e22.

Johnson-Frey, S.H., 2004. The neural bases of complex tool use in

Rakoczy, H., Schmidt, M.F., 2013. The early ontogeny of social norms.

humans. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 8, 71e78.

Child Development Perspectives 7, 17e21.

Kaas, J.H., 2000. Why is brain size so important: design problems and
solutions as neocortex gets bigger or smaller. Brain and Mind 1,
7e23.

Richerson, P., Boyd, R., 2005. Not by Genes Alone: How Culture
Transformed Human Evolution. University of Chicago Press, Chi-
cago, IL.

Kaas, J.H., 2006. Evolution of the neocortex. Current Biology 16,

Richerson, P., 2015. Human nature. In: Brockman, J. (Ed.), This Idea Must

R910eR914.

Die. Harper Collins, New York, pp. 88e91.

Kemler Nelson, D.G., Frankenﬁeld, A., Morris, C., Blair, E., 2000. Young
children’s use of functional information to categorize artifacts: three
factors that matter. Cognition 77, 133e168.

Rilling, J.K., Glasser, M.F., Preuss, T.M., Ma, X., Zhao, T., Hu, X.,
Behrens, T.E., 2008. The evolution of the arcuate fasciculus revealed
with comparative DTI. Nature Neuroscience 11, 426e428.

Krubitzer, L., Huffman, K.J., 2000. Arealization of the neocortex in
mammals: genetic and epigenetic contributions to the phenotype.
Brain, Behavior and Evolution 55, 322e335.

Laland, K.N., Odling-Smee, J., Feldman, M.W., 2001. Cultural niche
construction and human evolution. Journal of Evolutionary Biology
14, 22e33.

Lyons, D.E., Young, A.G., Keil, F.C., 2007. The hidden structure of
overimitation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 104, 19751e19756.

Mayr, E., 1963. Animal Species and Evolution. Harvard University Press,

Cambridge, MA.

Meunier, D., Lambiotte, R., Fornito, A., Ersche, K.D., Bullmore, E.T.,
2009. Hierarchical modularity in human brain functional networks.
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics 3, 37.

Natterson-Horowitz, B., Bowers, K., 2012. Zoobiquity: What Animals Can

Teach Us About Being Human. Knopf, New York, NY.

Penn, D.C., Holyoak, K.J., Povinelli, D.J., 2008. Darwin’s mistake:
explaining the discontinuity between human and nonhuman minds.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 31, 109e130.

Perry, G.H., Dominy, N.J., Claw, K.G., Lee, A.S., Fiegler, H., Redon, R.,
Werner, J., Villanea, F.A., Mountain, J.L., Misra, R., Carter, N.P.,

Rizzolatti, G., Arbib, M.A., 1998. Language within our grasp. Trends in

Neurosciences 21, 188e194.

Steffen, W., Crutzen, P.J., McNeill, J.R., 2007. The Anthropocene: are
humans now overwhelming the great forces of nature? AMBIO: A
Journal of the Human Environment 36, 614e621.

Striedter, G.F., Northcutt, R.G., 1991. Biological hierarchies and the
concept of homology. Brain, Behavior and Evolution 38, 177e189.
Striedter, G.F., 2005. Principles of Brain Evolution. Sinauer Associates,

Sunderland, MA.

Tennie, C., Call, J., Tomasello, M., 2009. Ratcheting up the ratchet: on the
evolution of cumulative culture. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 364, 2405e2415.

J.S., Powell, K., Mortensen, H.M., Hirbo1,

Tishkoff, S.A., Reed, F.A., Ranciaro, A., Voight, B.F., Babbitt, C.C.,
Silverman,
J.B.,
Osman, M., Ibrahim, M., Omar, S.A., Lema, G., Nyambo, T.B.,
Ghori, J., Bumpstead, S., Pritchard, J.K., Wray, G.A., Deloukas, P.,
2007. Convergent adaptation of human lactase persistence in Africa
and Europe. Nature Genetics 39, 31e40.

Wellman, H.M., Cross, D., Watson, J., 2001. Meta-analysis of theory-of-
mind development: the truth about false belief. Child Development 72,
655e684.

Chapter 29

Human Diversity at the Individual and
Population Levels, and Societal
Hierarchies

B. Dubreuil
Québec (Québec), Canada

INTRODUCTION

Hierarchies are ubiquitous in human societies, but describing
the multiple forms that they can take is a formidable chal-
lenge. Part of the problem is that we use the concept of hi-
erarchies to refer to various types of relationships between
people:
the bully intimidating younger children in the
schoolyard, the natural leader mobilizing his peers to take
part in an exciting project, the director of a large corporation
having formal authority over his employees, the traditional
chief using his wealth to support a large network of loyal
clients, the religious leader claiming authority to interpret
scripture, the prosperous professional beneﬁting from higher
standards of living than her working class peers, etc.

My objective in this chapter is not

to provide an
exhaustive description of the various forms that hierarchies
can take in human societies. This would clearly be
impossible, as potential variations are inﬁnite. My goal is
more modest. I aim to explain that hierarchies are the
outcome of a limited set of mechanisms working at
different levels: biological, psychological, and social. My
key message is that, despite interesting parallels with ani-
mals and especially apes, humans create societal hierarchies
that have no equivalent in the animal kingdom. The crea-
tion of human hierarchies is made possible by unique
social-cognitive skills and is a precondition to extending
cooperation beyond a few dozen people. The paradox, I
will claim, is that while human hierarchies result from our
exceptional capacity for cooperation,
they also make
possible unprecedented levels of violence and exploitation.
I begin the chapter by explaining in broad terms what
dominance hierarchies in the animal kingdom consist of and

present the main mechanisms that lead to their emergence
(section: Hierarchies and Dominance in the Animal
Kingdom). I then provide a brief overview of the research
aimed at documenting the presence in humans of these
mechanisms, including research on the link between social
status and hormones, behavior, and health outcomes (section:
Do Humans Have Hierarchies?). I will argue that the dynamics
of hierarchy formation among humans differs strongly from
other species because of our unique mind-reading capacity and
prosocial motivations (section: Uniquely Human Social
Cognition). During the evolution of the genus Homo, our
ancestors gradually developed an unprecedented capacity to
cooperate and resist would-be alpha males, which led to
the creation of relatively egalitarian social organizations
among small foraging bands (section: How Our Ancestors
Challenged Hierarchies). The last two sections of the chapter
examine the current paradox with human hierarchies in more
detail. On the one hand, we need large hierarchical organiza-
tions to support cooperation between thousands, if not mil-
lions, of people (section: Why Hierarchies Are Functional).
On the other hand, well-studied social and psychological
mechanisms open up the possibility that rulers will turn into
despots and use hierarchies for exploitation (section: From
Cooperative to Exploitative Hierarchies).

HIERARCHIES AND DOMINANCE IN THE
ANIMAL KINGDOM

Farmers and herders must have been aware for centuries, if
not millennia, of the existence of relationships of domi-
nance among animals, that is to say, of the presence of

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00029-6
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

475

476 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

individuals who were more assertive, aggressive, and
tended to harass and impose themselves over others. It is
not until the 20th century, however, that dominance hi-
erarchies were brought to scientiﬁc attention, after Nor-
wegian zoologist Thorleif Schjelderup-Ebbe published his
dissertation on the question. Schjelderup-Ebbe (1922)
crafted the concept of “pecking order” (Hackordnung) to
describe the strict sequence in which chickens were
allowed to access food. Since then, dominance hierarchies
have become a standard object of study among biologists
and have been largely documented in countless species,
ranging from crustaceans and ﬁshes to birds and mam-
mals. A large literature has documented the factors
inﬂuencing the formation and maintenance of hierarchies
in different species.

A ﬁrst group of variations concerns the stability of
hierarchies: while ranking is ﬁxed for long periods of time
in some species (or in some contexts), it remains ﬂuid in
others. Hierarchies are sometimes linear and transitive
(such that if A dominates B, and B dominates C, A dom-
inates C), but sometimes not. Hierarchies are partly deter-
mined by individual attributes, so that larger, healthier,
more aggressive and more assertive individuals tend to
dominate smaller, weaker, and more difﬁdent ones. But
hierarchies also vary in function of contextual factors, such
as predation pressure, environmental stress, or feeding and
sexual competition. The social intelligence of a species also
determines how it forms and maintains hierarchies, as
cognitively more sophisticated species, such as primates
can form coalitions that play a crucial role when disputing
rank. Among chimpanzees, for instance, raw physical force
is instrumental in rising through the ranks, but social in-
telligence and the capacity to forge alliances and enlist
supporters are also crucial for ambitious individuals to ﬁnd
their way to the top (de Waal, 1982).

Signiﬁcant work has been done not only to characterize
dominance hierarchies, but also to explain their existence.
At the higher level of explanation, one can say that hier-
archies result from the very nature of social life, in which
animals are simultaneously in competitive and cooperative
relationships with one another. On the one hand, living in
groups can be a major source of well-being for animals.
Conspeciﬁcs sometimes help protect against predators,
access certain sources of food (eg, larger prey), and invest
in offspring. At the same time, social life is a source of
rivalry, especially when it comes to feeding and repro-
duction. Dominance hierarchies exist because animals are
at an advantage if they can avoid permanent ﬁghting, while
drawing beneﬁts from life in society. Once in place, stable
hierarchies can be to the advantage of everyone. Dominants
do not need to engage in permanent combat with sub-
ordinates to maintain their privileges, while subordinates
can avoid taking the risk of challenging higher-ranking
individuals in vain.

A more fundamental question is why animals strive
toward higher social ranks in the ﬁrst place. The generally
accepted answer
is that high-ranking individuals have
greater access to feeding and mating opportunities, which
leads to higher ﬁtness (Clutton-Brock, 1988; Buss, 2007;
Cummins, 2005). This view explains why the drive toward
dominance is generally greater among males than among
females. In most species, males and females do not face the
same evolutionary trade-offs. For males, sperm is abundant
and cheap, while reproduction is generally costlier to
females (this is particularly true of mammals). For this
reason, male reproductive success is much more variable
than women’s. As David Buss (2007, p. 360) puts it:
“Nearly all fertile females will succeed in reproducing,
regardless of their social status, but the same cannot be said
of all fertile males. For each man who gains reproductive
access to a disproportionate share of women, other men are
consigned to bachelorhood and reproductive oblivion.” In
his survey of 700 studies, Ellis (1995) argues that high-
ranking males typically have a reproductive advantage
over low-ranking ones. The link, however, is not universal,
revealing that subordinate males sometimes ﬁnd ways to
compensate for their disadvantage and highlighting the
need to pay close attention to context when studying
dominance hierarchies and their impacts.

Signiﬁcant research has also been conducted to uncover
the neurocognitive and behavioral mechanisms involved in
the creation of dominance hierarchies. These mechanisms
present interesting variations and similarities across spe-
cies. Sheri Johnson et al. (2012, p. 692) have used the
concept of dominance behavioral system (DBS) to refer to
the “series of biological, psychological, and behavioral
components” that “serve the organism’s goal of control
over social and material resources that are critical for sur-
vival and reproduction.” The DBS is composed of a
mechanism that monitors the environment to detect threat
to one’s rank, as well as a motivational system that direct
action toward the goal of controlling resources. The drive to
rise through the ranks is not the same for different in-
dividuals and can also vary depending on the social-
cognitive abilities of each species. At
the behavioral
level, the DBS generally takes the form of easily recog-
nizable gestures and displays of dominance and subordi-
nation. Among chimpanzees,
instance, dominant
individuals make assertive and aggressive movements and
try to appear larger and heavier, while subordinates lower
their bodies, present their rear-ends or emit pant-grunts as
they look up at higher-ranking individuals (de Waal, 1982).
Failing to display signs of submission comes with the risk
of being punished.

for

At the biological level, there is a close connection be-
tween dominance behavior and the neuroendocrine system
that regulates the production of hormones, such as testos-
terone and cortisol (Sapolsky, 2004a,b; 2005). For instance,

there is an unambiguous link between aggression, the drive
toward dominance, and the production of testosterone. It
has long been known, for instance, that castrated rodents
barely ever ﬁght, but resume combat when testosterone is
administrated to them (Beeman, 1947). Among birds,
Wingﬁeld et al. (1990) proposed the so-called “challenge
hypothesis” to account for changes in patterns of testos-
terone production and aggression in the context of seasonal
breeding. According to this hypothesis,
testosterone in-
creases among males at the onset of the breeding season
and reaches its peak to support maleemale aggression in
the context of territory formation and mate guarding. The
challenge hypothesis has been particularly effective at
explaining patterns of testosterone changes among birds,
but has also been applied to a large array of species,
including ﬁshes (Wingﬁeld et al., 2000; Hirschenhauser
et al., 2004).

The relationship between aggression and testosterone
production has also been closely studied among pri-
mates. High-ranking chimpanzees, for instance, constantly
harass and randomly aggress low-ranking ones and, as
expected, rank is a good predictor of testosterone secretion
(Muller and Wrangham, 2004; Muehlenbein et al., 2004).
Gesquiere et al. (2011) established that, among savannah
baboons (Papio cynocephalus), high-ranking males also
have higher
the link between
testosterone and rank is not always straightforward. In
closely related chacma baboons (Papio hamadryas ursinus)
from Okavango Delta, for instance, rank is not related to
testosterone levels after controlling for age. A close
connection is rather to be found between testosterone and
changes in rank (Beehner et al., 2006). Individuals with
high testosterone are more aggressive and more likely to
rise in the hierarchy, while those with low testosterone are
more likely to go down.

testosterone levels. But

A key point to keep in mind is that testosterone is costly
to produce at the metabolic level and triggers immuno-
suppression. As a result, secreting high levels of testos-
terone continuously comes with signiﬁcant costs in terms of
ﬁtness. It is no surprise thus that the connection between
testosterone and rank depends on the level of aggression
required to maintain one’s position. When hierarchies are
stable and high-ranking males remain unchallenged for a
certain time, secreting too much testosterone is of little use.
This is the case with chacma baboons (Beehner et al.,
in ﬁssionefusion chimpanzee communities,
2006). But
challenges are unpredictable and secreting more testos-
terone on a permanent basis can pay off.

Primatologists have also studied the link between
dominance hierarchies and another group of hormones.
Among mammals, glucocorticoids (especially cortisol) are
closely related to stress responses. More precisely, in the
presence of a stressor (eg, a predator), the adrenal gland
produces cortisol, which, in turn, stimulates the production

Human Diversity and Societal Hierarchies Chapter | 29 477

of glucose, increases blood pressure and muscle tension, and
gives the body the boost of energy it needs for a quick
response: ﬁght or ﬂight. As with testosterone, the secretion
of cortisol comes with costs, in that it is also linked to
immunosuppression, leading to higher risk of illness. As
neuroendocrinologist Robert M. Sapolsky (2004b) famously
argued, the stress response makes perfect sense from an
evolutionary viewpoint. In the face of an imminent threat
(eg, a lion), the right thing for the zebra to do is to mobilize
all possible energy and to run as fast as it can. Turning off
immunosuppression for a brief period of time is not a major
issue. However, among social animals, including humans,
some stressors are not as temporary as a lion attack. This is
the case with the persistent stress that can result from
dominance relationships. So-called “chronic stress” leads to
the prolonged secretion of glucocorticoids and increases the
risk of a broad variety of diseases, including ulcers, sterility,
stunted growth, hypertension, arteriosclerosis, cardiovascular
disease,
type 2 diabetes, and osteoporosis (Sapolsky,
2004a,b; McEwen and Lasley, 2002).

For decades, Sapolsky et al. have studied the social
behavior of a troop of wild baboons in Kenya. As with
many primate species, life at the bottom of the hierarchy
can be nasty, with low-ranking individuals having to
endure random attacks and daily persecution from high-
ranking ones. Being constantly pushed around when one
tries to eat or rest is a form of terror that can lead to chronic
stress. Elizabeth Archie et al. (2012) have shown that,
among wild baboons from Kenya, rank is a good predictor
of how well an individual will recover from a wound,
which seems to be at least partially linked to the immu-
nosuppressive impact of glucocorticoid secretion and
chronic stress.

things

stressors, but

As for testosterone, the link between chronic stress,
glucocorticoids, and rank is not straightforward. In a stable
dominance system, individuals at the bottom of the hier-
archy tend to be subject to most of the physical and psy-
chological
are different when
hierarchies are unstable (Sapolsky, 1993). In periods of
uncertainty, alpha males and other high-ranking individuals
have to constantly remain on their guard. They experience
signiﬁcant stress as their position is openly challenged.
Studying a group of mandrills, for instance, Setchell et al.
(2010) found that glucocorticoid levels were higher among
subordinates in times of stability, but higher among high-
ranking males in times of social unrest. Because of the
link between chronic stress and immunosuppression, high-
ranking males showed a greater variety of gastrointestinal
parasite infections. Similarly, in some baboon troops, being
in the top position is associated with persistent stress, and
glucocorticoids are signiﬁcantly higher among alpha males
than among second-ranking males (Gesquiere et al., 2011).
If ranking high can be a source of stress in many con-
texts, ranking low does not necessarily mean that one’s life

478 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

will be miserable. A metaanalysis of research conducted
among seven primate species has shown that stress among
low-ranking primates is a function of two variables: (1) the
rate of stressors to which individuals are exposed, for
instance, in the form of harassment by dominants, and (2)
the opportunities they have to ﬁnd social support, espe-
cially among kin (Abbott et al., 2003). As a result, ranking
low can turn out to be a blessing under some circumstances,
for instance,
in old age. As Sapolsky (2004b, p. 393)
comments in the case of wild baboons, males that have
always ranked low in the hierarchy often age surrounded by
familiar kin and friends, among whom they can ﬁnd relief
in times of stress. On the other hand, former alpha males
can be traumatized by the experience of losing rank and,
under harassment from younger individuals, can be forced
to move into another troop, where they will end their days
miserably in the company of strangers.

levels, which suggests that

Dominance hierarchies are not only the outcome of
individual attributes and various contextual factors. As the
social dynamics unfold, they shape the minds and brains of
individuals in a way that determines their further capacity
to thrive. In a study of squirrel monkeys, Kirk R. Manogue
et al. (1975) have shown that social rank shapes individual
responses to stressors. Alpha males had low baseline
cortisol
they had not been
exposed to prolonged stress. When exposed to a stressor,
however, they had a large increase in cortisol, the kind of
response that prepared them well for an energetic reaction.
Subordinates, by contrast, had a higher baseline and
signiﬁcantly lower increase in response to a stressor. This
pattern suggests that chronic exposure to stress had left
subordinates with blunted responses in the face of new
challenges, a situation that left them ill-positioned to react
to stressful events.

they engage in a ﬁght

Dominance relationships do not only shape the brain of
cognitively complex species like primates. When two male
crayﬁsh meet, for instance,
to
establish dominance. The loser moves away and avoids
further contact with the winner. Such ﬁghts have been
shown to shape the responses of a speciﬁc neuron in
the crayﬁsh’s brain (Yeh et al., 1996). Among winners,
the neuron is more likely to be activated in the presence
of the neurotransmitter serotonin, which is associated with
aggressive behavior in this species. Among subordinates,
by contrast, activation of this neuron is more likely to be
inhibited. This neural change is not without consequence:
when two subordinate crayﬁsh are put in competition, they
engage in a ﬁght and one ends up dominating the other. But
things work out differently when previously dominant
males are placed in competition: a ﬁght is engaged, but the
losing crayﬁsh seems unable to accept his subordination,
and keeps engaging the dominant one at the risk of being
killed. Because of similar neural changes, social dynamics
can signiﬁcantly shape dominance hierarchies. Initial wins

and losses in the competition for status help determine how
individuals will behave in further combats. This feedback
loop has been claimed to explain why initial attributes, such
as size and aggressive behavior are insufﬁcient to predict
the outcome of hierarchy formation among ﬁshes (Chase
et al., 2002).

DO HUMANS HAVE HIERARCHIES?

Dominance hierarchies among animals are the outcome of a
large complex of variables: individual attributes rooted in
biological mechanisms, social and environmental factors,
as well as the feedback between them. What about properly
human hierarchies? I will argue that, because of our unique
social-cognitive skills, we form hierarchies that are pro-
foundly different from the ones formed by other primates.
But signiﬁcant research has also documented the impor-
tance of the various mechanisms among humans described
earlier in this chapter. This section brieﬂy summarizes this
research before explaining how humans differ from other
species in the rest of the chapter.

A ﬁrst similarity between humans and other animals is
found in the presence of individual variations as to how
people behave in competitive social settings. The presence
of a drive for dominance is clearly present in humans and
has been documented through various psychological con-
structs. Individuals with so-called “type-A personalities,”
for instance, have been described as prone to being impa-
tient, hostile, aggressive, and competitive (Friedman,
1996). In his book on the psychology of social class,
Michael Argyle (1994, pp. 54e55) contrasts the behavior
of dominant individuals who stand with straight posture
and an expanded chest, and who look at others and gesture,
with the bent posture of submissive individuals who give
deferential head nods, speak less, and do not interrupt high-
status persons.

Several authors have also described important gender
differences with respect to dominance. Moskowitz (1993),
for instance, has shown that, in a cooperative setting, men
tend to be more dominant than women, especially when
interacting with other men. In his study, dominance is
deﬁned as the disposition to try to inﬂuence others or the
outcome of a situation, with key behaviors including telling
the other person what to do, taking control of the resources
necessary to solve the problem, and ignoring the other
person. Reviewing the large literature on the question,
Eleanor Maccoby (1990) has argued that signiﬁcant gender
differences with respect
to dominance and competition
already exist in preschool years. Boys tend to prefer a
rough-and-tumble play style and use language in an
egoistic fashion. Girls, by contrast, tend to use conversation
as a binding process and ﬁnd it difﬁcult to inﬂuence boys.
A large literature has also examined how informal hi-
erarchies rapidly emerge through group dynamics. Fisek

Human Diversity and Societal Hierarchies Chapter | 29 479

and Ofshe (1970) have observed how the distribution of
speaking time and the capacity to inﬂuence group decisions
evolved in groups of three people meeting for the ﬁrst time.
They found that a clear differentiation appears within a few
minutes of the beginning of the conversation, with some
individuals taking more place and having more inﬂuence on
outcomes than others. In a similar spirit, Kalma (1991) has
shown that individuals are good at predicting how much
place they will have in a discussion as soon as they have
seen other participants, but before a word has been spoken.
This and similar studies have been taken as evidence that
dominance hierarchies do not only exist, but play a
pervasive role in small groups and face-to-face interactions
(Booth et al., 2006).

Another inﬂuential stream of research has examined the
hormonal correlates of aggression, competition, and
dominance. As with other primates, testosterone plays a
crucial role. A study conducted among inmates revealed
that men with high testosterone levels were more likely to
have committed crimes involving physical violence than
property crimes, such as burglary and theft, and they were
also more likely to have overtly transgressed prison rules
(Dabbs et al., 1995). Testosterone levels are also predictive
of criminal violence and aggressive dominance among
women (Dabbs and Hargrove, 1997). A large number of
studies have also examined changes in testosterone in
competitive settings, especially in sports (for review, see
Booth et al., 2006). The best-established result
is that
testosterone increases in the face of a challenge, as one
anticipates the efforts to come. After the competition,
testosterone remains high among winners but declines
among losers. This pattern can also be observed among
voters who win or lose an election (Stanton et al., 2009).
Similar results have been used to argue that there is a
reciprocal relationship between hormonal secretion and
social dynamics in humans as in many other species (Mazur
and Booth, 1998). Testosterone levels inﬂuence how one
performs in competitive social settings, but the reverse is
also true. The outcome of social interactions determines
further testosterone levels.

That being said, the relationship between testosterone
and dominance is far from straightforward. Studies of
college students, for instance, have established that young
men and women with higher testosterone levels have a
more engaging and conﬁdent interaction style, which could
be conducive to more helpful behavior (Dabbs et al., 2001).
These ﬁndings suggest that the link between dominance
and testosterone, although present in humans, is strongly
modulated by our disposition to cooperate and capacity to
inhibit aggression (Christiansen, 1998).
It also helps
explain why the relationship between testosterone and so-
cial status among humans is more intricate than among
other primates. Those of us with high levels of testosterone
are far from being guaranteed a high rank in society. In fact,

there is a negative association between testosterone levels
and social status in men, at least when status is deﬁned in
terms of occupational prestige and income (Dabbs, 1992).
This negative association is of limited amplitude, however,
and high testosterone men can also ﬁnd their way to pres-
tigious positions in society. Mazur and Booth (1998) have
argued that high testosterone can motivate both prosocial
and antisocial behaviors, pushing some individuals toward
the bottom of the occupational hierarchy, and others toward
the top.

A large stream of research has looked into the physical,
behavioral, and health correlates of socioeconomic status
(SES). A well-researched relationship exists, for instance,
between height and SES. Various explanations have been
proposed to account for this link, including self-esteem and
dominance, but also the presence of an advantage in
cognitive skills among taller persons (Case and Paxson,
2008). In a similar spirit, Schmitt and Atzwanger (1995)
measured the speed at which people walk through Vienna.
They then stopped the people to inquire about their SES.
They noted that men of higher SES walked signiﬁcantly
faster than men of lower status (although they found no
such correlation among women). Height and walking speed
are not the only variables predictive of SES. Mueller and
Mazur (1996) have examined the link between military
rank and facial dominance, indicated by a prominent chin,
heavy brow ridges, and a muscular face. Using photographs
from the military academy, they rated the facial dominance
of 434 West Point cadets and then found that
it was
correlated with military ranks attained more than 20 years
later. Cadets with low facial dominancedindicated by a
weak chin, slight brow ridges, and a ﬂeshy facedwere less
likely to have gone up in the hierarchy.

The relationship between SES and health has also
attracted signiﬁcant attention. The famous Whitehall study,
for instance, examined the health correlates of rank among
members of the British civil service over several decades
(Marmot et al., 1991). The study found a strong relation-
ship between rank and the prevalence of illness, high blood
pressure, obesity, smoking, and associated mortality risks.
This relationship is also supported by a large literature in
public health,
revealing the existence of a consistent
gradient where individuals of low SES face greater health
risks, independent of factors, such as access to health care
or the dangers inherent in one’s occupation (Rivers and
Joseph, 2010). The relationship between health and status is
even stronger when subjective SES (one’s perceived status)
is taken into account rather than objective SES. A study by
Adler et al. (2000) found that subjective SES in women is
associated with heart rate, sleep latency, abdominal body
fat, and hyperactive cortisol response to chronic stress, even
after controlling for objective SES. Individuals with higher
perceived status are also less at risk of developing the
common cold (Cohen et al., 2008). The relationship

480 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

between subjective SES and health is arguably mediated by
the stress resulting from perceiving oneself as in a position
of subordination relative to other people.

One key question is whether the human drive to attain
higher status, especially among men, is driven by the same
evolutionary logic present in most other species. In other
words, is the ultimate cause of the quest for high status the
outcome of dominant individuals’ greater ﬁtness? Several
authors have argued in favor of this hypothesis (Cummins,
2005; Buss, 2007). Evolutionary psychologist Laura Betzig
(1993), for instance, examined the link between rank and
reproductive success among six early civilizations (Meso-
potamia, Egypt, India, China, Incan Peru, Mexico). She
found that
in all cases, rulers maintained large harems
composed of dozens and sometimes hundreds of fertile
women. In some cases, the reproductive success of the
despots has been so large that it can still be traced in
contemporary populations. The most famous case is that of
the Mongol ruler Ghenghis Khan. A study of the popula-
tion from the territory covered by the former Mongolian
empire suggests that no less than 8% of the men from this
region descend from the famous emperor and his sons
(Zerjal et al., 2003). The link between social status and
reproductive
controversial, however,
because of the way social norms (eg, monogamy) and
technologies (eg, contraception) inﬂuence sexuality and
reproduction. Nevertheless, studies of both premodern
and modern societies have tended to ﬁnd a positive link
between social status, wealth, and fertility among men (but
not among women), suggesting that status pays off in
evolutionary terms in a broad variety of social contexts
(Fieder et al., 2011).

remains

success

UNIQUELY HUMAN SOCIAL
COGNITION

Research reviewed in the previous sections has shown
interesting parallels between human and nonhuman hier-
archies. This research, however, raises important deﬁni-
tional issues. Human hierarchies are sometimes deﬁned in a
way that is similar to those in animal studies. A relationship
of dominance is said to exist, for instance, when one in-
dividual is assertive and aggressive and the other difﬁdent
and deferent. But the concept of a dominance hierarchy is
often extended to refer to any type of inequality, including
the existence of social classes, occupational and wealth
inequalities, and institutional authority. This extension is
problematic, given the complexity of human societies. As
Sapolsky (2004b, p. 363) puts it:

So, the lowly subordinate in the mailroom of the big cor-
poration may, after hours, be deriving tremendous prestige
and self-esteem from being the deacon of his church, or the
captain of her weekend softball team, or may be at the top

of the class at the adult-extension school. One person’s
highly empowering dominance hierarchy may be a mere 9-
to-5 irrelevancy to the person in the next cubicle, and this
will greatly skew results.

What is often missing in discussions of human hierar-
chies is a cogent account of how human culture and unique
social skills alter the dynamics of hierarchy formation. This
is what this section and the following aim at providing. The
concept of culture is arguably the most important in the
study of human societies and, at the same time, the hardest to
deﬁne (Kroeber and Klockhohn, 1952). Explaining what we
mean by culture is made even harder by the growing
recognition
animal
kingdomdincluding apes, but also cetaceans and birdsd
adopt socially transmitted behaviors (Laland and Galef,
2009). Fortunately, a rapidly expanding literature, comparing
human and nonhuman psychology, helps in discerning what
is so speciﬁc about human social cognition.

species

several

that

across

the

Summarizing human speciﬁcity in one sentence, we
might say that we are wired to be attuned to one another.
This attunement begins from the earliest age and shapes the
way we interact with one another throughout our lives.
Indeed, from their ﬁrst days of life, newborns are sensitive
to others’ emotional states. A baby that hears the cries of
another child is more likely to start crying, just as one that
sees a smile is more likely to smile, a phenomenon known
as emotional contagion (Martin and Clark, 1982). Such
reactions appear so early in child development that they are
unlikely to be the result of social learning. In all likelihood,
they are based on hardwired mechanisms that match our
affective reactions of pleasure and displeasure to those of
our peers.

Newborns’ attunement to others is obviously limited by
the narrowness of their understanding of the world. But it
offers the basis on which they build more complex cogni-
tive skills. From 9 to 12 months, for instance, children
begin to actively monitor the gaze of their parents and take
an increasing pleasure in sharing their attention. The
ingenuous interest that a toddler ﬁnds in pointing objects
out to his parents may not be impressive at ﬁrst sight, but it
has no equivalent in the world of primates (Tomasello,
2010, 2014). Apes, for instance, can learn hundreds of
symbols from sign language, as the famous examples of the
bonobo Kanzi and the gorilla Koko have shown. But they
approach language in a way that is very different from
toddlers. Instead of taking pleasure in the simple act of
referring to things, they use language in an almost exclu-
sively instrumental manner.

It would be hard to overemphasize how the pleasure we
take in sharing each other’s attention and emotions trans-
forms our life and societies. It is not only at the foundation
of properly human language; it is also the ground on which
altruism, cooperation, social norms, and morality can

develop. Take altruism, for instance. Carolyn Zahn-Waxler
et al. (1992) have studied how concern for others develops
in toddlers. Between the ages of one and three, children
respond increasingly clearly to the presence of a person in
distress. For instance, they will approach a person that
simulates pain and try to comfort her with a hug, by
handing her a doll, by inquiring if everything is okay or by
manifesting sadness. Felix Warneken et al. (2006) have
shown that 18-month-old toddlers spontaneously try to help
an adult retrieve a marker that
the adult accidentally
dropped on the ﬂoor or to open the door of a cabinet that
the adult is manifestly unable to open. They found that
similar helping behaviors are present among chimpanzees,
although signiﬁcantly less robust, arguably because of
apes’ limited abilities to infer more complex goals (or a
limited interest in doing so).

It is true that apes’ social cognition is signiﬁcantly more
complex than once believed. There is a growing consensus,
for instance, that apes are capable of representing others’
intentions. Placed in competition with an alpha male for a
favored food, a subordinate chimpanzee ﬁrst ﬁnds out if the
dominant individual can see the food and then decides
whether it is safe to approach it or not (Hare et al., 2000).
Similarly, chimpanzees can differentiate, on the basis of
subtle behavioral cues, between an experimenter who re-
fuses to give them food intentionally and another who fails
to deliver it accidentally (Call et al., 2004).

Children’s understanding of the social world, however,
grows rapidly beyond that of their primate cousins. They
also begin by inferring simple goals in their ﬁrst year of
life, but they progressively develop more complex models
of how others see the world. This is most obvious in their
understanding of false beliefs. In a classical experiment, a
puppet named Sally takes a marble, puts it in a basket and
then leaves the room. A second puppet, Anne, then takes
the marble out of the basket and puts it in her own box.
When Sally comes back into the room, the experimenter
asks children: where will Sally look for her marble? Will
she look in the basket (where she thinks it is) or in the box
(where the children know it is)? Research in psychology
demonstrates that, before 4e5 years of age, children claim
that Sally will look in the box, failing to take into account
her false belief (Wimmer and Perner, 1983; Baron-Cohen
et al., 1985). After this age, however, they grasp that she
will look in the basket, because she has no reason to think
that Anne moved the marble into the box. This is not case,
however, for autistic children, who tend to fail the test even
when they grow older.

Extensive research over the past decades has reﬁned our
understanding of false beliefs. First,
is now widely
accepted that children younger than 4 or 5 years of age do
have some grasp of false beliefs, although only at the im-
plicit level. Indeed, toddlers between the ages of one and
two are surprised if Sally looks for the marble in the box,

it

Human Diversity and Societal Hierarchies Chapter | 29 481

when she should not know that
it has been displaced
(Onishi and Baillargeon, 2005; Surian et al., 2007). In other
words, children do have a cognitive model of false beliefs,
but they are still unable to verbalize it. Second, research has
established with a high degree of conﬁdence that apes do
not understand false beliefs in settings similar to the Sally
and Anne test (for review, see Tomasello and Moll, 2013).
Third, the understanding of false beliefs is associated with
the broader capacity of young children to articulate multiple
perspectives on objects, for instance, the capacity to ima-
gine how an object looks from different points of view or to
understand that appearance can differ from reality (Flavell
et al., 1983; Perner et al., 2002).

Human-speciﬁc social motivations and skills allow for
the emergence of social norms and more complex in-
stitutions. As early as age three, for instance, young chil-
dren understand that games have rules, and insist that these
rules be respected (Schmidt and Tomasello, 2012).
Rakoczy et al. (2008), for instance, taught three-year-old
children a simple game called “Dax.” At some point, a
puppet called “Max” arrives and says he also wants to play
Dax. If the puppet failed to play correctly, children inter-
vened to stop him: “No, this is not how you play!” By
contrast, if Max did not say that he wanted to play Dax, but
rather that he wanted to show something interesting to the
children, they did not protest. The Dax game is obviously
simpler than the most complex institutions that humans
have created throughout history. Nevertheless, it illustrates
the foundation on which human culture is built. We do not
simply develop expectations toward one another (what
other primates do). We also devise abstract games in which
expectations are deﬁned in function of one’s role (Searle,
1995; Tomasello, 2014). A long learning process is needed
for children to fully appreciate, for instance, how rights and
obligations are allocated within complex institutions and
how such institutions evolve over time.

Another

important

feature of human-speciﬁc social
cognition is morality. There is signiﬁcant controversy in
psychology and philosophy concerning the exact func-
tioning of moral judgment. Not everyone agrees on the way
in which emotions, intuitions, reasons, and abstract con-
siderations of fairness intervene in the distinction between
good and evil (see, for instance, Prinz, 2007; Baumard,
2016; Mikhail, 2010; Haidt, 2012; Greene, 2013). There is
broad agreement, however, that morality is somehow based
on the sociocognitive and socioaffective skills that I just
described, that is, on our capacity to read other minds and
motivations to help and cooperate with others.

There is also no doubt that morality, through its con-
nections with affects, motivates behavior in important
ways. Indeed, moral judgment is linked to both positive and
negative emotions, directed both toward oneself and others
(Haidt, 2003). Good deeds, for instance, inspire pride in
those who commit
them, and admiration in observers.

482 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

Moral violations, by contrast, tend to elicit negative emo-
tions,
including guilt and shame in transgressors and
indignation and anger in victims or third parties who wit-
ness the transgression. Here again,
there is signiﬁcant
debate as to how exactly moral emotions motivate behavior
(Fessler and Haley, 2003; van Winden, 2007; Clavien and
Klein, 2010; Batson, 2011). There is no doubt, however,
that under a broad range of circumstances, positive and
negative emotions steer us away from moral transgressions.
A large literature in experimental economics, for instance,
has examined how emotions, such as anger and indignation
can, under many circumstances, motivate the punishment
of unfair behavior and promote cooperation (Gintis et al.,
2006; Dubreuil, 2015).

Human-speciﬁc disposition to altruism, cooperation,
norm following, and morality do not offset the mecha-
nisms, discussed in the previous sections, that explain the
formation of dominance hierarchies in the animal kingdom.
They explain, however, why the process of hierarchy for-
mation is much more complex among humans. Develop-
mental psychology can shed a unique light on how the
progressive integration of young children into the world of
norms and morality inﬂuences dominance behavior. It is
well established, for instance, that during preschool years,
important changes happen as to how children try to inﬂu-
ence others and take control of resources (Hawley, 1999;
Pellegrini et al., 2007). While younger children tend to
coerce others into doing what they want, older preschoolers
switch to more subtle approaches based on cooperation,
negotiation, and alliance formation.

This is not to say that coercion, aggression, and intim-
idation play no role among older children. As adults, they
remain capable of gross forms of violence and abuse.
Nevertheless, the socialization process, the development of
social norms and moral judgment, changes what can and
cannot be an effective way of inﬂuencing others dramati-
cally. In the social world of humans, the drive to dominance
can rapidly lead to appalling consequences if one is inca-
pable of controlling one’s impulses and regulating one’s
emotions. In fact, we care so much about how people
regulate the drive to dominance that we recognize various
conditions that prevent people from regulating their emo-
tions as mental disorders. This is the case for antisocial
disorders and psychopathy and also for disorders, such as
narcissism and mania, related to an inﬂated view of one’s
power and value (Johnson et al., 2012).

HOW OUR ANCESTORS CHALLENGED
HIERARCHIES

Most humans today live in societies where hierarchies and
inequalities are ubiquitous: large corporations, religious or-
ganizations, and governments are all organized hierarchically,
and there is a dramatically unequal distribution of wealth,

health, and well-being. This makes it easy to lose sight of the
fact that, from the perspective of our evolutionary history, this
situation is totally extraordinary. For hundreds of thousands of
years, our ancestors lived in small foraging bands with limited
inequalities and no wealth as we know it. How did our an-
cestors evolve, from ape-like dominance hierarchies to a
properly human way of life? Reconstructing our evolutionary
past cannot be done through direct observation. It must rely on
an inference to the best explanation, drawing from research
from a variety of disciplines, including paleoanthropology,
archeology, anthropology, theoretical biology, and compara-
tive cognitive neurosciences.

Ethnographies of historical foragers offer a good start-
ing point for an inquiry into our evolutionary past, although
it is true that the Inuit, Australian Aborigines, or San and
Mbuti people are not relics of the distant Paleolithic.
Indeed, most foraging people, even at the time of their ﬁrst
contact with European explorers, had already had signiﬁ-
cant contact with nonforaging people and, in some cases,
had themselves been involved in agriculture in the past.
Furthermore, questions can be raised as to whether modern
foragers live in habitats that are representative of the ones
found in the Paleolithic (Porter and Marlowe, 2007).
Holding these caveats in mind, however, a comparative
analysis of foraging societies can undeniably reveal how
Homo sapiens tends to organize its social life in the absence
of a state and wealth. One of the most common traits of
foraging societies, for instance, and one that drew the
attention of the ﬁrst European explorers and ethnographers,
was the absence of coercive political authority (Clastres,
1989). Indeed, throughout the world, foragers spend most
of their time in small mobile bands comprised of a few
dozen individuals, who are generally related to one another
(Kelly, 1995; Lee and Daly, 1999). These bands are
embedded in a broader social landscape and participate in
ﬁssion-fusion networks: groups split and new groups are
formed periodically as a function of marriage, afﬁnity, and
necessity.

Life in small bands and the ﬁssion-fusion dynamic are
not proper to Homo sapiens but can be found in several
primate species. What is interesting about human foragers,
though, is the lack of a clear hierarchy, in which more
robust and aggressive individuals impose themselves over
others through bullying and harassment. Foraging societies
are not strictly egalitarian. A division of labor exists along
gender lines, as well as a marked power differential be-
tween younger and older individuals. Nevertheless, among
adults, no one is in position to dominate others through the
use of naked force. Moral suasion exists and individuals
can demonstrate leadership, but there is no ruler capable of
imposing his will to the group. Henrich and Gil-White
(2001) described this
leadership as “freely
conferred deference” and contrasted it with dominance
based on fear and threat.

form of

Human Diversity and Societal Hierarchies Chapter | 29 483

The relative egalitarianism of

foraging societies is
facilitated by the very nature of their mode of subsistence.
In the vast rainforest, desert, or tundra, most adults or
households have the capacity to leave one group and join
another one. In some cases, they can even subsist on their
own. But the possibility of escaping potential bullies is not
the main reason for the infrequency of open forms of
dominance. The key to more egalitarian social relations
among foragers is the disposition to cooperate, enforce
social norms, and develop a sense of fairness. Anthropol-
ogist Christopher Boehm (2012) completed ambitious
surveys of the ethnographic literature on foraging societies
in order to ﬁnd out how they counteracted the drive to
dominance of more aggressive individuals. Among other
things, he looked for instances in which capital punishment
had been imposed on an individual. Not only did he ﬁnd
several instances of executions, but found that, in about half
of the cases, the person put to death was a man who was
intimidating the group through malicious
sorcery or
different forms of aggression (Boehm, 2012, pp. 83e85).
In the other cases, the execution targeted individuals who
had committed serious moral breaches (eg, violation of a
taboo, sexual transgression, betrayal of the group).

Capital punishment is obviously a rare and extreme
form of punishment. Imposing it is dangerous. There is a
risk of retaliation, unless the entire group is in agreement
with the sanction. Moreover, by carrying out an execution,
a foraging band loses one of its members, someone who
could contribute to the group’s subsistence. As a result,
social control takes signiﬁcantly milder forms most of the
time. Gossip, ridicule, and ostracism, for instance, are
favored tools used against arrogant individuals who try to
impose themselves over others, refuse to share, or adopt all
kinds of antisocial behaviors. Such tools are efﬁcient not
only because foragers want to avoid the negative feeling of
shame, but also because they care about social status. In a
world in which cooperation is often needed for survival,
maintaining a good reputation is crucial for ﬁnding partners
and allies. In this sense, Baumard (2010) has argued that
open and direct punishment is rather unusual among for-
agers, and that the motivation to behave fairly is, more
often than not, driven by the need to position oneself as a
partner of choice in the market of cooperation.

Boehm (1993, 1999) argues that the human capacity for
social control and cooperation has led through evolution to
the emergence of “reverse dominance hierarchies.” In
contrast to what happens in ape societies, aggressive and
intimidating foragers generally fail to establish dominance
over others and are instead pushed toward the bottom of the
hierarchy, reversing the usual pyramid. There is little doubt
that such a reversal occurred at some point in the human
lineage. An interesting question, however, is when did it
happened and what prompted it? Unfortunately, we do not
have direct access to the social
life of our forebears.

We cannot directly observe how australopithecines, Homo
erectus or Neandertals treated more aggressive individuals
who tried to dominate others. Nevertheless, the archeo-
logical and paleoanthropological records can help docu-
ment major transitions in social organization and modes of
subsistence. A reasonable assumption is that we can read
the gradual emergence of the disposition for cooperation in
the human lineage in these transitions. As cooperation is
what stands behind the capacity of foragers to oppose more
aggressive and dominant individuals, ﬁnding the roots of
cooperation is tantamount to ﬁnding the origins of equality
among foragers.

In previous works (Dubreuil, 2010a,b; Henshilwood
and Dubreuil, 2011; Dubreuil and Henshilwood, 2013), I
argued that three major transitions can be identiﬁed in the
human lineage, each of them coinciding with a signiﬁcant
change in social cognition and an increase in our forebears’
capacity to cooperate. The ﬁrst transition came with the
slow emergence of the genus Homo, between 2.5 and
1.5 million years ago. This transition is linked with major
changes in hominid morphology, including increased brain
size in Homo habilis, Homo ergaster, and early H. erectus,
the progressive loss of upper limb morphology facilitating
climbing, and the evolution of morphological features
adapted to long-distance walking and running (McHenry
and Cofﬁng, 2000). In all likelihood, this new morphology
was linked to early humans moving into a new ecological
niche. Early members of the genus Homo, in contrast with
australopithecines, could not easily climb trees to ﬁnd
protection, but could walk long distances through more
open landscapes in search of plants, small prey, or fresh
carcasses to butcher, thanks to an increasingly regular use
of stone tools (Ungar et al., 2006). I have argued that this
new mode of foraging implied a greater capacity for
cooperation, the kind that could be supported by a growing
motivation to share attention and collaborate on joint tasks
(Dubreuil, 2010a). Indeed, early humans could stay on the
ground while protecting themselves against powerful
predators (eg, lions, hyenas), they could support less mo-
bile members of the group (eg, pregnant women, small
children, wounded individuals)
through long-distance
walking, and could confront other scavengers to access
carcasses early on.

The colonization of this new niche by early members of
the genus Homo triggered an evolutionary process that
spanned several hundreds of thousands of years. During the
period between 1.5 and 0.3 million ybp, human brains grew
slowly but steadily, suggesting a sustained evolutionary
pressure for more advanced cognitive skills (Rightmire,
2004). Technology also progressed slowly, but major
changes were introduced in the organization of social life.
By the end of this period, our ancestors had mastered
control over ﬁre, which provided protection against pred-
ators and cold, but also facilitated digestion, leading to

484 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

improvements

important
in human diet. Homo hei-
delbergensis and Neandertals were no longer limited to
small-game hunting and scavenging, but became top-level
predators who could switch to large-game hunting when
appropriate (Thieme, 1997; Richards et al., 2000). Large-
game hunting provides strong evidence of advanced
cooperation among early humans, not only because it has to
be conducted in groups to be efﬁcient, but also because
there is no point in adopting such a risky mode of subsis-
tence if hunters cannot ﬁnd ways of sharing meat with one
another and of bringing back carcasses to a base camp to
feed small children, pregnant women, and incapacitated
individuals, as modern H. sapiens do (Gurven, 2004).

Additional evidence of improving cooperation during
this period is found in the changing life-history patterns of
hominins (Kaplan et al., 2000). Indeed, one of the most
striking characteristics of modern humans is the time they
need to become adults. While chimpanzees can feed
autonomously at about four years of age, human children
typically cannot before adolescence. This prolonged period
of dependence plays a crucial role for human children: they
use it to develop their big brains. In fact, social, emotional,
linguistic, and technical skills keep developing well into
teenage years and young adulthood. But a longer childhood
also has signiﬁcant energetic implications: while female
chimpanzees care for only one child at a time, women in
foraging societies must typically care for two, three, or
four. They can do it because,
in contrast with female
chimpanzees, they can count on the support of both female
and male members of their band. Human cooperation and
sharing is the key mechanism that explains the evolution of
modern human life history, by supporting massive ener-
getic transfers from adults to children.

Several studies have attempted to reconstruct the evo-
lution of life history in the human lineage, by analyzing
changes in morphology and, more precisely, patterns of
dental and brain development (Robson and Wood, 2008).
Although the evidence is generally hard to decipher, a
prudent interpretation is that early H. erectus had already
departed from the ape-like life history, indicating signiﬁ-
cant changes in the organization of its social life, but was
also far from having developed the modern pattern. By
contrast, more
as
H. heidelbergensis and Neandertal were closer to modern
humans. Childhood and adolescence may not have fol-
lowed exactly the same pattern, suggesting some differ-
ences at the cognitive and behavioral levels, but there is
little doubt that raising children in these populations was a
long and largely cooperative venture (Hublin et al., 2015).
A third key transition in the history of mankind is
associated with the emergence of so-called “behavioral
modernity,” that is to say, of the set of behavioral traits
typically associated with H. sapiens, including more com-
plex and rapidly evolving technologies, as well as abstract

hominin

recent

species,

such

it was thought

representations and symbols. At least three major points of
contention remain in the literature concerning the evolution
of behavioral modernity. First, when exactly did behavioral
modernity ﬁrst emerge in the human lineage? For a long
time,
to coincide with the arrival of
H. sapiens in Eurasia between 50,000 and 40,000 years
ago. It is now broadly accepted that strong evidence of
behavioral modernitydincluding abstract engravings, per-
sonal ornaments, and compound toolsdwere already in
Africa in the period between 100,000 and 50,000 years ago,
and arguably earlier (Henshilwood and Dubreuil, 2011).
One possibility is that modern behavior progressively
emerged with the evolution of morphologically modern
H. sapiens around 200,000 years ago, but the evidence
remains scarce and contested.

A second point of contention is the alleged presence of
modern behavior among closely related Neandertals.
Although the majority opinion among archeologists has
long been that
there was a signiﬁcant cognitive and
behavioral gap between Neandertals and H. sapiens, a
number of ﬁndings raise questions about how the two
groups differed from one another. One of them is the pre-
sumed existence of interbreeding between H. sapiens and
Neandertals, as evidenced by the presence of Neandertalian
genes in human population originating outside Africa
(Green et al., 2010). Other ﬁndings concern material
culture, including an abstract engraving found in a late
Neandertal site in Gibraltar more than 39,000 years ago and
the well-known existence of personal ornaments from the
Grotte du Renne in France (Caron et al., 2011; Zilhão,
2012; Rodriguez-Vidal et al., 2014). Although substantial
controversy remains concerning the modernity of Nean-
dertals, a prudent conclusion is that they formed a highly
cooperative population, with advanced social cognition,
and that the behavioral gap between them and H. sapiens
may not have been unbridgeable.

A third open question concerning modern behavior is
how to account for its evolution at the neural and cognitive
levels. Although most authors agree that its emergence had
something to do with the evolution of social cognition
(including language or culture), researchers do not neces-
sarily agree on what particular changes in the human mind
and brain led to the emergence of symbolism, art, and
rapid technological progress. My own proposal (Dubreuil,
2010a; Henshilwood and Dubreuil, 2011; Dubreuil and
Henshilwood, 2013) is that modern behavior resulted from
advancements in mind reading and, more precisely, from the
development of the capacity, described earlier (section:
Uniquely Human Social Cognition), to represent the world
through the eyes of others. The capacity to imagine how
people see things (and not simply to understand, as apes do,
that they see things) has allowed early H. sapiens to develop an
interest in their own appearance and reputation, as well as in
objective representations of situations and meanings.

Human Diversity and Societal Hierarchies Chapter | 29 485

Independent of the details of our evolutionary history, a
few indisputable facts need to be emphasized. The main one
is that humans, over the past 2 million years, moved into an
evolutionary niche that fostered the adoption of new modes
of subsistence based on unprecedented levels of cooperation.
There is no question that this new social organization was
accompanied by major cognitive and affective changes
through the selection of unique prosocial motivations, mind-
reading skills, and forms of communication.

Further debates concern the precise selection mecha-
nism that led to the evolution of human-speciﬁc cognitive
skills. Some authors contend that natural selection, oper-
ating at the individual level, is sufﬁcient to account for the
evolution of cooperation and morality (Baumard et al.,
2013). From this perspective, humans moved into a niche
where more prosocial individuals had a ﬁtness advantage
over others, arguably because they were desirable partners
in the market of cooperation. A second possibility is that
early groups of Homo that were comprised of a greater
share of prosocial individuals were more prosperous than
others, and that cooperation evolved through the mecha-
nism known as group selection (Bowles and Gintis, 2011).
Individual and group selection are not mutually incompat-
ible, and both may have played a role in the evolution of
human cooperation.

Although reconstructing the social life of extinct species
is challenging, we now know enough about it to make an
informed guess about when humans got rid of ape-like
dominance hierarchies. The ﬁrst point that we can make
is that early Homo species, living roughly between 2.5 and
1.5 million years ago, had departed from the typical ape
niche and adopted a more cooperative way of life. This
trend became even more pronounced during the long reign
of H. erectus, spanning more than a million years. If ape-
like dominance hierarchies still existed during this long
period, it must have been in a diminished form. That being
said,
the last
300,000 years in late H. erectus, H. heidelbergensis,
Neandertal, and early H. sapiensdas is evidenced by their
changing life histories, the adoption of large-game hunting,
and the controlled use of ﬁredstrikes me as entirely
incompatible with the existence of dominance hierarchies,
at least as they exist in ape societies. The cooperative skills
of these human populations were clearly sufﬁcient to keep
would-be tyrants under control.

the level of cooperation observed over

WHY HIERARCHIES ARE FUNCTIONAL

I have argued so far that dominance hierarchies are ubiq-
uitous among social animals and result from increasingly
well-understood neurological and behavioral mechanisms,
as well as social dynamics. Although many of
these
mechanisms are present in our species, I explained that the
comparison between human and animal hierarchies is often

misleading. Indeed, humans have unique cognitive skills
that support exceptional levels of cooperation and that have
led in our evolutionary history to what Boehm (1999) calls
“reversed dominance hierarchies,” where uncooperative
and aggressive bullies are pushed toward the bottom of
hierarchies instead of rising to the top.

This account, however, raises further questions. The
fact is that over the past 10,000 years or so most humans
stopped living in relatively egalitarian foraging bands and
were absorbed into increasingly large polities. They were
broughtdwillingly or notdunder the control of chiefs,
kings, and presidents. Despite the success of some of these
polities at maintaining relative equality between their sub-
jects or citizens, the undisputable fact remains that most
existing and past civilizations involved massive inequalities
and forms of exploitation rarely seen in the animal
kingdom. The existence of large-scale hierarchies as we
know them raises an interesting scientiﬁc puzzle. How is it
that humansdwho, for most of their history, have been
successful
in tackling the ambitions of would-be alpha
malesdended up creating forms of social organizations in
which wealth and power is more often than not concen-
trated in the hands of the few? The question is the object of
old controversies in philosophy, anthropology, and other
social sciences. Why do chiefdoms and states exist? What
are the origins of political power and domination?

Despite the variety of answers that these questions have
received, two opposite views seem to have resisted the
passage of time. The ﬁrst contends that hierarchies exist
because they yield collective beneﬁts. Political centraliza-
tion provides cooperation the scaffolding necessary to
ﬂourish beyond the foraging band. In philosophy, this view
is generally associated with social contract theorists, such
as Hobbes, Locke, and Rousseau. A similar perspective is
also present in the more recent work of various social
scientists inspired by functionalism and systems theory and,
perhaps most prominently, those of Talcott Parsons (1966)
and Elman Service (1962). The latter proposed an inﬂu-
ential typology of “stages” in the evolution of human so-
cieties (from bands to tribes, chiefdoms, and states), with
each stage leading to larger polities and more centralized
leadership. A second view on the origin of hierarchies is
that they result primarily from strategies of aggrandizing
rulers, mindful of their own interests. This view is associ-
ated with the works of Marxist authors, including most
prominently, Friedrich Engels (1884), and also with the
classical work of Franz Oppenheimer (1972 [1908]), neo-
evolutionary anthropologist Morton H. Fried (1967), and
more recently, anthropologist Brian Hayden (2008, 2011).
I will call the ﬁrst perspective the functionalist approach
and the second the conﬂict-based approach to hierarchies.
Economist Paul H. Rubin (2000) proposed a similar
distinction when he opposed “dominance hierarchies,”
based on fear and exploitation, to “production hierarchies,”

486 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

supporting cooperation. At ﬁrst sight both perspectives
seem plausible. Anyone who has spent more than a week in
a large organization will recognize that some form of hi-
erarchical control is necessary for things to function. At the
same time, the idea that leaders and rulers care more about
their self-interest than about the well-being of their group or
community sounds reasonable as well. I will argue that we
do not have to choose between the functionalist and
conﬂict-based approaches to hierarchies. As is often the
case in the social sciences, a closer examination of the
cognitive and behavioral mechanisms behind the phenom-
enon can help bridge the gap between the two positions
(Bloch, 2013). My claim is that, given the nature of human
cooperation,
indeed a
precondition to sustaining cooperation in very large groups,
but that, depending on the form they take, hierarchies also
create room for unprecedented exploitation.

the creation of hierarchies

is

Over the past decades, a large literature examined the
dynamics of cooperation in the context of economic ex-
periments (Fehr and Gächter, 2000; Camerer, 2003;
Henrich et al., 2004; Gintis et al., 2006; Guala, 2012).
This research established without any doubt that, under a
broad range of circumstances, people are willing to incur
some personal costs to punish unfair and opportunistic
behavior and that this motivation is instrumental in sup-
porting high levels of cooperation. For practical reasons,
experimental research on cooperation focuses on the dy-
namics of small groups, where the behavior of individuals
can be easily observed and measured. Research on small
groups is crucial
to understand the conditions under
which people engage in cooperative ventures with col-
leagues,
friends, and relatives. These are the most
meaningful relationships we take part in, but they are not
the only ones. Most of us are not afraid to take a walk
alone at night because we know that police ofﬁcers
actively work to protect us. Most of us beneﬁt every day
from dozens of goods that would not exist if thousands of
peopledif not millionsdacross the world did not coor-
dinate their actions through an amazing number of legal
and economic arrangements. The crucial question is: why
do we put our subsistence and well-being in the hands of
people that we will never meet?

The question is relevant because the cooperative dispo-
sition we inherited from our foraging ancestors, although in
many ways impressive, is also severely limited. We love to
cooperate, but our prosocial motivations rapidly vanish
when others deceive us or take advantage of us. Moreover,
we are inclined to do less than our share as soon as we can
do so without damaging our reputations (Kurzban, 2011;
Pedersen et al., 2013). In daily face-to-face cooperation with
our friends and colleagues, we overcome such limitations by
keeping track of what others are doing. We make sure that
everyone contributes to common goals and blame or shun
free-riders when they fail to do so. But keeping score of

everyone’s actions becomes rapidly impracticable when
cooperation involves too many people. Time is a scarce
resource and much of it is needed to ﬁnd out who did what
to whom and under which circumstances. Gossip can pro-
vide information about people outside our immediate vi-
cinity, but it is also time consuming and inefﬁcient when too
many people are concerned (Dunbar, 1996).

in one way or another, support

Cognitive limitations thus impose design constraints on
the main institutions of human societies. For all
time,
meaningful cooperation between more than a few dozen
people has depended on the presence of institutions that
can,
trust between in-
dividuals that are not actively monitoring each other: trust
that your colleagues in the other branches of the ﬁrm are
doing their work, trust that the members of the other regi-
ments are not deserting, trust that your follow citizens are
paying their taxes and respecting the law, trust that the
school personnel is taking care of your children, etc. Tribal
systems, premodern states, modern governments, and large
corporations have at least one design feature in common:
they are all based on some form of grouping, in which the
opinions and preferences of a representative reliably in-
dicates the behavior of his peers, followers, or subordinates.
Such groupings are extremely diversedclans,
lineages,
societies, corporations, patronage networks, divisions,
branches, departments, regiments, political parties, etc.d
and can generally be treated as group agents, in the sense
that they have a capacity to form beliefs and desires of their
own, as well as to act upon those intentional states (List
and Pettit, 2011). At
the creation
of group agents is closely linked to the human social-
cognitive capacity to create institutional facts (Dubreuil
and Henshilwood, 2013; Tomasello, 2014).

the cognitive level,

In modern urban societies, large-scale cooperation is
supported by complex group agents, such as governments
and corporations, with long chains of command through
which a CEO or a minister provides directives to senior
managers, who in turn oversee the work of middle and
lower management, who oversees the work of the rank and
ﬁle. Management specialists study what they call “span of
control,” that is to say, the number of employees under the
supervision of a manager in an organization (Keren and
Levhari, 1979; Meier and Bohte, 2003; Topp and Desjar-
dins, 2011). Optimal span of control, which makes the
organization most efﬁcient, is known to vary importantly
depending on context. When work is highly routinized, a
manager can supervise up to 25 employees without too
much difﬁculty. But when work is more analytic in nature,
a narrower span of control is needed, with a ratio that can
go down to three to ﬁve employees per manager
in
information-rich environments. Variations in spans of
control further suggest that managers are “nerve centers”
who sustain trust across the organization by creating
bridges between multiple “bands” (Mintzberg, 1971).

Human Diversity and Societal Hierarchies Chapter | 29 487

The creation of group agents to support large-scale
cooperation is not speciﬁc to modern societies. Ethnog-
raphies of the most egalitarian hunters-gatherers, horti-
culturalists, and agriculturalists reveal that clans (or other
kindred structure) play a central role in the establishment
of alliances and exchange networks between bands, set-
tlements, or villages. Thanks to their existence,
in-
dividuals do not have to track the deeds of every person
they might interact with and can focus on the reputation of
a few group agents: which clan is reliable when it comes
to paying the bride price or the wergild, partaking in raids
against neighboring tribes or contributing to public work
projects.

Group agents are necessary for large-scale cooperation
to ﬂourish, but they can take wildly different forms. The
most prominent distinction concerns the way they make
decisions. On the one hand,
there are groups where
everyone has her say and decisions are made mostly
consensually. On the other hand, there are groups where
one or a few individuals make decisions that they impose
on subordinates. Let’s call the ﬁrst form of decision making
“collegial” and the second “autocratic” (and let us
acknowledge that there is a continuum between the two
models). Autocratic and collegial decision making can both
predominate in one society, just as they can coexist under
various forms. For instance,
traditional chiefdoms and
premodern states are autocratic, but generally coexist with
institutions like kindred structures, age grades, corpora-
tions, or secret societies, in which decision making can be
more collegial. Similarly, modern governments and large
corporations are structured mostly autocratically but coexist
with a vast array of associations where individuals have
more or less of an equal say. Even smaller work units
within large hierarchical organizations generally have some
room for collegial decision making (in fact, a general trend
in management science over the past decades has been to
emphasize the importance of
fostering some form of
collegiality in large organizations in order to empower
employees and support their engagement).

Collegial and autocratic models have strongly divergent
implications for the organization of cooperation. I want to
mention two: the costs of decision making and the align-
ment of individual motivations with group decision, what
List and Pettit (2011) call “incentive compatibility.”

l Costs of decision making: Under the collegial approach,
decision making is time consuming. Long discussions
are needed to reach consensus. By contrast, autocratic
decision making can go quickly (to fully appreciate
the point, compare decision making by an academic
department and by an army regiment).

l Alignment of individual motivations: Under the collegial
model, securing individual motivation to comply with
group decisions is typically easier, because everyone

takes part in the decision. The situation is more complex
under the autocratic approach, where individuals do not
have their say.

Understanding the costs and beneﬁts of both models is
crucial in explaining why hierarchies exist among humans
and what form they take. In many circumstances of social
life, collegiality is an obvious choice. It works especially
well among small groups, when there is no pressing need to
make critical decisions or when individuals’ beliefs and
interests are well aligned with one another. This is gener-
ally the case within the household, within friend networks,
or within small work units in larger organizations. By
contrast, collegiality becomes ineffective when too many
people are concerned, when urgent decisions must be made,
and when opinions are too divergent.

More autocratic decision making addresses the prob-
lems of collegiality, but comes with its own challenge.
Indeed, people need good reasons to comply with decisions
they did not contribute to making. Generally, this good
reason is some form of material compensation. Throughout
history, autocratic decision making appears when leaders
have the capacity to redistribute wealth and gifts of all sorts
to secure the compliance of their subordinates (Earle, 1997;
Trigger, 2003; Hayden and Villeneuve, 2011). This is the
case with “big men” in traditional societies, chiefs in so-
called complex chiefdoms, and aristocrats and kings in
both premodern and modern states. This is also the case
with managers in modern ﬁrms or government, where
subordination to a chain of command is a condition of
employment. Autocratic decision making typically persists
as long as subordinates depend on rulers for their subsis-
tence and well-being. This reality imposes a constraint on
the expansion of autocratic group agents, which is limited
by the capacity of leaders to extract resources and turn
followers into subordinates.

FROM COOPERATIVE TO EXPLOITATIVE
HIERARCHIES

The discussion outlined in the previous section clearly has a
functionalist ﬂavor. My claim is that, without hierarchies,
large-scale cooperation would be impossible. Several peo-
ple, however, are not satisﬁed with a purely functionalist
explanation of hierarchies. It is easy to understand why.
Chiefdoms, states, and other large organizations often
involve such dramatic forms of violence, mistreatment, and
injustice that it is hard to deny that not everyone beneﬁts
from them. From the perspective of a slave, a serf, or a
member of a subordinate cast, hierarchies are more about
exploitation than cooperation. My claim is that both the
functionalist and conﬂict-based approaches capture part of
the truth about hierarchies. In this section, I present three of
the main reasons why hierarchies, although functional in

488 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

some sense, are not always equally functional for everyone
(and sometimes even at the source of massive violence and
abuse).

The ﬁrst reason is linked to the very nature of human
hierarchies. Leaders, even when they are constrained by
collegiality, can draw some advantages from their position:
prestige, credibility, discretionary control over resources,
access to privileged information or contact networks, etc.
The most egalitarian nonstate societies have rules and
strategies to ensure that these advantages remain limited
(Clastres, 1989; Boehm, 1999, 2012). Norms against
polygyny, ostentatious displays of wealth, debt bondage, or
slavery, for instance, help restrain the power of chiefs. In
Iroquois society, for example, chiefs could capture slaves
during raids against neighboring tribes, but after a few
months, these slaves had to either be adopted into an Iro-
quois family (replacing a deceased person) or tortured to
death. As a result, ambitious leaders could not accumulate
large numbers of slaves that they could then use as a power
basis to dominate the rest of their community (Viau, 1997).
But even under the best circumstances, controlling leaders
and rulers in a hierarchical context presents challenges. As
the organization grows, members lose the capacity to track
the behavior of their superiors directly and might start
suspecting that the latter are taking advantage of their po-
sition (which may or may not be true). The challenge can
never be fully eradicated in a world in which time is a
scarce resource, although attempts can be made to mini-
mize it. (In fact, a central objective of extremely popular
leadership studies is to identify ways in which leaders of
large organizations can build trust and keep their base
engaged.)

I have argued elsewhere (Dubreuil, 2010a) that the main
determinant of exploitative relationships is not the presence
of hierarchies per se, but the existence of strong relation-
ships of debt and dependence between leaders and their
subordinates. The argument
is that, once subordinates
become highly dependent on leaders, they lose the capacity
to exert an ethical check on them. The centrality of debt and
dependence in the emergence of domination is a classical
theme in political philosophy. It is ubiquitous in the work
of Machiavelli, but was never so clearly described as in La
Boétie’s (2012 [1549], p. 30) Discourse on Voluntary
Servitude:

There have always been ﬁve or six who had the tyrant’s ear,
and have gotten there by themselves or else were called by
him to be accomplices in his cruelties and companions in
his pleasures, to pander to his lusts and share in the goods
he pillages. These six manage their chief so well that, out of
solidarity, he has to be wicked not only for his own wick-
edness but also for theirs. These six have six hundred who
proﬁt under them and they do to their six hundreds what the
six to do the tyrant. These six hundred hold under

themselves six thousand whom they have raised up in state,
to whom they grant either the governing of provinces of the
handling of funds, so they will have a hand in their rapacity
and cruelty and carry it out when the time comes, and
otherwise do so much evil that they can only endure in their
shadow, and be exempt
from the law and punishment
through them.

La Boétie’s description can be linked to my argument
earlier regarding autocratic decision making. Autocracy
reduces the cost of decision making, which explains why it
can emerge in the ﬁrst place. But to impose themselves,
autocratic rulers need to make sure that the preferences of
their subordinates align with theirs, which typically ne-
cessitates the transfer of a large number of resources and
privileges. These transfers,
in turn, make subordinates
dependent on their rulers (through the system so brilliantly
described by La Boétie) and unlikely to bite the hand that
feeds them. In some circumstances, these mechanisms can
lead to a vicious circle of growing oppression. The more
the rulers and their subordinates oppress the masses to
extract resources, the more they fear losing power and, as a
result, the more they oppress the masses to extract more
resources to consolidate their oppression (Fig. 29.1).
Typically, oppressive systems collapse when rulers become
unable to ﬁnd the resources they need to support the loyalty
of their subordinates, provoking defection in the ruling
elites and the creation of new alliances with formerly
excluded political actors (Tilly, 2004, 2007).

The role of debt and dependence in the emergence of
exploitative hierarchies is a common theme in anthropol-
ogy and archeology. In his classical work on Highland
Burma, for instance, Edmund Leach (1954) describes the
ﬂuctuation between two types of political structures, one
where power is in the hands of a single chief with loyal
subordinates and the other, more republican, where a bal-
ance of power exists between different clans. A similar
distinction is at
the foundation of the dual-processual

FIGURE 29.1 The dynamics of oppression.

theory in archeology (Blanton et al., 1996) that distin-
guishes two paths leading to complexity: one in which
political power is based on the personal networks of
aggrandizing leaders, the other where it rests on the equi-
librium between corporate groups. These accounts can be
linked to the distinction proposed earlier between collegial
and autocratic decision making. Earle (1997), Testart
(2004a,b, 2013), and Hayden (2008, 2011) have also pro-
vided detailed arguments concerning the role of wealth,
ostentatious gift-giving, slavery, and debt bondage in
securing the types of personal dependence at the origins of
inequality and exploitation. Various strategies can be
developed by subordinates to resist exploitation when hi-
erarchies are based on strong relationships of dependence,
including playing one chief against the other (Hayden and
Villeneuve, 2011) or withdrawing cooperation and insu-
lating oneself from rulers, as lower status groups often do in
undemocratic states (Tilly, 2007).

The third reason why hierarchies, while in some sense
functional, often lead to injustice and exploitation is found
in our psychological
reactions to inequalities between
groups. Sidanius and Pratto (1999) developed the concept
of social dominance to refer to the nexus of psychological
mechanisms activated when a group is perceived as having
higher status, prestige, and power. There is strong evidence
that hierarchies trigger asymmetric behavioral responses
among high-status and low-status groups. While in-group
favoritism predominates among members of dominant
groups, out-group favoritism is often observed among
members of subordinate groups. For instance, members of
low-status groups tend to perceive themselves and their
peers as less competent and less deserving than members of
high-status groups. As a consequence, emphasizing the
lower status of a group can lead its members to adopt self-
defeating behavior
the very negative
stereotypes from which they suffer. Such behavioral
asymmetries are particularly well documented in the case of
African Americans, but seem to be a central feature of all
relationships between groups of unequal status. A related
phenomenon is known as social justiﬁcation and is asso-
ciated with research conducted by John Jost et al. (2009).
The phenomenon refers to people’s tendency to justify and
legitimize the system in place, independently of how po-
litical and economic power is distributed within it. Such a
tendency is widely documented, not only among those who
take advantage of the system, but also among underprivi-
leged groups. It is true that, other things being equal, slaves,
members of low castes, proletarians, and subordinate ethnic
groups do not support existing social arrangements as much
as members of high-status groups, but they nevertheless
present a strong bias in favor of the status quo even when it
becomes manifestly unfavorable to them.

reinforces

that

It is not entirely clear why exploited and underprivi-
leged social groups have a bias in favor of existing

Human Diversity and Societal Hierarchies Chapter | 29 489

hierarchies, but a plausible explanation can be found in
Leon Festinger’s (1957) theory of cognitive dissonance,
according to which people experience psychological
discomfort when they hold conﬂicting mental states.
Indeed, the presence of strong inequalities and exploitative
social arrangements can produce a conﬂict in subordinate
groups between the frustration of being disadvantaged and
the conviction that the system cannot be altered. Psychol-
ogist Susan Fiske (2011, p. 67) describes this tension in the
following way:

Low-status groups face a conﬂict between favoring their in-
group and living within a system that devalues it, so they
show more ambivalence toward their own group than high-
status people show toward theirs. The more low-status
groups view hierarchy as inevitable, the worse is this in-
ternal conﬂict between valuing their group and acknowl-
edging society’s contempt for it.

Reframing the situation and representing social ar-
rangements as fair does not improve the material conditions
of underprivileged groups, but can relieve the signiﬁcant
displeasure resulting from cognitive dissonance.

The concepts of social dominance and system justiﬁ-
cation do not explain why marked group-based inequalities
became so important with the centralization of political
power (while they were much more limited among our
foraging ancestors), but they partly explain why exploit-
ative social arrangements often persist and remain unchal-
lenged by those who suffer under them.

CONCLUSION

This chapter aimed at providing a general overview of the
diversity of social hierarchies in human populations. I had
no intention of being exhaustive, as literally thousands of
booksdin virtually all disciplines in the humanities, the
social sciences, and the life sciencesdhave been written on
one aspect or another of this question. My objective was
more modest: to provide a broad overview of the main
mechanisms behind the creation of hierarchies in humans. I
have shown that these mechanisms operate at various levels
(biological, psychological, and social) and interact with one
another to produce myriad outcomes. From mostly egali-
tarian foraging bands to large repressive regimes, as well as
from small despotic chiefdoms to large democratic states,
formal and institutionalized hierarchies often coexist with
informal ones, and both can have wide-ranging inﬂuences
on people’s attitudes, behaviors, beliefs, well-being, health,
fertility, and countless other variables.

My argument was broad, but can be summarized in a

few key points:

l Social animals beneﬁt from living in groups but are also
in competition with one another when it comes to

490 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

feeding and mating. Dominance hierarchies are the
outcome of an animals’ interest in having privileged ac-
cess to resources and mating opportunities, but also of
avoiding aggression and maintaining relatively peaceful
relationships with their conspeciﬁcs. The formation of
hierarchies is inﬂuenced by several variables, including
individual attributes, environmental factors, and social
dynamics within groups.

l The basic mechanisms supporting an animal’s drive to
dominance are also present in humans and their effects
can be observed in multiple ways. Nevertheless,
humans do not form dominance hierarchies in the way
that primates do. Their unequaled capacity for coopera-
tion, rooted in unique social-cognitive skills and proso-
cial motivations, gives them the capacity to collectively
resist potential alpha males.

l Control over aggressive and antisocial individuals is
ubiquitous in small foraging bands and was the norm
before the Neolithic. It appeared gradually during the
long evolution of
the genus Homo, supported by
changes in human social cognition. In all likelihood,
ape-like dominance hierarchies disappeared some hun-
dreds of thousands of years ago and were absent in
H. heidelbergensis, Neandertals, and early H. sapiens.
l Humans are experts at cooperating, but face signiﬁcant
difﬁculty when they try to extend cooperation beyond a
few dozen individuals. Because of their limited capacity
to monitor what people are doing, they need to design
institutionsdbased on collective agents
hierarchical
with a reputation of their owndto maintain trust in
large-scale cooperative networks. Some collective
agents make decisions collegially, which is
time
consuming but helps to secure legitimacy, whereas
others do it autocratically, which is more efﬁcient but
requires resources to secure the alignment of individual
motivations with rulers’ decisions.

l Hierarchies are functional in that their existence is a
precondition of large-scale cooperation. On the other
hand, they can easily lead to forms of inequality, exploi-
tation and mistreatment unobserved in the animal
kingdom. Exploitative hierarchies develop for a number
of reasons, but most notably when subordinates depend
on rulers for their well-being and have no incentive to
exert an ethical check on them. Once in place, exploit-
ative hierarchies persist partly because underprivileged
and exploited groups are biased in favor of the status
quo, even when they suffer from it.

The account proposed in this chapter provides no
roadmap to the abolition of exploitation and injustice, but
the mechanisms it described should be of interest to anyone
who wishes to transform hierarchies we are a part of to
promote greater respect, equality, and cooperation. There is
no question that securing the subsistence and well-being of

billions of people does and will continue to require high
levels of cooperation. Humanity will not return to hunting
and gathering and, in this sense, there are no alternatives to
hierarchies. Nevertheless, an understanding of the mecha-
nisms behind them can explain why they can be poorly
designed and how they can be changed for the better.

REFERENCES

Abbott, D.H., Keverne, E.B., Bercovitch, F.B., et al., 2003. Are subordinates
always stressed? A comparative analysis of rank differences in cortisol
levels among primates. Hormones and Behaviour 43 (1), 67e82.

Adler, N.E., Epel, E.S., Castellazzo, G., Ickovics, J.R., 2000. Relationship
of subjective and objective social status with psychological and
physiological functioning: preliminary data in healthy white women.
Health Psychology 19, 586e592.

Archie, E.A., Altmann, J., Alberts, S.C., 2012. Social status predicts

wound healing in wild baboons. PNAS 109 (23), 9017e9022.

Argyle, M., 1994. The Psychology of Social Class. Routledge, New York.
Baron-Cohen, S., Leslie, A.M., Frith, U., 1985. Does the autistic child

have a “theory of mind”? Cognition 21 (1), 37e46.

Batson, D., 2011. What’s wrong with morality? Emotion Review 3,

230e235.

Baumard, N., 2016. The Origins of Fairness: How Evolution Explains Our

Moral Nature. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Baumard, N., 2010. Has punishment played a role in the evolution of

cooperation? A critical review. Mind and Society 9 (2), 171e192.

Baumard, N., André, J.B., Sperber, D., 2013. A mutualistic theory of
morality: the evolution of fairness by partner choice. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences 36 (1), 59e78.

Beehner, J.C., Bergman, T.J., Cheney, D.L., Seyfarth, R.M., Whitten, P.L.,
2006. Testosterone predicts future dominance rank and mating activity
among male chacma baboons. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology
59, 469e479.

Beeman, E.A., 1947. The relation of the interval between castration and 1st
encounter to the aggressive behavior of mice. Anatomical Record 99,
570e571.

Betzig, L., 1993. Sex, succession, and stratiﬁcation in the ﬁrst six civili-
zations: how powerful men reproduced, passed power on to their sons,
and used power to defend their wealth, women and children. In:
Ellis, L. (Ed.), Social Stratiﬁcation and Socioeconomic Inequality, vol.
1. Praeger, New York, pp. 37e74.

Blanton, R., Feinman, G., Kowalewski, S., Peregrine, P., 1996. A dual-
theory for the evolution of mesoamerican civilization.

processual
Current Anthropology 37 (1), 1e14.

Bloch, M., 2013. Anthropology and the Cognitive Challenge. Cambridge

University Press.

Boehm, C., 1993. Egalitarian behavior and reverse dominance hierarchy.

Current Anthropology 34 (3), 227e254.

Boehm, C., 1999. Hierarchy in the Forest. Harvard University Press,

Cambridge.

Boehm, C., 2012. Moral Origins: The Evolution of Virtue, Altruism, and

Shame. Basic Books, New York.

Booth, A., Granger, D., Mazur, A., Kivlighan, K., 2006. Testosterone and

social behavior. Social Forces 85, 167e191.

Bowles, S., Gintis, H., 2011. The Cooperative Species. Princeton Uni-

versity Press, Princeton.

Buss, D.M., 2007. Evolutionary Psychology: The New Science of the

Mind. Omegatype Typography, Inc., Boston.

Call, J., Hare, B., Carpenter, M., Tomasello, M., 2004. “Unwilling” versus
“unable”: chimpanzees understanding of human intentional action.
Developmental Science 7, 488e498.

Camerer, C., 2003. Behavioral Game Theory: Experiment in Strategic

Interactions. Princeton University Press, Princeton.

Caron, F., d’Errico, F., Del Moral, P., Santos, F., Zilhão, J., 2011. The
reality of Neandertal symbolic behavior at the Grotte du Renne, Arcy-
sur-Cure. PLoS One 6 (6), e21545.

Case, A., Paxson, C., 2008. Stature and status: height, ability, and labor

market outcomes. Journal of Political Economy 116, 499e532.

Chase, I.D., Tovey, C., Spangler-Martin, D., Manfredonia, M., 2002. In-
dividual differences versus social dynamics in the formation of animal
dominance hierarchies. PNAS 99, 5744e5749.

Christiansen, K., 1998. Behavioural correlates of

In:
Nieschlag, E., Behre, H.M. (Eds.), Testosterone: Action, Deﬁciency,
Substitution. Springer, Berlin, pp. 125e172.

testosterone.

Clastres, P., 1989. Society Against the State. Zone Books, New York.
Clavien, C., Klein, R., 2010. Eager at fairness or for revenge? Psycho-
logical altruism in economics. Economics and Philosophy 26 (3),
267e290.

Clutton-Brock, T.H., 1988. Reproductive success. In: Clutton-Brock, T.H.
(Ed.), Reproductive Success. University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
pp. 472e486.

Cohen, S., Alper, C.M., Doyle, W.J., et al., 2008. Objective and subjective
socioeconomic status and susceptibility to the common cold. Health
Psychology 27 (2), 268e274.

Cummins, D.D., 2005. Dominance, status, and social hierarchies. In:
Buss, D.M. (Ed.), The Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology. Wiley,
Hoboken, NJ, pp. 676e697.

Dabbs Jr., J.M., 1992. Testosterone and occupational achievement. Social

Forces 70, 813e824.

Dabbs Jr., J.M., Carr, T.S., Frady, R.L., Riad, J.K., 1995. Testosterone,
crime, and misbehavior among 692 male prison inmates. Personality
and Individual Differences 18 (5), 627e663.

Dabbs Jr., J.M., Bernieri, F.J., Strong, R.K., Campo, R., Milun, R., 2001.
Going on stage: testosterone in greetings and meetings. Journal of
Research in Personality 35, 27e40.

Human Diversity and Societal Hierarchies Chapter | 29 491

Engels, F., 1884. The Origin of the Family, Private Property, and the State:
In the Light of the Researches of Lewis H. Morgan. Penguin Classics.
Fehr, E., Gächter, S., 2000. Cooperation and punishment in public goods

experiments. American Economic Review 90 (4), 980e994.

Fessler, D., Haley, K., 2003. The strategy of affect: emotions in human
cooperation. In: Hammerstein, P. (Ed.), The Genetic and Cultural
Evolution of Cooperation. MIT Press, Cambridge.

Festinger, L., 1957. A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance. Stanford Uni-

versity Press, California.

Fieder, M., Suber, S., Bookstein, F.L., 2011. Socioeconomic status, marital
status and childlessness in men and women: an analysis of census data
from six countries. Journal of Biosocial Science 43, 619e635.

Fisek, M.H., Ofshe, R., 1970. The process of status evolution. Sociometry

33, 327e346.

Fiske, S.T., 2011. Envy Up, Scorn Down: How Status Divides Us. Russell

Sage Foundation, New York.

Flavell, J., Flavell, E., Green, F., 1983. Development of the appearance-

reality distinction. Cognitive Development 15, 95e120.

Fried, M.H., 1967. The Evolution of Political Society an Essay in Political

Anthropology. Random House, New York.

Friedman, M., 1996. Type a Behavior: Its Diagnosis and Treatment.

Plenum Press, New York.

Gesquiere, L.R., Learn, N.H., Simao, C.M., et al., 2011. Life at the top:

rank and stress in wild male baboons. Science 333, 357e360.

Gintis, H., Bowles, S., Boyd, R., Fehr, E. (Eds.), 2006. Moral Sentiments

and Material Interests. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Green, R.E., Krause, J., Briggs, A.W., et al., 2010. A draft sequence of the

Neandertal genome. Science 328 (5979), 710e722.

Greene, J., 2013. Moral Tribes: Emotion, Reason, and the Gap Between Us

and Them. The Pinguin Press, New York.

Guala, F., 2012. Reciprocity: weak or strong? What punishment experi-
ments do (and do not) demonstrate. Behavioral and Brain Science 35,
1e59.

Gurven, M., 2004. To give or to give not: an evolutionary ecology of
human food transfers. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 27, 543e583.
Haidt, J., 2003. The moral emotions. In: Davidson, R., Scherer, K.,
Goldsmith, H. (Eds.), Handbook of Affective Sciences. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, Oxford.

Haidt, J., 2012. The Righteous Mind: Why Good People Are Divided by

Dabbs Jr., J.M., Hargrove, M.F., 1997. Age, testosterone, and behavior among

Politics and Religion. Pantheon Books, New York.

female prison inmates. Psychosomatic Medecine 59 (5), 477e480.

Dubreuil, B., 2015. Anger and morality. Topoi 34 (2), 475e482.
Dubreuil, B., 2010a. Human Evolution and the Origins of Hierarchies.

Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Dubreuil, B., 2010b. Paleolithic public goods games: why human coop-
eration and culture did not evolve in one step. Biology and Philosophy
25 (1), 53e73.

Dubreuil, B., Henshilwood, C., 2013. Material culture and language. In:
Lefebvre, C., Comrie, B., Cohen, H. (Eds.), New Perspectives on the
Origins of Language. John Benjamins Publishing Company.

Dunbar, R., 1996. Grooming, Gossip and the Evolution of Language.

Harvard University Press.

Hare, B., Call, J., Agnetta, B., Tomasello, M., 2000. Chimpanzees know
what conspeciﬁcs do and do not see. Animal Behaviour 59,
771e786.

Hawley, P., 1999. The ontogenesis of social dominance: a strategy-based

evolutionary perspective. Developmental Review 19, 97e132.

Hayden, B., 2008. L’homme et l’inégalité: L’invention de la hiérarchie

pendant la préhistoire. CNRS Éditions, Paris.

Hayden, B., 2011. Big man, big heart? The political role of aggrandizers in
egalitarian and transegalitarian societies. In: Forsyth, D., Hoyt, C.
(Eds.), For the Greater Good of All: Perspectives on Individualism,
Society, and Leadership, pp. 101e118.

Hayden, B., Villeneuve, S., 2011. A century of feasting studies. Annual

Earle, T., 1997. How Chiefs Come to Power: The Political Economy in

Review of Anthropology 40, 433e449.

Prehistory. Stanford University Press.

Ellis, L., 1995. Dominance and reproductive success among nonhuman
animals: a cross-species comparison. Ethology & Sociobiology 16,
257e333.

Henrich, J., Bowles, S., Boyd, R., Camerer, C., Fehr, E., Gintis, H., 2004.
Foundations of Human Sociality: Economic Experiments and Ethno-
graphic Evidence From Fifteen Small-scale Societies. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, Oxford.

492 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

Henrich, J., Gil-White, F., 2001. The evolution of prestige:

freely
conferred deference as a mechanism for enhancing the beneﬁts of
cultural transmission. Evolution and Human Behavior 22, 165e196.
Henshilwood, C., Dubreuil, B., 2011. The still Bay and Howiesons Poort,
77e59 ka: symbolic material culture and the evolution of the mind during
the African middle stone age. Current Anthropology 52 (3), 361e400.
Hirschenhauser, K., Taborsky, M., Oliveira, T., Canàrio, A.V.M.,
Oliveira, R.F., 2004. A test of the “challenge hypothesis” in cichlid
ﬁsh: simulated partner and territory intruder experiments. Animal
Behaviour 68 (4), 741e750.

Hublin, J.-J., Neubauer, S., Gunz, P., 2015. Brain ontogeny and life history
in Pleistocene hominins. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society B 370 (1663).

Johnson, S.L., Leedom, L.J., Muhtadie, L., 2012. The dominance behavioral
system and psychopathology: evidence from self-report, observational,
and biological studies. Psychological Bulletin 138 (4), 692e743.

Jost, J.T., Kay, A.C., Thorisdottir, H. (Eds.), 2009. Social and Psycho-
logical Bases of Ideology and System Justiﬁcation. Oxford University
Press, New York.

Kalma, A., 1991. Hierarchisation and dominance assessment at ﬁrst

glance. European Journal of Social Psychology 21 (2), 165e181.

Kaplan, H.S., Hill, K.R., Lancaster, J., Hurtado, A.M., 2000. A theory of
intelligence, and longevity.

human life history evolution: diet,
Evolutionary Anthropology 9, 156e185.

McHenry, H.M., Cofﬁng, K., 2000. Australopithecus to Homo: trans-
formations in body and mind. Annual Review of Anthropology 29,
125e146.

Meier, K.J., Bohte, J., 2003. Span of control and public organizations:
implementing luther gulick’s research design. Public Administration
Review 63 (1), 61e70.

Mikhail, J., 2010. Elements of Moral Cognition: Rawls Linguistic Analogy
and the Cognitive Science of Moral and Legal Judgment. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.

Mintzberg, H., 1971. Managerial work: analysis from observation. Man-

agement Science 18 (2), B97eB110.

Moskowitz, D.S., 1993. Dominance and friendliness: on the interaction of

gender and situation. Journal of Personality 61, 387e409.

Muehlenbein, M.P., Watts, D.P., Whitten, P., 2004. Dominance rank and
fecal testosterone levels in adult male chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes
schweinfurthii) at Ngogo, Kibale National Park, Uganda. American
Journal of Primatology 64, 71e82.

Mueller, A., Mazur, A., 1996. Facial dominance of West Point cadets as a

predictor of later military rank. Social Forces 74, 823e850.

Muller, M.N., Wrangham, R.W., 2004. Dominance, aggression and
testosterone in wild chimpanzees: a test of the “challenge hypothesis”.
Animal Behaviour 67 (1), 113e123.

Onishi, K., Baillargeon, R., 2005. Do 15-month-old infants understand

false beliefs? Science 308, 255e258.

Kelly, R.L., 1995. The Foraging Spectrum: Diversity in Hunter-Gatherer

Oppenheimer, F., 1972 [1908]. The State: Its History and Development

Life Ways. Smithsonian Institution, Washington.

Viewed Sociologically. Arno Press, New York.

Keren, M., Levhari, D., 1979. The optimum span of control in a pure

Parsons, T., 1966. Societies: Evolutionary and Comparative Perspectives.

hierarchy. Management Science 25 (11), 1162e1172.

Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Kroeber, A.L., Kluckhohn, C., 1952. Culture: A Critical Review of
Concepts and Deﬁnitions. Harvard University Peabody Museum of
American Archeology and Ethnology. Papers 47.

Pedersen, E., Kurzban, R., McCullough, M., 2013. Do humans really
punish altruistically? A closer look. Proceedings of the Royal Society
B 280 (1758), 2012e2723.

Kurzban, R., 2011. Why Everyone (Else) Is a Hypocrite: Evolution and the

Modular Mind. Princeton University Press, Princeton.

de La Boétie, E., 2012 [1549]. Discourse on Voluntary Servitude. Hackett

Publishing Compagny.

Laland, K.N., Galef, B.G., 2009. The Question of Animal Culture. Harvard

University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Pellegrini, A.D., Roseth, C.J., Mliner, S., et al., 2007. Social dominance in
preschool classrooms. Journal of Comparative Psychology 121 (1), 54e64.
Perner, J., Stummer, S., Sprung, M., Doherty, M., 2002. Theory of mind
ﬁnds its Piagetian perspective: why alternative naming comes with
understanding belief. Cognitive Development 17, 1451e1472.

Portera, C.C., Marlowe, F.W., 2007. How marginal are forager habitats?

Leach, E., 1954. Political System of Highland Burma. Harvard University

Journal of Archaeological Science 34 (1), 59e68.

Press, Cambridge, MA.

Prinz, J., 2007. The Emotional Construction of Morals. Oxford University

Lee, R.B., Daly, R. (Eds.), 1999. The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Hunters

Press, Oxford.

and Gatherers. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

List, C., Pettit, P., 2011. Group Agency: The Possibility, Design and Status

of Corporate Agents. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Maccoby, E.E., 1990. Gender and relationships: a developmental account.

American Psychologist 45, 513e520.

Manogue, K., Leshner, A., Candland, D., 1975. Dominance status and
adrenocortical reactivity to stress in squirrel monkeys (Saimiri sciur-
eus). Primates 16, 457e463.

Marmot, M.G., Smith, G.D., Stansfeld, S., et al., 1991. Health Inequalities
the Whitehall II study. Lancet 337

among British civil servants:
(8754), 1387e1393.

Martin, G.B., Clark, R.D., 1982. Distress crying in neonates: species and

peer speciﬁcity. Developmental Psychology 18, 3e9.

Rakoczy, H., Warneken, F., Tomasello, M., 2008. The sources of nor-
mativity: young children’s awareness of the normative structure of
games. Developmental Psychology 44, 875e881.

Richards, M.P., Pettitt, P.B., Trinkaus, E., et al., 2000. Neanderthal diet at
Vindija and Neanderthal predation: the evidence from stable isotopes.
PNAS 97, 7663e7666.

Rightmire, G.P., 2004. Brain size and encephalization in early to mid-
pleistocene homo. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 124,
109e123.

Rivers, J.J., Josephs, R.A., 2010. Dominance and Health: the role of social
rank in physiology and illness. In: Guinote, A., Vescio, T.K. (Eds.), The
Social Psychology of Power. Guilford Press, New York, pp. 87e112.
Robson, S.L., Wood, B., 2008. Hominin life history: reconstruction and

Mazur, A., Booth, A., 1998. Testosterone and dominance in men.

evolution. Journal of Anatomy 212, 394e425.

Behavioral and Brain Sciences 21, 353e363.

McEwen, B.S., Lasley, E.N., 2002. The End of Stress as We Know It.

Joseph Henry Press, Washington, DC.

Rodríguez-Vidal, J., d’Errico, F., Giles Pacheco, F., et al., 2014. A rock
in Gibraltar. PNAS 111,

engraving made by Neanderthals
13301e13306.

Human Diversity and Societal Hierarchies Chapter | 29 493

Rubin, P.H., 2000. Hierarchy. Human Nature 11 (3), 259e279.
Surian, L., Caldi, S., Sperber, D., 2007. Attribution of beliefs by 13-

month-old infants. Psychological Science 18, 580e586.

Sapolsky, R.M., 1993. The physiology of dominance in stable versus
unstable social hierarchies. In: Mason, W., Mendoza, S.P. (Eds.),
Primate and Social Conﬂict. State University of New York Press,
Albany, pp. 171e204.

Sapolsky, R.M., 2004a. Social status and health in humans and other an-

imals. Annual Review of Anthropology 33, 393e418.

Sapolsky, R., 2004b. Why Zebras Don’t Get Ulcers: The Acclaimed Guide
to Stress, Stress-related Diseases, and Coping. Henry Holt and
Company, New York.

Sapolsky, R.M., 2005. The inﬂuence of social hierarchy on primate health.

Science 308, 648e652.

Schjelderup-Ebbe, T., 1922. Beiträge zur sozialpsychologie des haush-

uhns. Zeitschrift für Psychologie 88, 225e252.

Schmidt, M.F.H., Tomasello, M., 2012. Young children enforce social
norms. Current Directions in Psychological Science 21 (4), 232e236.
Schmitt, A., Atzwanger, K., 1995. Walking fast-ranking high: a sociobio-
logical perspective on pace. Ethology and Sociobiology 16, 451e462.
Searle, J., 1995. The Construction of Social Reality. The Free Press, New

York.

Service, E.R., 1962. Primitive Social Organization: An Evolutionary

Perspective. Random House, New York.

Setchell, J.M., Smith, T., Wickings, E.J., Knapp, L.A., 2010. Stress, social
behaviour, and secondary sexual traits in a male primate. Hormones
and Behavior 58, 720e728.

Sidanius, J., Pratto, F., 1999. Social Dominance: An Intergroup Theory of
Social Hierarchy and Oppression. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.

Stanton, S.J., Beehner, J.C., Saini, E.K., Kuhn, C.M., LaBar, K.S., 2009.
Dominance, politics, and physiology: voters’ testosterone changes on
the night of the 2008 United States Presidential election. PLoS One 4
(10), e7543.

Testart, A., 2004a. La Servitude Volontaire I: Les Morts D’accompagne-

ment. Errance, Paris.

Testart, A., 2004b. La Servitude Volontaire II: L’origine de l’État. Errance,

Paris.

Testart, A., 2013. Avant l’histoire. L’évolution des Sociétés de Lascaux à

Carnac. Gallimard, Paris.

Thieme, H., 1997. Lower paleolithic hunting spears. Nature 385,

807e810.

Tilly, C., 2004. Contention & Democracy in Europe, 1650e2000. Cam-

bridge University Press, Cambridge.

Tilly, C., 2007. Democracy. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Tomasello, M., 2010. Origins of Human Communication. MIT Press,

Cambridge, MA.

Tomasello, M., 2014. A Natural History of Human Thinking. Harvard

University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Tomasello, M., Moll, H., 2013. Why don’t apes understand false beliefs?
In: Banaji, M.R., Gelman, S.A. (Eds.), Navigating the Social World:
What Infants, Children, and Other Species Can Teach Us. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, pp. 81e87.

Topp, K., Desjardins, J., 2011. Span of control: designing organizations
for effectiveness. In: Wolf, J., Hanson, H., Moir, M. (Eds.), Organi-
zation Development in Healthcare, a Guide for Leaders. Information
Age Publishing Inc., Charlotte, NC, pp. 211e230.

Trigger, B., 2003. Understanding Early Civilizations: A Comparative

Study. Cambridge University Press, New York.

Ungar, P.S., Grine, F.E., Teaford, M.F., 2006. Diet in early homo: a review
of the evidence and a new model of adaptive versatility. Annual Re-
view Anthropology 35, 209e228.

Viau, R., 1997. Enfants du Néant et Mangeurs D’âmes: Guerre, Culture et

Société en Iroquoisie Ancienne. Boréal, Montréal.

van Winden, F., 2007. Affect and fairness in economics. Social Justice

Research 20 (1), 35e52.

de Waal, F., 1982. Chimpanzee Politics. Power and Sex among Apes.

Jonathan Cape, London.

Warneken, F., Chen, F., Tomasello, M., 2006. Cooperative activities in
young children and chimpanzees. Child Development 77 (3), 640e663.
Wimmer, H., Perner, J., 1983. Beliefs about beliefs: representation and
constraining function of wrong beliefs in young children’s under-
standing of deception. Cognition 13 (1), 103e128.

Wingﬁeld, J.C., Hegner, R.E., Dufty, A.M., Ball, G.F., 1990. The “chal-
lenge hypothesis”: theoretical implications for patterns of testosterone
secretion, mating systems and breeding strategies. American Natu-
ralist 136, 829e846.

Wingﬁeld, J.C., Jacobs, J.D., Tramontin, A.D., et al., 2000. Toward an
ecological basis of hormone-behavior interactions in reproduction of
birds. In: Wallen, K., Schneider, J. (Eds.), Reproduction in Context.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 85e128.

Yeh, S.-R., Fricke, R.A., Edwards, D.H., 1996. The effect of social
experience on serotonergic modulation of the escape circuit of cray-
ﬁsh. Science 271 (5247), 366e369.

Zahn-Waxler, C., Radke-Yarrow, M., Wagner, E., Chapman, M., 1992.
Development of concern for others. Developmental Psychology 28,
126e136.

Zerjal, T., Xue, Y., Bertorelle, G., et al., 2003. The genetic legacy of
the Mongols. American Journal of Human Genetics 72 (3),
717e721.

Zilhão, J., 2012. Personal ornaments and symbolism among the Nean-
derthals. In: Elias, S. (Ed.), Origins of Human Innovation and Crea-
tivity, Developments in Quaternary Science, vol. 16. Elsevier,
Amsterdam, pp. 35e49.

Chapter 30

Homosexuality and Evolution:
A Critical Appraisal*

J. Roughgarden1,2
1The Hawai’i Institute of Marine Biology, Kane’ohe, HI, United States; 2Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States

INTRODUCTION
This chapter investigates human homosexuality from an
evolutionary perspective. The chapter is broad in scope with
three main sections. These consider (1) the extent of ho-
mosexuality both among animals and among humans in
present and past cultures; (2) the structural correlates of
human homosexuality in both genes and brain structure; and
(3) theories for why human homosexuality has evolved.

To begin, a major issue is how homosexuality is deﬁned.
Indeed, is homosexuality a biological trait at all? Is it ho-
mosexuality when two men or two women gaze lovingly at
each other across a crowded room, destined never to meet;
when a married man with children assumes the superior
position atop a willing, hairy,
leather-bedecked partner;
when a war lord rapes a male prisoner-of-war; when a
teenage cabin boy services his ship’s captain; when two men
or two women partners of 30 years marry at their local place
of worship? Is homosexuality some of these, all of these?

Researchers have devised many operational deﬁnitions
for homosexuality including same-sex genital contact
regardless of context or motivation, or a sense of personal
identity revealed through interviews. Varied operational
deﬁnitions of homosexuality affect
the repeatability of
biological studies of homosexuality.

Ancillary issues arise too. What evolutionary purpose
do the external genitals serve? Is homosexual sex a misuse
of these organs? Even the gonads, organs whose primary
function is the production of gametes, have other functions,
such as hormone secretion. What about the external geni-
tals? Is their only purpose to serve as conduits for the
heterosexual transfer and receipt of sperm?

* Because of its subject matter, the editors caution that some readers might
ﬁnd the language to be strong and the material to be graphic.

Indeed, in mammals, genitals are often signaling organs.
In humans, the signaling signiﬁcance of genitals may un-
derlie why pornography is provocative.

Moreover,

the innervation of external genitals in
mammals provides a highway to the brain’s pleasure cen-
ters. Could the reciprocal pleasure from tactile stimulation
of genitals in mammals be the counterpart of the reciprocal
pleasure birds experience when mutually preening each
other’s feathers? Are studies of homosexuality missing the
point? Perhaps we should be investigating reciprocal
physical intimacy in general? Does focusing on reciprocal
sexual pleasure while ignoring other forms of reciprocal
physical pleasure represent a fetishizing of sex to the
exclusion of other functionally equivalent behaviors?

And then there is gender. How many human genders
exist? Two? No. India, Pakistan, Nepal, and Bangladesh
have three. In these countries, the hijra, a cast-like group of
male-to-female transgender people who number over ﬁve
million members, are formally classiﬁed as a third gender
on government documents. A sexually intimate relation
between a hijra woman and her male husband might then
be considered homosexual, yet also heterogenderal.
Among animals too, many species have more than the two
morphs associated with the male and female sexes. The
multiple morphs, sometimes termed alternative mating
strategies, amount
to multiple genders of males and
females, allowing for a network of same-sex, different-
gender schemes of courtship, afﬁliation, and physical in-
timacy. Can an evolutionary theory of homosexuality
ignore its
intertwining with gender expression and
identity?

An evolutionary theory of human homosexuality is thus
a multifaceted enterprise. In the following pages, I will
critically review studies that are relevant to one or more
possible objectives of an evolutionary theory of human

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00030-2
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

495

496 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

homosexuality. Some aspects of this review are partly
condensed from Roughgarden (2004).

EXTENT OF HOMOSEXUALITY
This major section of the chapter considers the distribution
of homosexuality among animals and across human
cultures.

Animals
Fifteen years ago scientists were still in denial about how
common homosexuality is among animals. By “homosex-
uality,” for the moment I refer only to same-sex mounting
regardless of context and mutual touching of genitals.

In 2000, George Barlow, about to retire, in a summary
of his career’s work on the biology of cichlid ﬁsh wrote,
“When animals have access to members of the opposite
sex, homosexuality is virtually unknown in nature, with
some rare exceptions among primates.”

Yet a year earlier, Bruce Bagemihl, out as gay and early
in his career, published a 751-page book (Bagemihl, 1999)
reviewing unforced same-sex genital contact in the wild in
over 300 species of vertebrates. Bagemihl, at
the time
largely unknown to biologists, received his PhD in lin-
guistics from the University of British Columbia. All his
cases were drawn from the peer-reviewed scientiﬁc litera-
ture. Bagemihl’s compilation was followed by another in
2006 (Sommer and Vasey, 2006).

Today, in 2016, the reality of extensive homosexuality
among animals is generally accepted among biologists. The
300 known examples of homosexuality in animals, surely
an underestimate, reveal much diversity: in some species
only males are homosexual, in some only females, in others
both sexes; in almost all the homosexuality is mixed in with
heterosexuality by the same individual; in some species a
small fraction participates in homosexuality; in others, like
our closest relative, the bonobo chimpanzee, every animal
does (Parish, 1996). Clearly, homosexuality among animals
exhibits great contextual variation.

Rather than wondering why an animal is homosexual,
the converse may be more interesting. Why is not every
animal homosexual, perhaps mixed in with some minimal
amount of heterosexuality to ensure reproduction? Indeed,
the task of an evolutionary theory of homosexual behavior
might be conceived as the need to explain a polymorphism:
to account in each species for the ratio of those who do to
those who do not employ homosexual behavior.

Homosexuality is widely distributed across many higher
taxa and is especially well-documented in birds and
mammals, and also in insects. This wide distribution im-
plies that homosexuality has originated many times in the
animal kingdom.

their

Concerning primates,

family tree indicates a
pattern. From its base near the ground, the primate tree
trunk splits ﬁrst into the prosimians on one side and the
anthropoids on the other side. The prosimian branch,
including bush babies, lemurs, and tarsiers, appear to have
only incidental same-sex mounting while in heat, and no
evidence of a major social role for same-sex courtship. The
anthropoid branch splits into two subbranches: the new
world primates and the old world primates. The new world
primates, including marmosets, tamarins, and the monkeys
with prehensile tails, such as spider monkeys, do have some
homosexual behavior. In the old world primates though,
homosexual courtship becomes prominent. The old world
primates, including the macaques (cheek pouch monkeys),
baboons, gibbons, orangutans, gorillas,
chimpanzees,
bonobos, and humans, have the most sophisticated of the
primate societies and also the most extensive homosexu-
individuals form complex re-
ality. In these societies,
lationships with one another,
relationships evidently
fostered both with same-sex as well as between-sex sexu-
ality (Vasey, 1995).

The pattern of occurrence of homosexuality across the
primate family tree indicates that homosexuality in an-
thropoid primates, especially in the old world lineages, is
an evolutionary innovation originating around 50 million -
years ago when the prosimian and anthropoid lineages
began their divergence.

Species with multiple genders of males and females are
rather common. Documented examples include the North
American bull frog, North American plainﬁn midshipman,
and Paciﬁc and Atlantic salmon: two male genders, one
female gender; North American bluegill sunﬁsh, spotted
European wrasse, cichlid ﬁsh from Mozambique, and the
Southwestern American tree lizard: three male genders, one
female gender; Canadian white throated sparrow: two male
genders, two female genders; Southwestern side blotched
lizard: three male genders, two female genders, and many
others (cf. review in Roughgarden, 2004, pp. 75e106).

In addition, transgender animals have been reported in
detail for the sunangel hummingbirds of the Andes from
Venezuela through Columbia, Ecuador, Peru, to Bolivia.
Male sunangel hummingbirds have colorful feathers on
their throats called a gorget. In these species, a “masculine
female” is a female with the markings that a majority of the
males possess, and a “feminine male” is male with the
markings that a majority of the females possess. The
investigation of masculine females and feminine males now
encompasses 42 species of hummingbirds from ﬁve genera,
yielding the statistical
transgender
expression in this entire groups of birds (Bleiweiss, 1992,
1999, 2001).

information about

I note in passing that the variation in gender and sexu-
the animal kingdom and

ality now known throughout

Homosexuality and Evolution: A Critical Appraisal Chapter | 30 497

especially well-documented in vertebrates, casts consider-
able doubt on the accuracy and usefulness of Darwin’s
(1871) theory of sexual selection. This area of evolutionary
biology presents a binary male/female and strictly hetero-
sexual picture of sex and gender
roles as universally
normal. The form that sexual theory’s modiﬁcation and/
or replacement should take is hotly debated (see, eg,
Roughgarden, 2004, 2009, 2015; Roughgarden et al., 2015).

Humans
Turning from animals to people, the subject of homosex-
uality moves beyond behavior to identity. Homosexuality
did not become a category of personal identity until the
mid-1800s.

Karl Kertbeny, a Hungarian-German author, published
the term “homosexual” (in German) in 1869 and used the
term, “heterosexual,” in private correspondence the year
before (Greenberg, 1988; Katz, 1995; Beachey, 2010).
Before this, homosexuality did not exist as a category of
personal
identity, although ample reference is made to
homosexual conduct
in writings for many civilizations
extending to ancient time.

A wealth of material from ancient Greece pertains to
same-sex love and sexuality, including dialogues of Plato,
such as the Symposium, plays by Aristophanes, and Greek
artwork and vases
(Dover, 1978; Halperin, 1990).
Homosexual images are even found on European Meso-
lithic rock art (Nash, 2001). In India, the antecedents of
today’s third gender,
the hijra, are featured in the
Mahabharata, the Kama Sutra, and in some translations of
the Ramayana. Signs of hijra extend to early, even pre-
historic, periods of civilization as long ago as 2500 BCE
(Zwilling and Sweet, 1996; Penrose, 2001). At more or
less the same time, the galli or Cybelean priestesses rep-
resented a third gender group that originated in the
Neolithic of Anatolia and later spread throughout
the
Roman empire (Roscoe, 1996; Doniger, 2009; Kuefﬂer,
2001). Gender-variant homosexual people are well rep-
resented in the Bible too. Both the Hebrew and Christian
Testaments refer at length to eunuchs. In Isaiah 56:3e5,
eunuchs are welcomed into the temple.
In Matthew
19:11e12, Jesus speaks approvingly of eunuchs, and in
Acts 32-40, a eunuch is baptized (Jung and Coray, 2001;
Jung and Vigen, 2010). The new world also featured
gender-variant homosexual people, referred to as two-
spirited or winkte (Williams, 1986; Roscoe, 1991,
1998), the muxe in Zapotec, Mexico, as well as the mahu,
fa’afaﬁne, and others throughout Polynesia (Herdt, 1994).
Southeast Asia features the waria in Indonesia,
the
kathoey of Thailand, and the bissu, calabai, and calalai of
Sulawesi, among others (Peletz, 2006). Indeed, collec-
tively,
today and throughout

the sum of all cultures,

history, reveal a seemingly endless number of native
transgender categories. Moreover, those cultures in which
gender identity is associated with genital morphology
have an indigenous form of gender reassignment surgery,
such as the nirvan among the hijra, whereas cultures that
emphasize work and occupation as the marker of gender
identity, such as the two-spirits, do not.

The reason why homosexuality did not exist as a
category of personal
identity even though homosexual
activity and non-binary gender expressions have existed in
the human species since prehistoric times is that
the
techniques of sexual activity, not the sexual identity of the
partner, were socially regulated. For example, the famous
injunction against homosexual activity from the Holiness
Code in the Bible, “You shall not lie with a male as with a
woman; it is an abomination” (Leviticus 18:22) specif-
ically condemns sex in which one male partner penetrates
the other, particularly anal sex. (Heterosexual sex featured
frontal intercourse when seeking conception and anal in-
tercourse when avoiding pregnancy.) In contrast, approved
same-sex intercourse among the Greeks was the intercrural
or inter-crotch position: the active partner thrusts his penis
between the thighs of the passive partner just below the
scrotum (Dover, 1978). I have termed this the “missionary
position for gay male sex”; it satisﬁes the letter of the law
in Leviticus because a man would not lie with a woman
and use the intercrural position with her (Roughgarden,
2004).

Even today, some cultural traditions focus more on the
techniques of same-sex activity than on the gender of the
participants. For example, in India, kothis are an identity
category of receptive partners in sexual encounters with
men who are nonetheless considered heterosexual and
who often have a wife and children (Chakrapani et al.,
2007).

Thus, an evolutionary theory of homosexuality, what it
needs to explain, is itself a cultural artifact. A Western
perspective might demand an explanation of why same-sex
genital contact behavior evolved. Elsewhere, an evolu-
tionary theory of homosexuality might be called upon to
explain why a male would assume the subordinate position
in intercourse. When Western science purports to explain
any deviation from “normal” human sexual conduct, the
effort ﬂies in the face of extensive cross-cultural variation
in exactly what constitutes normal.

SUBSTANCE OF HOMOSEXUALITY
This major section of the chapter considers the structural
correlates of homosexuality and gender identity. First,
genes are discussed with respect to homosexuality, then
brain structure is discussed separately with respect to ho-
mosexuality and to gender identity.

498 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

Gay Genes
Being gay and lesbian runs in families. If a man is straight,
the chance is only 4% his brother is gay, the same per-
centage as in the general population. If a man is gay, the
chance increases ﬁvefold, to 22%, that his brother is gay or
bisexual too. Whether a man is straight or gay has no sta-
tistical effect on whether his sister is straight or lesbian
(Pillard and Weinrich, 1986). Similarly, if a woman is
lesbian, her sister is about twice as likely also to be lesbian
than if a woman is straight. Whether a woman is lesbian has
a very small or undetectable statistical effect on whether her
brother is gay or straight (Bailey and Benishay, 1993;
Bailey and Bell, 1993; Dawood et al., 2009). These data
show that gay men and lesbian women cluster in families,
but they do not say whether shared genes or environment
are involved. Gay men and lesbian women cluster
independently.

Comparing identical and fraternal twins suggests some
genetic component.
In one American study, 52% of
identical male twins were both gay, while only 22% of
fraternal twins were both gay (Bailey and Pillard, 1991).
In a later study, 65% of identical male twins were both
gay, and 29% of
twins were both gay
(Whitam et al., 1993). Similarly, a study of woman re-
ported that 48% of identical female twins were both
lesbian, and only 6% of fraternal twins were both lesbian
(Bailey et al., 1993). A British study of males and females
combined showed that 25% of identical twins were both
homosexual, whereas only 2.5% of fraternal twins were
homosexual (King and McDonald, 1992).

the fraternal

These early studies invited twins to participate by
placing advertisements in magazines and other sources
likely to be seen by gay readers. More recent studies use a
preexisting list of
twins based on national censuses:
Australia (Bailey et al., 2000), United States (Kendler,
2000), and Sweden (Långström et al., 2010). These also
show that identical twins are about twice as likely both to
be homosexual as fraternal twins. The chance that identical
twins are both gay ranges from about 1/4 to 1/2, depending
on the study, and is decidedly less than 100%. Thus, even
though a genetic component may be present, environ-
mental factors comprise 50e75% of the story.

Despite the aforementioned evidence for a small genetic
component to homosexuality, contrary data also exist. The
1991 study already mentioned (Bailey and Pillard, 1991)
also showed that an adopted brother of a gay man is twice
as likely to be gay, 11%, compared with an adopted brother
of a straight man, 5%. So, unless the adoptive parents are
somehow selecting babies likely to become gay, something
about
into which the adopted child is
placed is contributing to sexual orientation as much as any
genes are.

the environment

That homosexuality is to a large degree determined by
environmental factors should not be taken as implying that
homosexuality is reversible once it has been develop-
mentally attained. Borrowing language from endocri-
nology, the environment may “organize” the development
of behavior, or may “activate” already developed behav-
ioral abilities. Organization is a permanent consequence
from a stimulus, whereas activation reverses when the
stimulus is removed. Many aspects of an individual’s
morphology are organized during development by envi-
ronmental conditions. The resultant morphology is often
quite adaptive, even though realized through environ-
mental factors in addition to genetic factors. One may
illustrate with an obvious botanical example. A vine of ivy
produces small leaves in the sun and large leaves in the
shade: these are the adaptive shapes for hot sunny spots
and the moist understory, respectively. Once the leaf shape
has been organized during development in a certain envi-
ronment, the shape cannot be reversed, even if the envi-
ronment changes. Similarly, homosexual capability may be
organized to develop in certain social situations for which
it
is adaptive, and yet once attained, be impossible to
reverse.

the location of

In addition to pedigree studies mentioned, geneticists
the particular genes that
have sought
contribute to homosexuality. The most famous of these is
the study by Hamer and Pattatucci (Hamer et al., 1993,
hereafter denoted as HP). HP deﬁnes homosexuality as a
form of self-identity, irrespective of sexual practice. Hamer
states, “As a geneticist, to be blunt about it, I don’t really
give a damn what label anyone uses, or even what they do,
or with whom. I care about what they feel inside” (quoted
in Burr, 1996, pp. 179e180). Similarly, Pattatucci states, “I
want to know what’s on your interior . do you feel that
who you are now, your homosexual orientation, has always
been part of you, part of who you are . even though your
sexual behavior might have been with members of the
opposite sex? . That’s the important thing. The behavior
is irrelevant compared to the core” (quoted in Burr, 1996,
pp. 235e236).

HP made several points, some controversial:

1. HP conﬁrmed yet again the tendency for Western gay
men to cluster in families. The brother of a gay man
had a 13.5% of being gay, whereas the brother of a
straight man had only the baseline chance of being
gay, which in this study was estimated at about 2%.

2. HP claimed that

the distribution of men into the
categories of straight and gay was nearly absolute:
bisexuals were almost completely absent. The authors
concluded,
sexual
orientation as a dimorphic rather than as a continuously
variable trait.”

appropriate

“it was

to treat

Homosexuality and Evolution: A Critical Appraisal Chapter | 30 499

This sorting into only two distinct categories is appar-
ently an artifact of present-day social pressures within
Western gay and straight communities. The subjects
were self-acknowledged homosexual men recruited
through the out-patient HIV clinics in the Washington
DC area, and through local homophile organizations.
Ninety percent of these men said they were nearly
exclusively homosexual, and 90% of the straight men
said they were nearly exclusively straight too, giving
the impression of a clear-cut bi-modality. However, a
present-day Western gay man cannot admit to being
sexually interested in a woman any more than a present-
day Western straight man can admit to being sexually
interested in a man. HP did not solicit the organizations
and magazines that offer safe space for those who do
claim a bisexual identity. Moreover, in most cultures,
same-sex sexuality is mixed with between-sex sexu-
ality,
implying that widespread bisexuality exits
(Greenberg, 1988; Herdt, 1994).

3. HP provided demographic data on the life-history of
gay men in the United States. The average age of ﬁrst
same-sex attraction was 10 years, 2 years before their
average age of puberty at 12. The average age of self-
acknowledgment was 15 years, and the average age of
coming out was 21 years.

4. HP claimed that gayness in males is maternally inherited
and linked to the X chromosome. The paper reports that
maternal uncles and sons of maternal aunts (ﬁrst
cousins) of a gay man had a 7.5% chance of being
gay, higher than the baseline chance of 2%. These pur-
ported genetic effects are small. Out of say, 100 maternal
uncles and cousins of maternal aunts, only about seven
are likely to be gay. Although seven is higher than the
two who are likely to be gay on the paternal side, the
claimed maternal genetic effect is very weak.

5. Building on the premise that some genetic component of
gayness is maternally inherited, HP reported that a sec-
tion on the X chromosome at the tip of its long arm called
Xq28 was statistically related to gayness, a “gay gene.”
Out of 40 pairs of gay brothers, 33 shared the Xq28 sec-
tion of chromosome X, and seven did not. This is an in-
termediate result. If something on Xq28 were absolutely
needed to be gay, then all 40 brothers would share this
chunk of DNA, whereas if only 20 brothers shared
Xq28, then its random presence would indicate an irrel-
evance to gayness. The ﬁgure of 33 out of 40 is statisti-
cally signiﬁcant, and HP concluded that some gene in
the Xq28 region of the X chromosome tends to produce
gayness in males. This claim is modest. Although a gene
in the Xq28 region is claimed to have some effect, it is
clearly neither necessary nor sufﬁcient for gayness in
males. HP repeated their study with similar, though
somewhat weaker results (Hu et al., 1995).

The HP study was then repeated by a different group, in
Canada, using the same overall design (Rice et al., 1999).
Advertisements were placed in the Canadian gay news
magazines for families in which there were at least two gay
brothers. Forty-six families with two gay brothers and two
families with three gay brothers were studied. The sexual
orientation was conﬁrmed for each subject by direct ques-
tions from a “gay interviewer,” each subject read gay
magazines, volunteered that he was gay, and his self-report
was corroborated by interviewing the gay brother. These
are behavioral criteria, not testimonials about one’s “core
identity.” Considering the 46 brother-pairs, 23 would be
expected to share Xq28 if this section were irrelevant to
gayness, whereas all 46 would share their Xq28 if neces-
sary for gayness in males. In fact, only 20 of the pairs
shared their Xq28, a number low enough to show that Xq28
is irrelevant to whether a male becomes gay. So, there is no
gay gene in the Xq28 region of the X chromosome. The
Canadian investigators conclude, “It is unclear why our
results are so discrepant from Hamer’s original study .
Nonetheless, our data do not support the presence of a gene
of large effect inﬂuencing sexual orientation at position
Xq28.”

What then could account for the difference between
Hamer et al., 1993 and Rice et al. (1999) concerning the
gay gene supposedly on the X chromosome at position
Xq28? The difference that jumps out is how people were as
gay to begin with. The Canadian team did demand that a
gay person afﬁrm sexual orientation as a personal identity;
sexual practice apparently sufﬁced, whereas HP insisted
that the subject afﬁrm their sexual orientation as a personal
identity.

More recently, Mustanski et al. (2005) conducted a full-
genome scan of sexual orientation in men by genotyping
456 individuals from 146 families with two or more gay
brothers using microsatellite markers. These researchers
also did not ﬁnd evidence of any linkage between homo-
sexuality and the X chromosome, but they did pick up
traces of linkage to spots on the 7th, 8th, and 10th chro-
mosomes, traces not strong enough to be statistically sig-
niﬁcant. A follow up by Ramagopalan et al. (2010) also did
not ﬁnd statistically signiﬁcant evidence of linkage to male
homosexuality, and the locations of what little linkage they
did detect on chromosome 14 did not coincide with that
found by Mustanski et al. (2005). The most recent study in
this vein by Sanders et al. (2015) conﬁrms a possible
linkage to male homosexuality on chromosome 8 as
Mustanski et al. (2005) reported but not on chromosome 14
as Ramagopalan et al. (2010) reported. In any case, linkage
to autosomes, whichever is implicated, does not support
maternal inheritance. However, Sanders et al. (2015) do
claim a comparatively weak linkage to a region of chro-
mosome X which might overlap Xq28. The linkage in all
these studies is barely signiﬁcant, if at all.

500 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

How to deﬁne homosexuality: whether it

is sexual
behavior, testimonial of personal identity, or some other
criterion confounds genetic studies to this day. Some
studies use solely behavior: “[our] survey included no
direct question about self-deﬁned sexual orientation. Actual
partnered sexual behavior was assessed with two items:
lifetime number of opposite-sex and same-sex individuals,
respectively, that the respondent had ever ‘been sexually
together with’” (Långström et al., 2010). Others, like HP,
are adamant that sense of personal identity should be the
criterion for assessing homosexuality.

Even more recent studies are also failing to conﬁrm a
connection between homosexuality and maternal inheri-
tance. Schwartz et al. (2010) report that although male
homosexuals had more male homosexual relatives than
heterosexual males did, these homosexual relatives were
distributed approximately equally on both the maternal and
paternal lines. They conclude their results “failed to support
the importance of the maternal over the paternal line for
male sexual orientation.”

Some researchers prefer still another non-behavioral
criterion for homosexuality called “psychological sexual
orientation.” A recent
review asserts, “Whereas older
studies tended to deﬁne sexual orientation behaviorally,
most current researchers, ourselves included, deﬁne sexual
orientation psychologically. Because sexual attraction and
fantasy are less likely than behavior to be constrained by
societal pressures, psychological sexual orientation is
thought
trait”
(Dawood et al., 2009). Despite the claim that “most current
researchers” prefer their psychological criterion, the large
population study of
twins in Sweden just mentioned
(Långström et al., 2010) does use solely a behavioral cri-
terion, indicating that little consensus exists among genet-
icists even today on how to deﬁne homosexuality. This
situation implies that any ensuing genetic analysis, however
technically advanced, is of uncertain value.

to be a more stable and fundamental

It should be added that major difﬁculties attend any
non-behavioral deﬁnition of homosexuality, such as any
personal identity or psychological criteria just mentioned.
The non-behavioral criteria do not involve characteristics
that are exposed to natural selection. Natural selection
evaluates results, not motivation. An evolutionary approach
to homosexuality can address whether the expression of
homosexuality is beneﬁcial, not what motivates that
expression.

In addition, the personal identity criterion is not appli-
cable to explaining homosexual expression before the mid-
identity emerged as a social
1800s when homosexual
category. Similarly,
those
expressing homosexuality in the past is largely unavailable,
except perhaps as revealed in provocative gay publications
from the Victorian era. Non-behavioral criteria are largely
unworkable outside present-day Western settings.

the psychological

state of

Furthermore, an evolutionary account of homosexuality
must address homosexuality not only cross-culturally
and through history, but also across species. If homosex-
uality is deﬁned in terms of personal identity, then no
species we know of can be said to possess homosexuality,
even though same-sex behavior might be common within
it. Similarly, a psychological criterion is impossible to
apply to other species, given that little is known (or even
knowable) about the psychology of nonhuman animals.
Using a non-behavioral criterion for homosexuality isolates
its study from the wider community of biologists and re-
serves its investigation to medical researchers who are
automatically pre-committed to a medical model that treats
diversity as a pathology.

All in all, 30 years of genetic analysis have shown a
possibly small genetic contribution to the development of
homosexuality arising from unknown locations in the hu-
man genome. These 30 years have also revealed a large
environmental contribution, much of which may act
to
organize the pathways of a person’s organic development.

Gay Brains
For 30 years, neurobiologists have sought morphological
differences between the brains of homosexual and hetero-
sexual individuals. Much of this work has been motived by
the so-called “neurohormonal theory” that posits that ho-
mosexuality is caused by unusual sex hormone levels prior
to birth. In particular, male homosexuality is posited to
depend on low prenatal androgen action and female ho-
mosexuality on high prenatal androgen action (Ellis and
Ames, 1987). If sex hormone levels inﬂuence the devel-
opment of homosexuality, they must be acting before birth
rather than after birth because hormone treatments in adults
have failed to inﬂuence sexual orientation, and no associ-
ation has been found between adult hormone levels and
sexual orientation (Byne and Parsons, 1993a,b). Focus
therefore turns to hormones before birth rather than after
birth.

The most

famous studies claiming to support

the
neurohormonal theory pertain to what I have termed a tiny
“rice grain of brain” within the hypothalamus called INAH-
3. Allen et al. (1989) reported that INAH-3 is sexually
dimorphic, being smaller in females than males. In a highly
publicized article, LeVay (1991) conﬁrmed that INAH-3 is
sexually dimorphic, and in addition, reported that the size
of INAH-3 in gay males was the same as in females. In
heterosexual men, this rice grain of brain averages about
1/10 mm3, in heterosexual women, about 1/20 mm3, and in
gay men, also about 1/20 mm3. This study would appear to
support the gay brain equals female brain theory, with male
homosexuality presumably resulting from development
under conditions of unusually low prenatal androgen con-
centration or with unusually weak androgen receptors.

Homosexuality and Evolution: A Critical Appraisal Chapter | 30 501

(2001)
looked
But a follow-up by Byne et al.
more carefully into the claims about
INAH-3. They
observed that the sexual dimorphism between heterosexual
males and females pertains not only to the volume of the
INAH-3 but also to the number of cells within that volume.
Speciﬁcally, the volume of INAH-3 in HIVþ heterosexual
males is about 0.11 mm3 and in HIVþ females is about
0.07 mm3, and the number of their neurons is about 1900
and 1100, respectively. Now compare the INAH-3 volume
in HIVþ homosexual males: 0.10 mm3, which is actually
quite close to the HIVþ heterosexual male volume. In
addition, the number of neurons in HIVþ homosexual males
INAH-3 is 1800, a value not signiﬁcantly different from that
of HIVþ heterosexual males and quite different from that of
females. In short, data simply do not support the claim that
the male homosexual INAH-3 resembles the female INAH-3.
Byne et al. (2001) conclude “We can neither ascribe any
function to INAH-3, nor can we interpret the functional
signiﬁcance of its sexual dimorphism” and that, “sexual
orientation cannot be reliably predicted on the basis of
INAH-3 volume alone.”

Well,

if INAH-3 does not connote homosexuality,
perhaps another part of the brain does. A small rice grain
of nerve cells, a 0.25 mm3 cluster, in the hypothalamus
called VIP-SCN also shows sexual dimorphism. After
about 10 years of age, males have about 2500 cells, and
females about 1000 cells in this cluster (Swaab et al.,
1994). VIP-SCN also seems to align with sexuality in
males. You may be guessing that gay males have a
female-sized VIP-SCN. Nope. Gay males have an even
bigger VIP-SCN than straight males, which is in turn
bigger than the VIP-SCN of females. So much for the
belief that gay men have female brains (Swaab et al.,
1995). Speciﬁcally, gay males had a volume of VIP-SCN
that was 1.7 times as large, and with 2.1 times as many
cells, as straight males. This result directly contradicts the
neurohormonal hypothesis
for male homosexuality.
Homosexual and heterosexual male brains may indeed
differ, but homosexual male brains do not differ by being
anatomically more female-like than heterosexual male
brains are.

Still, the neurohormonal theory for homosexuality just
will not die. A review that actually cites the aforementioned
studies (Mustanski et al., 2002) manages somehow to
conclude, “Evidence consistent with the INAH-3 differ-
ences described by LeVay (1991) has been reported in one
study (Byne et al., 2001), and these results are compatible
with the neurohormonal theory.” As just shown however, a
close reading of the data in Byne et al. (2001) reveals that
this study has been misquoted and that its ﬁndings are not
compatible with LeVay (1991). It is time to throw in the
towel on the neurohormonal theory for the development of
male homosexuality.

That said, a postnatal, rather than prenatal, inﬂuence of
hormones may be involved in differentiating gay and
straight brains outside the hypothalamus. Cerebral matu-
ration continues after puberty, especially in boys (Paus,
2005), providing a substrate for effects of social/environ-
mental factors. Savic and Lindström (2008) have shown
with PET and MRI scans that homosexual men align with
heterosexual women and homosexual women with hetero-
sexual men with regard to features of the cerebrum. Het-
erosexual men and homosexual women showed a rightward
cerebral asymmetry as well as connections from the right
amygdala.

Given enough research effort, differences in the brains
of gay and straight males will surely accumulate. Consider
though, what is the ordinary person-to-person variation in
brain structure? Do the brains of politicians and poets also
differ? Is some rice grain of Beethoven’s brain shared by all
composers? Is a different rice grain of Picasso’s brain
shared by all painters? Are there anatomical markers of
ability in performing and graphic arts? Indeed, the part of
the brain controlling left-hand ﬁngers is larger in string
players than everyone else (Elbert et al., 1995). Political
orientation is correlated with brain structure (Kanai et al.,
2011), as
is musicianship (Bengtsson et al., 2005;
Bermudez et al., 2009; Bermudez and Zatorre, 2005; Gaser
and Schlaug, 2003; Zatorre et al., 2002) and also the ability
to speak Chinese (Crinion et al., 2009). The difference
between the brains of homosexual and heterosexual people
is like the difference among the brains of any collection of
people with diverse capabilities.

Transgender Brains
The inconclusive search for prenatal hormones inﬂuencing
sexual orientation carried out during the 1990s and earlier
have now given way during the 2000s and later to a search
for prenatal hormones that organize the brain’s develop-
ment of gender identity. Here, the search for an inﬂuence of
prenatal hormones is more plausible.

A divergence between genital sex and gender identity
theoretically can emerge because an embryo’s genitals
sexually differentiate at a different
time than its brain
sexually differentiates (Swaab and Garcia-Falgueras, 2009;
Bao and Swaab, 2011). Testosterone during the ﬁrst
6e12 weeks of embryonic growth leads to the formation of
male sexual organs, whereas a lack of testosterone during
that period allows the genitals to develop as female sexual
organs. In contrast, sexual differentiation of the brain oc-
curs in the second half of pregnancy by the organizing
effects of sexual hormones. Hence, the developmental of
genitals and the brain are independent and chronologically
separated by many months. Therefore, it is plausible to
hypothesize that
the genitals develop in one hormonal

502 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

regime and the brain in another, leading to a difference
between genital structure and gender identity.

Indeed, many studies are now reporting that the phys-
ical brain structure of transgender people more closely re-
sembles the sex they identify with rather than with their
genital sex. This match of gender identity with brain sex
rather than genital sex is now conﬁrmed for the following:
the number of neurons and volume of subcortical nuclei
(Zhou et al., 1995; Garcia-Falgueras and Swaab, 2008),
cerebral activation by visual erotic stimulai (Gizewski
et al., 2009), functional alterations of regional cerebral
blood ﬂow (Nawata et al., 2010), and neuronal activation
(Schoning et al., 2010), as well as structural differences of
gray (Simon et al., 2013) and white matter microstructure
(Rametti et al., 2011a, 2011b; Kranz et al., 2014). Saraswat
et al. (2015) have contributed a recent review of evidence
for a biological under-pining to gender identity. They re-
view data on intersex people, neurohormonal data on brain
structure such as that just noted, and also limited data on
the genetics of steroid hormones that might be associated
with transgender identity.

Moreover, depending on their sexual orientation, some
transgender people show hypothalamus activation to
odorous steroids intermediate between male and female
controls (Berglund et al., 2008). In addition,
the brain
structure of trans women who are sexually attracted to
women is explored with respect to white and gray matter,
hemispheric asymmetry, and volumes of the hippocampus,
thalamus, caudate, and putamen sections of the brain
showing a complex pattern (Savic and Arver, 2011).
Furthermore, the structural connectivity networks among
different regions of the brains of transgender people differ
from both non-transgender males and non-transgender fe-
males (Hahn et al., 2015). As before, it is again difﬁcult to
contextualize these technical details about brain structure
among different people in light of the many differences in
brain structure among people more generally.

Taking a synthetic view, I hypothesize that gender
identity must develop in the ﬁrst place as a prerequisite to
the later developing of same-gender sexual orientation. I
conjecture that gender identity has been attained at or near
birth, whereas developing sexual orientation awaits expe-
rience during the ﬁrst few years of infancy after birth
(Roughgarden, 2004). This conjecture accords with anec-
dotes about how stable gender identity can be soon after
birth (Colapinto, 2000), whereas the average age of real-
izing same-sex attraction is about 10 years after birth
(Hamer et al., 1993).

But what exactly is “gender

identity”? The brain
structure studies do not answer this basic question. I
have envisioned gender
identity as a cognitive lens
(Roughgarden, 2004). When a baby opens his or her eyes
after birth and looks around, whom will the baby emulate
and whom will he or she merely notice? Perhaps a male

baby will emulate his father or other men, perhaps not, and
a female baby her mother or other women, perhaps not. I
imagine a lens exists in the brain that controls who to focus
on as a “tutor.” Transgender identity then is the acceptance
of a tutor from the opposite sex. Degrees of transgender
identity reﬂect different degrees of single-mindedness in
the selection of the tutor’s gender. Gender expression thus
depends both on brain statedwhich is where the lens is,
and on early postnatal experiencedbecause the environ-
ment supplies the image photographed through that lens
that
is developed into brain circuitry. This hypothesis
might be tested experimentally. In birds like canaries,
males learn their song from male “tutors,” often their fa-
thers (Williams, 2008; Belzner et al., 2009). How does a
male chick know to listen to his father instead of his
mother? Female canaries sing a different song from males.
I wonder if an occasional male chick learns his mother’s
song and an occasional female chick learns her father’s
song. Such gender-crossing birds would offer a model
system to study jointly both transgender behavior and brain
structure experimentally.

In summary, the brain structure of transgender people
apparently does differ
from non-transgender people
because, in many details, their brains match the structure of
the gender they identify with rather than the sex of their
genitals. This presumably reﬂects the difference in timing
of androgen action in early versus late embryonic growth,
the different times at which the genitals and brain develop,
respectively. In contrast, research shows no convincing
evidence that the brain structure of homosexual people has
been organized by the action of sex hormones prior to birth:
the so-called neurohormonal theory of homosexuality is not
true. The slight differences detected in the brain structure
between homosexual and heterosexual people are well
within the differences that distinguish all persons from one
another reﬂecting their individual aptitudes and training.
Thus,
the developmental route to attaining transgender
capability appears to involve a different androgen level at
early verus late episodes prior to birth, whereas the devel-
opmental route to attaining homosexual capability is un-
known but presumably involves experience during the ﬁrst
10 years after birth.

Finally, I should alert

the reader to the unfortunate
language used by investigators of genetic correlates of
sexual orientation. Their studies, carried out in medical
schools and using pathologizing medical
terminology,
proceed with the unspoken assumption that homosexual
capability is a deleterious trait. Their reports read like those
tracing a genetic defect, such as hemophilia through a
family pedigree. In fact, whether homosexual capability is
deleterious or not is beyond the purview of genetic analysis
and lies in the domain of human evolutionary biology, the
discipline that considers a trait’s function in its natural
context.

Homosexuality and Evolution: A Critical Appraisal Chapter | 30 503

Similarly, neurological studies of homosexuality and
gender identity also convey the unspoken assumption that a
heterosexual male/female binary is the normal biological
condition for humans,
in obvious contradiction with
zoological and human cross-cultural data. Transgender
people in particular are regularly described by medical re-
searchers as possessing a neurobiological “intersex” con-
dition because their brain structure matches their gender
identity rather than their genitals. This terminology lumps
transgender people with people possessing a so-called
“disorder of sex development”, for example, an unusual
number of sex chromosomes or insensitive hormone re-
ceptors, which lead to genitals that pediatricians consider
“too big” or “too small.” This is not the place to debate the
zoologically uninformed and clinically dubious procedures
inﬂicted by the medical industrial complex upon babies
born with unusual genital morphology. The point here is
simple: all traits result from some developmental pathway,
and all developmental pathways can be described with
intimidating Latin- and Greek-derived technical terms. An
innocuous trait like having ears big enough to attract the
ridicule of a cartoon artist (like that of a recent American
president) could be described as “macrotia,” etymologically
derived from “large” in Latin combined with “ear” in
Greek. The condition of macrotia undoubtedly results from
the action of certain genes, hormones, hormone receptors,
etc., all of which could be spun as an intimidating story of
developmental pathology. Of course, having large ears is
not a pathology, and indeed, it might be especially ad-
vantageous in some circumstances. Similarly, if homosex-
ual
evolutionarily
advantageous, they will, of course, be realized through
some biochemical pathway that features some particular
timing of growth hormones during embryonic develop-
ment. Describing that pathway with pejorative medical
jargon does not affect whether the trait is in fact valuable
and adaptive in its natural context.

transgender

and

capabilities

are

The source of natural selection that promotes the evo-
lution and development of homosexual and transgender
capability lies in the function of these traits in the cultural
contexts where they appear, the subject to which we now
turn.

FUNCTION OF HOMOSEXUALITY
This major section of the chapter considers the functions of
homosexuality and gender identity among humans in their
natural cultural context. Theories for the evolution of ho-
mosexuality can be ordered along an axis that expresses an
implicit value judgment as to homosexuality’s worth. One
may start at one extreme with theories that view homo-
sexuality as completely deleterious, then move to theories
that view homosexuality as deleterious in some circum-
stances and beneﬁcial
then continue on to

in others,

theories that view homosexuality as neutral and inconse-
quential, ﬁnally culminating at
the other extreme with
theories that view homosexuality as an adaptive trait
mutually beneﬁting all participants. Subsections of this
section present the major types of theories ordered along
this deleterious-to-advantageous axis, and sub-subsections
within these further describe important subtopics. In its
entirety,
the chapter presents a
comprehensive look at all the varieties of theories presently
available about why homosexuality and transgender iden-
tity have evolved.

this major section of

Homosexuality Deleterious in All
Circumstances: A Genetic Disease
This subsection pertains to theories for the evolution of
homosexuality that assume homosexuality is unequivo-
cally deleterious. The ﬁrst sub-subsection considers the
population-genetic relation between how common a
genetically based trait is and how deleterious it is. The next
sub-subsection presents a sample of theories that assume
homosexuality is some type of pathology.

Criterion for a Genetic Disease

Until recently, researchers have taken for granted that
homosexuality is a deleterious trait because it supposedly
leads to lower reproduction by homosexuals compared
with heterosexuals. Hence, researchers have traditionally
looked for theories, often far-fetched, to explain how a
deleterious trait can somehow become common through
evolution.

To begin, we ask, is homosexuality in fact a genetic
disease? Even if a gay gene does not exist, or if the inﬂu-
ence of genetics on the development of homosexuality is
limited and/or complicated, it is important to see what
conditions must be satisﬁed before homosexuality could be
considered a genetic disease. A genetic disease is a genet-
ically determined condition that is deleterious at all times
and under all conditions. Could homosexuality be consid-
ered a genetic disease?

Genetic diseases are automatically rare in the population
because they are continually being weeded out by natural
selection. The degree of rarity for a genetic disease is set by
a balance between two rates: the rate at which the bad gene
arises by mutation and the rate of elimination by natural
selection. This level of rarity is called a mutationeselection
equilibrium. A formula from population genetics expresses
the connection among three numbers: how common a
disease gene is, how deleterious it is, and how often it is
regenerated by mutation from healthy genes.

Suppose, hypothetically, a population consists initially
of straight individuals, and a mutation arises for same-sex
attraction (a gay gene). Let the average net reproduction

504 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

by a straight individual be standardized to 1 and the average
net reproduction of a gay individual be deﬁned as 1-s. The s
might be called the coefﬁcient of deleteriousness. The
bigger s is, the more deleterious it is to be gay. If s is 1, an
average gay individual does not reproduce at all, which
would be equivalent to reproductive sterility or lethality. If
s is 0, an average gay individual reproduces just as much as
an average straight
individual, which would mean that
being gay was not deleterious at all. An s between these
extremes would indicate that an average gay individual
does reproduce, but not as much as a straight individual
does, so being gay is partially deleterious. The phrase “net
reproduction” means that one takes account not only of
how many offspring an individual produces (fecundity) but
also the probability of living to reproductive age (survi-
vorship). For example, if the number of offspring that an
individual of reproductive age produces is 2, and if the
chance of living long enough to reach reproductive age is
½, then the net reproduction by the individual is 1. (“Net
reproduction” here is synonymous with what is usually
called “Darwinian ﬁtness” in the population-genetic
literature.)

If the mutation rate producing a bad gene balances the
rate that natural selection is eliminating the bad gene, then
the frequency of births carrying the gay gene, b, works out
to equal about v/s, where v is the mutation rate (for details
see, eg, Roughgarden, 2004, pp 281e282, 446e447).
A typical mutation rate, v, is one in a million. So if gays
do not reproduce at all (s ¼ 1), they would be very rare,
say around one in million, that is, each gay individual
would be a new mutation. Indeed, almost-lethal traits like
Huntington disease are present in frequencies of 5 per
100,000 births, hemophilia A at 1 birth per 8500, and so
forth, very rare. Gay and transgender people are nowhere
close to being this rare.

The formula relating b to v/s can be rearranged to pre-
dict how deleterious a trait must be given how common it
is. Upon rearranging the formula, a trait’s degree of dele-
teriousness, s, given how common it is, b, and the mutation
rate, v, works out to be v/b.

According to 2011 demographic information on
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people in the
United States (Gates, 2011), 3.5% of adults in the United
States explicitly identify as lesbian, gay, or bisexual
(LGBT), and an estimated 0.3% of adults identify as
transgender. Thus, approximately 9 million Americans
identify as LGBT, a ﬁgure roughly equivalent
to the
population of New Jersey. Moreover, those who report any
lifetime same-sex sexual behavior and/or any same-sex
sexual attraction are substantially more common than
those who explicitly identify as LGBT. Indeed, 8.2%
report that they have at some point in their life engaged in
same-sex sexual behavior, and 11% acknowledge at least
some same-sex sexual attraction.

Let us use a nominal value of 1 in 20 (5%) as the fre-
quency of gay people. How deleterious is it to be gay, given
that gays are this common? Taking a mutation rate of 1 in a
million divided by 0.05 yields a coefﬁcient of deleteri-
ousness, s, of only 0.00002. That is, the degree of overall
deleteriousness for being gay must be inﬁnitesimal.

Similarly, take a nominal value of 1 in 300 (0.3%) as
the frequency of transgender people. How deleterious is it
to be transgender? Taking the mutation rate of 1 in a
million divided by 0.003 yields an s of 0.0003, which is
also inﬁnitesimal.

Although one can ﬁddle with the value of the mutation
rate or use a more accurate formula to describe the
mutationeselection equilibrium than the simple heuristic of
b z v/s, the conclusion is inescapable that gay and trans-
gender people are 10,000 times more common than would
be consistent with assuming that being gay or transgender
express a trait deleterious under all conditions.

Candidate Genetic Diseases

That said, researchers have conjured no shortage of theories
that cast homosexuality as a pathology. Blanchard has been
especially energetic in this effort (Jannini et al., 2010;
Blanchard and Klassen, 1997; Blanchard, 2008), proposing
that homosexual men who have older brothers owe their
homosexuality to an autoimmune disease acquired from
their mother. The rationale for this suggestion comes from
the so-called “birth order effect” among gay men.

Blanchard and Bogaert (1996) calculated that each
additional older brother increases a male’s odds of homo-
sexuality by 33%. Bogaert (2006) found that biological
brothers increase the odds of homosexuality in later-born
males, even if they were reared in different households,
whereas stepbrothers or adoptive brothers have no effect on
sexual orientation. This suggests that the birth order effect
is caused somehow by prenatal conditions.

To explain the birth order effect, Blanchard and Bogaert
(1996) formulated what they call the maternal
immune
hypothesis. According to this hypothesis, cell or cell frag-
ments from a male fetus enter the maternal circulation
during childbirth. The mother’s immune system recognizes
these male substances as foreign and starts producing an-
tibodies against them. The mother’s antibodies then cross
the placenta into a subsequent male fetus. When absorbed
by the male fetus, these antibodies somehow inﬂuence the
sexual differentiation of the fetal male brain in a female
direction so that the individual will later be attracted to men
rather than women. Blanchard acknowledges, however, that
because half or more of all homosexual men have no older
brothers, other causes must account for at least half of
existing homosexual men.

Two problems arise in the autoimmune disease theory of
male homosexuality. First, as we have seen, brains of male

Homosexuality and Evolution: A Critical Appraisal Chapter | 30 505

homosexuals do not resemble the brains of females regard-
less of whether that resemblance is supposed to have been
caused by prenatal hormones or by prenatal antibodies.

Second, the autoimmune theory of male homosexuality is
a developmental theory, not an evolutionary theory. Evolu-
tionarily, it does not matter how the birth order effect is
produced, what matters is what the advantage is for more
younger brothers to be homosexual than older brothers. The
autoimmune theory of homosexuality does not address the
evolution of homosexuality. It merely casts the development
of homosexuality in pathological sounding language. And
the theory is incomplete because the connection between
maternal antibodies to a male fetus and the brain structure of
subsequent male offspring is left dangling mysteriously.

Other disease theories for the development of human
homosexuality are regularly given by researchers to the
news media. A scientist who declined to be quoted by name
stated to the science writer, Chandler Burr, that homosex-
uality was caused by a mitochondrial gene or a bacterium
transmitted exclusively through females. He went on to
brag, “homosexuality may be a type of bacterial infection
we’ve just never encountered before, one that we may
eventually be able to eradicate with an antibiotic” (Burr,
1996, pp. 257e259).

These homosexuality-as-a-disease theories all spring
from an uncritical acceptance of homosexuality as univer-
sally deleterious. If one accepts that premise, one is forced
to conjure up scenarios whereby a deleterious trait can
become as common as homosexuality is. The widespread
uncritical acceptance of homosexuality as deleterious by
the medical community explains why so many foolish
disease theories of homosexuality keep popping up.

Homosexuality Deleterious in Some
Circumstances and Beneﬁcial in Others
This subsection pertains to theories for the evolution of
homosexuality that assume homosexuality is deleterious in
some circumstances and beneﬁcial in others, or has positive
consequences in addition to negative consequences. The
ﬁrst sub-subsection considers what the cost is to being
homosexual
two
sub-subsections present two different theories for how ho-
mosexuality may offer other, possibly indirect, fertility
beneﬁts that may compensate for its fertility cost.

in terms of lower fertility. The next

Fertility Cost of Homosexuality

If not always deleterious, perhaps homosexuality is some-
how occasionally beneﬁcial, directly or indirectly. This
contingent beneﬁt might offset some of
its presumed
deleteriousness and account for homosexuality being much

more common than it would be if it were simply a genetic
disease.

Direct evidence is surprisingly scanty as to how
deleterious homosexuality actually is for fertility, setting
aside for the moment
the impact of homosexuality on
survival.

homosexual

experience

(Essock-Vitale

For lesbian women, a 1988 US survey reported that the
mean number of children born to women with homosexual
experience was 1.2 compared to a mean of 2.2 for women
without
and
McGuire, 1988). A 1994 survey reported that 67% of
lesbian women were mothers, compared with 72% for
straight women (Yankelovich Partners, 1994). A 1995
study of contemporary British women showed bisexual
women have a higher fecundity to age 25 and no signiﬁcant
difference in lifetime fecundity compared to heterosexual
women (Baker and Bellis, 1995). Thus,
lesbian and
bisexual woman apparently have about the same or higher
reproduction than straight women.

For gay men, the 1994 study showed that 27% were
fathers, compared with 60% for straight men (Yankelovich
Partners, 1994). Of 655 homosexual and bisexual men in
contemporary Japan, 83% have offspring (Isomura and
Mizogami, 1992). A 1997 investigation surveyed 256 ho-
mosexual men in Australia who were older than 49 years of
age. Of these about 63% were or had been married and
about 56% had children (Van de Ven et al., 1997). Clearly,
gay men are not reproductively sterile.

However, King et al. (2005) asked male attendees at
two central London clinics for sexually transmitted in-
fections to complete anonymous questionnaires. They
compared offspring production from 403 white gay males
with 301 white straight males. But
the study excluded
bisexual men. Not surprisingly, they found that gay males
in this sample of people on the average produced only
0.002 offspring, whereas the straight men produced 0.36
offspring.

Schwartz et al. (2010) recruited a sample of 894 straight
males and 694 gay males from 16 gay-themed festivals and
eight general community festivals in the United States and
Canada. Gay males produced on the average about 0.2
offspring and straight males about 0.6.

Clearly, no one really knows what the impact of ho-
mosexuality on fertility is. It is difﬁcult to obtain a repre-
sentative sample of people. Those still in the closet and
those who are bisexual are not as likely to turn up at gay
pride events or AIDS clinics as those who are out and
sexually active in the gay community (cf. Gates, 2012).
This will lead to an underestimate of the fertility of ho-
mosexual people.

Furthermore, the fertility cost of homosexuality clearly
depends on the culture in with the behavior takes place. An

506 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

extreme example comes from Melanesia where homosexual
behavior is well known. About 10e20% of Melanesian
societies require all men to participate in homosexual as
well as heterosexual sex (reviewed in Herdt, 1994). Obvi-
ously homosexual behavior there not only involves no cost,
but to the contrary, failure to share in homosexual behavior
is deleterious.

Studies that deliberately omit bisexual people from
their survey samples commit a particularly serious mistake
with regard to the evolution of homosexuality. Hypothet-
ically, if exclusive homosexuality represents a genotype
homozygous for a gay gene, bisexuality a genotype
heterozygous with both the gay gene and a straight gene,
and exclusive heterosexuality a genotype homozygous for
the straight gene,
then the course of evolution of
homosexuality, and whether a polymorphism exists, de-
pends on knowing the average net reproduction by all three
the types.
genotypes of
Similarly,
the
net reproduction for all
the genotypes associated with
any particular genetic mechanism must be known if the
course of evolution based on that mechanism is to be
predicted.

for more complex genetic mechanisms,

individuals, not only two of

Moreover, Western national surveys of LGBT people
consistently and clearly show that bisexual people are about
as common as gay and lesbian people (Gates, 2011), con-
trary to the presumption often expressed by gay researchers
that bisexuals are rare (eg, Hamer et al., 1993). What is
going on is that bisexual people are not socially organized
around their sexuality to the extent that gay people are, so
survey protocols that sample primarily gay venues amplify
the gay component of the LGBT population while under-
estimating the bisexual component.

What then, if anything, can be said about the impact of
homosexuality on fertility? In the Western cultures that
have been sampled,
to summarize that
homosexuality in males might involve a reduction of say,
50%, in fertility relative to heterosexuality.

it seems fair

To explain homosexuality’s evolution, a 50% reduction
in fertility would need to be compensated somehow by a
doubling of the probability of survival if the net repro-
duction of homosexuals is to match that of heterosexuals.
Today’s society in many countries is certainly not kind to
the survival and health of gay and lesbian people (eg, Dean
et al., 2000), but the matter may have been entirely different
during human evolutionary history. The possibility that
homosexuality may increase survival through building al-
liances and partnerships, and thereby compensate for the
fertility cost of homosexuality, is taken up in detail later in
“Homosexuality Promotes Alliances and Partnerships”.
Here, the next sub-subsections focus on possible fertility
beneﬁts that might compensate for the fertility cost of
homosexuality.

Fertility Beneﬁt of Homosexuality:
Sex-Antagonistic Pleiotropy

Although the fertility cost of homosexuality may be
compensated by increased survival, other possible avenues
for compensation exist
too. One idea receiving current
attention is that the gay gene functions to increase any in-
dividual’s sexual attraction to men. The gene is supposed to
cause females to seek heterosexual mating more than fe-
males lacking the gene, yielding more offspring. As a side
effect, the gene is also supposed to lead males to seek more
homosexual mating than males lacking the gene, yielding
fewer offspring. Thus the gene is beneﬁcial in females and
deleterious in males. This genetic mechanism for evolution
is called sex-antagonistic pleiotropy.

The theoretical possibility of sex-antagonistic pleiot-
ropy accounting for male homosexuality has been explored
using mathematical models by Gavrilets and Rice (2006)
and Camperio Ciani et al. (2008). The applicability of this
mechanism to humans has been proposed by Camperio
Ciani and colleagues in a series of papers (Camperio Ciani
et al., 2004, 2009; Iemmola and Camperio Ciani, 2009) and
in Drosophila by Hoskins et al. (2015).

In a sample of homosexual and heterosexual people
drawn from Northern Italy, Camperio Ciani et al. (2004)
found that the mothers of male homosexuals had on the
average about 2.7 offspring, whereas the mothers of het-
erosexual males had on the average about 2.3 offspring.
Camperio Ciani et al. (2009) extended their samples to
include bisexual men. Here, they found that the mothers of
homosexual men had on the average 2.6 offspring, the
mothers of bisexual men had on the average 2.7 offspring,
whereas the mothers of heterosexual men had on the
average 2.1 offspring. These results are consistent with the
hypothesis that homosexuality results from genes that
promote a general sexual attraction to males by any indi-
vidual regardless of sex.

Camperio Ciani et al. (2008) found in their mathemat-
ical models that the enhanced male sexual attraction trait
required a certain minimal genetic system: the genetics for
the trait must consist at least of two loci with two alleles at
each locus, and at least one of the loci must be located on
the X chromosome. If the trait was determined by a single
locus, either autosomal or X-linked, or by two loci neither
of which is on the X chromosome,
then the predicted
evolutionary process would not agree with their data.

Four objections might be raised to this sex-antagonistic
pleiotropy hypothesis for humans. First, the size of the
difference between the fecundity of mothers of homosexual
males and mothers of heterosexual males is not very big. An
increase of only 0.5 extra offspring produced by mothers of
homosexual males may not be enough to compensate for
the 50% loss of fertility in her homosexual children.

Homosexuality and Evolution: A Critical Appraisal Chapter | 30 507

factor

Second, although Camperio Ciani’s et al.’s (2004) data
showed evidence of maternally inherited genetic factors
favoring male homosexuality, other
studies do not.
Schwartz et al. (2010) are explicit: “none of our ﬁndings
supported the hypothesis that maternal inheritance of male
sexual orientation was a more signiﬁcant
than
paternal
inheritance.” They go on to say, “the lack of
elevated ‘transmission’ of male sexual orientation in the
maternal line in the current study supports the notion that
hereditary contributions to male sexual orientation do not
predominantly reside on the X chromosome, but instead
primarily reside elsewhere,
is, on the autosomes.”
Recall, too, this chapter’s previous discussion concerning
Hamer et al.’s (1993) study claiming a gay gene is on the X
chromosome. That study has not been conﬁrmed, and
Mustanski et al.’s (2005) whole-genome scan and others
found little or no evidence of genes for homosexuality on
the X chromosome, or elsewhere for that matter. Thus,
Camperio Ciani’s ﬁndings about maternal inheritance of
homosexuality are apparently not general, undercutting
their requirement for a gay gene on the X chromosome.

that

Third, no direct information about behavior itself is
available. Do mothers of homosexual children actually
show an elevated sexual attraction to men compared with
mothers of heterosexual children? Camperio Ciani and
colleagues do not survey any of the women implicated in
their hypothesis, only men. So far as the women are con-
cerned, we must content ourselves solely with statistics on
their “fecundity.” No one actually asks the women them-
selves to see whether those with more homosexual children
are in fact more attracted to sex with men than the mothers
of solely heterosexual children. On reﬂection, mothers of a
gay child may have more children than mothers without
any gay children for many reasons having nothing to do
with an elevated sexual attraction to men. The mother of a
gay child may have an additional child to have grand-
children. Or the social dynamics within large families
might promote situations where being homosexual
is
adaptive.

Fourth, resting an explanation for a trait as widespread
as homosexuality on the peculiar properties of a speciﬁc
genetic mechanism is dubious theoretically. If an increase
in the degree of sexual attraction by females to males is
adaptive, natural selection need not shackle this trait to a
deleterious trait in males. Beyond the two primary loci for
elevated sexual attraction to males in the Camperio Ciani
et al. (2008) model, a third locus might be introduced, a
modiﬁer locus (eg, Feldman, 1972), whose alleles alter the
extent to which the primary genes are expressed in males.
Modiﬁer genes will then increase to reduce any deleterious
impact in males of a trait that is beneﬁcial in females. The
genetic mechanism that Camperio Ciani et al. (2008) relies
upon is not structurally stable to an increase of genes that
would alter the genetic system itself, removing the peculiar

properties that enable male homosexuality to be interpreted
as a deleterious side effect of a gene that is beneﬁcial to
females.

Fertility Beneﬁt of Transgender: Helpers at
the Nest

Another way to compensate for the fertility cost of homo-
sexuality is for the gene to increase the fertility of relatives.
If a homosexual person augments the fertility of a close
relative, the person theoretically can compensate for their
own fertility cost by propagating the genes contained in the
offspring of their close relatives. This hypothesis is a
version of what evolutionists term kin selection.

By this theory, gays and lesbians are similar to avian
helpers at the nest, offspring who stay around their nuclear
family to help in raising brothers, sisters, and cousins who
then go on to do the reproducing (Wilson, 1975, 1979).
When initially proposed, this theory broke new ground by
valuing the contributions to family and society that gay and
lesbian people might potentially make and was a step for-
ward in de-pathologizing same-sex sexuality. However, a
limitation of this theory to begin with is that it does not
explain why helpers who remain as part of an extended
family would speciﬁcally be gay or lesbian.

Important though this suggestion has been historically,
helping at the nest does not appear to hold the answer to
why homosexuality has evolved in humans. In a 2001 study
(Bobrow and Bailey, 2001), 66 homosexual and 57 het-
erosexual men were recruited using advertisements in free
urban alternative and gay publications. The name of the city
is not mentioned, but it is presumably Chicago because that
is where the investigators were located. Based on ques-
tionnaires, homosexual men were no more likely than
heterosexual men to channel
resources toward family
members. To the contrary, heterosexual men tended to give
more ﬁnancial resources to siblings than homosexual men.
Furthermore, homosexual men were somewhat more
estranged from family members, especially from fathers
and oldest siblings than heterosexual men.

A follow-up study in 2005 (Rahman and Hull, 2005)
found similar results based on 60 homosexual and 60 het-
erosexual men recruited from East London and Essex.
Questionnaires revealed no signiﬁcant differences between
heterosexual and homosexual men in general familial af-
ﬁnity, generous feelings (willingness to provide ﬁnancial
and emotional resources), and benevolent tendencies (such
as willingness to baby-sit).

In contrast to the studies from urban Western settings,
evidence supporting kin selection theory does come from
transgender people in Samoa.

Like other Polynesian cultures, Samoan culture features
a third gender for male-to-female transgender people,
called the fa’afaﬁne (pronounced,
fah-ah-fah-fee-nay).

508 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

They often are “strikingly feminine” and can easily pass as
women in public by wearing make-up, jewelry, women’s
clothing, feminine hairstyles, and speaking with a feminine
voice, and moving in a feminine manner (Bartlett and
Vasey, 2006). As Schmidt (2003) explains, drawing on her
own ﬁeld work and that of Poasa (1992) and Besnier
(1994), parents identify fa’afaﬁne when they are children
because of a propensity for feminine tasks. Families do not
equate this early preference for feminine labor with sexual
orientation. Upon reaching adulthood, sexual relations
with men are seen as a consequence of being fa’afaﬁne
rather than as a deﬁning criterion for inclusion in the
category. Fa’afaﬁne have traditionally been, and generally
still are, identiﬁed by their labor preferences not sexual
preferences. Furthermore, fa’afaﬁne do not identify as gay
because this is interpreted as indicating a straight man
having sex with another straight man. Thus, sexual re-
lations between fa’afaﬁne and straight men would be
described as homosexual and heterogenderal. This fact
means that evidence of kin selection found for fa’afaﬁne
pertains primarily to the evolution of transgender expres-
sion: any implications for the evolution of homosexuality
are incidental.

In Samoa, child-care activity is largely a feminine
gender role activity (Vasey and VanderLaan, 2009). When
their children are infants, Samoan mothers take primary
responsibility for child care. New mothers are surrounded
by kinswomen who take care of her other children while
she rests and recovers. Infants are often handed over for
extended periods of time to the care of an older female
relative, usually a sister or a cousin. Some women offer
specialized child-care activities, such as massaging infants
and small children to cure muscular soreness. Grand-
mothers often feed children if mothers are away. In addi-
tion, aunts and grandmothers often instruct young girls in
handicrafts and other work.

Vasey et al. (2007) gave questionnaires to 38 self-
identiﬁed fa’afaﬁne and 43 self-identiﬁed straight men in
Independent Samoa. Vasey et al. (2007) found that the
fa’afaﬁne and straight men did not differ in their overall
generosity and allocation of ﬁnancial resources toward kin,
nor did they differ in general neediness or ﬁnancial re-
sources obtained from kin. However, fa’afaﬁne did carry
out a suite of activities pertaining to their family’s child
care more than the straight men did: babysitting for an
evening, babysitting on a regular basis, taking care of the
children for a week while their parents are away, buying
toys for the children,
tutoring the children, helping to
expose the children to art and music, contributing money
for day care, contributing money for the children’s medical
expenses, and contributing money for the children’s edu-
cation. A follow-up study (Vasey and VanderLaan, 2009)
supplied questionnaires to 136 self-identiﬁed fa’afaﬁne,
182 self-identiﬁed straight men, 40 women without

children, and 89 mothers. In this study the fa’afaﬁne had
the highest willingness to carry out the suite of child-care
activities, higher even than the mothers,
the women
without children and the straight men in the sample.

Readers who refer back to the papers by Vasey and
colleagues may be confused by the terminology used.
Vasey describes the child-care activities by the fa’afaﬁne as
“avuncular,” a word that means uncle-like even though the
activities themselves are exactly the same as those used by
women while carrying out their child-care responsibilities.
The activities might better be described by the word,
“materteral” which means aunt-like because the fa’afaﬁne
are performing in a feminine work role in accordance with
why they identify as fa’afaﬁne to begin with. By focusing
on the biological sex of the fa’afaﬁne rather than their
gender expression, Vasey is considering them as uncle-like
even though their behavior is aunt-like, erasing their gender
identity in favor of a sexual identity.

There is a backstory to Vasey’s gender identity: erasing
language. Vasey subscribes to a controversial typology of
transgendered people introduced by Blanchard (1989). By
this typology, all transgender women belong to two distinct
non-overlapping classes: heterosexual cross-dressing men
(CD-trans) and homosexual men (H-trans). Blanchard en-
visions that CD-trans women are heterosexual men pursu-
ing a cross-dressing sexual fetish to the extreme of having a
vagina surgically constructed in them. He envisions that the
H-trans women are homosexual men seeking to improve
their attractiveness for sex with men. In the Blanchard ty-
pology, bisexuals do not exist; they are homosexuals in
self-denial. In addition, gender identity does not exist;
transsexual claims to identifying with the gender opposite
to their sex are delusions.

Research from the Blanchard perspective comes pri-
marily from faculty at three institutions: The Clarke Insti-
tute of Psychiatry in Toronto (now absorbed into the Center
for Addiction and Mental Health), the psychology depart-
ment of Northwestern University, and more recently the
psychology department in the University of Lethbridge.
Vasey is from Lethbridge.

The Blanchard typology ignited 20 years of vitriolic
controversy, largely because of its proponent’s incendiary
animus toward transgender people. (For a history of the dis-
putes, see http://ai.eecs.umich.edu/people/conway/conway.
html and http://www.tsroadmap.com/info/bailey-blanchard-
lawrence.html). The Blanchard typology is increasingly
discredited among academics (Moser, 2010; Nuttbrock et al.,
2011; see also Smith et al., 2005). Hence, the interpretation
favored in this paper is that transgender expression does exist
as a primary trait, and not as the derivative of some sexual
drive. Therefore, the evidence for kin selection among the
Samoan fa’afaﬁne is regarded as pertaining to the evolution of
transgender expression, not to the evolution of homosexuality.
The sexual orientation of the fa’afaﬁne is taken to be a

Homosexuality and Evolution: A Critical Appraisal Chapter | 30 509

by-product of the fa’afaﬁne’s social expectations, consistent
with the ethnographic studies on Samoa.

The case for kin selection favoring the evolution of
transgender expression among the fa’afaﬁne has not yet
been made quantitatively. Although the contribution of the
fa’afaﬁne to child care undoubtedly increases the repro-
duction from their families, as evidenced by the larger
family sizes of families with fa’afaﬁne compared to fam-
ilies without, it is not clear if this effect is large enough to
fully compensate for the fertility cost of the homosexuality
that the fa’afaﬁne practice.

The generality of a kin selection theory for the evolution
of transgender expression as in the fa’afaﬁne is not clear.
The hijra in India, for example, are generally cast out from
their extended families and instead join collectives
managed by a hijra guru (Nanda, 1999). On the other hand,
transgender people, such as the two-spirited women of
some Native American nations do participate to some
extent in women’s labor roles but also have unique social
roles, such as mediating disputes between men and women
and acting as shamans (Herdt, 1994; Roscoe, 1991, 1998).
Although the importance of fa’afaﬁne child care has
been discussed in the literature with regard to kin selection,
reﬂecting the early formulation originating with Wilson
(1975), a contemporary quantitative analysis of the fa’afa-
ﬁne contribution to reproduction might best be framed in
terms of family selection, or multilevel selection (Wilson
and Wilson, 2007). Indeed, the social roles of third-gender
people that go beyond helping in child care, and extend to
mediating disputes and to leading religious ceremonies that
bind people together, might produce tribes that prosper
more than tribes lacking such social glue. Differential
success of tribes with and without
third-gender people
might form the basis for a multilevel selection theory for
the evolution of transgender expression. Such transgender
expression might include homosexuality as a side effect.
The sex in such situations would be homosexual and
heterogenderal.

A theory emphasizing the value of helping in child care
and thereby increasing family size needs to explain why
such care is offered speciﬁcally by transgender people. Why
could not anyone else provide the help, say other women, or
the men: why a transgender woman speciﬁcally?

As a possible answer, I ﬁrst conjecture that the gender
role whereby child care is primarily the women’s re-
sponsibility is an ancient and preexisting condition. Next,
suppose an increase in size of the female labor pool is
favored through multilevel selection on families, despite
the constraint of an underlying 50:50 biological male-to-
female sex ratio. In this situation, evolution can add to the
female labor pool by tuning the amount and timing of the
delivery of prenatal hormones to produce a female-
identifying individuals from within the male pool. This
allows the production of more people carrying out female

labor tasks rather than male tasks despite the population
biological sex ratio remaining ﬁxed at 50:50. That is, the
phenotypic male-to-female sex ratio is free to vary even
though the biological sex ratio remains 50:50.

Homosexuality Selectively Neutral
This subsection pertains to theories for
the evolution
of homosexuality that assume it is costless, a harmless
by-product of other activities
that are adaptive. A
sub-subsection presents a well-known case with Japanese
macaques
the
population-genetic criterion for a trait to be neutral with
respect to natural selection.

sub-subsection

presents

and

another

Japanese Macaques

This harmless by-product view of homosexuality, ﬁrst
stated most clearly by Futuyma and Risch (1984), has
been further developed and applied to the case of female
homosexuality in Japanese macaques (Vasey, 1998). After
reviewing and dismissing possible functions of homo-
sexuality in female Japanese macaques, Vasey concludes
the females carry out homosexuality for its sheer pleasure.
He writes, although “sexual pleasure was selected for
because it motivates individuals to engage in fertile sex .
sexual pleasure is not speciﬁc to reproductive sex but can
be satisﬁed by many non-reproductive sexual outlets as
well.”

All Japanese macaque females participate in what are
called femaleefemale consorts. These are short-term re-
lationships (STRs) that last for less than an hour up to four
days. During this time, the two females mount each other
frequently with genitalegenital contact. When not having
sex together, they huddle, sleep, and forage together, groom
each other, and defend each other from challenges. For the
duration of their STR, a pair is monogamous. After a few
days though, they re-assort and form new STR’s with one
another.

Female Japanese macaque back each other up while
together in an STR. The lower ranking member of an STR
increases in rank temporarily because of her partner’s
support (Vasey, 1996). This temporary increase in rank
ends when the STR dissolves. The mountings are bidirec-
tional and mutually pleasurable, and they show no sign of a
dominance or
submissiveness within the relationship
(Vasey et al., 1998).

According to the theory that homosexuality is selec-
tively neutral, homosexuality does not disappear during
evolution because homosexuality is harmless. Female ma-
caques have lots of offspring, and they do participate in
heterosexual mating whenever they need some sperm.
Homosexuality does not apparently interfere with their
reproduction, so how could natural selection remove this
harmless behavior?

510 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

Thus, by chance, according to the selective neutrality
theory, homosexuality has drifted over the course of evo-
lution into prominence in some species, while remaining
nearly absent in others. Or, in some species, chance has
genetically linked homosexuality to certain important genes
and homosexuality has “hitchhiked” into prominence on
the coattails of those genes. Homosexuality is viewed as
beneath natural selection’s radar screen and subject only to
the winds of passion.

Do Japanese macaques have lots of free time to hang
around? Is every day another day in paradise, an endless
party ﬁlled with evolutionarily meaningless play? Why
should macaques be so lucky, while the rest of us poor sods
have to work for a living? Actually, homosexual interaction
would seem to occupy far too much time in the lives of
female macaques to be evolutionarily incidental. So, is
homosexuality plausibly a selectively neutral trait?

Criterion for Selective Neutrality

Evolutionary theory offers quantitative rule of thumb for
whether homosexuality can be a selectively neutral trait. If
the strength of natural selection against
the trait as
measured by s, the coefﬁcient of deleteriousness, is less
than the reciprocal of the population size, then the trait is
neutral;
selection.
Conversely,
if s is greater than the reciprocal of the
population size, the trait is deleterious and will tend to be
removed by natural selection resulting in a selection/
mutation equilibrium, as previously discussed.

it cannot be touched by natural

If s is less than the reciprocal of the population size,
indicating that the gene for homosexuality is neutral, then
the strength of genetic drift, the ever-present random ﬂuc-
tuation of gene pool frequencies, exceeds the strength of the
natural selection against the gene. That is, if homosexuality
is selectively neutral, any small “signal” of natural selection
is buried in the ever-present “noise” of the gene pool’s
random ﬂuctuations.

For example, if the population size of Japanese ma-
caques is 50, the reciprocal of the population size is 1/50,
or 0.02. Suppose the average net number of offspring left
by non-homosexual females is scaled to 1.0, and the
average net number of offspring left by homosexual fe-
males is 0.99. Then s, the coefﬁcient of deleteriousness, is
0.01. In this case, homosexuality is selectively neutral.
However, if the homosexual females have even a little bit
fewer offspring than the homosexual females because of
wasting time in homosexual mounting, say homosexual
females leave 0.95 offspring to every one left by a non-
homosexual female, then s is 0.05, which is greater than
the reciprocal of the population size. In this case, homo-
sexuality would not be neutral and would evolve to be
present
a mutation/selection

low frequency

in

at

equilibrium. Thus, for homosexuality to be evolutionarily
neutral, females who do, and who do not, participate in
short-term homosexual
relationships need to have an
almost exactly identical average life-long net reproduction,
which seems highly improbable.

Vasey (in comment following Kirkpatrick, 2000) re-
iterates his belief that human homosexual behavior is a
neutral by-product of direct selection for heterosexual sex-
ual pleasure, that homosexuality is expressed solely for
sexual gratiﬁcation. As such, Vasey claims that homosexual
behavior has no evolutionary function and simply will not
be selected against, presuming it does not interfere with the
participants’ heterosexual efforts. Vasey allows, however,
that homosexual behavior could be co-opted to serve a
sociosexual role, such as alliance formation (an exaptation).
As such, Vasey envisions that homosexuality may then
come under positive selection because of its beneﬁcial ef-
fects on ﬁtness. The problem with this seemingly appealing
theory is that the initial condition is improbable. That is,
selectively neutral traits do not patiently await, so to speak,
to be pressed into duty for some adaptive function. A time-
consuming behavior like homosexuality as practiced in the
Japanese macaques would almost surely not have been
neutral to begin with. Instead, if homosexuality has evolved
as an offshoot from heterosexuality, then it will have been
advantageous immediately without passing through an
intermediate state of selective neutrality awaiting to be
adaptively rescued.

To the contrary, homosexuality in Japanese macaques
is apparently beneﬁcial now and always has been. Indeed,
all females do participate in homosexual STRs. If there is a
beneﬁt to homosexuality, the coefﬁcient of deleterious, s,
is negative. The reason why homosexuality might be
beneﬁcial in Japanese macaques is that the fate of a female
who decides not to participate in homosexual STRs would
seem bleak because she is likely to be kicked out of the
group and left
to die soon thereafter. If participating
in STRs is necessary for inclusion in female social groups,
then those who are not homosexual would be at a
selective disadvantage. In this species female same-sex
sexuality is what I am calling a social-inclusionary trait
(Roughgarden, 2004).

Homosexuality Selectively Advantageous
This subsection pertains to theories for the evolution of
homosexuality that assume homosexuality is a positive
adaptation for
the
commonness of homosexuality is no problem whatsoever.
Indeed, the problem with these theories is to explain why
everyone is not homosexual. Two sub-subsections offer
different
theories for why homosexuality is
adaptive.

its participants. For

these theories,

types of

Homosexuality and Evolution: A Critical Appraisal Chapter | 30 511

Homosexuality Promotes Alliances and
Partnerships

Two papers in 2000 advance the hypothesis that homo-
sexual behavior is advantageous by promoting bonding in
varying circumstances.

I

is what

Greenberg (1988) classiﬁes homosexual behavior into
three types. One is transgenderal exempliﬁed by the fa’a-
faﬁne, hijra, and so forth, as previously discussed in
“Fertility Beneﬁt of Transgender: Helpers at the Nest”.
That
term homosexual and heterogenderal.
Instead, this section focuses on homosexuality that is both
homosexual and homogenderal. In this regard, Greenberg
distinguishes two types: adult-peer (which he calls egali-
tarian) and the patron/client (which he calls transgenera-
tional). Adult-peer homosexuality is type most common in
contemporary discourse about gay marriage; both partners
are nearly the same age, and they belong to the same
generation. However, patron/client homosexuality is
evidently the most common type of homosexuality cross-
culturally and throughout history.

Muscarella (2000) focuses on the value of homosexual
behavior in male patron/client relationships which he states,
“has been a persistent feature of the human species since
recorded history.” Continuing, Muscarella (2000) writes,
“The long history of institutionalized homosexuality be-
tween higher status and lower status males,” usually of
different ages by ﬁve years or more, produces “relation-
ships [that] tend to socialize the youths into the adult male
role, nurture and protect the youths and provide the basis
for life-long friendships, social alliances and social status
. Social status, a reﬂection of political strength and alli-
ances, appears to have played a large role in the evolu-
tionary history of human male reproductive success.”

For women, Muscarella (2000) suggests that homo-
sexuality provides bonds of friendship that lead to mutual
assistance in raising children, assuming paternal assistance
is absent in primitive societies. Here too, homosexuality is
hypothesized to provide higher reproductive success.

These conjectures about how homosexuality evolved
feedback to determining the type of environment in which
homosexuality develops during infancy. Muscarella (2000)
writes, “Homoerotic behavior may be evoked as a normal
response to placement in an environment which closely
resembles the environment in which it evolved and was
adaptive in the evolutionary past.”

Kirkpatrick (2000) generalizes the discussion about
homosexuality leading to alliances beyond a focus on the
patron/client. He writes, “If homosexual behavior also
serves non-conceptive functions, such as the maintenance
of same-sex alliances (long-term supportive relationships)
that aid in resource competition or in cooperative defense,
then homosexual behavior will be under positive selection

. Homosexual behavior is a survival strategy, not a
reproductive strategy.”

Kirkpatrick (2000) mentions many examples. I have
condensed his account as follows: “Pair-bonds between
adult-peer males in many societies of native North America
reduced variance in food intake and provided for cooper-
ative defense. Males become companions in hunting, in
war, and in fortune and have a right to food and lodging in
each other’s cabin. Within patron/client same-sex alliances
in Melanesia, the younger client provides labor in the ﬁelds
(and sexual services) while the older patron provides food
and education. In precolonial Tahiti and Hawaii, the clients
of powerful patrons gained prestige, as did clients in clas-
sical Athens and 15th-century Florence. In ancient Crete,
men without same-sex sexual partners were at a social
disadvantage. Same-sex sexual partners of the Japanese
samurai gained both martial training and land. In classical
Athens and in Tokugawa Japan, same-sex alliances were
thought to be more dangerous to entrenched interests than
female-male alliances. And lest one think of homosexual
and heterosexual relationships as antagonistic, both female-
exchange marriage and homosexual behavior integrate with
each other in Melanesia to link individuals in complex
chains of mutual dependency and obligation. Among the
Etoro, a patron’s ideal client is his wife’s younger brother,
effectively linking wife and client in a hetero/homosexual
threesome marriage in which one co-spouse is reproduc-
tively active.”

social groups

Tantalizing clues also exist that homosexual behavior
becomes expressed more in complex rather than simple
societies. Homosexual behavior occurs more often in
agricultural than in hunter-gather societies, and more often
in larger
(Barber, 1998). Homosexual
behavior may also be more frequent when political net-
works rather than independent individuals are empowered,
and it may be expressed more in industrial nations after
their demographic transition, that is, the shift in a pop-
ulation’s demography from high reproduction to high sur-
vival following industrialization (Dickemann, 1993).

A difﬁculty faced by a theory of homosexuality as a
form of alliance building is that maleemale alliances can
be built without using sexuality. This brings me to my own
contributions pertaining to the evolution of homosexuality
(Roughgarden, 2012a).

Physical Intimacy Promotes Cooperative
Coordination

My hypothesis is that it is speciﬁcally the physical intimacy
in homosexuality that is important, not sex. I conjecture
that the research focus on the sexual aspect of homosexu-
ality merely reﬂects our fetishizing of sex and not what is
important about homosexuality.

512 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

Instead, I hypothesize that genitalegenital contact is a
special case of physical intimacy that pertains uniquely to
mammals who happen to have genitals ﬁlled with pleasure
sensing neurons and who happen to use their genitals for
signaling and social purposes other than the exchange of
gametes in heterosexual mating. Indeed, I hypothesize that
mutual grooming in mammals, mutual preening in birds,
even calling together in chorus, also fulﬁll a similar func-
tion to the physical intimacy of homosexuality.

And what function is that? The reciprocal exchange of
pleasure in these behaviors provides coordination to coop-
erative activities in a way that allows a pair of animals (or
people) that have a potential conﬂict of interest to arrive at a
cooperative outcome rather than a competitive outcome.

Darwin (1872) reviewed the facial and bodily expres-
sions of many animals, especially mammals, and frequently
mentioned how pleasure is expressed. He writes, “With the
lower animals we see the same principle of pleasure derived
from contact
in association with love. Dogs and cats
manifestly take pleasure in rubbing against their masters
and mistresses, and in being rubbed or patted by them.
Many kinds of monkeys . delight in fondling and being
fondled by each other, and by persons to whom they are
attached” [31, pp. 215e216]. Darwin also recognized
pleasure through song: “We can plainly perceive, with
some of the lower animals, that the males employ their
voices to please the females, and that they themselves take
pleasure in their own vocal utterances” [31, pp. 87e88].
The pleasure associated with physical and vocal intimacy
that Darwin describes is the key feature to my concept of
teamwork.

I have further hypothesized that the act of cooperation
itself is pleasurable. As a human analogy, consider the
difference in pleasure between making an “Alley-Oop
pass” in basketball compared with making two foul shots,
both of which yield the same two points. Of course, every
member of a basketball team feels some pleasure when two
foul shots are successful, but the pleasure experienced is
even greater if the two points are obtained with a beautiful
acrobatic pass followed by a teammate’s dunk at the basket.
This is invariably followed by high-ﬁves all around. A
similar point could be made about the pleasure of scoring a
goal during regulation play in soccer compared with
scoring a goal during sudden death overtime.

Together with colleagues,

I have published game-
theoretic mathematical models showing how cooperation
attained via the reciprocal exchange of pleasure, including
leads to cooperative solutions to games
homosexuality,
that
interest between the parties
(Roughgarden et al., 2006; Akçay et al., 2009; Akçay and
Roughgarden, 2011; Roughgarden, 2012b).

involve conﬂicts of

Finally, I would like to remark on what might explain
the polymorphism in sexual orientation: the ratio of gays to
straights? Indeed, a problem if homosexuality supplies

advantages becomes why is everyone not homosexual, as in
bonobos and Japanese macaques.

The polymorphism between straights and gays may be
maintained by frequency-dependent selection between two
alternative strategies of within-sex relations, each of which
provides survival or reproductive advantages. Members of
the straight morph may build alliances based on a meri-
tocracy and/or the exchange of power, and members of the
gay morph may build alliances based on the exchange of
pleasure. Either strategy, if common enough, would be
subject to increase when rare by the other, leading to a
polymorphism.

Furthermore, the conﬂict likely to occur between these
alternative morphs for same-sex relations is possibly the
basis of homophobia. Alliances based on the exchange of
pleasure may threaten to subvert alliances based on the
exchange of socially constructed concepts of merit and
power. Same-sex pleasure-based alliances would then be
subject to suppression seemingly justiﬁed with a dispar-
aging narrative propounded those with the power to deﬁne
normalcy.

SUMMARY
1. Homosexual behavior occurs naturally in many species
of mammals, and also in insects. Among primates, ho-
mosexuality is an evolutionary innovation originating
when the anthropoid lineage split from the prosimian
linage, and it becomes particularly prominent in the
complex societies of the old world primates.

2. Many species possess multiple genders: multiple

morphs within each sex.

3. Transgender species have been documented, especially

in hummingbirds.

4. Homosexual behavior and transgender expression is
documented across all present-day human cultures,
throughout recorded history, including the Bible and
other religious texts, and in Paleolithic drawings and
artifacts.

5. A transgender “third sex” exists in many cultures, and

it has ofﬁcial status in India and its neighbors.

6. Homosexuality became a Western category of human

personal identity in the mid-1800s.

7. Investigators employ many inconsistent deﬁnitions of

homosexuality.

8. Gay and lesbian people cluster in families.
9. Despite 30 years of research, a gay gene has not been

located in the human genome.

10. Despite 30 years of research, the brains of homosexual
men have not been shown to resemble the brains of
women.

11. The brains of transgender people resemble the brains of
the gender they identify with and not with the brains
corresponding to their biological sex.

Homosexuality and Evolution: A Critical Appraisal Chapter | 30 513

12. The brains of transgender people develop reﬂecting the
timing of sex hormones at different stages during fetal
growth.

13. Gender identity may exist in the brain as a “cognitive
lens” that controls who to focus on as a developmental
“tutor.” Transgender identity is the acceptance of a
tutor from the opposite sex.

14. Gender identity has developed by the time of birth, and
sexual orientation develops later during the ﬁrst few
years of infancy.

15. Homosexuality and transgender are too common to be

considered genetic diseases.

16. The fertility cost of male homosexuality is as much as
50% in contemporary Western culture and much less
or nonexistent in other cultures.

17. The theory that the fertility cost of male homosexual
behavior is offset by a fecundity advantage to the
mothers of homosexual children has weak or no sup-
portive evidence.

18. Transgender expression, but not homosexual behavior,
might have evolved through kin selection in cultures
with a third sex, such as the fa’afaﬁne of Samoa.

19. It is improbable that homosexual behavior is selec-

tively neutral.

20. Homosexual behavior appears to be selectively advan-
tageous because it produces alliances and partnerships.
21. Homosexual behavior may be a special case of various
forms of physically intimate behavior that promote
cooperation through the reciprocal sharing of pleasure.
22. The homosexual/heterosexual polymorphism may
result
from frequency-dependent selection between
alternative same-sex alliance strategies: alliances based
on a socially-constructed meritocracy and alliances
based on a mutual exchange of pleasure. Homophobia
might be a byproduct of competition between these
types of alliances.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
I thank Milton Diamond, Sebastian Donovan, and Gillian Einstein for
helpful comments that greatly improved the manuscript.

REFERENCES

Akçay, E., Roughgarden, J., 2011. The evolution of payoff matrices:
providing incentives to cooperate. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London, Series B: Biological Sciences 278, 2198e2206. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2010.2105.

Akçay, E., Van Cleve, J., Feldman, M.W., Roughgarden, J., 2009.
A theory for the evolution of other-regard integrating proximate and
ultimate perspectives. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences of the United States of America 106, 19061e19066.

Allen, L.S., Hines, M., Shryne, J.E., Gorski, R.A., 1989. Two sexually
dimorphic cell groups in the human brain. Journal of Neuroscience 9,
497e506.

Bagemihl, B., 1999. Biological Exuberance: Animal Homosexuality and

Natural Diversity. St. Martin’s Press, New York.

Bailey, J., Bell, A., 1993. Familiality of female and male homosexuality.

Behavioral Genetics 23, 313e322.

Bailey, J., Benishay, D., 1993. Familial aggregation of female sexual

orientation. American Journal of Psychiatry 150, 272e277.

Bailey, J.M., Pillard, R.C., 1991. A genetic study of male sexual orien-

tation. Archives of General Psychiatry 48, 1089e1096.

Bailey, J.M., Pillard, R.C., Neale, M.C., Agyei, Y., 1993. Heritable factors
inﬂuence sexual orientation in women. Archives of General Psychiatry
50, 217e223.

Bailey, J.M., Dunne, M.P., Martin, N.G., 2000. Genetic and environmental
inﬂuences on sexual orientation and its correlates in an Australian twin
sample. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 78, 524e536.
Baker, R., Bellis, M., 1995. Human Sperm Competition: Copulation,

Masturbation, and Inﬁdelity. Chapman and Hall, New York.

Bao, A.M., Swaab, D.F., 2011. Sexual differentiation of the human brain:
relation to gender identity, sexual orientation and neuropsychiatric
disorders. Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology 32, 214e226.

Barber, N., 1998. Ecological and psychosocial correlates of male homo-
investigation. Journal of Cross-Cultural

sexuality: a cross-cultural
Psychology 29, 387e401.

Barlow, G., 2000. The Cichlid Fishes. Perseus Publishing, p. 145.
Bartlett, N.H., Vasey, P.L., 2006. A retrospective study of childhood
gender: atypical behavior in Samoan fa’afaﬁne. Archives of Sexual
Behavior 35, 559e566.

Beachy, R., 2010. The German Invention of homosexuality. The Journal of

Modern History 82, 801e838.

Belzner, S., Voigt, C., Catchpole, C.K., Leitner, S., 2009. Song learning
in domesticated canaries in a restricted acoustic environment.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series B: Biological
Sciences 276, 2881e2886. http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2009.0669.
Bengtsson, S.L., Nagy, Z., Skare, S., Forsman, L., Forssberg, H., Ullen, F.,
2005. Extensive piano practicing has regionally speciﬁc effects on
white matter development. Nature Neuroscience 8, 1148e1150.

Berglund, H., Lindström, P., Dhejne-Helmy, C., Savic, I., 2008. Male-to-
female transsexuals show sex-atypical hypothalamus activation when
smelling odorous steroids. Cerebral Cortex 18, 1900e1908.

Bermudez, P., Zatorre, R.J., 2005. Differences in gray matter between
musicians and nonmusicians. In: Avanzini, G., Koelsch, S., Lopez, L.,
Majno, M. (Eds.), Neurosciences and Music II: From Perception to
Performance, pp. 395e399.

Bermudez, P., Lerch, J.P., Evans, A.C., Zatorre, R.J., 2009. Neuroana-
tomical correlates of musicianship as revealed by cortical thickness
and voxel-based morphometry. Cerebral Cortex 19, 1583e1596.

Besnier, N., 1994. Polynesian gender liminality. In: Herdt, G. (Ed.), Third

Sex, Third Gender. Zone, New York, pp. 285e328.

Blanchard, R., Bogaert, A.F., 1996. Homosexuality in men and number of

older brothers. American Journal of Psychiatry 153, 27e31.

Blanchard, R., Klassen, P., 1997. H-Y antigen and homosexuality in men.

Journal of Theoretical Biology 185, 373e378.

Blanchard, R., 1989. The concept of autogynephilia and typology of male
gender dysphoria. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 177, 616e623.
Blanchard, R., 2008. Review and theory of handedness, birth order, and

homosexuality in men. Laterality 13, 51e70.

Bleiweiss, R., 1992. Widespread polychromatism in female sunangel
hummingbirds (Heliangelus: Trochilidae). Biological Journal of the
Linnean Society 45, 291e314.

514 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

Bleiweiss, R., 1999. Joint effects of feeding and breeding behavior
on trophic dimorphism in hummingbirds. Proceedings of
the
Royal Society of London, Series B: Biological Sciences 266,
2491e2497.

Bleiweiss, R., 2001. Asymmetrical expression of transsexual phenotypes
in hummingbirds. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series
B: Biological Sciences 268, 639e646.

Bobrow, D., Bailey, J.M., 2001. Is male homosexuality maintained via kin

selection? Evolution and Human Behavior 22, 361e368.

Bogaert, A.F., 2006. Biological versus nonbiological older brothers and
men’s sexual orientation. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 103, 10771e10774.

Burr, C., 1996. A Separate Creation; The Search for the Biological Origins

of Sexual Orientation. Hyperion, New York.

Dover, K.J., 1978. Greek Homosexuality. Harvard University Press,

Cambridge, MA.

Elbert, T., Pantev, C., Wienbruch, C., Rockstroh, B., Taub, E., 1995.
Increased cortical representation of the ﬁngers of the left hand in string
players. Science 270, 305e306.

Ellis, L., Ames, M.A., 1987. Neurohormonal functioning and sexual
orientation: a theory of homosexuality/heterosexuality. Psychological
Bulletin 101, 233e258.

Essock-Vitale, S., McGuire, M., 1988. What 70 million years hath
wrought: sexual histories and reproductive success of a random
sample of American women. In: Betzig, Mulder, M.B., Turke, P.
(Eds.), Human Reproductive Behavior: A Darwinian Perspective.
Cambridge University Press, pp. 221e235.

Feldman, M.W., 1972. Selection for linkage modiﬁcation. I. Random

Byne, W., Parsons, B., 1993a. Human sexual orientation: the biologic

mating populations. Theoretical Population Biology 3, 324e346.

theories reappraised. Archives of General Psychiatry 50, 228e239.

Futuyma, D., Risch, S., 1984. Sexual orientation, sociobiology, and

Byne, W., Parsons, B., 1993b. Human homosexuality:

the biological

evolution. Journal of Homosexuality 9, 157e168.

theories reappraised. Archives of General Psychiatry 50, 228e239.

Byne, W., Tobet, S., Mattiace, L., Lasco, M.S., Kemether, E.,
Edgar, M.A., Morgello, S., Buchsbaum, M.S., Jones, L.B., 2001. The
interstitial nuclei of the human anterior hypothalamus: an investigation
of variation within sex, sexual orientation and HIV status. Hormones
& Behavior 40, 86e92.

Camperio Ciani, A., Corna, F., Capiluppi, C., 2004. Evidence for mater-
nally inherited factors favouring male homosexuality and promoting
female fecundity. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series
B: Biological Sciences 271, 2217e2221.

Camperio Ciani, A., Cermelli, P., Zanzotto, G., 2008. Sexually antago-
nistic selection in human male homosexuality. PLoS One 3 (6), e2282.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0002282.

Camperio Ciani, A., Iemmola, F., Blecher, S.R., 2009. Genetic factors
increase fecundity in female maternal relatives of bisexual men as in
homosexuals. Journal of Sexual Medicine 6, 449e455.

Chakrapani, V., Newman, P.A., Shunmugam, M., McLuckie, A.,
Melwin, F., 2007. Structural violence against kothieidentiﬁed men
who have sex with men in Chennai, India: a qualitative investigation.
AIDS Education and Prevention 19, 346e364.

Colapinto, J., 2000. As Nature Made Him: The Boy Who Was Raised as a

Girl. HarperCollins.

Crinion, J.T., Green, D.W., Chung, R., Ali, N., Grogan, A., Price, G.R.,
Price, C.J., 2009. Neuroanatomical markers of speaking Chinese.
Human Brain Mapping 30, 4108e4115.

Darwin, C., 1871. The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex.

Volumes I. and II.. John Murray, London.

Garcia-Falgueras, A., Swaab, D.F., 2008. A sex difference in the
hypothalamic uncinate nucleus: relationship to gender identity. Brain
131, 3132e3146.

Gaser, C., Schlaug, G., 2003. Brain structures differ between musicians

and non-musicians. Journal of Neuroscience 23, 9240e9245.

Gates, G., 2011. How Many People Are Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and
Transgender? The Williams Institute. UCLA, Los Angeles. http://
williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/research/census-lgbt-demographics-
studies/how-many-people-are-lesbian-gay-bisexual-and-transgender/.
Gates, G., 2012. LGBT identity: a demographer’s perspective. Loyola of
Los Angeles Law Review 45, 693e714. Available at: http://
digitalcommons.lmu.edu/llr/vol45/iss3/2.

Gavrilets, S., Rice, W.R., 2006. Genetic models of homosexuality:
generating testable predictions. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London, Series B: Biological Sciences 273, 3031e3038. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1098/rspb. 2006.3684.

Gizewski, E.R., Krause, E., Schlamann, M., Happich, F., Ladd, M.E.,
Forsting, M., Senf, W., 2009. Speciﬁc cerebral activation due to visual
erotic stimuli in male-to-female transsexuals compared with male and
female controls: an fMRI study. Journal of Sexual Medicine 6,
440e448.

Greenberg, D., 1988. The Construction of Homosexuality. University of

Chicago Press.

Hahn, A., Kranz, G.S., Küblböck, M., Kaufmann, U., Ganger, S.,
Hummer, A., Lanzenberger, R., 2015. Structural connectivity
networks of transgender people. Cerebral Cortex 25, 3527e3534.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhu194.

Darwin, C., 1872. The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals.

Halperin, D.M., 1990. One Hundred Years of Homosexuality: And Other

John Murray, London, UK.

Essays on Greek Love. Routledge, New York.

Dawood, K., Michael Bailey, J., Martin, N.G., 2009. Genetic and envi-
ronmental inﬂuences on sexual orientation. In: Handbook of Behavior
Genetics. Springer, New York, pp. 269e279.

Hamer, D., Hu, S., Magnuson, V., Hu, N., Pattatucci, A., 1993. A linkage
between DNA markers on the X chromosome and male sexual
orientation. Science 261, 321e327.

Dean, L., Meyer, I., Robinson, K., Sell, R., Sember, R., Silenzio, V.,
Bowen, D., Bradford, J., Rothblum, E., Scout, M., White, J., Dunn, P.,
Lawrence, A., Wolfe, D., Xavier, J., 2000. Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transgender health: ﬁndings and concerns. Journal of the Gay and
Lesbian Medical Association 4, 101e151.

Dickemann, M., 1993. Reproductive strategies and gender construction: an
evolutionary view of homosexualities. Journal of Homosexuality 24
(3/4), 55e71.

Doniger, W., 2009. The Hindus: An Alternative History. The Penguin

Press, New York.

Herdt, G. (Ed.), 1994. Third Sex Third Gender: Beyond Sexual Dimor-

phism in Culture and History. Zone Books, New York.

Hoskins, J.L., Ritchie, M.G., Bailey, N.W., 2015. A test of genetic models
for the evolutionary maintenance of same-sex sexual behaviour.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series B: Biological
Sciences 282. http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2015.0429.

Hu, S., Pattatucci, A., Patterson, C., Li, L., Fulker, D., Cherny, S.,
Kruglyak, L., Hamer, D., 1995. Linkage between sexual orientation
and chromosome Xq28 in males but not in females. Nature Genetics
11, 248e256.

Homosexuality and Evolution: A Critical Appraisal Chapter | 30 515

Iemmola, F., Camperio Ciani, A., 2009. New evidence of genetic factors
inﬂuencing sexual orientation in men: female fecundity increase in the
maternal line. Archives of Sexual Behavior 38, 393e399.

Isomura, S., Mizogami, M., 1992. The low rate of HIV infection in
Japanese homosexual and bisexual men: an analysis of HIV sero-
prevalence and behavioral risk factors. AIDS 6, 501e503.

Jannini, E.A., Blanchard, R., Camperio-Ciani, A., Bancroft, J., 2010. Male
homosexuality: nature or culture? Journal of Sexual Medicine 7,
3245e3253.

Jung, P., Coray, J. (Eds.), 2001. Sexual Diversity and Catholicism: Toward

ﬂow changes in female to male gender identity disorder. Psychiatry
and Clinical Neurosciences 64, 157e161.

Nuttbrock, L., Bockting, W., Mason, M., Hwahng, S., Rosenblum, A.,
Macri, M., Becker, J., 2011. A further assessment of Blanchard’s
typology of homosexual versus non-homosexual or autogynephilic
gender dysphoria. Archives of Sexual Behavior 40, 247e257. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10508-009-9579-2.

Parish, A., 1996. Female relationships in bonobos (Pan paniscus),
evidence for bonding, cooperation, and female dominance in a male-
philopatric species. Human Nature 7, 61e96.

the Development of Moral Theology. The Liturgical Press.

Paus, T., 2005. Mapping brain maturation and cognitive development

Jung, P., Vigen, A. (Eds.), 2010. God, Science, Sex, Gender: An Inter-
disciplinary Approach to Christian Ethics. University of Illinois Press.
Kanai, R., Feilden, T., Firth, C., Rees, G., 2011. Political orientations are
correlated with brain structure in young adults. Current Biology 21,
677e680.

Katz, J., 1995. The Invention of Heterosexuality. Dutton.
Kendler, K., Thornton, L., Gilman, S., Kessler, R., 2000. Sexual orienta-
tion in a U.S. National sample of twin and nontwin sibling pairs.
American Journal of Psychiatry 157 (11), 1843e1846.

King, M., McDonald, E., 1992. Homosexuals who are twins: a study of 46

probands. British Journal of Psychiatry 160, 407e409.

during adolescence. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 9, 60e68.

Peletz, M., 2006. Transgenderism and gender pluralism in Southeast
Asia since early modern times. Current Anthropology 47, 309e340.
Penrose, W., 2001. Hidden in history: Female homoeroticism and women
of a “third nature” in the South Asian past. Journal of the History of
Sexuality 10, 3e39.

Pillard, R., Weinrich, J., 1986. Evidence of familial nature of male ho-

mosexuality. Archives of General Psychiatry 43, 808e812.

Poasa, K., 1992. The Samoan Fa’afaﬁne: one case study and discussion of
trans- sexualism. Journal of Psychology and Human Sexuality 5 (3),
39e51.

King, M.D., Green, J., Osborn, D.P.J., Arkell, J., Hetherton, J., Pereira, E.,
2005. Family size in white gay and heterosexual men. Archives of
Sexual Behavior 34, 117e122.

Rahman, Q., Hull, M., 2005. An empirical test of the kin selection hy-
pothesis for male homosexuality. Archives of Sexual Behavior 34,
461e467.

Kirkpatrick, R., 2000. The evolution of human homosexual behavior.

Current Anthropology 41, 385e413.

Kranz, G.S., Hahn, A., Kaufmann, U., Küblböck, M., Hummer, A.,
Ganger, S., Lanzenberger, R., 2014. White matter microstructure in
transsexuals and controls investigated by diffusion tensor imaging.
The Journal of Neuroscience 34 (46), 15466e15475.

Kuefﬂer, M., 2001. The Manly Eunuch: Masculinity, Gender Ambiguity,
and Christian Ideology in Late Antiquity. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.

Långström, N., Rahman, Q., Carlström, E., Lichtenstein, P., 2010. Genetic
and environmental effects on same-sex sexual behavior: a population
study of twins in Sweden. Archives of Sexual Behavior 39, 75e80.
LeVay, S., 1991. A difference in hypothalamic structure between hetero-

sexual and homo- sexual men. Science 253, 1034e1037.

Moser, C., 2010. Blanchard’s autogynephilia theory: a critique. Journal of
Homosexuality 57 (6), 790e809. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00918369.
2010.486241.

Ramagopalan, S.V., Dyment, D.A., Handunnetthi, L., Rice, G.P.,
Ebers, G.C., 2010. A genome-wide scan of male sexual orientation.
Journal of Human Genetics 55, 131e132.

Rametti, G., Carrillo, B., Gomez-Gil, E., Junque, C., Segovia, S.,
Gomez, A., Guillamon, A., 2011a. White matter microstructure in
female to male transsexuals before cross-sex hormonal treatment. A
diffusion tensor imaging study. Journal of Psychiatric Research 45,
199e204.

Rametti, G., Carrillo, B., Gomez-Gil, E., Junque, C., Zubiarre-Elorza, L.,
Segovia, S., Gomez, A., Guillamon, A., 2011b. The microstructure of
white matter in male to female transsexuals before cross-sex hormonal
treatment. A DTI
study. Journal of Psychiatric Research 45,
949e954.

Rice, G., Anderson, C., Risch, N., Ebers, G., 1999. Male homosexuality:
absence of linkage to microsatellite markers at Xq28. Science 284,
665e667.

Roscoe, W., 1991. The Zuni Man-woman. University of New Mexico

Muscarella, F., 2000. The evolution of homoerotic behavior in humans.

Press, Albuquerque.

Journal of Homosexuality 40, 51e77.

Mustanski, B.S., Chivers, M.L., Bailey, J.M., 2002. A critical review of
recent biological research on human sexual orientation. Annual Re-
view of Sex Research 13, 89e140.

Mustanski, B.S., Dupree, M.G., Nievergelt, C.M., Bocklandt, S.,
Schork, N.J., Hamer, D.H., 2005. A genomewide scan of male sexual
orientation. Human Genetics 116, 272e278.

Nanda, S., 1999. Neither Man nor Woman: The Hijras of India, second ed.

Wadsworth Publishing Company, Belmont, CA.

Nash, G., 2001. The subversive male: homosexual and bestial images on
European Mesolithic rock art. In: Bevan, L. (Ed.), Indecent Exposure:
Sexuality, Society and the Archaeological Record. Cruithne, Glasgow,
pp. 43e55.

Roscoe, W., 1996. Priests of the goddess: gender transgression in ancient

religion. History of Religions 35, 195e230.

Roscoe, W., 1998. Changing Ones: Third and Fourth Genders in Native

North America. St. Martin’s Press, New York.

Roughgarden, J., Oishi, M., Akçay, E., 2006. Reproductive social
behavior: cooperative games to replace sexual selection. Science 311,
965e969.
Roughgarden,

J., Adkins-Regan, E., Akçay, E., Crawford,

J.C.,
Gadagkar, R., Grifﬁth, S.C., Hinde, C.A., Hoquet, T., O’Connor, C.,
Prokop, Z.M., Prum, R.O., Shaﬁr, S., Snow, S.S., Taylor, D., Van
Cleve, J., Weisberg, M., 2015. Sexual selection studies: a NESCent
catalyst meeting. PeerJ PrePrints 3, e680v3. http://dx.doi.org/10.7287/
peerj.preprints.680v3.

Nawata, H., Ogomori, K., Tanaka, M., Nishimura, R., Urashima, H.,
Yano, R., Takano, K., Kuwabara, Y., 2010. Regional cerebral blood

Roughgarden, J., 2004. Evolution’s Rainbow: Diversity, Gender, and
Sexuality in Nature and People. University of California Press,

516 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

Berkeley, CA. Portuguese translation, 2005, published by editoria
Planta, Brazil. Korean translation, 2010, published by Puriwa Ipari
Publishing Co., Seoul, Korea.

Roughgarden, J., 2009. The Genial Gene: Deconstructing Darwinian
Selﬁshness. University of California Press, Berkeley, CA. French
translation, 2012, published by Le Seuil, Paris.

Swaab, D., Zhou, J.-N., Ehlhart, T., Hofman, M., 1994. Development of
vasoactive intestinal polypeptide neurons in the human suprachias-
matic nucleus in relation to birth and sex. Developmental Brain
Research 79, 249e259.

Swaab, D., Gooren, L., Hofman, M., 1995. Brain research, gender, and

sexual orientation. Journal of Homosexuality 28, 283e301.

Roughgarden, J., 2012a. The social selection alternative to sexual selec-
tion. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London.
Series B: Biological Sciences 367, 2294e2303.

Van de Ven, P., Rodden, P., Crawford,

J., Kippax, S., 1997.
A comparative demographic and sexual proﬁle of older homosexually
active men. Journal of Sex Research 34, 349e360.

Roughgarden, J., 2012b. Teamwork, pleasure and bargaining in animal
social behaviour. Journal of Evolutionary Biology 25, 1454e1462.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1420-9101.2012.02505.x.

Vasey, P.L., VanderLaan, D.P., 2009. Materteral and avuncular tendencies
in Samoa: a comparative study of women, men, and fa’afaﬁne. Human
Nature 20, 269e281.

Roughgarden, J., 2015. Sexual selection: is anything left? In: Hoquet, T.
(Ed.), Current Perspectives on Sexual Selection: What’s Left after
Darwin? Springer Verlag, pp. 85e102.

Vasey, P., Chapais, B., Gauthier, C., 1998. Mounting interactions between
female Japanese macaques: testing the inﬂuence of dominance and
aggression. Ethology 104, 387e398.

Sanders, A.R., Martin, E.R., Beecham, G.W., Guo, S., Dawood, K., Rieger, G.,
Badner, J.A., Gershon, E.S., Krishnappa, R.S., Kolundzija, A.B., Duan, J.,
Gejman, P.V., Bailey, J.M., 2015. Genome-wide scan demonstrates sig-
niﬁcant linkage for male sexual orientation. Psychological Medicine 45,
1379e1388. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0033291714002451.

Vasey, P.L., Pocock, D.S., VanderLaan, D.P., 2007. Kin selection and
male androphilia in Samoan fa’afaﬁne. Evolution and Human
Behavior 28, 159e167.

Vasey, P., 1995. Homosexual behavior in primates: a review of evidence

and theory. Journal of Primatology 16, 173e204.

Saraswat, A., Weinand, J.D., Safer, J.D., 2015. Evidence supporting the
biologic nature of gender identity. Endocrine Practice 21, 199e204.
Savic, I., Arver, S., 2011. Sex dimorphism of the brain in male-to-female

Vasey, P., 1996. Interventions and alliance formation between female
Japanese macaques, Macaca fuscata, during homosexual consort-
ships. Animal Behaviour 52, 539e551.

transsexuals. Cerebral Cortex 21, 2525e2533.

Savic, I., Lindström, P., 2008. PET and MRI show differences in cerebral
asymmetry and functional connectivity between homo- and hetero-
sexual subjects. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 105, 9403e9408.

Vasey, P., 1998. Intimate sexual relations in prehistory: lessons from the

Japanese macaques. World Archaeology 29, 407e425.

Whitam, F., Diamond, M., Martin, J., 1993. Homosexual orientation in
twins: a report on 61 pairs and three triplet sets. Archives of Sexual
Behavior 22, 187e206.

Schmidt, J., 2003. Paradise lost? Social change and fa’afaﬁne in Samoa.

Williams, W., 1986. The Spirit and the Flesh: Sexual Diversity in Amer-

Current Sociology 51, 417e432.

ican Indian Culture. Beacon Press, Boston.

Schoning, S., Engelien, A., Bauer, C., Kugel, H., Kersting, A., Roestel, C.,
Zwitser- lood, P., Pyka, M., Dannlowski, U., Lehmann, W., et al.,
2010. Neuroimaging differences in spatial cognition between men and
male-to-female trans- sexuals before and during hormone therapy.
Journal of Sexual Medicine 7, 1858e1867.

Williams, H., 2008. Bird song and singing behavior. In: Ziegler, H.P.,
Marler, P. (Eds.), The Neuroscience of Bird Song. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge.

Wilson, D.S., Wilson, E.O., 2007. Rethinking the theoretical foundation of

sociobiology. Quarterly Review of Biology 82, 327e348.

Schwartz, G., Kim, R.M., Kolundziji, A.B., Rieger, G., Sanders, A.R.,
2010. Biodemographic and physical correlates of sexual orientation in
men. Archives of Sexual Behavior 39, 93e109.

Wilson, E.O., 1975. Sociobiology: The New Synthesis. Harvard Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge, MA see especially page 555 for a discussion of
homosexuality.

Simon, L., Kozak, L.R., Simon, V., Czobor, P., Unoka, Z., Szabo, A.,
Csukly, G., 2013. Regional grey matter structure differences between
transsexuals and healthy controls e a voxel based morphometry study.
PloS One 8, e83947.

Smith, Y.L., van Goozen, S.H., Kuiper, A.J., Cohen-Kettenis, P.T., 2005.
Transsexual subtypes: clinical and theoretical signiﬁcance. Psychiatry
Research 137, 151e160.

Sommer, V., Vasey, P. (Eds.), 2006. Homosexual Behaviour in Animals:

An Evolutionary Perspective. Cambridge University Press.

Wilson, E.O., May 03, 1979. Gay as normal: homosexuality and human

nature: a sociobiological view. Advocate 15, 18.

Yankelovich Partners, 1994. A Yankelovich MONITOR Perspective on

Gays and Lesbians (Norwalk, Connecticut).

Zatorre, R.J., Belin, P., Penhune, V.B., 2002. Structure and function of audi-
tory cortex: music and speech. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 6, 37e46.
Zhou, J.N., Hofman, M.A., Gooren, L.J., Swaab, D.F., 1995. A sex dif-
ference in the human brain and its relation to transsexuality. Nature
378, 68e70.

Swaab, D.F., Garcia-Falgueras, A., 2009. Sexual differentiation of the
human brain in relation to gender identity and sexual orientation.
Functional Neurology 24, 17e28.

Zwilling, L., Sweet, M.J., 1996. Like a city ablaze: the third sex and the
creation of sexuality in Jain religious literature. Journal of the History
of Sexuality 613, 359e384.

Chapter 31

The Roots and Individual Diversity
of Addiction

A. Bilbao Leis
University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
ADH Alcohol dehydrogenase
ADE Alcohol deprivation effect
ASI Alcohol Composite Index of the Addiction Severity Index
CPP Conditioned place preference
CRH Corticotropin releasing hormone
CTA Conditioned taste aversion
DSM-V Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th

edition

EPM Elevated plus maze
GWAS Genome-wide association studies
HPA Hypothalamic-pituitary adrenal axis
ICD International Statistical Classiﬁcation of Diseases and Related

Health Problems

ICSS Intracranial self-stimulation
MDMA 3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine
mGluR5 Metabotropic glutamate receptor type 5
NAc Nucleus accumbens
PFC Prefrontal cortex

INTRODUCTION
In medicine or psychology,
the detailed report of the
symptoms, signs, diagnosis, and treatment obtained from
patients with addictive problems is known as a “case
report.” While it is understood that these are anecdotal
accounts, ultimately they might provide insight into the
disease and the treatments for it. At this point, as a ﬁrst step,
personal stories can also help us identify questions that we
will want to answer in our search for the roots and indi-
vidual diversity of addiction. Here are two stories.

Jörg never liked school; he was not good, so he soon
decided to not continue his studies. He always wanted
something that could give him easy money without great
effort. Having left school, it was time to ﬁnd a job, and he

(cocaine,

found it: Jörg started selling drugs on the street. This de-
cision was motivated by his twin brother, who at that time
worked as a manager for famous music bands, and thus had
a direct contact with any kind of addictive drugs. During
the following years, Jörg (with his brother) continuously
succeeded in his “business” and had a lot of money and
friends. His life was based on going to parties all night long
and consuming addictive drugs
cannabis,
amphetamine, and designer drugs) without control. All of a
sudden,
this situation radically changed when he was
arrested by the police. After spending about 5 years in
prison, his life, obviously, would never be the same. He had
no money, he could not ﬁnd a job, and his brother (always
very attached to him) became seriously ill. Now, the over-
50-year-old Jörg works as a dishwasher in a restaurant,
many times he cannot pay the rent of his apartment, and he
continuously smokes marijuana. Surprisingly, this life does
not seem to bother him much, as he always looks happy,
too happy. Moreover,
to be
“confused” and “disconnected” from the real world. For
example, he forgets his keys in the apartment, gets lost
when driving, or forgets to wake up in the morning to go to
work. Some of the people that know him (like neighbors)
think that
the reason for this illogic unawareness and
confusion is that he smokes too much marijuana; however,
friends close to him say that “he was always like that, a bit
short.” But at the present, just one thing is clear for all of
the people that know Jörg: he is getting worse and worse.
The story of Andrew is different. His life started to be
difﬁcult in childhood. His parents did not get along together,
and a few years after his birth, the mother left the country with
Andrew. He was a very hyperactive child, and this behavior
caused him a lot of problems, particularly in the school.
Indeed, he received different pharmacological treatments on

sometimes, he seems

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00031-4
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

517

518 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

several occasions, without ever achieving a complete suc-
cess. After ﬁnishing school, he constantly tried different jobs
(always independent), and at some point, he started selling
drugs on the street in parallel. His dynamic and hyperactive
personality ﬁt so perfectly in this environment that he soon
really succeeded and earned big amounts of money. His work
was then progressive neglected, and his behavior became
characterized by a permanent compulsivity and loss of con-
trol over his life: he could not refrain from taking drugs, and
he could not refrain from wasting money. But, as with Jörg,
he was sent to prison. However, this experience did not
change his life as one would expect. Andrew started working
independently, and he kept consuming drugs in a more or less
compulsive way. Interestingly, as soon as he started ﬁnding
some stability in his job and earning money, he progressively
started consuming more and more drugs. Over the next years,
his life was characterized by repeated cycles of binge in-
toxications, followed by short periods of abstinence that
affected him strongly psychologically, physically, and so-
cially: his mood became very unstable, irritable (up to
aggressiveness), and depressive; he appeared tired and thin,
and he lost contact with some of his friends. Andrew reached
such a point that he almost ruined his own business. Now he
has been in abstinence from psychostimulants for more than
one year and has changed his life completely: he is focused
on his business again; he has healthy habits like practicing
sports and keeping a healthy diet, and he has contact with
some of his friends again. Although he still suffers the eco-
nomic and health consequences of that period, he has mostly
recovered psychologically, and more importantly, he is
highly motivated and reinforced by his achievement.

These stories exemplify clearly the problem of addic-
tion. More importantly, they reﬂect the complexity of the
disorder. How should one classify this? The reader might
ﬁnd it interesting to identify symptoms of addiction from
these two stories according to the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-V). The DSM-V
(American Psychiatric Association, 2013) speciﬁes 11
symptoms: the presence of two to three symptoms within a
12-month period indicates a mild disorder, four to ﬁve a
moderate one, and six or more a severe disorder. These
criteria include the following:

1. the drug is often taken in larger amounts or over a

longer period than was intended,

2. there is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut

down or control drug use,

3. a great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to
obtain the drug, use the drug, or recover from its effects,

4. craving or a strong desire or urge to use the drug,
5. recurrent drug use resulting in a failure to fulﬁll major

role obligations at work, school, or home,

6. continued drug use despite having persistent or recur-
rent social or interpersonal problems caused or exacer-
bated by the effects of the drug,

7. important social, occupational, or recreational activities

are given up or reduced because of drug use,

8. recurrent drug use in situations in which it is physically

hazardous,

9. drug use is continued despite knowledge of having a
persistent or recurrent physical or psychological prob-
lem that is likely to have been caused or exacerbated
by the drug,

10. tolerance, as deﬁned by either of the following:

a. a need for markedly increased amounts of the drug

to achieve intoxication or desired effect,

b. a markedly diminished effect with continued use of

the same amount of the drug.

11. withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following:
a. the characteristic withdrawal symptoms for the drug,
b. the drug (or a closely related substance) is taken to

relieve or avoid withdrawal symptoms.

If the reader took the time to diagnose Jörg and Andrew
according to the DSM-V criteria, he/she might have real-
ized that both can be diagnosed as substance abusers
regardless of how and why they ended up in this addictive
behavior. From their stories, one can easily notice that
different factors inﬂuenced the development of such dis-
order. Thus, was Jörg environmentally inﬂuenced, being
surrounded by drugs, or had he some neurocognitive deﬁ-
cits that predisposed him to addiction? In the case of
Andrew, did his early adverse life experiences impact on
his later addictive behaviors, or was his hyperactive per-
sonality more inﬂuential? We cannot answer these ques-
tions because addiction cannot be solely attributed to one or
another cause. Rather, addiction has many roots, and it
varies across individuals. In this chapter, I will try to give
an overview about the roots and individual diversity of
addiction. To that end, I will ﬁrst show that addiction is an
old phenomenon that has always been present across his-
tory. Then, I will introduce the psychological constructs
through which drugs gradually modify behavior during the
transition to addiction, and the resulting speciﬁc genotypes
or behavioral patterns associated to addiction. Finally, I will
brieﬂy go over biological, psychological
(personality),
environmental, and genetic vulnerability factors that pre-
dispose the individuals to addictive disorders.

ADDICTIVE BEHAVIOR IN HUMANS
THROUGHOUT HISTORY

Addictive Drugs in Prehistory and Patterns
of Use
The use of addictive drugs is an old phenomenon in human
history. Exemplifying this fact, Ötzi,
the oldest natural
mummy found in Europe from the late Neolithic (around
5300 years ago, found in the Alps by two German hikers in
1991) carried in his bag some plants and substances

together with a polypore fungus with antibacterial and he-
mostatic properties (Kutschera and Rom, 2000). Further,
from the oral, written, or art references found by archae-
ologists and anthropologists, the human’s relationship with
addictive drugs has been recognized in almost all cultural
groups and has persisted across the prehistoric era. But, to
what extent were drugs used? The answer is clear: since
those ancient times till now, the driving force of such a
relationship between humans and psychoactive substances
has been psychological, with the ﬁnal purpose of altering
the states of consciousness.

In this regard, it has been suggested that the use of drugs
may have played an additional evolutionary role in mental
or brain development, and in the origin of language and
religion, an idea proposed by Terence Kemp McKenna. He
wrote about the theoretical origins of human consciousness,
and his work culminated in the formulation of the “stoned
ape” theory of human evolution. In this theory, he argued
that the consumption of mushrooms would be triggering
activity in the language-forming region of
the brain,
resulting in an evolutionary advantage leading to the
development of language, projective imagination, the arts,
religion, philosophy, science, and all of human culture
(Sheldrake et al., 1998).

During prehistoric times, the use of substances inﬂu-
encing mood and thinking processes was restricted to
particular environmental conditions and inﬂuenced by three
dominant patterns of use: religious, medicinal, and recrea-
tional. Some of the most commonly used substances for
religious or medicinal purposes were the mushroom ﬂy
agaric (Amanita muscaria), opium (Papaver somniferum),
marijuana (Cannabis sativa), the peyote cactus (Lopho-
phora williamsi), alcohol, tobacco (Nicotiana), and cocaine
(Erythroxylon coca). The consumption of ﬂy agaric,
believed to have been used in Neolithic times and later in
Central Asia for at least 4000 years, caused states of spir-
itual introspection; marijuana was consumed together with
the peyote cactus and mescaline by ancient Aztecs and
other Mexican Indians 4000 years ago and in India near
1500 BC for their hallucinogenic properties; priests from
Ethiopia used to roast and boil coffee beans to stay awake
through nights of prayer. We also know that alcohol was
used by Greeks and wine in Jewish and Christian cere-
monies (Crocq, 2007). Opium and marijuana were widely
used to treat several diseases: the earliest recorded use of
cannabis is approximately 2700 BC when the “father of
Chinese medicine” described the use of cannabis to treat
several conditions (Childers and Breivogel, 1998), and
opium was ﬁrst mentioned in the ninth century BC in
Homer’s Odyssey as being able to treat a wide variety of
diseases. In addition to opium and marijuana, tobacco also
had an important medical use: traces of nicotine were found
in children and adult hair samples from Nubian burial sites,
indicating that plants containing nicotine may have been

The Diversity of Addiction Chapter | 31 519

used as medical stimulants (Baez et al., 2000), and in 1492,
tobacco was imported from San Salvador by Columbus to
Europe to cure almost every pathological condition.

A third parallel and dominant pattern of use of the
psychoactive substances was a regular consumption-based
or socially accepted recreational consumption. Alcohol is
probably the best example as its common recreational use
since the beginning of history is well documented. During
prehistoric times, as soon as humans realized that drinking
the juices of fruits that had been exposed to airborne yeast
produced pleasant and euphoric feelings, they began the
production and cultivation of wine and beer: the oldest
seeds of cultivated vines were found in Georgia (estimated
7000e5000 BC), and in ancient Mesopotamia (BCE 3000),
beer was produced by the cultivation of wheat and barley.
Marijuana was also intensively used in China, Central Asia,
India, in Islamic culture, the Middle East, and Africa and
was cultivated for psychoactive purposes in the Gobi desert
about 2700 years ago (Russo et al., 2008). Opium and
marijuana were used as primary social drugs, to relax and
pass time by a wide range of cultures, eg, Romans, Indians,
Assyrians, and Egyptians. Tobacco was similarly used for
socialization in Europa. An evidence of recreational coca
leaf chewing comes from chemical analysis of ancient hair
2000 BCe
samples
AD 1500, where the presence of the cocaine metabolite
benzoylecgonine was detected (Cartmell et al., 1991).

from Chilean mummies

dated

Under these well-established cultural patterns, where
the use of drugs as a vehicle to alter mood and behavior
was socially accepted, abnormal patterns of consumption
were almost absent as evidenced from few anecdotal de-
scriptions. As an example,
the earliest description of
alcohol abuse is found in the Hebrew/Christian Bible,
where in Genesis Chapter 9 verses 20e23, the Semite
Patriarch Noah is described as becoming drunken, dishev-
eled, naked, and ﬁlthy from overindulgence in wine.
Aristotle also recorded the effects of alcohol withdrawal
and advised that drinking during pregnancy could be
injurious, and the Roman physician Celsius held that
dependence on intoxicating drink was a disease (O’Brien,
1980).

Addictive Drugs in Modern Times: Toward
a Scientiﬁc Deﬁnition of Addiction
In sharp contrast to the prehistoric scenario described, in
the 18th century, another picture raised: while only a few
substances “survived” and retained the cultural uses (like
some tribes from Australia, Amazon, Kalahari Desert, or
Bolivian highlands), many other substances sifted to a non-
socially accepted pattern of abuse and dependence. Why
did those “controlled” behavioral patterns, which persisted
across such a long period of time and virtually all cultures,
change? Psychological
variables

environmental

and

520 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

occurring during the 18th century played a crucial role in
such a dramatic change in the behavior toward psychoac-
tive drugs. More importantly, the recognition of this new
and pathological use led to an explosion in drug research
that culminated in the development of the science of
addiction (Fig. 31.1).

The ﬁrst variable was of a psychological nature. That is,
although the primary motivation to use psychoactive drugs
continued to be the alteration in mood and thinking, those
substances started to be used to experience pleasure
(regardless of any controlled or conventional environmental
conditions). In another words, drugs were now used for
illicit pleasures. The logical consequence of this behavior
was a rapid increase in the consumption of drugs, which
also extended to a wide diversity of groups. As a result, the
ﬁrst attempt to make those drugs illegal came with the

Harrison Act in United States after the World War I, and
the use became restricted to certain outsider groups. This
situation continued escalating, and after World War II,
consumption of those drugs became much more widespread
for larger groups and for age of initiation.

A second variable that impacted the cultural history of
drugs use was new advances in chemistry that made it
possible to develop methods of puriﬁcation, distillation,
and isolation of drugs. As a result, the psychoactive prop-
erties of the existing drugs were increased, and the syn-
thesis of new and more potent substances developed.
Cocaine best represents this scenario: its isolation from the
coca leaves in 1884 ﬁrst spread its medical use as an
anesthetic from pharmaceutical companies in Europe and
the United States, and it later became a trendy stimulant in
the upper classes. Its popularity was increased even more

FIGURE 31.1 Milestones in the history of addiction medicine and research. The birth of addiction medicine in modern times is sometimes credited
to Calvinist theologians who offered explanations for the phenomenon of compulsive drinking. With the colonial era, industrial revolution, and inter-
national trade, addiction became a global public health problem. The recognition of a pathological use of addictive drugs led to an explosion in research
that culminated in the development of the science of addiction. The 21st century is characterized by the use of new technologies applied to addiction
research and a new conceptualization of addiction disorder in the DSM-V.

The Diversity of Addiction Chapter | 31 521

by the psychiatrist Sigmund Freud, as well as by being the
main ingredient in several products, like Coca-Cola, “a
drink of intellect and moderation.” Regarding the devel-
opment of synthetic drugs, barbiturates, amphetamine, or
heroin are the best examples: initially developed as medi-
cines, they rapidly became associated with abuse.

In parallel, a third variable that strongly impacted and
favored this new pattern of illicit drug use was the migra-
tions of laborers from India or China to Europe and the
United States who introduced cannabis and smoking opium
to these lands.

The impact of these three variables was so strong that
from the 19th century on a pathological use of these drugs
was recognized, was deﬁned as a disease, and was included
in the medical community as becoming a public health
problem. In this context, it is worth mentioning the epi-
demics explosion, such as the methamphetamine in Japan
in the 1950s, cocaine in the United States in the 1980s, and
crack cocaine of the 1990s. At this point, the urgent need
for a deﬁnition and more knowledge about this disease lead
to an explosion of research in neuroscience: the science of
addiction appeared.

The Root of the Scientiﬁc Deﬁnition of
Addiction
From 1956, when the American medical association declared
that alcoholism is a disease,
till now, research in the
neuroscience ﬁeld has been continuously developing the
deﬁnition of addiction (Table 31.1). Now, addiction can be
best deﬁned as a behavioral syndrome, characterized by
compulsive drug seeking with repeated relapses into drug
use. More in detail, drug addiction or substance dependence
(American Psychiatric Association, 1994) is a chronically
relapsing disorder that is characterized by (1) compulsion to
seek and take the drug, (2) loss of control in limiting intake,
and (3) emergence of a negative emotional state, like anxiety
or irritability, when access to the drug is prevented (deﬁned
as dependence). Addiction is further conceptualized as a
progression from impulsivity to compulsivity, it and includes

three stages: binge/intoxication, withdrawal/negative affect,
and preoccupation/anticipation (Koob and Le Moal, 1997).
Some modern views of addiction have focused the attention
on three types of drug use (namely occasional, controlled, or
social), abuse or harmful use, and addiction. In this regard, is
important to note that other phenomena, such as physical
dependence and withdrawal, have to be strictly separated
from addictive behavior, as an individual can be physically
dependent on a drug without being addicted to it and vice
versa (Spanagel and Heilig, 2005).

The diagnostic criteria for addiction are described in the
recently updated DSM-V and in the International Statisti-
cal Classiﬁcation of Diseases and Related Health Problems
(ICD-10). The criteria outlined by both manuals are similar,
and the number of criteria might vary with the severity of
the addiction, the stage of the addiction process, and the
drug in question (Chung and Martin, 2001). A well-
accepted model illustrating the different stages of addic-
tion was developed by Koob and Le Moal (2005). This
model proposes that drug taking invariably begins with
social drug taking and acute reinforcement, that often, but
not exclusively, may move in a pattern of use from esca-
lating compulsive use to dependence, withdrawal, and
protracted abstinence. During withdrawal and protracted
abstinence, relapse to compulsive use is likely to occur with
a repeat of the cycle. Genetic factors, environmental fac-
tors, stress, and conditioning or learning all contribute to
the vulnerability to enter the cycle of abuse/dependence and
relapse within the cycle.

From a social psychology level, a self-regulation failure
(loss of control) has been proposed as the root of a major
social pathology in present times (Baumeister et al., 1994).
At a neurobiological and behavioral
level, such self-
regulation failure is reﬂected in deﬁcits in information
processing, attention, planning, reasoning, self-monitoring,
or inhibition (Giancola et al., 1996). From this view, the
progression to develop addiction across the different stages
described earlier might include crucial self-regulation ele-
ments, similar to other pathological behaviors, such as
binge eating. Those failures in self-regulation in the context

TABLE 31.1 Development on the Scientiﬁc Deﬁnition of Addiction

Concept added to addiction deﬁnition

Romans: not linked to substance use; “addictus” was a term applied
to a person in a legal slave-like condition

References

Smith (1898)

DSM-III-R: substance use

Compulsive drug use

American Psychiatric Association (1994)

O’Brien et al. (2006)

DSM-IV: substance-related disorders

American Psychiatric Association (1994)

DSM-V: substance-related and addictive disorders

American Psychiatric Association (2013)

522 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

of drug use might lead to the development of an addictive
behavior. Particularly, the failure in self-regulation is re-
ﬂected in strength deﬁcits, failure to establish standards or
conﬂict
in standards, and attention failures, as well as
misregulation (misdirected attempts
to self-regulate)
contributing to the development of addiction-like patterns
of behavior (Koob and Le Moal, 2005). Repeated self-
regulation failures might
lead to an emotional distress
that would start a cycle of repeated failures to self-regulate,
resulting in spiraling distress (Baumeister et al., 1994). This
process may lead to either initiating or preventing the exit
from the addiction cycle.

Although this view of addiction has been predominant
across the 20th and 21st centuries, advances in neurosci-
ence, and clinical and public health have added new aspects
and expanded the scientiﬁc deﬁnition of addiction. Illus-
trating this, the term addiction has been also applied to a
range of problematic behaviors such as pathological
gambling, pathological internet use, and binge eating to
mention only a few. This is reﬂected in the new DSM-V,
which marks the ﬁrst signiﬁcant revision of the publication
since the DSM-IV in 1994 (American Psychiatric Associ-
ation, 1994), and the upcoming ICD 11th edition (ICD-11).
Thus, the new psychiatric classiﬁcation system DSM-V has
for the ﬁrst time categorized drug addictions vs. so-called
behavioral addictions. This marks a milestone in psychia-
try. Thus, the addition of gambling disorder as a behavioral
addiction together with the replacement of abuse and
dependence criteria with a single substance use disorder
entity in the new DSM-V might point
toward a new
dimension of addiction. This new conceptualization may
open a new era of addiction in science where other potential
behavioral addictions
shopping,
sports, or eating might be (scientiﬁcally) deﬁned. Sup-
porting this idea, emerging neurobiological and clinical
data collectively suggest that overlaps exist between food
and drug addiction. In fact,
the behavioral phenotypes
associated with obesity resemble those of drug addiction:
compulsive overconsumption, difﬁculty controlling the
intake of food, and the emergence of negative emotional
states. Still, although the idea that the development of an
addiction to food (ie, overeating) may be the cause of the
increasing prevalence of obesity, the term “food addiction”
still remains a subject of debate.

like sexual,

internet,

ROOTS OF REINFORCEMENT AND
MOTIVATION IN ADDICTION
The psychological constructs through which drugs modify
gradually behavior during the transition to addiction
depend on learning and the formation of long-lasting
conditioned associations, and they include multiple moti-
vational mechanisms. In the following sections, I will
describe ﬁrst the different theories or models explaining the

psychological mechanisms underlying the process of
addiction and will give an overview of the neuroanatomical
substrate mediating those processes,
the so-called brain
reward system. Finally,
I will describe the particular
motivational and psychological alterations underlying
dependence, craving and relapse, core features of addiction.

Psychological and Motivational
Mechanisms in Addiction: Reward
Dysregulation
A common view for many scientiﬁc theories of addiction is
that changes in relative reward value underlie the addictive
process; in fact, it is known that in drug addicts, drugs are
more powerful than natural rewards. Thus, evidence from
subjective measures together with some alterations in the
brain reward system found in drug addicts (Volkow et al.,
1999) have led to the conceptualization of addiction as a
reward deﬁciency syndrome (Blum et al., 1996). This
concept of
reduced reward sensitivity characterizing
addiction has become a central pillar from different ap-
proaches or theories aiming to explain the motivational/
psychological mechanisms involved in the addiction pro-
cess, described as follows (Table 31.2).

The ﬁrst is the counter-adaptation opponent-process
and allostasis model. This theory, ﬁrst developed by
Solomon and Corbit (1974), proposes that the initial acute
effect of the drug is opposed or counteracted by homeo-
static changes in systems that mediate primary drug effects,
resulting in a reduction of the intensity of the hedonic
feelings experienced initially (Solomon and Corbit, 1974;
Poulos and Cappell, 1991). The current view of this theory
was originated by Koob and Le Moal, and it states that
prolonged drug use can lead to a general state of anhedonia,
and only very powerful rewards can overcome such a state.
Thus, the positive effect (“process a”) from drug-taking
produces automatically a counteracting, opponent “pro-
cess b” to maintain homeostasis. After experience, the “b
process” occurs more readily and in greater magnitude,
resulting in an attenuation of the “a process,” or the positive
effects of drugs, ultimately becoming the homeostatic set
point. More importantly,
the
decreased sensitivity to the drug is associated with
increased motivation to obtain it. A similar shift in the
homeostatic level of control is hypothesized for signs of
withdrawal and precipitated abstinence in chronically
dependent subjects (Koob and Le Moal, 2005). It has been
proposed that these opponent processes (ie, drug-induced
state of anhedonia) represent one of the major motiva-
tions for compulsivity in drug taking in the form of a
motivational withdrawal syndrome (Koob and Volokw,
2010). Thus, manifestation of a withdrawal syndrome after
removal of chronic drug administration, either acute or
protracted, is deﬁned in terms of motivational aspects of

this theory predicts that

The Diversity of Addiction Chapter | 31 523

TABLE 31.2 Psychological Processes and Constructs Associated to Addiction

Term

Motivation

Reward

Reinforcer

Deﬁnition

Theoretical construct used to explain behavior. It represents the reasons for people’s actions, desires,
and needs. Motivation can also be deﬁned as one’s direction to behavior or what causes a person to
want to repeat a behavior and vice versa.

Stimuli that the brain interprets as intrinsically positive or as something to be approached.

Stimuli that increase the probability of repeating behaviors paired with them.

Positive reinforcement

Process by which the presentation of a stimulus increases the probability of a response.

Negative reinforcement

Process by which the removal of a (usually aversive) stimulus increases the probability of a response.

Compulsivity

Impulsivity

Elements of behavior that result in perseveration in responding in the face of adverse consequences,
perseveration in responding in the face of incorrect responses in choice situations, or persistent
re-initiation of habitual acts.

Predisposition toward rapid, unplanned reactions to either internal or external stimuli without regard for
negative consequences.

Associative learning

Process by which an association between two stimuli or a behavior and a stimulus is learned. The two
forms of associative learning are classical and operant conditioning.

Conditioning

Habit

A form of learning in which (1) one stimulus comes to signal the occurrence of a second stimulus
(Pavlovian) or (2) behavior is modiﬁed by its consequences (instrumental conditioning).

A more or less ﬁxed way of thinking, willing, or feeling acquired through previous repetition of a
mental experience.

dependence such as the emergence of a negative emotional
state (eg, dysphoria, anxiety, irritability) when access to the
drug is prevented (Koob and Le Moal, 2001), rather than on
the physical signs of dependence, which tend to be of short
duration (Koob and Volkow, 2010).

that mediate psychostimulant motor

In the incentive sensitization theory, the motivational
changes characteristic of
the addictive behavior are
conceptualized from a reward dysregulation perspective
developed by Robinson and Berridge (1993, 2000). This
theory proposes that repeated drug use sensitizes neuronal
circuits
effects
(behavioral sensitization), drug reward (incentive motiva-
tion), and the attribution of incentive salience to reward-
associated environmental cues (conditioned reinforcement,
maladaptive associative learning). Importantly, this theory
clearly dissociates between drug “wanting,” deﬁned as the
motivation to take the drug, and drug “liking,” deﬁned as
the
from
consuming the drug, and it proposes that the “wanting” but
not the “liking” is critical in the development and mainte-
nance of an addictive behavior. Thus, a shift in an incentive
salience state, described as “wanting” linked to compulsive
use, as opposed to “liking” linked to hedonic responses,
was hypothesized to be progressively increased by repeated
exposure to drugs of abuse (Robinson and Berridge, 1993).
This psychological process of
incentive salience is
responsible for drug-seeking and drug-taking behavior
(Robinson and Berridge, 2003). First, once sensitized, this

unconscious

hedonic

experience

derived

incentive salience process produces compulsive patterns of
drug use; second, through associative learning processes,
the enhanced incentive value becomes oriented speciﬁcally
toward drug-related stimuli, leading to escalating compul-
sion for
seeking and taking drugs. Supporting this
assumption, clinical observations from addicts to psy-
chostimulants show unusual focus on drug seeking, which
originates from the facilitation of conditioned reinforce-
ment and drug seeking (Robbins, 1976; Hill, 1970). In this
way, drug seeking is controlled by a succession of drug-
associated discriminative stimuli that can also function as
conditioned reinforcers when presented as a consequence
of instrumental responses (Everitt et al., 2008). In addition,
a compulsive escalation of drug taking and seeking may
also result from an enhanced incentive salience state, ori-
ented speciﬁcally toward drug-related stimuli by means of
associative learning processes (Hyman et al., 2006; Kalivas
and Volkow, 2005). Interestingly, similar to the opponent
process theory, Robinson and Berridge proposed that the
affective experience of the drug (thus the liking) decreases
after repeated use.

A third view comes from the transition to habit theory
of Everitt and Robbins (2005; Everitt et al., 2008). Here, a
switch from a reward-sensitive behavior to a habit-based
behavior is proposed to underlie decreased reward sensi-
tivity. That is, while initially drug seeking is triggered by a
mental representation of the reward (Tiffany, 1990; Everitt
et al., 2001; Dickinson et al., 2002), after chronic use, this

524 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

repertoire

comes

to

it

be

dominated

conscious representation is no longer needed, and the
seeking behavior will be triggered by a stimuluseresponse
habit; consequently, the habit (and not the affective reward
response) will be critical
in maintaining the addictive
behavior. From this perspective,
is proposed that an
initial drug seeking is goal-directed; following extended
use, it comes under habitual stimuluseresponse control and
so does the acquired natural reward seeking. Then, the
behavioral
by
stimuluseresponse habits. The main feature of habits,
opposite of goal-directed actions, is that they are not guided
by the motivational value of the reward, and they are
directly triggered by conditioned stimuli without any
recruitment of higher cognitive processes, such as intention
or decision-making (Belin et al., 2013). Illustrating this, an
imaging study has shown activation of habit-related brain
areas when craving is provoked by cues in cocaine users
(Childress et al., 1999). In humans, little evidence exists of
habit
learning controlling drug-seeking behavior. These
studies have shown that smoking deprivation increases
motivation for tobacco smoke in instrumental and choice
measures (Epstein et al., 1991; Madden and Bickel, 1999;
Perkins et al., 1994, 1996; Rusted et al., 1998; Willner
et al., 1995). More recently, a comparable effect of no
contingent alcohol exposure on habitual control has been
demonstrated (Hogarth et al., 2012). This study showed
that alcohol attenuated goal-directed control over chocolate
choice in the extinction test, suggesting accelerated habit
learning.

A last theory comes from the impulsivity models, which
propose that prolonged drug intake affects impulse control
mechanisms that may lead to addictive behaviors (for a
review see Stephens et al., 2010). The rationale of this
theory comes from three different sources: First, impulsive
control disorders might be thought of as a (non-substance)
behavioral addiction (Grant, 2008); second, early work
already pointed out an association between alcohol use
and impulsivity (Cloninger, 1987), and studies with
nonhuman primates have also shown increased impul-
sivity and alcohol consumption (Higley et al., 1996a,b;
Mehlman et al., 1994), and third, many behavioral and
neurobiological studies have consistently shown frontal
cortical dysfunction in human drug users, a brain region
directly involved in impulse control. In this sense, crucial
studies have shown changes in regional cerebral blood
ﬂow of cocaine users (Volkow et al., 1993), structural
volume (Liu et al., 1998), as well as D2 dopamine receptor
binding (Volkow et al., 1993)
regions.
Importantly, some of those ﬁndings have been replicated
in animal studies (Stephens et al., 2010). Thus from this
view, rather than the motivational systems (ie, brain
reward system), the frontostriatal inhibitory mechanisms
play a dominant
role in the reward devaluation and
therefore addiction.

in prefrontal

In conclusion, the motivational/psychological view of
addiction provided by different
theories indicates the
complexity of alterations in reward value and their impact
on drug addiction. Those different motivational processes
lead to a reward dysregulation and ultimately drive impulse
control disorders and compulsive disorders characteristic of
the addictive phenotype.

The Brain Reward System: Substrate for
Neuroadaptations in Addiction
Rewards (Table 31.2) have their origin in drinking, eating,
and reproduction, and the brain reward system mediates
motivational responses related to these natural rewards.
Consequently, the reward system provides the anatomical
substrate for emotions and motivated behavior, including
the circuitry for reward-related events. Since drugs of abuse
are also rewarding and reinforcing, they also act through
the reward system, this system being the substrate of the
changes in the motivational aspects described earlier.
Indeed, already in 1979, Goldstein made the claim that
heroin and other narcotics worked on a bundle of neurons
deep in the brain called the mesolimbic dopaminergic
pathway (Hokfelt et al., 1979).

The reward system consists of a set of interconnected
forebrain structures often called brain reward pathways. In
a simpliﬁed way,
these structures include the nucleus
accumbens (NAc), the basal forebrain, and regions of the
prefrontal cortex (Fig. 31.2), being most of the pathways
which connect these structures within the reward system
glutamatergic interneurons, GABAergic medium spiny
neurons, and dopaminergic projection neurons. It appears
that both addictive drugs and natural rewards are rewarding
and reinforcing because they act within this system to
enhance dopamine release in the NAc or related structures.
In particular, a group of neurons known as the mesolimbic
dopamine pathway, which connect to the NAc, along with
the associated GABAergic medium spiny neurons in the
NAc, is a critical component of the reward system that is
directly involved in the immediate perception of reward
(Kalivas and Nakamura, 1999).

Natural and drug rewards impact the reward system in
different ways; subsequently, compared with the normal
brain, the addicted brain programs behavior differently.
First, a natural activation of the reward pathway is triggered
by sensory cues that are produced by natural reinforcers
(like food, water, or sex); in contrast, the activation of this
same circuitry by addictive drugs is triggered by chemical
means, circumventing the need for evolutionary useful
behaviors (Schultz, 2000). Accordingly,
the powerful
control over behavior exerted by addictive drugs may have
a ﬁrst origin from the brains inability to distinguish be-
tween the activation of reward circuitry by drugs and nat-
ural activation of the same circuitry by useful and necessary

The Diversity of Addiction Chapter | 31 525

FIGURE 31.2 Schematic representation of
the
brain reward system. The reward system consists on a
set of interconnected forebrain structures including the
NAc, ventral tegmental area, the basal forebrain, and
regions of the prefrontal cortex (PFC). These structures
are interconnected within the reward system by gluta-
matergic interneurons, GABAergic medium spiny neu-
rons, and dopaminergic projection neurons (shown in
the ﬁgure). The reward system provides the anatomical
substrate for drug-induced alterations in emotions and
motivated behaviors.

(Squire and Kandel, 2009). Last, dependence develops in
response to repeated drug administration and is linked to
withdrawal. It has both a somatic component, manifested by
physical symptoms that develop when the drug use ceases
(ie, during withdrawal), and an emotional-motivational
component, manifested by dysphoria and anhedonic symp-
toms that occur when a drug is discontinued.

addiction

represents

aforementioned,

Neuropsychological Adaptations of
Dependence, Craving and Relapse in
Humans
As
sequential
neuronal, motivational/affective, and behavioral adapta-
the initial action of consuming an
tions. Consequently,
addictive drug turns impulsive after repeated use,
then
compulsive, and eventually may become chronic and re-
lapsing. According to human studies, this process of tran-
sition involves progressive new programming of neural
circuits that mediate reward and motivation, memory,
conditioning, and habituation processes, executive function
and inhibitory control, interoception and self-awareness,
and stress reactivity (Koob and Volkow, 2010).

In most cases, the driving force for initiating the abuse
is experiencing their hedonic properties. Nevertheless,
another driving force may be found in the reinforcing ef-
fects derived from conforming social groups, with the
eventual subsequent transfer of motivation to taking the
drug for its reinforcing effects. In another cases, a drug may
be consumed because of its therapeutic properties (ie,
opiate analgesics for pain or amphetamine for attention-
deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder). As already mentioned, it is
largely accepted that this ﬁrst reinforcing or euphoric effect
results from a large increase in dopamine release in the
reward system (including the NAc). Indeed, brain imaging
has conﬁrmed that drug-induced increases in dopamine in
the striatum (a part of the reward system where the NAc is
located) are associated with subjective descriptors of

Indeed,

the
behaviors for survival and reproduction.
chemical activation of the reward system by drugs of abuse
produces not only extreme states of euphoria (that may
motivate repeated drug use) but also underlies the extreme
adaptations in motivational behavior. Moreover,
is
believed that repeated exposure to drugs induces cellular
and molecular changes within the reward pathway, which
in turn cause alterations in reinforcement, motivational
mechanisms, and memory systems mechanisms
that
contribute to sustain addiction over long periods of time
(Nestler and Aghajanian, 1997). These changes ultimately
usurp normal learning mechanisms to shift neurocircuitry to
associations or a form of habit learning that persists in the
face of signiﬁcant adverse consequences (Everitt and Wolf,
2002; Hyman et al., 2006).

it

The functional consequences of chronic,

long-term
exposure to addictive drugs believed to underlie addiction
are mainly the development of tolerance, sensitization, and
dependence. Tolerance is a pharmacological term to describe
when a subject’s reaction to a speciﬁc drug and concentra-
tion of the drug is reduced followed repeated use, requiring
an increased dose to achieve the desired effect. Behavioral
tolerance occurs with the use of certain psychoactive drugs,
where tolerance to a behavioral effect of a drug, such as
increased motor activity by methamphetamine, occurs with
repeated use. This form of tolerance is a more important
mechanism in terms of its contribution to addictive behavior.
The opposite phenomenon to tolerance is the development of
sensitization, also known as reverse tolerance. Sensitization
to drugs occurs when repeated administration of the same
drug dose elicits escalating effects. Eric Kandel, Nobel Prize
in Physiology or Medicine for his research in neuronal
learning processes, was one of the ﬁrst to study the neural
basis of sensitization, conducting experiments in the 1960
and 1970s on the gill withdrawal
the sea
slug Aplysia. He observed that after sensitization, a light
touch to the siphon alone produced a strong gill withdrawal
response, and this sensitization effect lasted for several days

reﬂex of

526 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

reward (eg, pleasure, high, euphoria; Volkow et al., 1996).
Another neurobehavioral aspect that adapts during addic-
tion is expectation. As the drug consumption becomes
chronic, the expectation of the drug’s effects signiﬁcantly
inﬂuences the rewarding responses to drugs, such that the
behavioral
(together with regional brain activation)
response to the drug tends to be more intense when a
rewarding drug is expected compared with when the same
drug is received unexpectedly (Volkow et al., 2003). Sur-
prisingly, the desire for a drug is clearly different from the
initial rewarding effect, and in many cases the chronic
intake of the drug continues despite the fact that the drug
has lost some of its associated euphoric effects (as a result
of tolerance).

When drug intake is discontinued in chronic drug users,
different physical withdrawal syndromes are triggered that
depend on the drug per se (ie, psychostimulants, alcohol, or
opiates) and the chronicity and frequency of its abuse.
Despite this, all drugs of abuse (when the intake is inter-
rupted) include a common motivational withdrawal syn-
drome characterized by dysphoria, irritability, emotional
distress, and sleep disturbances that persist even after pro-
tracted withdrawal. Although both acute and protracted
withdrawal syndromes contribute to relapse,
the neuro-
psychological response of acute withdrawal is distinct from
protracted or motivational withdrawal (once the symptoms
of acute withdrawal have subsided) as the latest is inten-
siﬁed with repeated withdrawals. In addition,
imaging
studies have documented hypofunction in dopamine path-
ways during protracted withdrawal, which may contribute
to the anhedonia or decreased sensitivity to rewarding
stimuli (including drugs) and lack of motivation reported
by drug-addicted subjects (Martinez et al., 2004, 2005;
Volkow et al., 1997, 2007). Another neuropsychological
response that is altered during protracted withdrawal is
drug-related conditioned association processes;
imaging
studies have documented that in contrast to the decreased
sensitivity to rewards, enhanced sensitivity to conditioned
cues also occurs. Abstinence from smoking, for example,
can dramatically potentiate neural responses to smoking-
related cues (McClernon et al., 2009). The intensiﬁcation
of these conditioned responses is critically important in
sustaining the cycle of abstinence and relapse that charac-
terizes substance use disorders (Childress et al., 1988).
Last, imaging studies have shown that drug abusers tested
during protracted detoxiﬁcation show evidence of disrupted
activity of frontal regions, which is hypothesized to un-
derlie their impaired inhibitory control and impulsivity and
contribute to relapse (Koob and Volkow, 2010).

As a result of this enhanced sensitivity to conditioned
cues including emotional states, a latent preoccupation/
anticipation (craving) stage arises, which is characterized
by an increase in drug desire or craving. Although craving
per se often does not correlate well with the relapse, stress

does so, and enhanced sensitivity to stressors is character-
istic during craving. Moreover, stress is a powerful trigger
of relapse to drug-taking behaviors through the activation
of brain circuits involved in reward processing and in the
attentional and mnemonic bias for drug use reminders
(Duncan et al., 2007). Indeed, the chronic relapse phe-
nomenon is one of the most challenging problems in
treating addiction, as addicted subjects are likely to return
to compulsive drug taking long after experiencing acute
withdrawal symptoms (Langleben et al., 2008). Besides,
addicted humans (to cocaine) show impaired performance
in tasks involving attention, cognitive ﬂexibility, and
delayed reward discounting, as well as spatial, verbal, and
recognition memory impairment, deﬁcits that can also
predict poor treatment outcomes (Aharonovich et al., 2006;
Bolla et al., 2003). In this regard, a gradual reorganization
of reward and memory circuits occurring across the chronic
drug abuse is proposed to be crucial.

In conclusion, the roots of reinforcement and motivation
in addiction can be conceptualized by different theories
explaining the complexity of alterations in reward value
and their impact on drug addiction. The anatomical sub-
strate of those motivational processes leading to reward
dysregulation includes the brain reward system that will be
differently affected during dependence, craving, and
relapse.

DISSECTING ADDICTIVE BEHAVIOR:
APPROACHES TO MEASURE REWARD
AND ADDICTIVE PHENOTYPES IN
HUMANS AND ANIMALS
To have a better understanding of the complex phenome-
non of addiction, two aspects are fundamental: ﬁrst, it is of
crucial
importance to elucidate how rewards and rein-
forcement processes impact on the addictive behavior, and
second, which are the relevant behavioral hallmarks of
addiction. To that end, ﬁrst I will describe different ap-
proaches used in the laboratory to measure reward in
humans. Next, I will describe preclinical and basic research
with animals aiming to isolate and analyze the complexity
of addiction, by studying drug-induced reinforcement pro-
cesses and mimicking human addictive phenotypes.

Measuring Reward in Humans
The “gold standard” test for assessing the initial abuse li-
ability of a novel drug is the classic acute dose-effect
comparison study (Grifﬁths et al., 2003). This test is usu-
ally performed in volunteers with histories of drug abuse,
and it is appropriate for predicting the likelihood of abuse
by drug abusers. In addition, it provides crucial information
about potential abuse risk of marketing of a novel com-
pound as well as about some adverse consequences of its

recreational abuse. Most importantly, the dose-effect com-
parison test is also helpful in establishing parameters for
subsequent
like those
described subsequently (Stephens et al., 2010).

studies using other methods,

Another method used to measure reward and addiction
liability in humans is the self-report. Usually, self-reports
are developed in the laboratory to measure the rewarding
properties of a given drug that is being abused. Although it
is a good and direct indicator of a drug’s rewarding value,
an important limitation of using self-report measures is that
substance-dependent individuals may have low insight (or
consciousness) into their motivations and misrepresent their
thoughts and feelings, or their reports may be biased due to
social desirability (Marhe et al., 2014). Besides this, an
additional limitation comes from the multifaceted aspect of
the pleasurable feelings reported that may have both com-
ponents of positively reinforcing drug effects (ie, euphoria
or high) as well as negatively reinforcing effects (ie,
relaxation due to relief from tension and craving). Exem-
plifying this with alcohol,
the subjective response to
alcohol includes euphorigenic, stimulating, and anxiolytic/
sedative components, and it is not clear which of those
components is associated to abuse liability. A “differ-
entiator model” has been proposed, which suggests that
rapid dynamic changes (acute tolerance) to some, but not
other, components may in fact drive the addictive process
(Newlin and Thomson, 1990).

Drugs effects can also be examined through the use of
subject ratings of estimates of street value, as a measure of
the rewarding properties of a drug given in the laboratory
(Roache and Grifﬁths, 1985), and it is well established that
they can predict abuse liability and diversion (Grifﬁths
et al., 2003). That is, it is hypothesized that drugs reported
to have high monetary value also have high rewarding
properties. In fact, many studies have evidenced a constant
ranking of the street value between several drugs, places,
and times, which strongly proposes the estimates value as a
useful measure of abuse liability. Still, since the rating can
vary across cultures and over time, they may only be useful
within a single study and when current street values are
taken into account (Foltin and Fischman, 1991).

Another method is the self-administration, which mea-
sures operant responding, in which participants make a
behavioral response (such as pressing a spacebar) to receive
drug. Laboratory self-administration studies have focused
on heroin, cocaine, cannabis, amphetamines, nicotine, and
benzodiazepines (Comer et al., 2008; Haney, 2009; Haney
and Spealman, 2008; Justinova et al., 2005; Koob, 2009;
Panlilio and Goldberg, 2007) more frequently than on
alcohol (Zimmermann et al., 2009), being the frequency
availability for each particular drug similar to the pattern by
which the drug is normally abused. Self-administration
sessions in the laboratory provide measures of reinforce-
ment and ratings of drug and mood effects, which provide

The Diversity of Addiction Chapter | 31 527

information on drug craving, and the subjective experience
of the drug; volunteers may also be studied under the
withdrawal syndrome, or they may be allowed to self-
administer the drug to prevent the onset of withdrawal
symptoms. One main advantage in controlled self-
administration studies is that meaningful behavioral data
can be obtained in a relatively small number of individuals.
Results obtained by several studies using cocaine, heroin,
or cannabis self-administration support the importance of
this model
in terms of predicting medication effects.
Therefore, these studies contribute to our understanding of
the variables maintaining cocaine, marijuana, and heroin
intake, and they are important in guiding the development
of more effective treatment and prevention programs
(Haney, 2009). A particularly interesting feature of this
method consists of its great homology with animal self-
administration models (see later section) and therefore
can be potentially used for translational research studies.
However, some differences must be considered before
comparing them. A major difference relies on the human
insight into the nature of the experiments and the ability to
anticipate the outcome of prolonged sequences of behavior.
A more objective measure for evaluating the rewarding
properties of drugs is the choice procedure. Here, under
controlled laboratory settings,
the subjects are able to
request an aliquot of the drug when required, and use is
noted (Grifﬁths et al., 1986). In the verbal variant of the
procedure, individuals are given samples doses of both the
drug and placebo and required to choose one by verbal
report (de Wit and Chutuape, 1993), thus providing mea-
sures of the rewarding properties of both substances. Be-
sides providing measures of the rewarding properties of
both the drug and the placebo, these procedures also indi-
cate the preference of the drug over placebo by means of
self-reports of linking or over a monetary reward (Fillmore
and Rush, 2001). As for the self-administration procedures,
the choice method can also be directly compared to drug-
conditioning procedures with laboratory animals (see later
section) and, therefore, might also be useful in translational
studies.

A more recent approach comes from the rewarding
behavioral economic perspective. In general, behavioral
economics provides a framework to understand when and
how people make errors, and a key concept in behavioral
economics focuses on how delayed rewards are discounted
and how there is deviation from the rational-choice para-
digm (Heshmat, 2015). A main advantage of this approach
is the direct comparison between qualitatively different
reinforcers (drugs or drug doses) and the assessment of
interactions between them. This is supported by several
studies showing that drug-dependent subjects tended to be
less sensitive to changes in price of their drug of choice, in
comparison to other drugs of abuse (Jacobs and Bickel,
1999). A limitation of this perspective lies on the fact that it

528 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

does not assume that behavior is rational and therefore
disconnects descriptive models (characterizations of actual
behavior)
from normative models (characterizations of
optimal behavior) (Monteroso et al., 2012). Although this
perspective has not been deeply developed so far in the
addiction research ﬁeld, the delay-discounting procedure
has recently become a focus of interest for modeling dif-
ferences in impulsivity in preclinical research (Wilhelm and
Mitchell, 2008).

to resist

Among the measurements of

reward in humans,
“craving” is most probably the one that has attracted more
attention as a core component of drug abuse. Indeed, it has
been suggested that many of the symptoms of craving in
the dependent individual are similar to the thought patterns
and behaviors of persons with obsessive-compulsive dis-
order, including recurrent and persistent thoughts about the
drug and the inability of the individual
these
thoughts and a compulsive drive to consume the drug and
loss of control over that drive (Modell et al., 1992). Ac-
cording to this, the main component of craving might not
only be the desire to take the drug but also a measure of
incentive, and the current theories differ on that. In this
regard, the relevance or weight of craving in addiction is a
matter of debate, and it ranges from a denial that craving
plays any role (Tiffany, 1990) to craving either emerging
from the subjective experience to take drug, or being syn-
onymous to motivation, being triggered by signals of drug
availability (Robinson and Berridge, 1993; Stewart et al.,
1984). A theory that might reconcile the different aspects of
craving and their role in addiction might be the incentive
sensitization hypothesis proposed by Robinson and Ber-
ridge (Robinson and Berridge, 2003). Thus, this theory
proposed two separate aspects of reward: incentive moti-
vation (deﬁned as the desire to obtain the reward;
“wanting”) and reward derived from consumption (deﬁned
as hedonic value, or liking). Consequently, craving would
reﬂect the “wanting” aspect, and other affective responses
index “liking.” Thus, the “liking” of the drug may not be
predictive for its self-administration, or for it to be chosen
over an alternative, non-rewarding option (Stephens et al.,
2010). In addition, indirect measurement of craving like
attentional biases or physiological responses to cues asso-
ciated with drug experience has also been proposed (Carter
and Tiffany, 1999; Tiffany, 1990). Such measures, how-
ever, show a poor relationship to subjective measurements
of craving. It is worth to point out here that preclinical and
basic research with rodents has developed methods to
measure craving that are consistent with the incentive
theory addiction (see later section).

Modeling relapse situations and compulsive drug
seeking in laboratory settings remains a challenge in the
ﬁeld of human research. A key challenge is the ecological
relevance of the method used for provocation, especially
when the participants
are under psychopathological

conditions (Brady and Sinha, 2005). The use of standard-
ized provocation methods mask individual differences in
relapse situations, making it not possible to capture drug-
related particular associations involved in the motiva-
tional processes that lead to craving or relapse (McKay
et al., 1996). Another challenge is to address alterations in
stress responses. This is particularly important, as relapse
often involves drug-related emotional or stressful stimuli,
triggering or activating stress pathways. To overcome these
caveats, there has been an effort in the last years to better
capture the relapse in the laboratory and to develop a valid
laboratory model. Sinha proposed four objectives to be
achieved to develop a validated method to study relapse in
alcoholics (Sinha, 2009). The method should do the
following: reproduce a hallmark disease symptom (ie,
craving) providing internal validity; provoke a particular
disease symptom that, in turn, should be associated with the
severity of alcoholism; be predictive of alcohol use be-
haviors and real-world clinical outcomes and be sensitive to
intervention,
improving, or worsening the disease. To
improve the method, the studies by Sinha focused on the
development of a relevant and ecological method that
models relapse risk in real-world situations,
therefore
providing information about behavioral mechanisms of
relapse vulnerability. In this regard, a key aspect of the
method was to trigger two of the most common relapse
situations, namely stressful and drug-related situations to
make this method comparable to stress- and drug-related
craving provocation. Another key aspect of the method
was to add adequate within-group control conditions and/or
between-group controls such as non-addicted healthy con-
trols to control unspeciﬁc aspects of the experimental
procedure.

In general, it is an obvious conclusion that addiction
research in experimental human models is limited due to
the technical and ethical aspects involved (the latter not
discussed here). Therefore, human addiction is not repro-
ducible within the laboratory settings. For that reason, the
ultimate goal and challenge of measuring reward in humans
is to model these laboratory human conditions in animals,
as there is a continuous need to better understand what
causes addiction and the neurobiological mechanisms un-
derlying addictive disorders.

Measuring Addictive Phenotypes in
Animals
In addition to the limitation of the human studies and
considering the complexity of the addiction disorder that
involves multiple environmental and genetic interactions
(discussed later), the need for adequate behavioral animal
paradigms to investigate the neurobiological mechanisms
of addiction is of great importance. In this regard, a parallel
progress done in the behavioral ﬁeld during the previous

The Diversity of Addiction Chapter | 31 529

TABLE 31.3 Measurements of Reward and Drug Reinforcement in Human and Laboratory Animals

Human Method

Self-report

Acute dose-effect

Animal Method

Aspect Measured

Rewarding Properties

Operant self-administration

Reinforcement, Rewarding properties

Estimates of street value

Oral self-administration, CPP

Rewarding properties, Preference

Operant self-administration

Operant self-administration

Reinforcement

Choice procedure

Delay discounting

Brain stimulation

CPP

Rewarding properties, Preference

Operant self-administration

Reinforcement, Preference

Brain stimulation

Rewarding Properties

years, aiming to isolate and analyze the complexity of
addiction, has resulted in the development of animal
models highly sophisticated in studying drug-induced
reinforcement processes and mimicking each particular
phase of the addiction cycle (Table 31.3).

Before describing them (for a detailed description, see
Sanchis-Segura and Spanagel, 2006), it is important to note
that an animal model must be reliable and validated. Reli-
ability refers to the consistency with which the variable
under study can be measured and is achieved when after
repeated measurements the between and within-subject
variability is small. The most relevant concept
in the
validation of an animal model
is the construct validity
(Ebel, 1961). It refers to the explanatory power of the
model, and the requirement that models meet the construct
of functional equivalence, or how controlling variables
inﬂuence the outcome in the model and the target disorder
(Katz and Higgins, 2003). The face validity refers to the
reproduction in the animals of the syndromes found in
humans (McKinney, 1998). The predictive validity refers to
the ability to lead to accurate predictions about the human
phenomenon based on the response of the model. Most
often, it refers to the ability of the model to identify phar-
macological agents with potential
therapeutic use in
humans (McKinney, 1998).

Drug-Induced Reinforcement

It is considered that the reinforcing or rewarding effects of
drugs are important in the initiation of the addiction cycle.
The motivational properties of
rewards are evaluated
through consumption/preference-based measures;
these
include self-administration, conditioned place preference
(CPP), and brain self-stimulation paradigms. Thus, drugs
with positive reinforcing effects on those paradigms might
also have a high abuse potential.

Self-administration-based methods are probably the most
commonly employed models for measuring reward value
in laboratory animals. In general, they can be classiﬁed in

non-operant and operant methods. The non-operant pro-
cedures almost exclusively involve oral alcohol
self-
administration, mainly because of the obvious face and
construct validity as models of human alcohol consumption.
In particular,
the initiation and maintenance of alcohol
consumption, as well as the escalation of alcohol drinking
(Rosenwasser et al., 2013; Linsenbardt and Boehm, 2014)
and relapse-like drinking (Vengeliene et al., 2014), are
successfully demonstrated by various voluntary free-choice
alcohol drinking paradigms in the home cage. Regardless
of the modiﬁcations of the drinking procedure, the experi-
mental approach usually consists of monitoring the daily
amount of alcohol consumed from a bottle containing an
alcohol solution (5e40%) in the home cage and the choice
between alcohol and water. In this procedure, the concen-
tration of alcohol is critical and might inﬂuence the amount
and pattern of intake in rodents. Indeed, because rodents
have an innate aversion to alcohol taste, several procedures
have been developed to overcome this and train the rodents
to self-administer pharmacologically relevant amounts of
alcohol. Such procedures
include the presentation of
ascending concentrations of ethanol and/or the addition of a
sweet ﬂavor agent (ie, sucrose or saccharine), the inclusion
of a time period of forced exposure to ethanol, or a short
period of water deprivation (usually no more than 20 h)
before the alcohol bottle availability. Another important
variable to consider when using the oral self-administration
model
is known that strains,
particularly mice, differ in their intake and preference for
alcohol (ie, low versus high alcohol drinking mice). More-
over, this aspect is particularly relevant when using geneti-
cally modiﬁed mouse models (for a review see Bilbao,
2013a). For the home cage drinking paradigms, simple
alcohol intake and preference measures have been devel-
oped. The preference measure gives a general overview of
drinking behavior and usually decreases with increasing
alcohol concentrations, but it provides no information on the
net alcohol intake. While the intake proﬁles are usually best
described by ethanol intake in g/kg body weight per day, this

is the rodent strain, as it

The operant or

cage that allows for detecting micro-drinking and circadian
drinking patterns (Fig. 31.3, Eisenhardt et al., 2015b).
instrumental procedures of

self-
administration are conducted in the so-called operant or
skinner boxes. In brief, they include levers or nose poking
linked to the delivery of a reinforcer. As for the non-operant
procedures, many approaches here are designed to over-
come the sometimes aversive effects of initial exposure to
drugs. Thus, similar to non-operant procedures, animals can
be exposed initially to lower concentrations of the drug that
will be slowly increased. A main advantage of
this
approach compared to the non-operant methods is that the
effort to obtain the reward can be separately assessed from
the pure consummatory response. In addition, control var-
iables can be implemented into the schedule of reinforce-
ment that will provide information about nonspeciﬁc motor
responses by introducing a second, non-active lever or
nose-poke (where its activation has no consequences). The
most common schedule of reinforcement used in these
studies is the ﬁxed ratio, where the reinforcer is delivered
every time that a preselected number of responses are
completed. In these continuous schedules, animals will
maintain a stable level of responding, and the rate of
responding will increase as the dose unit will decrease and
vice versa. In this regard, it has been suggested that ma-
nipulations
self-administration rate
resemble decreases in the unit dose, and they may be
interpreted as decreases in the reinforcing potency of the
drug (Caine et al., 1993). Another variation of these pro-
cedures is the second-order schedule. Here, the main goal is
that a stimulus (usually visual) comes to acquire secondary
reinforcing properties. To that end, animals have to

that

increase

the

530 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

measure does not address the fact that a less concentrated
alcohol solution takes longer time to ingest and therefore
may have a different effect on the brain. Thus, the amount of
accompanying water, as well as the time required to drink
the amount of net alcohol, varies greatly in respect to the
ethanol concentration. This should especially be taken into
account in a multiple-concentration approach, ie, in free-
choice drinking procedures from multiple bottles (with 3
bottles) containing water vs. different concentrations of
ethanol solutions. For such a paradigm, the so-called “water-
penalized net ethanol intake” measure has been developed
(Pildaín et al., 2013). This measure provides the best stability
for repeated baseline assessments and long-term experiments
(Pildaín et al., 2013). Although all modiﬁcations of home
cage free-choice alcohol drinking paradigms lead to an an-
imal model with good face validity, these procedures are
limited in the accuracy and timely resolution of the afore-
mentioned measures of drinking behavior. This is a partic-
ular problem when animals drink small amounts (on a
drinking occasion, a mouse usually drinks 10e20 mL) and
evaporation and dropping of the bottles lead to errors in
measurement. In addition, the manual measurements are a
disruptive element for the animals that may affect drinking
behavior. Furthermore, many of the experimental conditions
in alcohol research require the determination of consumption
patterns within hours or even minutes. Such experimental
situations include assessing the onset of a pharmacological
treatment or the effect of environmental manipulations like
stress on alcohol drinking behavior (Peters et al., 2013;
Spanagel et al., 2014b). To overcome these limitations, we
recently have developed a fully automated, highly precise
monitoring system for alcohol drinking in mice in the home

FIGURE 31.3 Overview of
the drink-
ometer system to study alcohol drinking
patterns in mice. This system is a fully
automated, highly precise monitoring system
for alcohol drinking in mice in the home cage
that allows for detecting micro-drinking and
circadian drinking patterns. The system is
used to monitor simultaneously water and
alcohol consumption as well as motor activ-
ity at high accuracy and in a high time
resolution.

complete different trains of responding before obtaining the
reinforcer. Thus, the completion of the requirements of a
ﬁrst operant schedule results in the presentation of an
initially neutral stimulus. Satisfying the requirements of the
second schedule (in the presence of the neutral stimulus)
will result in the delivery of a reinforcer. Therefore, while
the behavior for the ﬁnal schedule would still be paired
with a primary reinforcer,
the behavior in the earlier
component of the chain is maintained by the acquired
motivational properties of a previously neutral event
(Sanchis-Segura and Spanagel, 2006). A third most used
schedule is the progressive ratio. Here, the required ratio
increases
following a predeﬁned progression, and a
“breaking point” is determined as the highest response rate
accomplished to obtain a single reinforcer. This schedule is
particularly useful in determining the relative reinforcement
strength or reinforcing efﬁcacy of the delivered reinforcer.
Indeed, it has been reported that increasing the unit dose of
the drug increases the breakpoint on a progressive ratio
schedule (Roberts et al., 1989).

In summary, non-operant and operant drug self-
administration procedures are considered to be valid and
reliable models of human drug consumption. However,
compared to the (technically) more simple non-operant
procedures, the use of operant schedules provides more
ﬂexibility in the experimental design in addition to being
more informative. In this context, it should be noted that
operant procedures require learning abilities that can be a
determinant factor in operant-based procedures and there-
fore a confounding factor.

A second group of methods used for assessing drug-
induced reinforcement in laboratory animals includes the
conditioned preference (CPP) tests. These tests, also called
place conditioning, are non-operant procedures where the
drug is administered by the experimenter and are based on
classical or Pavlovian learning processes. In practice, the
drug’s effects, which functions as the unconditioned stim-
ulus, are repeatedly paired spatially and temporally with an
initially neutral stimulus (an environment). After repeated
pairings, the drug-associated environment acquires the abil-
ity to act as a conditioned stimulus and will be able to elicit
approach/avoidance behavioral responses depending on the
nature of the used unconditioned stimuli (for a review see
Tzschentke, 2007). According to this, it is suggested that
these procedures can be useful in determining if a drug
produces reward/aversion. In general, a higher number of
pairings will strength the CPP, while in contrast, repeated
exposures to the previously drug-associated environment
without administering the drug will result in a reduction of
the conditioning and subsequent extinction of the preference,
a phenomenon also called Pavlovian latent inhibition. Thus,
it is proposed that in addition to being useful in isolating the
hedonic value or rewarding properties of a drug, this test also
enables one to measure drug-seeking behavior. However,

The Diversity of Addiction Chapter | 31 531

little is known about the psychological processes involved in
the development and expression of such conditioned pref-
erences. A similar procedure can be established in humans,
as conﬁrmed by recent human studies. Those studies have
shown development of place preference using amphetamine
(Childs and de Wit, 2009), food (Astur et al., 2014), or a
secondary reinforcer (Astur et al., 2016). A modiﬁed version
of place conditioning is the conditioning taste aversion tests
(CTA). From an evolutionary point of view, the CTA is a
Pavlovian learning process that develops after aversive post-
ingestive consequences occur, so the taste will be avoided on
later encounters (for a review, Lin et al., 2014). Thus, a
solution (usually sucrose/saccharin) is paired with the un-
conditioned stimulus subject to study (ie, lithium chloride or
other substances that induce aversion). Therefore, the CTA
causes a reduction in the hedonic value of the taste-
conditioned stimulus, a property commonly referred to as
palatability, and such a reduction can be viewed as a
consequence of the conditioned reduction in palatability.
Intriguingly, when drugs of abuse are used as the uncondi-
tioned stimulus, instead of producing a positive emotional
response, as observed in the CPP or self-administration
paradigms, they result in the development of CTA. This
topic has been a major focus of research in the last years (ie,
why reinforcing drugs induce a CTA) with the two dominant
explanations being that drugs of abuse have both rewarding
and aversive properties and that drugs of abuse do not cause
aversion but avoidance (which can be differentiated from
aversion mainly as a non-emotional
(Parker,
2003). However, this issue seems now to be solved, as recent
results have indicated that drugs of abuse, in fact, induce
CTA (Lin et al., 2014).

response)

The last method presented here to evaluate the moti-
vational properties of rewards is the brain self-stimulation
reward paradigm. In 1953, James Olds and Peter Milner
demonstrated in a series of experiments with rats that direct
brain electrical stimulation (ie, intracranial self-stimulation,
ICSS) was rewarding, leading to the conclusion that elec-
trical brain stimulation (ie, brain stimulation reward) could
serve as an operant reinforcer (Olds and Milner, 1954).
Later on, the laboratory of Robert Heath demonstrated this
phenomenon in humans, by modifying intracranial self-
stimulation techniques for use with neuropsychiatric pa-
tients, which provided data suggestive of positive and
negative reinforcing properties of brief electrical stimula-
tion to various subcortical structures of the human brain
(Bishop et al., 1963). In subsequent work, the study of the
neuroanatomical and neurochemical substrates of ICSS
suggested that ICSS activates neuronal circuits that are
activated by natural
is well
accepted that ICSS might reﬂect the stimulation of the brain
systems involved in motivated behavior, and thus the brain
reward pathway (Carlezon and Chartoff, 2007). In the ﬁeld
of addiction,
the intracranial self-stimulation paradigm

reinforcers. Moreover,

it

532 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

represents the principal
technique to study behavioral
consequences of alterations in the brain reinforcement
system and reward processing. In brief, applied to rodents,
it is an operant procedure in which responding is main-
tained by electrical brain stimulation within the mesolimbic
dopamine system, including the medial forebrain bundle.
Stimulation of this pathway produces reliable ICSS. This
method is very reliable to quantify the acute reinforcement-
potentiating effects of rewards by determining the mini-
mum electrical stimulation required to sustain responding
(the brain stimulation threshold, that is decreased by natural
and drug rewards). The main advantage of this procedure
includes its stability over the time, rendering it sensitive to
changes produced by manipulations. Therefore, the ICSS
represents a powerful and reliable behavioral measurement
of the brain reward function over time.

In summary, animal studies of the motivational prop-
erties of rewards have allowed us to identify motivational
and psychological processes involved in the initiation of
drug addiction in humans (Table 31.3). In fact, these par-
adigms are more focused on the rewarding and reinforcing
aspects of drugs, rather than in the generation of speciﬁc
phenotypes relevant
to addiction. Although these para-
digms do not necessarily reﬂect an addictive behavior
(described next), they are valuable in detecting the abuse
potential of drugs.

Addictive Behaviors in Animals

Modeling the entire spectrum of a complex human mental
disorder such as addiction in animals is not possible. Yet,
based on the current psychiatric diagnostic classiﬁcation
system DSM-5, it is possible to translate anthropomorphic
terminology into objective and behaviorally measurable
parameters in animals. Thus, as will be described, currently,
we are able to model at least some of the features that
characterize the transition to addiction in humans. These
addictive phenotypes include increased motivation for
drugs, drug seeking, relapse, loss of control, and intake
despite negative consequences.

A progressive increase in the motivation for drugs is
one of the major hallmarks in the transition to addiction. In
rodents the most commonly used tests capturing this aspect
are the escalation of drug use and the progressive ratio
schedule of reinforcement. The escalation effect refers to
the progressive increase in the frequency and intensity of
drug use, and it has good face validity. Thus, the drug is
often taken in larger amounts and over a longer period that
was intended (American Psychiatric Association, 1994). A
key study with rats demonstrated that the pattern of drug
exposure is critical in triggering this phenomenon. Thus,
long-term exposure (or extended access) to cocaine (6 h)
produced a particular pattern of drug use (compared to
short-term exposures of 1 h), which was characterized by

sustained higher intake over the time, suggesting an in-
crease in hedonic set point (Ahmed and Koob, 1998).
Similar results have been observed with other drugs (for a
review, see Vanderschuren and Ahmed, 2013). Alcohol has
also been widely studied in this aspect. An early study by
Wise in 1976 already showed an escalation pattern on
intake in rats exposed intermittently to alcohol (every
second day) in the home cage. Later, Spanagel’s lab
extended these ﬁndings by showing that repeated periods of
withdrawal from alcohol induced not only a progressive
increase of alcohol intake over the time, but also a prefer-
ence for higher ethanol concentrations (Spanagel and
Hölter, 1999). Although the development of tolerance has
been classically proposed to contribute to the escalating
intake, other psychological, societal, and economic factors
might also be involved (Ahmed, 2011). Last, it is worth
mentioning here another animal model of excessive alcohol
drinking following a history of dependence classically used
to study the substrates of the “addicted brain” (for a review
Spanagel, 2009). Thus, dependence is induced by exposing
the animals during a period ranging from 4 to 8 weeks to
intermittent ethanol vapor, and the increased ethanol self-
administration observed after has been suggested to
involve an allostatic-like adjustment in which the set point
for ethanol reward is enhanced (Koob and Le Moal, 2001).
The aforementioned escalation and excessive drinking
patterns are associated with increased break points in the
progressive ratio schedule of reinforcement (where the
animals have to increase the number of responses for every
subsequent reward), suggesting an increased motivation.
Thus,
the described studies performed with cocaine or
ethanol that report an escalation intake after extended drug
access have also reported increased break points (for review
Vanderschuren and Ahmed, 2013; Spanagel, 2009). Addi-
tional evidence supporting parallel occurrence of drug
escalation and increased motivation phenomenon comes
from operant
runaway procedures, where rats with
extended access to cocaine were faster in reaching a goal
box to receive a cocaine dose (Ben-Shahar et al., 2008).
Overall, these studies show that extended access to the drug
leads to excessive consumption and escalation of the drug
intake over days, similar to the pattern of use seen in human
addicts.

The most popular procedure to study drug-seeking
behavior is the so-called reinstatement model of relapse
to drug seeking. It refers to the resumption of drug seeking
after extinction following exposure to drugs, drug cues or
contexts, or stressors (Shaham et al., 2003). In this proce-
dure, animals are ﬁrst trained to self-administer a drug and
then subjected to an extinction phase, where lever pressing
or nose poking is extinguished in the absence of the drug.
Once extinguished, animals are presented with several
stimuli (without
the drug reward) that will cause the
renewal of the responding (reinstatement of drug-seeking

behavior). Thus, the ability of the exposure to the stimuli to
reinstate drug seeking is determined under extinction con-
ditions. Importantly, this method appears to resemble the
factors that trigger craving and relapse in humans, and it
reﬂects the increased development of preoccupation to ac-
cess the drugs. That is, similar to the human situation, three
events can reinstate the drug-seeking behavior in this
model: drug priming (or a small drug dose), stress, and
conditioned/contextual stimuli. This model has some de-
gree of pharmacological validation: the anti-craving and
anti-relapse drugs acamprosate and naltrexone, known to be
effective in alcoholic patients, are able to reduce cue-
induced reinstatement of alcohol-seeking behavior in rats
(Katner et al., 1999; Batchteler et al., 2005). An alternative
approach consists of assessing priming-induced drug
seeking by the use of CPP paradigm.

Besides, by particularly examining the responding rates
during extinction, this procedure allows for studying the
difﬁculty abstaining from drugs that characterize addicted
humans (ie, resistance to extinction). Results from several
studies indicate that increased self-administration experience
and the length of the withdrawal period are critical factors
inﬂuencing the resistance to extinction (Vanderschuren and
Ahmed, 2013). Actually, the latter has been extensively
studied by Shaham’s lab in the so-called incubation of drug
craving model. This model is based on the early observation
in humans made by Gawin and Kleber (Gawin and Kleber,
1986), who proposed that cue-induced cocaine craving
progressively increases over the ﬁrst weeks of abstinence
and remains high over extended periods. Thus, this phe-
nomenon was subsequently identiﬁed in rats and for other
natural or drug rewards like methamphetamine (Shepard
et al., 2004), alcohol (Bienkowski et al., 2004), nicotine
(Abdolahi et al., 2010), and sucrose (Grimm et al., 2002)
and consists in time-dependent
increases in extinction
responding and cue-induced reinstatement after cessation of
drug self-administration training (Grimm et al., 2001;
Neisewander et al., 2000; Shalev et al., 2001).

A third addictive trait

is relapse after a period of
deprivation. It can be deﬁned as the recurrence of a past
condition, namely excessive and uncontrolled drug taking
after a phase of abstinence (Vengeliene et al., 2014). The
most studied model
is the alcohol deprivation model,
which provides excellent face validity to relapse behavior
seen in alcoholics. A series of experiments performed in
rats, mice, and monkeys 30e50 years ago described that,
in animals given voluntary access to alcohol for a certain
period of time and then deprived for several days/weeks/
months, representation of alcohol lead to a robust but
temporary increase in alcohol intake over baseline drink-
ing, referred to as the alcohol deprivation effect (ADE)
(Sinclair and Senter, 1967; Salimov and Salimova, 1993;
Sinclair, 1971). The genetic make-up of the animal, con-
current access to more than one alcohol concentration, the

The Diversity of Addiction Chapter | 31 533

duration of access to alcohol, and the length of abstinence
are all factors inﬂuencing the magnitude of the ADE (for
review, Vengeliene et al., 2008, 2014). It is important to
mention that this model has been validated pharmaco-
logically using acamprosate (Spanagel et al., 2014b),
naltrexone (Hölter and Spanagel, 1999), and nalmefene,
which are abstinence-promoting drugs used in the treat-
ment of alcohol-dependent patients, thus demonstrating an
excellent predictive validity for the human condition.
Hence, this model represents the standard in examining
the efﬁcacy of putative pharmacological agents for pre-
venting alcohol relapse (ie, Spanagel and Vengeliene,
2013). Other models of relapse to cocaine or alcohol have
developed operant self-administration procedures. These
models resemble more the voluntary abstinence and the
compulsive relapse typically observed in humans. To this
end, rats have to abstain responding to the drug when an
aversive stimulus is presented (self-imposed abstinence)
and resume the instrumental responding when the aversive
stimulus is removed (relapse) (ie, Economidou et al.,
2009; Marchant et al., 2014). By the use of this procedure,
the psychobiological mechanisms of both abstinence and
relapse can be explored.

Another core feature of addictive behavior is the loss of
control and compulsivity. In fact, solid evidence supports a
link between impulse control disorders and drug addictions
(Grant, 2008). Indeed, addictive behavior in most cases is
characterized as compulsive, and there is a progressive loss in
the ability to refrain from drug-related behaviors (Spanagel
and Heilig, 2005). In laboratory animals, this loss of control
can be assessed by measuring the impulsive choice trait,
deﬁned as high preference for small and immediate rewards
over larger and delayed rewards. The procedure used to
measure this aspect is the temporal discount paradigm, where
the animal is presented with those two behavioral alternatives,
and the choice of a small and immediate reward is considered
impulsive. This procedure resembles the higher rate of dis-
count displayed by drug addicts in similar tasks and therefore
has face and constructs validity (Kirby and Petry, 2004). In
addition, loss of control over behavior might also result from
neurocognitive deﬁcits, well documented in drug addicts
(reviewed in Franken and van de Wetering, 2015) and might
include among others, attention, memory, or decision-making
processes. In the past years, a growing body of animal studies
has addressed this particular relationship (Vanderschuren and
Ahmed, 2013). Thus, several studies have reported deﬁcits in
diverse cognitive functions,
including attention, working
memory, cognitive ﬂexibility, object recognition memory,
and impulsive behavior
self-
administrating cocaine, methamphetamine, MDMA (3,4-
methylenedioxymethamphetamine), or heroin (ie, Briand
et al., 2008; Dalley et al., 2005a,b; 2007, 2008; Parsegian
et al., 2011; Porter et al., 2011; Schenk et al., 2011; Schippers
et al., 2012). However, it still remains to be elucidated

in rats or primates

534 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

whether those neurocognitive and impulse control disorders
are in some cases present before the drug experience, therefore
predisposing the addictive behavior in vulnerable individuals
(see next section).

The last key feature of addictive behavior presented here
is drug intake despite the knowledge of negative, adverse
consequences. Certainly, this aspect is directly related to the
previously described loss of control over behavior,
in
the sense of a reduced behavioral elasticity. That is to say,
the compulsive behavior already described involves an
irresistible urge to take the drug regardless of whether it will
result in adverse consequences. Therefore, animal paradigms
capturing this behavior should reproduce a persistent (ie,
lack of elasticity) drug seeking or intake in spite of adverse
or negative consequences (ie, punishment). Irrespective of
the paradigm used, animal studies have consistently indi-
cated that after prolonged exposure to drugs, similar to
humans, drug seeking and intake becomes progressively
insensitive to punishment signals. For example, in conﬂict
paradigms, where there is a simultaneous delivery or pairing
of the drug and an aversive stimulus (like foot shock or
lithium chloride injection), rats with a long history of cocaine
or alcohol
intake did not considerably reduce the con-
sumption (Corbit et al., 2012; Cunningham, 2000; Deroche-
Gamonet et al., 2004; Dickinson et al., 2002). Importantly,
this resistance to punishment has a psychological nature, and
is not related to pharmacological interactions (like analgesic
or anxiolytic properties of some drugs); this was demon-
strated by Vanderschruen and Everitt (2004) by showing that
an aversive-conditioned stimulus (like a tone paired to a foot
shock) had a similar effect as the unconditioned stimulus
(foot shock) in long-term cocaine self-administering rats. In
the context of alcohol, the previously described ADE can
also be used as a model equivalent to human drug intake
despite adverse consequences. Thus, with repeated depriva-
tion phases, a compulsive drinking pattern arises during a
relapse situation, characterized by insensitivity to taste
adulteration with quinine, loss of circadian drinking patterns
toward consuming highly
during an ADE, and a shift
concentrated alcohol
to rapidly build up
blood alcohol concentrations and produce intoxication
(Vengelinene et al., 2014). The lack of sensitivity to quinine
adulteration has also been demonstrated in chronic intake
of opiates, amphetamine, and nicotine (Galli and Wolf-
fgramm, 2011; Heyne, 1996; Heyne and Wolffgramm, 1998;
Wolffgramm and Heyne, 1995). Together, all these studies
concluded that a long-term experience of drug taking is
enough to sift
the behavior in some individuals from
controlled, goal-directed behavior to a compulsive, insensi-
tive to punishment behavior.

solutions

As described earlier, due to the complexity of the
addiction phenomenon, preclinical and basic research has
focused on those addictive behaviors that model different
characteristics of
the addictive syndrome in humans.

However, it is noteworthy to mention here an exceptional
animal model developed that best captures addictive
behavior as a whole in rats. This model, established by
Piazza’s group is called the three-criteria addiction model
for cocaine (Deroche-Gamonet et al., 2004) and consists of
various measurements (three criteria) that reﬂect the moti-
vation for the drug. These criteria resemble three of the
essential diagnostic criteria for addiction and include high
motivation to obtain the drug, persistence of drug seeking
in the absence of drug (or resistance to extinction), and
motivation to obtain the drug despite negative conse-
quences (resistance to punishment). In the original article,
the authors demonstrated that these three addiction criteria
appear over time in rats trained to self-administer cocaine,
and they provide an “addiction score” that correlates with
the degree to which re-exposure to cocaine reinstates
responding to the drug (Deroche-Gamonet et al., 2004;
Belin et al., 2009). Furthermore, an early burst-like patterns
of cocaine use is predictive of later high “addiction scores.”
The ﬁnal score is the summary of the outcome of three
measures, those measures being independent, and each rat
may exhibit only one, two, or all three aspects of addiction.
More importantly, the results obtained with rats resemble
the human situation, as this addiction-like behavior is
present only in a small proportion of humans using cocaine
and is highly predictive of relapse after withdrawal. Thus,
closely similar to the humans, 41.4% of the rats did not
show any criteria, while 27.6% were positive for the
presence of one criterion, 13.8 for two criteria, and 17.2%
were positive for three criteria. Another important aspect of
this three-criteria model is that it integrates both experi-
mental and clinical perspectives, and thus shows that the
development of addiction depends on the interaction be-
tween long drug exposure and individual vulnerability.

In summary, we have shown how both reward-induced
motivational processes and some of the key symptoms of
addictive behavior can be reproduced in animals (high
motivation, drug seeking, relapse, loss of control, and drug
intake despite negative consequences), and therefore they
can be used to study the psychobiological mechanisms
underlying addiction in humans (Table 31.4). Importantly,
these studies have also led to the common conclusion that
the development of addictive behaviors depends not only
on certain environmental circumstances (like prolonged
drug access) but also on individual differences that pre-
dispose the addictive behavior. Next, we will describe some
vulnerability factors leading to addiction.

THE DIVERSITY IN TRANSITION TO
ADDICTION: VULNERABILITY FACTORS
The transition to addiction is heavily inﬂuenced by bio-
logical, personality, environmental and genetic factors and
their dynamic interactions, which will determine the course

The Diversity of Addiction Chapter | 31 535

TABLE 31.4 Main Addictive Phenotypes and Tests Used in Animals to Model Addiction Traits in Humans

Human trait

Increased motivation

Animal phenotype

Escalation
Increased intake

Test

Extended access
Alcohol vapor exposure
Progressive ratio
Operant runaway
Three-criteria model

Craving and relapse

Loss of control

Drug seeking after extinction
Increased drug taking after
withdrawal

Cue, context, priming, and stress-induced
reinstatement after extinction
Incubation effect
ADE
Three-criteria model

Preference for small and immediate
rewards
Neurocognitive deﬁcits

Delay discounting
Decision-making
Three-criteria model

Intake despite negative
consequences

Insensitive to punishment signals

Conﬂict paradigms
Taste adulteration during ADE
Three-criteria model

and severity of the addiction. Although those factors can
also be protective, here I will give an overview of the
susceptibility factors that increase the risk of developing
addictive-like behaviors.

Biological and Developmental Factors:
Gender and Adolescence

Gender

As the reader might have already noticed from his/her own
experience (most probably with alcohol), men and women
react differently to drugs. Certainly, gender differences are
present across the whole addiction cycle, which includes
initiation, maintenance, and progression to addiction, with
withdrawal followed by relapse. In general, the gender-
related differences are maintained regardless of the drug,
though speciﬁc drug  sex-dependent different patterns
also exist (which will not be discussed in detail here).

Epidemiological

studies have observed signiﬁcant
gender-speciﬁc differences in patients with addiction dis-
orders (Hudson and Stamp, 2011). For instance, the prev-
alence of drug abuse like alcohol, psychostimulants, and
narcotics is higher in males than in females (Tetrault et al.,
2008; Brady and Randall, 1999). Intriguingly, addiction-
related behaviors seem to be stronger in females. Thus,
women begin using drugs younger, escalate drug use faster
and experience shorter periods of drug abstinence (Brady
and Randall, 1999). Consequently, women show higher
propensities to relapses (Kosten et al., 1993; Becker and
Hu, 2008) with longer periods of drug use before abstaining
(Gallop et al., 2007; Anker and Carroll, 2010). In an
attempt to explain these apparent contradictory ﬁndings, it
has been proposed that the difference in the rate of drug use

may not be directly related to gender vulnerability, but
other societal factors (Van Etten and Anthony, 2001).
However, it must be kept in mind that the prevalence of
some psychiatric disorders is higher in women, some of
which are vulnerability factors for addiction (like anxiety,
stress, or depression; see other section) (reviewed in detail
in Bisagno and Cadet, 2014). In general, these different
patterns between males and females, being more males with
addiction disorders, and females suffering more severe
addiction problems, have been shown by clinical studies
with stimulants, opiates, nicotine, and alcohol (reviewed in
Becker and Hu, 2008). Importantly, it is suggested that the
enhanced subjective ratings experienced by drugs in fe-
males might contribute to the higher vulnerability to
addiction, a phenomenon called “telescoping”; this phe-
nomenon has been already reported for cannabis, alcohol,
and cocaine (Cooper and Haney, 2014; Piazza et al., 1989;
Becker and Hu, 2008). Despite this evidence, it must be
noticed that the pronounced differences between men and
women have been declining, and the misuse of drugs and
alcohol
in women is rapidly approaching that of men
(Becker and Koob, 2016). Stress and emotional factors
have been proposed as potential mechanisms underlying
these gender differences in addictive behaviors. In partic-
ular, the higher relapse risk in females has been associated
with negative emotional states induced by stress and
depression (Zilberman et al., 2003; Carroll et al., 2004).
Supporting this, a study (Potenza et al., 2012) has reported
that the brain activation induced during craving is triggered
by stress cues in females and drug cues in males. In addi-
tion, hormonal changes might also affect the response to
drugs. Thus, females report higher positive effects from
drug taking during their menstrual cycle (Evans et al.,
2002), and estrogen administration has a positive effect on

536 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

dopamine activity (Di Paolo et al., 1988; Levesque et al.,
1989). On the other hand, progesterone administration has
the opposite effect, reducing dopamine and subjective
positive responses to drugs in males (Fernandez-Ruiz et al.,
1990; Sofuoglu et al., 2004).

initiation of drug use to the withdrawal and relapse stages.
These differences have been attributed to hormonal and
stress/emotional factors, suggesting an important role of
ovarian hormones and stress in inﬂuencing vulnerability to
drug abuse and addiction.

female

rats

acquire

Interestingly,

cycle. Thus,

Similar to humans, extensive preclinical research with
laboratory animals has found gender differences across
different addictive phenotypes and mechanisms; in fact,
what can be generally concluded from animal studies is that
gender differences related to addiction do occur in rodents
and can be paralleled to those of humans (a detailed review
is provided by Becker and Koob, 2016). In general, and as
reported in humans, animal studies using rodents have re-
ported the presence of gender differences across the whole
addiction
self-
administration of drugs and alcohol faster than males,
indicating a faster initiation of drug use. After chronic use,
the intake of drugs during escalation and with extended
access is as well faster compared to males. Regarding the
withdrawal and craving stage, females show more moti-
vational withdrawal and greater reinstatement of drug-
seeking behavior.
female rats show less
motivational withdrawal from alcohol. These ﬁndings have
led to the suggestion that alcohol might have exclusive
gender-related differences (Becker and Koob, 2016). The
inﬂuence of hormonal/emotional and stress factors have
also been proposed as potential mechanisms. For example,
gonadal hormones seem to be important, as adult ovariec-
tomized females resemble the male phenotype and the
menstrual cycle/estrous cycle in females induces some,
although minor, behavioral alterations. In some cases,
changes in drug seeking have been observed after proges-
terone and estradiol treatments, with the former attenuating
and the later potentiating the behavior. These hormonal
effects, however, do not appear to affect advanced stages of
addiction, as compulsive drug taking is not affected by
these hormonal alterations. Another vast line of research
comes from the differential neural changes associated to
addiction in males and females. These studies have focused
mainly in alterations in neurotransmission induced by drugs
of abuse during the different stages of the addiction cycle.
Overall, these studies have reported quantitative and qual-
itative differences between males and females in key
neurotransmitter systems associated with the stress and
negative affective states occurring during the withdrawal
stage. In particular, these differences were found in the
corticotrophin releasing factor and the opioid dynorphin
neurotransmitters, both of which are critically involved in
hormonal and behavioral responses to stressors.

In summary, gender represents a key factor of vulner-
ability to develop addiction, and differences in responses to
drugs of abuse have been reported both in human and in
laboratory animals. Clinical and preclinical research has
revealed that
females are more vulnerable from the

Adolescence

substrates of

Three aspects render adolescence a critical vulnerability
window for developing addiction: ﬁrst, an immature,
developing brain; second, a risk-taking behavior, including
drug experimentation; and third, the (social) environment.
Consequently,
initiation of abused drugs use during
adolescence might lead to impaired psychological, cogni-
tive, and affective development, and later addiction. Indeed,
the striking increase in prevalence rates from ages 13 to 18
highlight adolescence as the key period of development of
substance use disorders (Merikangas and McClair, 2012).
Some of the characteristics of the developing brain
during adolescence might underlie the vulnerability to
addiction. Psychological and imaging studies show that the
underlying immature neural
self-control
(reviewed by Paus, 2005), decision-making, impulse con-
trol, and cognitive processes constitute risk for substance
used disorders, while reward-related processes show the
classic inverted U-shape that typiﬁes the peak of high-risk
behavior during adolescence (Casey and Jones, 2010). In
particular, changes in the dopamine system during adoles-
cence have been extensively studied (reviewed in detail in
Ernst and Luciana, 2015). First, alterations in the dopami-
nergic reward system have been reported, with high den-
sities of the dopaminergic D1 and D2 receptors in the
adolescent striatum (Goto et al., 2007). This upregulated
circuit might ultimately facilitate aspects of drug rein-
forcement and learning that are mediated, as mentioned
earlier, by dopamine signaling. The peak expression of this
speciﬁc receptor population during this stage is likely to
motivate adolescents to seek hedonic-related substances
more than any other age group and also plays a role in
novelty preferences and impulsive choice (Sonntag et al.,
2014). In fact, the mere experience or anticipation of re-
wards (that may include substances of abuse) causes a
stronger activation in reward-relevant structures within the
dopaminergic system of adolescents relative to children and
adults (Ernst and Luciana, 2015). In addition, this striatal
dopamine signaling might interact with the delayed and
protracted maturation of cortical control systems within the
prefrontal cortex relative to incentive- and stress-based
subcortical systems (Selemon, 2014; Somerville et al.,
2010). Moreover, it has been proposed that such alterations
might contribute to addictive phenotypes, in the form of
hyperresponsiveness to rewards (Braams et al., 2015) and
lack of self-restraint and emotional
regulation ability
(Casey and Jones, 2010). Besides, these two aspects (high

reactivity to rewards and lack of emotional regulation)
might also potentiate approach behavior, enabling contact
with reward-related contexts, despite of the risk that might
include. This idea is supported by the following ﬁndings:
ﬁrst, the social, sexual, and other risk-taking behaviors
(Eaton et al., 2012) characteristic of adolescents; second,
self-reports of reward reactivity and sensation seeking (ie,
Harden and Tucker-Drob, 2011); and third, neuroimaging
studies showing brain responses in reward processing (ie,
Richards et al., 2013).

Preclinical studies have conﬁrmed and extended the
aforementioned ﬁndings. More speciﬁcally,
it has been
reported that the developmental increase in dopaminergic
and glutamatergic interactions inﬂuence sensitivity to
cue-induced seeking, extinction, and reinstatement
(ie,
Kalivas, 2005; Badanich et al., 2006; Ventura et al., 2007;
Andersen et al., 2008; Brenhouse et al., 2008), as well as
the rewarding nature of cocaine and nicotine (Thiel et al.,
2008, 2009) by elevating motivational salience in adoles-
cent rats. Another study found that risk-taking behavior in
adolescent
self-
administration in adulthood and was linked to striatal
function (Mitchell et al., 2014).

a predictor

rats was

of

cocaine

Environmental factors also play a critical role in the
adolescence susceptibility to addiction. Thus, during
adolescence, individuals learn to engage in dynamic and
ﬂexible relationships in the context of social development.
Animal studies have reported the effect of social experience
on both neuronal and behavioral developments. These
studies have demonstrated that social isolation during the
peri-adolescence period of rats results in a heightened lo-
comotor reactivity to novelty and behavioral sensitivity to
psychostimulant drugs (Baarendse et al., 2014; Fone and
Porkess, 2008) as well as increased alcohol consumption
(Lesscher et al., 2015). Further, another set of studies
demonstrated that social
isolation affects prefrontal and
striatal circuits (Bianchi et al., 2006; Dalley et al., 2002;
Hall et al., 1998). In line with this, an environmental
enrichment has opposite effects on drug taking. Access to
exercise (wheel running) in the home cage is a classically
used animal model of environmental enrichment. Recent
studies have demonstrated that chronic exercise reduces
rewarding properties of cocaine, cocaine intake during
extended access, and cue-induced nicotine seeking behav-
iors in adolescents compared to adult rats (Thanos et al.,
2010; Zlebnik et al., 2012; Sanchez et al., 2013).

Taken together,

this brief overview indicates that
adolescence is a crucial time for the development of drug
use and addiction. Besides other factors (not discussed
here, like familiar, societal, or internal factors), an imma-
ture brain, more sensitivity to drugs, and psychological
traits that favor reward-related behaviors may represent key
factors that contribute to it.

The Diversity of Addiction Chapter | 31 537

Personality Traits and Psychiatric Disorders

Anxiety

From epidemiological studies, the idea of a predisposition
to addiction in individuals with preexisting psychological
and emotional disorders including anxiety has been already
reported (Rounsaville et al., 1991; Merikangas et al., 1998;
Marquenie et al., 2007). In humans, preexisting high anx-
iety (or trait) appears to have an impact on cocaine treat-
ment outcome and to be positively correlated with negative
consequences due to cocaine use. Moreover,
this same
study showed a positive correlation of anxiety with the
Alcohol Composite Index of the Addiction Severity Index
(ASI) (O’Leary et al., 2000). In fact, anxiety might be a
particularly important predisposing factor
for alcohol
addiction in individuals more sensitive to its anxiolytic
actions. The notion that anxiety might
trigger alcohol
consumption is based on the “tension reduction hypothesis”
of Conger (1956), which proposed that alcohol consump-
tion may be found to be anxiety reducing, which then re-
inforces alcohol consumption and promotes future alcohol
intake: the ingestion of alcohol may be an attempt to self-
medicate against anxiety symptoms (Spanagel, 2009).
Interestingly, clinical studies have reported that anxiety
disorders predict a faster progression from age at ﬁrst drink
and regular drinking to the onset of alcohol dependence
(Sartor et al., 2007; Kushner et al., 2012).

At a preclinical level, anxiety measurements consist of
assessing the natural fear of rats and mice to open, high,
and brightly lit spaces. The most commonly used appara-
tuses are the elevated plus maze (EPM, consisting of two
open and two closed arms in a “plus” shape and elevated
from the ﬂoor) and the lightedark box (a box divided in
two compartments, one of them is highly illuminated).
Exposure of the animals for a short period of time (ie, 5 m)
provides a fast and simple measurement of the basal anx-
iety level. In animal studies, the relationship between pre-
existing anxiety and predisposition to addictive-related
behaviors has been preferentially studied in the context of
cocaine and alcohol-related responses. Pelloux and col-
leagues found that in rats classiﬁed as anxious or non-
anxious on the basis of their performance on both the
EPM and lightedark box tests, the anxious animals expe-
rienced higher rewarding effects of cocaine, as measured in
the place conditioning paradigm (Pelloux et al., 2009).
High basal anxiety levels also predicted increased oral
cocaine consumption compared to non-anxious animals
(Walker et al., 2009). Rats that spent more time self-
grooming (a behavior indicative of high anxiety in ro-
dents) during the exposure to the EPM show a higher
breakpoint
tested in the progressive ratio schedule of
reinforcement, indicating a higher motivation for cocaine
(Homberg et al., 2002). More recently, it was shown that

538 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

rats showing high anxiety levels in the EPM showed a
higher loss of control over cocaine (but not heroin) intake,
as indicated by escalation of cocaine self-administration
(Dilleen et al., 2012). Regarding alcohol,
it has been
shown that elevated levels of anxiety as assessed in the
EPM correlate not only with high voluntary alcohol con-
sumption during the initiation of alcohol drinking behavior
but also with high preference for alcohol (Spanagel et al.,
1995; Henniger et al., 2002) and, more importantly, during
limited or continuous access to alcohol (Hayton et al.,
2012). In mice, high anxiety levels are also predictors of
greater consumption and preference for ethanol than low-
anxious mice (Bahi, 2013). In fact, genetically selected
alcohol-preferring lines are more anxious than their non-
preferring counterparts,
like the Sardinian (Colombo
et al., 2006) and the Marchigian Sardinian (Ciccocioppo
et al., 2006) Italian rat lines. Furthermore, only rats selected
as anxious show increased rewarding effects of alcohol in
the CPP paradigm (Blatt and Takahashi, 1999). A study
analyzed the relationships between ethanol consumption
in situations favoring excessive or limited intake or after
deprivation and preexisting levels of anxiety and found that
anxiety was associated with a quicker recovery of ethanol
consumption after the concentration drop and a greater
increase in ethanol consumption after deprivation (Pelloux
et al., 2015).

Novelty Seeking

Considerable evidence supports the idea that novelty or
sensation seeking in adult humans (adolescence will not be
introduced here) is highly predictive of addictive disorders.
Early studies have already shown that novelty or sensation
seeking is a common personality trait encountered in drug
addicts, which could preexist (Cloninger et al., 1993). In
line, high novelty seekers do prefer stimulant drugs
(Khantzian, 1985) and consumed earlier and more varied
drugs in comparison with the general population (Sutker
et al., 1978; Cloninger, 1987). In addition, high novelty
seeking or sensation seeking has been associated not only
with an increased frequency and amount of drug use, but
also with an increased risk for developing addiction
(Hawkins et al., 1992). A study performed with almost
9000 adults has found associations with the use of alcohol,
cannabis, and cocaine (Schneider et al., 2015). The main
hypothesis supported by most of the clinical studies pro-
poses that an individual displaying high novelty seeking
can be vulnerable to addiction due to increased sensitivity
to the reinforcing effects of drugs. Thus, in an interesting
study by Leyton et al., a positive correlation was found
between novelty seeking, amphetamine-induced drug
wanting, and amphetamine-induced dopamine release
(Leyton et al., 2002). In line with these results, Kelly et al.
found that individuals with high sensation seeking showed

greater sensitivity to the psychostimulant-like effects of
amphetamine on self-report measures that were associated
with the reinforcing effects of drugs (Kelly et al., 2006).

propensity

to

acquire

psychostimulant

Evidence from animal studies has also supported the
clinical ﬁndings. Thus, using different versions of pro-
cedures based on the measurement in an activity chamber
of the preference for novelty versus a familiar environment,
rodents can be classiﬁed into high and low novelty seekers.
Pioneer studies by Piazza showed that rats showing a
higher locomotor response in a novel environment have a
higher
self-
administration, and they self-administer more cocaine
than the low responder rats (ie, lower locomotor activity)
(Piazza et al., 1989, 2000). These results were conﬁrmed
and extended by Belin, who showed, using another pro-
cedure, that high novelty seeking rats showed a stronger
vulnerability
self-
administration (Belin et al., 2008, 2011). Additional
studies have shown a positive correlation of novelty pref-
erence with oral consumption of amphetamine and
morphine (Pelloux et al., 2004, 2006), and greater CPP
induced by morphine (Zheng et al., 2003; Pelloux et al.,
2006), amphetamine (Robinet et al., 1998; Klebaur and
Bardo, 1999) or cocaine (Vidal-Infer et al., 2012). Last, a
study has shown that spontaneously hypertensive rats show
high levels of novelty seeking and enhanced sensitivity to
the reinforcing effect of methylphenidate (dela Pena et al.,
2015).

compulsive

develop

to

cocaine

In the ﬁeld of alcohol, the association of novelty and
alcohol-related responses has been more controversial,
with some studies reporting no positive correlation (ie,
Bienkowski et al., 2001; Nadal et al., 2002; Hayton et al.,
2012; Manzo et al., 2014), while others did (Manzo et al.,
2014). However, a 2015 study might solve these discrep-
ancies. Here, assessment of
the relationship between
novelty-induced place preference and ethanol intake in rats
supports a positive correlation. Thus, in this study, it is
shown that
in situations favoring excessive or limited
intake or after deprivation, high novelty seeking rats
consume more alcohol than the low novelty seekers. In
view of these results, it has been suggested that high nov-
elty/sensation seeking individuals may be consuming drugs
in higher levels as a means to experience a new, intense,
and complex subjective state (Pelloux et al., 2015).

Impulsivity

In the last decades, impulsivity or impulse control disorders
have been considered as an important personality trait or
psychiatric condition in the development of addictive dis-
orders. In fact,
impulse control, also considered as a
behavioral addiction, shares common features with addic-
tion disorders,
craving state preceding
compulsive behavior, impaired control over behavior, and

including a

adverse

behavioral persistence despite
consequences
(Grant, 2008). Furthermore, similarities between these two
disorders can also be found at a neurobiological and neu-
rocircuitry levels. The most widely studied behavioral
facets of impulsivity both in humans and animals include
the action/motor and choice impulsivity using different
tasks or tests (detailed in Mitchell and Potenza, 2014).

Although in the addiction research ﬁeld impulsivity has
classically been studied in the context of a comorbid dis-
ease (where the disease might or might not come as a
consequence of drug use), in the last years some clinical
evidence is emerging supporting impulsivity as a preex-
isting factor in addiction disorders. In a series of interesting
studies performed with psychostimulant-addicted and
healthy siblings, Ersche and colleagues showed similar
impairments in impulsivity tasks and structural alterations,
with the addicted group showing more pronounced alter-
ations (Ersche et al., 2012a). Moreover, the cognitive and
emotional proﬁles of the healthy, non-addictive siblings
were characterized by deﬁcits in executive function, such as
working memory and mental planning, and high levels of
anxiety and stress sensitivity (Ersche et al., 2012b). The
notion that predisposing differences in impulsivity may
contribute to potentiate or develop addictive behaviors has
become an area of extensive preclinical research with
different animal models of impulsivity. Thus, high impul-
sivity in rats and mice predicts the vulnerability to alcohol
consumption (Poulos et al., 1995; Perry et al., 2005;
Radwanska and Kaczmarek, 2012) and methylphenidate
(Marusich and Bardo, 2009), but it does not predict heroin
self-administration (McNamara et al., 2010; Schippers
et al., 2012). Impulsive choice on a delay-discounting task
predicts a more rapid acquisition and escalation of cocaine
self-administration (Anker et al., 2009; Perry et al., 2005).
Impulsivity (choice) may also predict resistance to extinc-
tion and increased relapse to both nicotine and cocaine
(Diergaarde et al., 2008). An interesting study found that
exposing animals to delayed rewards resulted in an
increased alcohol self-administration as compared to ani-
mals exposed to prolonged rewards (Stein et al., 2013).
Dalley and colleagues have extensively studied a speciﬁc
form of impulsivity with the use of the ﬁve-choice serial
reaction time task, which captures waiting impulsivity that
can be paralleled to the human continuous performance test
of sustained attention. They have shown that excessive and
persistent failures to inhibit anticipatory responding (and
thus high impulsivity) on this task predicted escalation of
cocaine and nicotine self-administration (Dalley et al.,
2007; Diergaarde et al., 2008),
increased intake and
sensitivity to sucrose (Diergaarde et al., 2009), increased
the propensity for relapse following voluntary abstinence
(Economidou et al., 2009), and elevated cocaine self-
administration despite negative consequences (ie, punish-
ment) (Belin et al., 2008).

The Diversity of Addiction Chapter | 31 539

Environmental and Social Factors
Epidemiological studies have shown the complexity of the
environmental and social factors affecting drug addictive
behaviors in a negative way. Among others, environmental
factors include drug addiction of one or more family
members, family conﬂict,
lack of child supervision by
parents, parental unemployment (especially fathers), and
parents with low literacy. Some of the social factors include
school, friends, unhealthy entertainment, unemployment,
lack of social acceptance, cultural poverty, population
growth, and uncontrolled migration. Given this scenario, it
is obvious that disentangling the speciﬁc contribution of
each variable to addiction-related problem is not a realistic
option. However, a meta-analysis (Aghaii et al., 2012)
integrating the results of different studies to investigate the
impact of environmental versus social factors in people’s
tendency to become addicted found a greater relationship
between environmental factors than other social factors,
indicating that at least between those two, environment
seems to be more important
than societal variables in
promoting drug use and abuse. However, emerging evi-
dence supports an important role for societal factors.

Environment

(ie,

In an attempt to better understand the contribution of the
aforementioned environmental variables, the ﬁeld of clin-
ical and preclinical addiction research has proposed that the
environment can affect addictive behaviors in three ways:
adverse life experiences
stress), enhanced drug-
associated learning, and the environment associated to
drug taking. At a clinical level, in general, due to the
intrinsic difﬁculties and limitations of controlling many of
the mentioned variables, human studies have not always
provided enough evidence for a relationship between
environment and addiction in humans. This is particularly
the case when assessing stress impact on addiction. Thus,
human studies have mostly focused the attention on the
individual history of adverse life experiences and drug
addiction. For instance, events as different as sexual abuse/
harassment, combat-stress, occupational stress, marriage
dissatisfaction, and physical traumas have been linked to
the abuse of psychostimulants, opioids, and alcohol, and
adverse childhood experiences play an important role in the
susceptibility to drug abuse (for detailed references,
Caprioli et al., 2007). In this context, stress effects on
alcohol have been a main focus of research. In general,
various laboratory stressors have been examined for their
effects on alcohol self-administration, and the results vary
depending on the experimental stressor chosen and many
other factors (reviewed in Spanagel et al., 2014a). The ef-
fects of drug-conditioned associations (that is, Pavlovian
conditioning: initially neutral environmental stimuli paired
with the drug experience) have been almost exclusively

540 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

studied in the context of prevention, aiming to identify the
neurobiological basis of craving and relapse. In the 1980s,
drug-conditioned associations were described in humans to
induce withdrawal-like symptoms and craving (Childress
et al., 1984, 1986). In this context, the work from Volkow
using imaging techniques has provided a great advance
showing neurobiological changes associated to cue-induced
craving (for a review see Volkow and Morales, 2015).
Besides stress and drug-related learning, early studies
pointed out that the setting where the drug is consumed
importantly inﬂuences the drug experience in terms of
behavioral and psychological responses (ie, Kelleher and
Morse, 1968). Again,
in this particular context, human
evidences are not too much. A clear example is represented
by MDMA, which is exclusively consumed in clubs (Par-
rott, 2004; Schifano, 2000). Two other studies were per-
formed in the context of alcohol and amphetamine (Sher,
1985; Zacny et al., 1992). However, emerging evidence
suggests that the degree of promoting drug use of some
environmental settings is particularly associated with spe-
ciﬁc drugs, at
least cocaine and heroin. Retrospective
studies have shown that while heroin is used preferentially
at home, cocaine is preferentially consumed outside the
home (Caprioli et al., 2009; Badiani and Spagnolo, 2013).
In sharp contrast to the human research, preclinical
models have extensively addressed the effect of envi-
ronmental factors using animal models of addictive be-
haviors. One of the most studied variables to assess
adverse life experiences in adult animals is stress. Thus, a
variety of physical stressors (like electrical foot shock, tail
pinch, or immobilization) have been reported to increase
self-administration of many drugs,
including cocaine,
morphine, alcohol, and amphetamine (Goeders and
Guerin, 1994; Goeders, 2002; Mantsch and Katz, 2007;
Shaham and Stewart, 1994; Anisman and Waller, 1974;
Volpicelli et al., 1990; Piazza et al., 1990; Shaham,
1993). More importantly (from a therapeutic approach, at
least) is the effect of stress-induced reinstatement of drug
seeking. Developed by Shaham in 1993,
the stress-
induced reinstatement (induced by physical or pharma-
cological stressors)
represents today a solid and un-
equivocal paradigm to be used in laboratory animals, and
it has been shown to trigger drug seeking of virtually all
drugs of abuse (Bossert et al., 2013). Similar to human
research,
the effect of stress on alcohol seems to be
particular. Thus, the general conclusion from most of the
studies indicate that chronic stress, especially when
administered early in development, results in elevated
drinking later in adulthood. Moreover, the studies have
demonstrated that alcohol
itself a potent
stressor, especially when consumed chronically, which
then leads to escalation of voluntary alcohol consumption
(for a review, see Becker et al., 2011). However, it seems
that stress effect on alcohol intake might strongly depend

represents

et

of

interest

that

an

increased

activation

self-administration, Spanagel

on the experimental setting (ie, home cage drinking
versus operant
al.,
2014a). Regardless of the drug, there is vast evidence
suggesting
the
corticotropin-releasing factor
(particularly within the
extended amygdale) may mediate stress-induced rein-
statement, and several additional stress-related neuro-
peptides have also been proposed (for a review on this
topic see Spanagel et al., 2014a; Schank et al., 2012). The
cue-induced reinstatement has a particularly relevant
preclinical
in the context of Pavlovian condi-
tioning processes and the ability to trigger drug seeking
even after long periods of abstinence. Thus, similar to
stress, a vast literature has reported that drug-paired cues
(contextual, discrete, or discriminative) can reinstate drug
seeking after extinction of operant responding (Bossert
et al., 2013). As we pointed out before, a third environ-
mental variable that can alter the behavioral, subjective,
and rewarding effects of a given drug is the drug-
surrounding setting. Emerging evidence suggests that
the degree of promoting drug use of some environmental
settings is particularly associated with speciﬁc drugs, at
least cocaine and heroin. Retrospective studies have
shown that while heroin is used preferentially at home,
cocaine is preferentially consumed outside the home
(Caprioli et al., 2009; Badiani and Spagnolo, 2013).
These human results were elegantly conﬁrmed in a set
of
studies carried out by Badiani and colleagues
showing how the setting inﬂuences drug taking and drug
preference (Caprioli et al., 2009, 2007; Celentano et al.,
2009; Montanari et al., 2015). In these experiments, rats
were self-administering cocaine and heroin intravenously
either in their home cage (the resident group, meaning
that they were kept in the self-administration chamber
during the whole experiment) or in a distinct environment
in the
(the non-resident group, where they were kept
self-administration
the
self-
administration sessions, being then returned to their
home cage). Interestingly, the results showed that, similar
to humans, cocaine self-administration was greater and
more rewarding in non-resident rats than in resident rats,
whereas the opposite was true for heroin. Furthermore,
when rats were given the opportunity to choose between
heroin and cocaine, they exhibited distinct preferences as
a function of context. Thus, of
rats trained to self-
administer for both cocaine and heroin within a session,
most non-resident
rats preferred cocaine to heroin,
whereas resident rats tended to prefer heroin. Importantly,
these heroin- and cocaine-associated speciﬁc environ-
ments also differ in their ability to reinstate drug seeking
after a period of abstinence, with heroin priming being
much more effective in resident than in non-resident rats,
while cocaine priming was much more effective in non-
resident than in the resident rats.

chamber

only

during

Social

The impact of
the individual social environment on
addictive behaviors has become a main focus of research in
the last years. In fact, the social environment serves as the
context in which drug use occurs. Only to mention a few
human examples, social isolation and social ridicule are
associated with higher rates of drug use (Aloise-Young and
Kaeppner, 2005; Pearson et al., 2006; Rusby et al., 2005).
Particularly, social stressors have also a consistent effect in
promoting alcohol craving and consumption (reviewed in
Spanagel et al., 2014a). In this context, it is believed that
there are two aspects that are important for understanding
their
the
emotional valence of the social experience and (2) the
context in which the social interaction occurs, within or
outside of the drug-taking context.

impact on vulnerability to drug abuse:

(1)

A body of animal studies has focused on the effect of
social experiences outside of the drug context using isola-
tion and aggression as experimental conditions. Studies
comparing group-housed and single-housed rats have not
been consistent. Thus, the reinforcing effect of cocaine has
been reported to be increased both in isolated (Schenk
et al., 1987; Boyle et al., 1991) and grouped (Hill and
Powell, 1976; Morse et al., 1993; Phillips et al., 1994a,b)
rats. Similar contradictory data can be found with
amphetamine (ie, Bardo and Bevins, 2000 but Schenk
et al., 1988), and results with morphine and heroin are weak
(Alexander et al., 1978; Bozarth et al., 1989). Nevertheless,
it seems that intake of ethanol and heroin is higher in iso-
lated animals than social-housed animals (reviewed in
Neisewander et al., 2012). Social aggression is achieved by
the residenteintruder model in which brief agonistic con-
frontations occur between a nonaggressive rodent
(ie,
intruder) that is placed into the home cage of an aggressive
rodent (ie, resident). In a series of papers, Miczek has
shown that rats exposed to aggressive conspeciﬁcs have
higher vulnerability to acquire cocaine self-administration
relative to rats engaging in nonaggressive social encoun-
ters (Haney et al., 1995; Miczek and Mutschler, 1996;
Tidey and Miczek, 1997; Kabbaj et al., 2001). Yet, it was
suggested that the mechanism responsible for that has a
psychological nature, rather than a simple physical (stress-
induced blood corticosterone levels) nature (Covington and
Miczek, 2005). Supporting this idea, increased intake of
cocaine has also been reported in subordinated monkeys
and rats forced to witness other rats receiving foot shock
(Morgan et al., 2002; Czoty et al., 2005; Ramsey and Van
Ree, 1993). Indeed, chronic subordination is stressful in
both species (Blanchard et al., 2001; Nader et al., 2012),
and results from several studies suggest that subordination
stress causes dynamic regulatory changes in opiate systems
that alter sensitivity to morphine reward (Neisewander
et al., 2012).

The Diversity of Addiction Chapter | 31 541

The inﬂuence of isolation on vulnerability to drugs of
abuse within the context in which the animals have access
to drug is not clear, due to procedural difﬁculties. Thus, the
ﬁndings from these studies are affected by several factors
including strain, age, and length of isolation.

However, another set of experiments using social hier-
archy as variable in rodents and monkeys suggests that
subordination increases vulnerability for alcohol
intake
(Blanchard et al., 1992, 1987; Ellison, 1987; Ellison et al.,
1983; Pohorecky, 2006, 2008, 2010). In mice, increases in
ethanol intake are observed in subordinate, but not domi-
nant, male C57BL/6 J mice (Kudryavtseva et al., 1991,
2006). Overall, this brief overview of emerging evidence
suggest that the emotional valence of social circumstances
and whether they occur within or outside of the drug-taking
context is crucial on predisposing individuals to initiate on
addictive behaviors.

Genetic Factors and Gene 3 Environment
Interactions: A Focus on Alcoholism

Genetic Factors

For decades, researchers have tried to demonstrate genetic
predispositions to addiction. To that end, several ap-
proaches have been used: studies demonstrating the role of
heritable variation in addiction and the overlap across
drugs; identiﬁcation of putative candidate genes and results
from genome-wide association studies, and novel research
methods including endophenotypes, biomarkers, or imag-
ing. However, linking particular genes with addictions has
proved much more difﬁcult. One of the reasons is the lack
of replication of studies examining putative candidate genes
for addiction-related phenotypes. Given this scenario, there
are not that many genes that can be consistently associated
with addiction, and they have been almost exclusively
focused on alcohol and nicotine, and for most of the genes
studied so far, there is merely some evidence (mainly for
alcohol, nicotine, cannabis, cocaine, opioids, and more
recently, gambling disorder) (reviewed in Agrawal et al.,
2012). Let us have a closer look on alcohol, as due to the
strongest genetic component
is probably the most
researched among abused drugs. With regard to vulnera-
bility for alcohol use disorders, human studies have also
demonstrated a genetic component: ﬁrst, the offspring of
alcoholics
probability
of developing alcoholism compared with the offspring of
nonalcoholic parents (Mayﬁeld et al., 2008), and second,
from a meta-analysis performed with almost 10,000
monozygotic and dizygotic twin pairs, it has been shown
that genetic inﬂuences are directly responsible for some of
the individual differences observed in susceptibility to
alcoholism, estimating the heritability of alcoholism to be
around 50e60% (Goldman et al., 2005). From the 15

4e10-fold

increased

it

have

a

542 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of alcohol use
disorders and symptoms of alcohol use disorders, nine have
been published and shown consistent results about gene
clusters that encode products crucial for alcohol meta-
bolism, such as alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) (Rietchel
and Trutelin, 2013; Frank et al., 2012; Biernacka et al.,
2013).

research,

From preclinical

there is vast evidence
showing the inﬂuence of genetic variations of neurotrans-
mission in reward processing that in turn may affect char-
acteristic behavior and susceptibility to addiction. Among
them, endocannabinoid (Bilbao, 2013b), glutamatergic
(Spanagel, 2003), and dopaminergic (Nutt et al., 2015)
systems have been primary targets, and recent reports
introduce novel neurotransmitters into the game, such
dynorphins, orexins, histamine, gheralin, and galanin
(Arias-Carrión and Salama, 2012). Coming back to alcohol,
models using genetically modiﬁed animals have implicated
numerous (>50) genes in not only alcohol reinforcement
but the acquisition of alcohol consumption (Bilbao, 2013a).
In this regard, a major hypothesis in the addiction ﬁeld is
that glutamatergic neurotransmission and neuroadaptive
changes in glutamate receptors play a central role in alco-
holism (Tsai et al., 1995; Krystal et al., 2003; Gass and
Olive, 2008; Holmes et al., 2013). In particular, gluta-
matergic input onto the mesolimbic dopamine system ap-
pears to be relevant for the development of addictive
behavior. The contribution of glutamate receptors in
alcohol-related behaviors has been studied in either
knockout mouse models or in pharmacological studies, and
the results obtained point to a minor role of NMDA and
AMPA receptors in alcohol reinforcement and alcohol-
seeking responses (Sanchis-Segura et al., 2006; Spanagel,
2009; Bilbao, 2013a). However,
relapse behavior, as
measured by the ADE, is attenuated or blocked by several
glutamate NMDA and AMPA receptor antagonists (Hölter
et al., 1996; Vengeliene et al., 2005, 2008; Sanchis-Segura
et al., 2006; Spanagel, 2009; Holmes et al., 2013). Thus,
there is some indication that glutamate receptors are, at
least in part, involved in mediating the addictive properties
of alcohol, but
the neuroanatomical substrates and the
speciﬁc contributions of AMPA and NMDA receptors are
not well understood. In a 2015 study, we demonstrated that
dopamine and glutamatergic input act in concert to inﬂu-
ence alcohol relapse responses using highly sophisticated
mouse models, where particular glutamatergic genes were
knocked out in two neuronal populations of the reward
system (in simple words, the neurons receiving or trig-
gering dopaminergic signal). In particular, we show that
NMDA and AMPA receptor subunits within these neurons
of the reward system play an important role in the ADE, the
increase in alcohol intake after a period of abstinence. Thus,
while initiation and maintenance of voluntary alcohol
consumption in the home cage was not affected, the ADE

was attenuated in all transgenic lines tested. Interestingly,
the ability of conditioned cues to reinstate alcohol-seeking
behavior was normal. Furthermore, we validated those
ﬁnding by pharmacological manipulation of either NMDA
or AMPA receptor activity in both neuronal populations. In
conclusion, relapse-like drinking as measured by the ADE
is mediated by NMDA and AMPA receptors within the
mesolimbic system, whereas alcohol consumption, self-
behaviordas
administration,
measured by the context- and cue-induced reinstatement
proceduredis not inﬂuenced by these mesolimbic gluta-
mate receptors (Eisenhardt et al., 2015a).

alcohol-seeking

and

is

reward-related behaviors)

Another interesting genetic component of alcohol (and
natural
the metabotropic
glutamate receptor type 5 (mGluR5) and cannabinoid re-
ceptor CB1 interplay. Indeed, a crosstalk between these two
receptors on mediating reward and reinforcement processes
of drugs is illustrated by ﬁndings showing identical potency
on modulating cue-induced reinstatement of drug-seeking
responses (ie, Backstrom et al., 2004; Olive, 2009; Wang
et al., 2012; De Vries et al., 2001; Sanchis-Segura et al.,
2004; Cippitelli et al., 2005). More importantly, these two
components are necessary for synaptic plasticity to occur.
Thus, what is known is that both natural and drug reward-
seeking processes depend on learning and the formation of
long-lasting conditioned associations, and these learning
processes may involve synaptic plasticity within the brain
reward system, in particular of the NAc (ie, Stuber et al.,
2011; Kelley, 2004; Todd et al., 2012; Crockford et al.,
2005).

Alcohol seems to have a genetic component

in the
response to therapy. Indeed,
it has been proposed that
therapeutic responses to naltrexone in alcoholism are
moderated by variation at
the mu-opioid receptor gene
locus. In a recent study, we examined in humanized mice
carrying the respective human mu-opioid receptor (A118G)
variations in the effects of naltrexone or nalmefene on brain
stimulation and different paradigms of alcohol intake. It
was found that one of these variations robustly moderated
effects of opioid antagonism on alcohol reward and con-
sumption, suggesting a personalized medicine approach to
alcoholism treatment that takes into account the mu-opioid
receptor gene genotype (Bilbao et al., 2015).
Gene  Environment Interactions
Addictive behavior, however, is not purely the result of an
adverse combination of risk alleles. Today, it is believed
from clinical and preclinical evidence that drug addiction
is a multifactorial disorder in which genetic and envi-
ronmental variables interact
in modulating individual
responsiveness to addictive drugs (Chen and Anthony,
2004). That is, addiction is the result of cumulative re-
sponses to drug exposure,
the genetic and epigenetic

make-up of the individual, and environmental perturba-
tions over time. Gene  environment interaction refers to
moderation of genetic predisposition as a consequence of
environmental exposure. In the past decades, from linkage
and candidate gene studies and from the most modern
GWAS, there has been an exponential increase in the
number of gene  environment studies published (Dick
et al., 2014). As for the genetic factors, an overview about
speciﬁc interactions between different drugs of abuse,
genes, and particular environments is beyond the scope
here due to the vast research on this ﬁeld. I will exemplify
some of the work carried out in our lab by showing three
speciﬁc interactions of alcohol with genes related to
endocrine HPA axis activity and circadian control on the
stress.

One important environmental factor that contributes to
the development of alcohol use disorders is adverse life
events (that is, stress). A representative example related to
the stress HPA axis activity is that involving the CRH re-
ceptor 1 (Timpl et al., 1998). Spanagel showed in a science
paper that mice lacking a functional CRH 1 receptor
exposed to increasing concentrations of alcohol did not
differ in their daily intake of alcohol or during the exposure
to repeated episodes of social defeat stress. However, the
knockout mice progressively started to increase their intake
about 3 weeks later, an effect that persisted up to 6 months
(Sillaber et al., 2002). Ten years later, using genetically
modiﬁed mice with speciﬁc deletions of the CRH1 receptor
either in the HPA or in the brain (in particular, the amyg-
dala, a brain site that plays a key role in negative rein-
forcement processes in alcohol-dependent subjects), a
second key paper showed that this delayed stress response
in alcohol intake was indeed located in the HPA and not
outside (or extrahypothalamic) (Molander et al., 2012).
This particular interaction of HPA-CRH1-stress and the
onset of alcoholism has been consistently demonstrated in
human genetic studies as well (ie, Blomeyer et al., 2008).
These results are in agreement with the suggested opposing
roles of CRH1 receptors within the amygdala and the HPA
axis (Heilig and Koob, 2007). Indeed, it is suggested that
within the amygdale, CRH might interact with another
neuropeptide, the neuropeptide Y to regulate responsive-
ness to stressful stimuli and alcohol-related behaviors
(Heilig et al., 1994; Gilpin, 2012). Recently, several other
stress-related neuropeptides have been identiﬁed that play a
putative role in the regulation of alcohol consumption and
relapse, including the urocortins, nociceptin, substance P,
and neuropeptide S (Schank et al., 2012).
Another alcohol  stress  gene interaction is related
to the internal clock. Alcohol consumption and cortico-
sterone secretion are both under circadian control and
display circadian rhythmicity. Consequently,
the in-
teractions between the circadian system, stress, and
alcohol consumption are expected to occur too. Certainly,

The Diversity of Addiction Chapter | 31 543

it
is suggested that particular clock genes can control
functions of the stress response system and that these in-
teractions are affected by alcohol (Sarkar, 2012). A key
study by Spanagel and colleagues in knockout mouse
models revealed that the activity of the clock gene Per2
inﬂuenced alcohol consumption, a ﬁnding that was also
supported by human genetic studies (Spanagel et al.,
2005). Furthermore, it was later shown that genetic vari-
ation in the PER2 gene moderated the impact of severe life
stress on hazardous drinking in experienced alcohol users
(Blomeyer et al., 2013). This interaction seems to be
bidirectional, as alcohol and stressors were reported to
inﬂuence the expression of clock genes, and PER1 to be
target gene for glucocorticoids in mice (Yamamoto et al.,
2005) and humans (Reddy et al., 2009). In an additional
work, we found an association between a functional
genetic variaton in the promoter of the PER1 gene and
increased alcohol drinking in adolescents exposed to se-
vere adverse life events in early childhood (Dong et al.,
2011). This functional genetic variation was involved in
cortisol-induced, genotype-speciﬁc transcriptional activa-
tion of PER1. By knocking out the PER1 gene in mice, we
could validate those results by applying various stressors
such as social defeat stress and forced swim stress during
voluntary alcohol home cage drinking to the Per1
knockout mice. Following these stressors, augmented
stress-related drinking was observed in Per1 knockout
mice as opposed to their wild type litter-mates (Dong
et al., 2011). Another period gene, Per3 has an inﬂuence
on responses to alcohol and stress, and it provides a po-
tential causal link between stress, sleep disruption, and
alcohol consumption (Wang et al., 2012).

In conclusion, what I have here brieﬂy summarized
reﬂects the complexity of the diversity in transition to
addiction. That
is, addiction is a multifaceted disorder
heavily inﬂuenced among others, by gender, development,
personality traits, psychiatric conditions, environmental-
related drug association, social stress, and genetic factors.
Although I have introduced them separately, their dynamic
interactions, rather than single factors, will determine the
course and severity of the addiction.

CONCLUDING REMARKS
l Throughout history, addiction has always been present
in humans. During prehistoric times, the use substances
inﬂuencing mood and thinking processes was restricted
to particular environmental conditions and inﬂuenced
by three dominant patterns of use: religious, medicinal,
and recreational. In the 18th century, many substances
sifted to a non-socially accepted pattern of abuse and
dependence. The recognition of this new and patholog-
ical use led to an explosion in drug research that culmi-
nated in the development of the science of addiction.

544 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

Scientiﬁcally, drug addiction or substance dependence
is a chronically relapsing disorder that is characterized
by (1) compulsion to seek and take the drug, (2) loss
of control in limiting intake, and (3) emergence of a
negative emotional state,
like anxiety or irritability,
when access to the drug is prevented (deﬁned as depen-
dence). Addiction is further conceptualized as a pro-
gression from impulsivity to compulsivity, and it
includes three stages: binge/intoxication, withdrawal/
negative affect, and preoccupation/anticipation. Recent
advances in neuroscience and clinical and public health
have added new aspects and expanded the scientiﬁc
deﬁnition of addiction. This is reﬂected in the new psy-
chiatric classiﬁcation system DSM-V, which has for the
ﬁrst
time categorized drug addictions vs. so-called
behavioral addictions and has added the addiction of
gambling disorder. This new conceptualization marks
a milestone in psychiatry and may open a new era of
addiction in science where other potential behavioral
addictions like sexual,
internet, shopping, sports, or
eating might be (scientiﬁcally) deﬁned.

l The psychological constructs through which drugs
modify gradually behavior during the transition to addic-
tion depend on learning and the formation of long-lasting
conditioned associations, and they include multiple moti-
vational mechanisms. A central pillar from different ap-
proaches or theories aiming to explain the motivational/
psychological mechanisms involved in the addiction pro-
cess is based on reward dysregulation. The theory of
counter-adaptation opponent-process
and allostasis
models proposes that chronic drug-induced states of
anhedonia (as opposing to the acute, positive effects)
represent one of the major motivations for compulsivity
in drug taking in the form of a motivational withdrawal
syndrome. The incentive sensitization theory proposes
that repeated drug use sensitizes neuronal circuits that
mediate psychostimulant motor effects, drug reward,
and the attribution of incentive salience to reward-
associated environmental cues. This shift in an incentive
salience state is responsible for drug-seeking and drug-
taking behavior. From the transition to habit theory, a
switch from a reward-sensitive behavior to a habit-
based behavior is proposed to underlie decreased reward
sensitivity. Consequently, the seeking behavior will be
triggered by a stimuluseresponse habit and the habit
(and not the affective reward response) will be critical
in maintaining the addictive behavior. Finally, the impul-
sivity models proposed that prolonged drug intake affects
impulse control mechanisms that may lead to addictive
behaviors. The reward system provides the anatomical
substrate for emotions and motivated behavior, including
the circuitry for reward-related events. Compared to nat-
ural rewards, drugs of abuse impact this system differ-
ently,
addicted brain programs behavior

so the

differently. The functional consequences of chronic,
long-term exposure to addictive drugs believed to under-
lie addiction are mainly the development of tolerance,
sensitization, and dependence. The neuropsychological
adaptations of dependence, craving, and relapse to drugs
in humans involves progressive new programming of
neural circuits that mediate reward and motivation, mem-
ory, conditioning, and habituation processes, executive
function and inhibitory control, interoception, and self-
awareness and stress reactivity.

ratings of

estimates of

street value,

l To understand the complexity of addiction is funda-
mental to elucidate how rewards and reinforcement pro-
cesses impact the addictive behavior and which are the
relevant behavioral hallmarks of addiction. The most
common methods used to measure reward in humans
include acute dose-effect comparison, self-reports, sub-
ject
self-
administration, and the more objective choice procedure;
the recent behavioral economics approach applied to
addiction has the main advantage of the direct compari-
son between qualitatively different reinforcers by means
of delay-discounting. Among the measurements of
reward in humans, “craving” is most probably the one
that has attracted more attention as a core component
of drug abuse. However, modeling relapse situations
and compulsive drug seeking in laboratory settings re-
mains a challenge in the ﬁeld of human research. Both
reward-induced motivational processes and some of the
key symptoms of addictive behavior can be reproduced
in animals, and therefore they can be used to study the
psychobiological mechanisms underlying addiction in
humans. Thus, the motivational properties of rewards
are evaluated through consumption/preference-based
measures, which include self-administration, condition-
ing place preference, and brain self-stimulation para-
digms. Currently, it is possible to model at least some
of the features that characterize the transition to addiction
in humans. These
include
increased motivation for drugs, drug seeking, relapse,
loss of control, and intake despite negative conse-
quences. Importantly, the three-criteria addiction model
for cocaine represents an exceptional model developed
in the last few years that best captures addictive behavior
as a whole in rats.

phenotypes

addictive

l Preclinical and clinical evidence has extensively re-
ported that the transition to addiction is heavily inﬂu-
enced by biological, personality, environmental, and
genetic factors and their dynamic interactions, which
will determine the course and severity of the addiction.
The most
inﬂuencing biological and developmental
factors include gender and adolescence. The general
pattern of gender differences is pretty similar for all
drugs of abuse and stages of addiction, with females
being more susceptible, an effect suggested to be

interestingly,

mediated by emotional and neuroendocrine processes.
Adolescence is a crucial time for the development of
drug use and addiction. An immature brain more sen-
sitive to drugs and psychological
traits like risk
behavior that favors a reward approach are key factors
that contribute to it. Individuals with preexisting psy-
chological and emotional disorders including anxiety,
novelty seeking, and impulsivity are among the most
predisposing personality traits and psychiatric condi-
tions to addiction. Mostly from preclinical evidence,
it is known that the environment can affect addictive
behaviors by means of adverse life experiences,
enhanced drug-associated learning, and the setting
associated to drug taking;
there is
emerging interest on how the individual social envi-
ronment impacts addictive behavior, particularly the
emotional valence of the social experience and the
context in which the social interaction occurs, within
or outside of the drug-taking context. Linking partic-
ular genes with addictions has proved difﬁcult due to
the lack of replication studies. Alcoholism might be
an exception, as it has been the most researched addic-
tion due to its strong genetic component. Thus, the
offspring of alcoholics have a 4e10-fold increased
probability of developing alcoholism, the heritability
of alcoholism is estimated to be around 50e60%,
and the genetic variations of ADH has proven to be
crucial. An extensive animal research has demon-
strated an important role for genes related to the gluta-
mate and opioid systems in alcohol relapse and in
response to therapy, respectively. More importantly,
genetic and environmental variables interact in modu-
lating individual responsiveness to addictive drugs. In
particular, both the HPA stress axis and circadian
genes
alcohol
responses.

seem to modulate

stress-related

REFERENCES

Abdolahi, A., Acosta, G., Breslin, F.J., Hemby, S.E., Lynch, W.J., 2010.
Incubation of nicotine seeking is associated with enhanced protein
kinase A-regulated signaling of dopamine- and cAMP-regulated
phosphoprotein of 32 kDa in the insular cortex. European Journal of
Neuroscience 31, 733e741.

Agrawal, A., Verweij, K.J., Gillespie, N.A., Heath, A.C., Lessov-
Schlaggar, C.N., Martin, N.G., Nelson, E.C., Slutske, W.S.,
Whitﬁeld, J.B., Lynskey, M.T., 2012. The genetics of addiction-a
translational perspective. Translational Psychiatry 2, e140.

Aharonovich, E., Hasin, D.S., Brooks, A.C., Liu, X., Bisaga, A.,
Nunes, E.V., 2006. Cognitive deﬁcits predict low treatment retention
in cocaine dependent patients. Drug and Alcohol Dependence 81,
313e322.

Ahmed, S.H., Koob, G.F., 1998. Transition from moderate to excessive

drug intake: change in hedonic set point. Science 282, 298e300.

The Diversity of Addiction Chapter | 31 545

Ahmed, S.H., 2011. Escalation of drug use. Animal models of drug

addiction. Neuromethods 267e292.

Alexander, B.K., Coambs, R.B., Hadaway, P.F., 1978. The effect of
housing and gender on morphine self-administration in rats. Psycho-
pharmacology (Berlin) 58, 175e179.

Aloise-Young, P.A., Kaeppner, C.J., 2005. Sociometric status as a pre-
dictor of onset and progression in adolescent cigarette smoking.
Nicotine and Tobacco Research 7, 199e206.

American Psychiatric Association, 1994. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
ed. American PsychiatricPress,

fourth

of Mental Disorders,
Washington D.C.

American Psychiatric Association, 2013. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders, ﬁfth ed. American PsychiatricPublishing,
Arlington.

Andersen, S.L., Napierata, L., Brenhouse, H.C., Sonntag, K.C., 2008.
Juvenile methylphenidate modulates reward-related behaviors and
cerebral blood ﬂow by decreasing cortical D3 receptors. European
Journal of Neuroscience 27, 2962e2972.

Anisman, H., Waller, T.G., 1974. Effects of inescapable shock and shock-
produced conﬂict on self selection of alcohol in rats. Pharmacology
Biochemistry and Behavior 2, 27e33.

Anker, J.J., Carroll, M.E., 2010. The role of progestins in the behavioral
effects of cocaine and other drugs of abuse: human and animal
research. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 35, 315e333.

Anker, J.J., Perry, J.L., Gliddon, L.A., Carroll, M.E., 2009. Impulsivity
predicts the escalation of cocaine self-administration in rats. Phar-
macology Biochemistry and Behavior 93, 343e348.

Arias-Carrion, O., Salama, M., 2012. Reward-seeking behavior and
addiction: cause or cog? Current Drug Abuse Reviews 5, 178e189.
Astur, R.S., Carew, A.W., Deaton, B.E., 2014. Conditioned place prefer-
ences in humans using virtual reality. Behavioural Brain Research
267, 173e177.

Astur, R.S., Palmisano, A.N., Carew, A.W., Deaton, B.E., Kuhney, F.S.,
Niezrecki, R.N., Hudd, E.C., Mendicino, K.L., Ritter, C.J., 2016.
Conditioned place preferences in humans using secondary reinforcers.
Behavioural Brain Research 297, 15e19.

Baarendse, P.J., Limpens, J.H., Vanderschuren, L.J., 2014. Disrupted so-
cial development enhances the motivation for cocaine in rats. Psy-
chopharmacology (Berlin) 231, 1695e1704.

Bachteler, D., Economidou, D., Danysz, W., Ciccocioppo, R.,
Spanagel, R., 2005. The effects of acamprosate and neramexane on
cue-induced reinstatement of ethanol-seeking behavior in rat. Neuro-
psychopharmacology 30, 1104e1110.

Backstrom, P., Bachteler, D., Koch, S., Hyytia, P., Spanagel, R., 2004.
mGluR5 antagonist MPEP reduces ethanol-seeking and relapse
behavior. Neuropsychopharmacology 29, 921e928.

Badanich, K.A., Adler, K.J., Kirstein, C.L., 2006. Adolescents differ from
adults in cocaine conditioned place preference and cocaine-induced
dopamine in the nucleus accumbens septi. European Journal of
Pharmacology 550, 95e106.

Badiani, A., Spagnolo, P.A., 2013. Role of environmental factors in

cocaine addiction. Current Pharmaceutical Design 19, 6996e7008.

Baez, H., Castro, M.M., Benavente, M.A., Kintz, P., Cirimele, V.,
Camargo, C., Thomas, C., 2000. Drugs in prehistory: chemical analysis
of ancient human hair. Forensic Science International 108, 173e179.
Bahi, A., 2013. Individual differences in elevated plus-maze exploration
predicted higher ethanol consumption and preference in outbred mice.
Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior 105, 83e88.

546 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

Bardo, M.T., Bevins, R.A., 2000. Conditioned place preference: what does
it add to our preclinical understanding of drug reward? Psychophar-
macology (Berlin) 153, 31e43.

Baumeister, R.F., Stillwell, A.M., Heatherton, T.F., 1994. Guilt: an

interpersonal approach. Psychological Bulletin 115, 243e267.

Becker, J.B., Hu, M., 2008. Sex differences in drug abuse. Frontiers in

Neuroendocrinology 29, 36e47.

Becker, J.B., Koob, G.F., 2016. Sex differences in animal models: focus

on addiction. Pharmacological Reviews 68, 242e263.

Bishop, M.P., Elder, S.T., Heath, R.G., 1963. Intracranial self-stimulation

in man. Science 140, 394e396.

Blanchard, R.J., Hori, K., Tom, P., Blanchard, D.C., 1987. Social structure
and ethanol consumption in the laboratory rat. Pharmacology
Biochemistry and Behavior 28, 437e442.

Blanchard, R.J., Flores, T., Magee, L., Weiss, S., Blanchard, D.C., 1992.
Pregrouping aggression and defense scores inﬂuences alcohol con-
sumption for dominant and subordinate rats in visible burrow systems.
Aggressive Behavior 18, 459e467.

Becker, H.C., Lopez, M.F., Doremus-Fitzwater, T.L., 2011. Effects of
stress on alcohol drinking: a review of animal studies. Psychophar-
macology (Berlin) 218, 131e156.

Blanchard, R.J., McKittrick, C.R., Blanchard, D.C., 2001. Animal models
of social stress: effects on behavior and brain neurochemical systems.
Physiology and Behavior 73, 261e271.

Belin, D., Mar, A.C., Dalley, J.W., Robbins, T.W., Everitt, B.J., 2008.
High impulsivity predicts the switch to compulsive cocaine-taking.
Science 320, 1352e1355.

Blatt, S.L., Takahashi, R.N., 1999. Experimental anxiety and the rein-
forcing effects of ethanol in rats. Brazilian Journal of Medical and
Biological Research 32, 457e461.

Belin, D., Balado, E., Piazza, P.V., Deroche-Gamonet, V., 2009. Pattern of
intake and drug craving predict the development of cocaine addiction-
like behavior in rats. Biological Psychiatry 65, 863e868.

Blomeyer, D., Treutlein, J., Esser, G., Schmidt, M.H., Schumann, G., Laucht, M.,
2008. Interaction between CRHR1 gene and stressful life events predicts
adolescent heavy alcohol use. Biological Psychiatry 63, 146e151.

Belin, D., Berson, N., Balado, E., Piazza, P.V., Deroche-Gamonet, V.,
2011. High-novelty-preference rats are predisposed to compulsive
cocaine self-administration. Neuropsychopharmacology 36, 569e579.
Belin, D., Belin-Rauscent, A., Murray, J.E., Everitt, B.J., 2013. Addiction:
failure of control over maladaptive incentive habits. Current Opinion
in Neurobiology 23, 564e572.

Ben-Shahar, O., Posthumus, E.J., Waldroup, S.A., Ettenberg, A., 2008.
Heightened drug-seeking motivation following extended daily access
to self-administered cocaine. Progress in Neuropsychopharmacology
and Biological Psychiatry 32, 863e869.

Bianchi, M., Fone, K.F., Azmi, N., Heidbreder, C.A., Hagan, J.J.,
Marsden, C.A., 2006. Isolation rearing induces recognition memory
deﬁcits accompanied by cytoskeletal alterations in rat hippocampus.
European Journal of Neuroscience 24, 2894e2902.

Bienkowski, P., Koros, E., Kostowski, W., 2001. Novelty-seeking
behaviour and operant oral ethanol self-administration in Wistar
rats. Alcohol and Alcoholism 36, 525e528.

Bienkowski, P., Rogowski, A., Korkosz, A., Mierzejewski, P., Radwanska, K.,
Kaczmarek, L., Bogucka-Bonikowska, A., Kostowski, W., 2004. Time-
dependent changes in alcohol-seeking behaviour during abstinence. Eu-
ropean Neuropsychopharmacology 14, 355e360.

Biernacka,

J.M., Geske,

J.R., Schneekloth, T.D., Frye, M.A.,
Cunningham, J.M., Choi, D.S., Tapp, C.L., Lewis, B.R., Drews, M.S.,
L Pietrzak, T., Colby, C.L., Hall-Flavin, D.K., Loukianova, L.L.,
Heit, J.A., Mrazek, D.A., Karpyak, V.M., 2013. Replication of
genome wide association studies of alcohol dependence: support for
association with variation in ADH1C. PLoS One 8 (3), e58798.

Bilbao, A., Robinson, J.E., Heilig, M., Malanga, C.J., Spanagel, R.,
Sommer, W.H., Thorsell, A., 2015. A pharmacogenetic determinant of
mu-opioid receptor antagonist effects on alcohol reward and con-
sumption: evidence from humanized mice. Biological Psychiatry 77,
850e858.

Bilbao, A., 2013a. Advanced transgenic approaches to understand alcohol-
related phenotypes in animals. Current Topics in Behavioral Neuro-
sciences 13, 271e311.

Bilbao, A., 2013b. The role of the endocannabinoid system in addictive

behavior. Addiction Biology 18, 904e907.

Blomeyer, D., Buchmann, A.F., Lascorz, J., Zimmermann, U.S., Esser, G.,
Desrivieres, S., Schmidt, M.H., Banaschewski, T., Schumann, G.,
Laucht, M., 2013. Association of PER2 genotype and stressful life
events with alcohol drinking in young adults. PLoS One 8, e59136.
Blum, K., Sheridan, P.J., Wood, R.C., Braverman, E.R., Chen, T.J.,
Cull, J.G., Comings, D.E., 1996. The D2 dopamine receptor gene as a
determinant of reward deﬁciency syndrome. Journal of the Royal
Society of Medicine 89, 396e400.

Bolla, K.I., Eldreth, D.A., London, E.D., Kiehl, K.A., Mouratidis, M.,
Contoreggi, C., Matochik, J.A., Kurian, V., Cadet, J.L., Kimes, A.S.,
Funderburk, F.R., Ernst, M., 2003. Orbitofrontal cortex dysfunction in
abstinent cocaine abusers performing a decision-making task. Neu-
roimage 19, 1085e1094.

Bossert, J.M., Marchant, N.J., Calu, D.J., Shaham, Y., 2013. The rein-
statement model of drug relapse: recent neurobiological ﬁndings,
emerging research topics, and translational research. Psychopharma-
cology (Berlin) 229, 453e476.

Boyle, A.E., Gill, K., Smith, B.R., Amit, Z., 1991. Differential effects of
an early housing manipulation on cocaine-induced activity and self-
administration in laboratory rats. Pharmacology Biochemistry and
Behavior 39, 269e274.

Bozarth, M.A., Murray, A., Wise, R.A., 1989. Inﬂuence of housing conditions
on the acquisition of intravenous heroin and cocaine self-administration in
rats. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior 33, 903e907.

Braams, B.R., van Duijvenvoorde, A.C., Peper, J.S., Crone, E.A., 2015.
Longitudinal changes in adolescent risk-taking: a comprehensive
study of neural responses to rewards, pubertal development, and risk-
taking behavior. Journal of Neuroscience 35, 7226e7238.

Brady, K.T., Randall, C.L., 1999. Gender differences in substance use

disorders. Psychiatric Clinics of North America 22, 241e252.

Brady, K.T., Sinha, R., 2005. Co-occurring mental and substance use
the neurobiological effects of chronic stress. American

disorders:
Journal of Psychiatry 162, 1483e1493.

Brenhouse, H.C., Sonntag, K.C., Andersen, S.L., 2008. Transient D1
dopamine receptor expression on prefrontal cortex projection neurons:
relationship to enhanced motivational salience of drug cues in
adolescence. Journal of Neuroscience 28, 2375e2382.

Bisagno, V., Cadet, J.L., 2014. Stress, sex, and addiction: potential roles of
corticotropin-releasing factor, oxytocin, and arginine-vasopressin.
Behavioural Pharmacology 25, 445e457.

Briand, L.A., Flagel, S.B., Garcia-Fuster, M.J., Watson, S.J., Akil, H.,
Sarter, M., Robinson, T.E., 2008. Persistent alterations in cognitive
function and prefrontal dopamine D2 receptors following extended,

but not
psychopharmacology 33, 2969e2980.

limited,

access

to self-administered cocaine. Neuro-

Caine, S.B., Lintz, R., Koob, G.F., 1993.

Intravenous drug self-
administration techniques in animals. In: Behavioral Neuroscience:
A Practical Approach, vol. 2. IRL Press, Oxford, pp. 117e143.

Caprioli, D., Celentano, M., Paolone, G., Badiani, A., 2007. Modeling the role
of environment in addiction. Progress in Neuropsychopharmacology and
Biological Psychiatry 31, 1639e1653.

Caprioli, D., Celentano, M., Dubla, A., Lucantonio, F., Nencini, P.,
Badiani, A., 2009. Ambience and drug choice: cocaine- and heroin-
taking as a function of environmental context in humans and rats.
Biological Psychiatry 65, 893e899.

Carlezon Jr., W.A., Chartoff, E.H., 2007. Intracranial self-stimulation
(ICSS) in rodents to study the neurobiology of motivation. Nature
Protocols 2, 2987e2995.

Carroll, M.E., Lynch, W.J., Roth, M.E., Morgan, A.D., Cosgrove, K.P.,
2004. Sex and estrogen inﬂuence drug abuse. Trends in Pharmaco-
logical Sciences 25, 273e279.

Carter, B.L., Tiffany, S.T., 1999. Cue-reactivity and the future of addiction

research. Addiction 94, 349e351.

Cartmell, L.W., Aufderhide, A., Weems, C., 1991. Cocaine metabolites in
pre-Columbian mummy hair. Journal of Oklahoma State Medical
Association 84, 11e12.

Casey, B.J., Jones, R.M., 2010. Neurobiology of the adolescent brain and
behavior: implications for substance use disorders. Journal of the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 49,
1189e1201 quiz 1285.

Celentano, M., Caprioli, D., Dipasquale, P., Cardillo, V., Nencini, P.,
Gaetani, S., Badiani, A., 2009. Drug context differently regulates
cocaine versus heroin self-administration and cocaine- versus heroin-
induced Fos mRNA expression in the rat. Psychopharmacology
(Berlin) 204, 349e360.

Chen, C.Y., Anthony, J.C., 2004. Epidemiological estimates of risk in the
process of becoming dependent upon cocaine: cocaine hydrochloride
powder versus crack cocaine. Psychopharmacology (Berlin) 172,
78e86.

Childers, S.R., Breivogel, C.S., 1998. Cannabis and endogenous canna-

binoid systems. Drug and Alcohol Dependence 51, 173e187.

Childress, A.R., McLellan, A.T., O’Brien, C.P., 1984. Assessment and
extinction of conditioned withdrawal-like responses in an integrated
treatment for opiate dependence. NIDA Research Monographs 55,
202e210.

Childress, A.R., McLellan, A.T., O’Brien, C.P., 1986. Abstinent opiate
abusers exhibit conditioned craving, conditioned withdrawal and re-
ductions in both through extinction. British Journal of Addiction 81,
655e660.

Childress, A.R., McLellan, A.T., Ehrman, R., O’Brien, C.P., 1988. Clas-
sically conditioned responses in opioid and cocaine dependence: a role
in relapse? NIDA Research Monographs 84, 25e43.

Childress, A.R., Mozley, P.D., McElgin, W., Fitzgerald, J., Reivich, M.,
O’Brien, C.P., 1999. Limbic activation during cue-induced cocaine
craving. American Journal of Psychiatry 156, 11e18.

Childs, E., de Wit, H., 2009. Amphetamine-induced place preference in

humans. Biological Psychiatry 65, 900e904.

Chung, T., Martin, C.S., 2001. Classiﬁcation and course of
alcohol problems among adolescents in addictions treatment pro-
grams. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research 25,
1734e1742.

The Diversity of Addiction Chapter | 31 547

Ciccocioppo, R., Economidou, D., Cippitelli, A., Cucculelli, M.,
Ubaldi, M., Soverchia, L., Lourdusamy, A., Massi, M., 2006.
Genetically selected Marchigian Sardinian alcohol-preferring (msP)
rats: an animal model
to study the neurobiology of alcoholism.
Addiction Biology 11, 339e355.

Cippitelli, A., Bilbao, A., Hansson, A.C., del Arco, I., Sommer, W., Heilig, M.,
Massi, M., Bermudez-Silva, F.J., Navarro, M., Ciccocioppo, R., de
Fonseca, F.R., European, T.C., 2005. Cannabinoid CB1 receptor antag-
onism reduces conditioned reinstatement of ethanol-seeking behavior in
rats. European Journal of Neuroscience 21, 2243e2251.

Cloninger, C.R., Svrakic, D.M., Przybeck, T.R., 1993. A psychobiological
model of temperament and character. Archives of General Psychiatry
50, 975e990.

Cloninger, C.R., 1987. Neurogenetic adaptive mechanisms in alcoholism.

Science 236, 410e416.

Colombo, G., Lobina, C., Carai, M.A., Gessa, G.L., 2006. Phenotypic
characterization of genetically selected Sardinian alcohol-preferring
(sP) and -non-preferring (sNP) rats. Addiction Biology 11, 324e338.
Comer, S.D., Ashworth, J.B., Foltin, R.W., Johanson, C.E., Zacny, J.P.,
Walsh, S.L., 2008. The role of human drug self-administration pro-
cedures in the development of medications. Drug and Alcohol
Dependence 96, 1e15.

Conger, J.J., 1956. Alcoholism: theory, problem and challenge. II. Rein-
forcement theory and the dynamics of alcoholism. Quarterly Journal
of Studies on Alcohol 17, 296e305.

Cooper, Z.D., Haney, M., 2014. Investigation of sex-dependent effects of
cannabis in daily cannabis smokers. Drug and Alcohol Dependence
136, 85e91.

Corbit, L.H., Nie, H., Janak, P.H., 2012. Habitual alcohol seeking: time
course and the contribution of subregions of the dorsal striatum.
Biological Psychiatry 72, 389e395.

Covington 3rd, H.E., Miczek, K.A., 2005.

Intense cocaine self-
administration after episodic social defeat stress, but not after
aggressive behavior: dissociation from corticosterone activation.
Psychopharmacology (Berlin) 183, 331e340.

Crockford, D.N., Goodyear, B., Edwards, J., Quickfall, J., el-Guebaly, N.,
2005. Cue-induced brain activity in pathological gamblers. Biological
Psychiatry 58, 787e795.

Crocq, M.A., 2007. Historical and cultural aspects of man’s relationship
with addictive drugs. Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience 9, 355e361.
Cunningham, K.A., Anastasio, N.C., 2014. Serotonin at the nexus of
impulsivity and cue reactivity in cocaine addiction. Neuropharma-
cology 76 (Pt B), 460e478.

Cunningham, J.A., 2000. Remissions from drug dependence: is treatment a

prerequisite? Drug and Alcohol Dependence 59, 211e213.

Czoty, P.W., McCabe, C., Nader, M.A., 2005. Assessment of the relative
reinforcing strength of cocaine in socially housed monkeys using a
choice procedure. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Ther-
apeutics 312, 96e102.

Dalley, J.W., Theobald, D.E., Pereira, E.A., Li, P.M., Robbins, T.W.,
2002. Speciﬁc abnormalities in serotonin release in the prefrontal
cortex of isolation-reared rats measured during behavioural perfor-
mance of a task assessing visuospatial attention and impulsivity.
Psychopharmacology (Berlin) 164, 329e340.

Dalley, J.W., Laane, K., Pena, Y., Theobald, D.E., Everitt, B.J.,
Robbins, T.W., 2005a. Attentional and motivational deﬁcits in rats
withdrawn from intravenous self-administration of cocaine or heroin.
Psychopharmacology (Berlin) 182, 579e587.

548 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

Dalley, J.W., Theobald, D.E., Berry, D., Milstein, J.A., Laane, K.,
Everitt, B.J., Robbins, T.W., 2005b. Cognitive sequelae of intrave-
nous amphetamine self-administration in rats: evidence for selective
effects on attentional performance. Neuropsychopharmacology 30,
525e537.

Dalley, J.W., Laane, K., Theobald, D.E., Pena, Y., Bruce, C.C.,
Huszar, A.C., Wojcieszek, M., Everitt, B.J., Robbins, T.W., 2007.
Enduring deﬁcits in sustained visual attention during withdrawal of
intravenous methylenedioxymethamphetamine self-administration in
rats: results from a comparative study with d-amphetamine and
methamphetamine. Neuropsychopharmacology 32, 1195e1206.

Dalley, J.W., Mar, A.C., Economidou, D., Robbins, T.W., 2008. Neuro-
behavioral mechanisms of impulsivity: fronto-striatal systems and
functional neurochemistry. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior
90, 250e260.

De Vries, T.J., Shaham, Y., Homberg, J.R., Crombag, H., Schuurman, K.,
Dieben,
J., Vanderschuren, L.J., Schoffelmeer, A.N., 2001.
A cannabinoid mechanism in relapse to cocaine seeking. Nature
Medicine 7, 1151e1154.

de Wit, H., Chutuape, M.A., 1993. Increased ethanol choice in social
drinkers following ethanol preload. Behavioural Pharmacology 4,
29e36.

dela Pena, I., Gonzales, E.L., de la Pena, J.B., Kim, B.N., Han, D.H.,
Shin, C.Y., Cheong, J.H., 2015. Individual differences in novelty-
seeking behavior
in spontaneously hypertensive rats: enhanced
sensitivity to the reinforcing effect of methylphenidate in the high
novelty-preferring subpopulation. Journal of Neuroscience Methods
252, 48e54.

Deroche-Gamonet, V., Belin, D., Piazza, P.V., 2004. Evidence for

addiction-like behavior in the rat. Science 305, 1014e1017.

Di Paolo, T., Falardeau, P., Morissette, M., 1988. Striatal D-2 dopamine
agonist binding sites ﬂuctuate during the rat estrous cycle. Life Sci-
ences 43, 665e672.

Dick, D.M., Cho, S.B., Latendresse, S.J., Aliev, F., Nurnberger Jr., J.I.,
Edenberg, H.J., Schuckit, M., Hesselbrock, V.M., Porjesz, B.,
Bucholz, K., Wang, J.C., Goate, A., Kramer, J.R., Kuperman, S.,
2014. Genetic inﬂuences on alcohol use across stages of development:
GABRA2 and longitudinal trajectories of drunkenness from adoles-
cence to young adulthood. Addiction Biology 19, 1055e1064.

Dickinson, A., Wood, N., Smith, J.W., 2002. Alcohol seeking by rats:
action or habit? Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology B 55,
331e348.

Diergaarde, L., Pattij, T., Poortvliet, I., Hogenboom, F., de Vries, W.,
Schoffelmeer, A.N., De Vries, T.J., 2008. Impulsive choice and
impulsive action predict vulnerability to distinct stages of nicotine
seeking in rats. Biological Psychiatry 63, 301e308.

Diergaarde, L., Pattij, T., Nawijn, L., Schoffelmeer, A.N., De Vries, T.J.,
2009. Trait impulsivity predicts escalation of sucrose seeking and
hypersensitivity to sucrose-associated stimuli. Behavioral Neurosci-
ence 123, 794e803.

Dilleen, R., Pelloux, Y., Mar, A.C., Molander, A., Robbins, T.W.,
Everitt, B.J., Dalley, J.W., Belin, D., 2012. High anxiety is a pre-
disposing endophenotype for loss of control over cocaine, but not
heroin, self-administration in rats. Psychopharmacology (Berlin)
222, 89e97.

Lenz, S., Witt, S., Leonardi-Essmann, F., Wodarz, N., Zill, P.,
Soyka, M., Albrecht, U., Rietschel, M., Lathrop, M., Bakalkin, G.,
Spanagel, R., Schumann, G., 2011. Effects of the circadian rhythm
gene period 1 (per1) on psychosocial stress-induced alcohol drinking.
American Journal of Psychiatry 168, 1090e1098.

Duncan, E., Boshoven, W., Harenski, K., Fiallos, A., Tracy, H.,
Jovanovic, T., Hu, X., Drexler, K., Kilts, C., 2007. An fMRI study of
the interaction of stress and cocaine cues on cocaine craving in
cocaine-dependent men. American Journal of Addictions 16,
174e182.

Eaton, D.K., Kann, L., Kinchen, S., Shanklin, S., Flint, K.H., Hawkins, J.,
Harris, W.A., Lowry, R., McManus, T., Chyen, D., Whittle, L.,
Lim, C., Wechsler, H., Centers for Disease (CDC), 2012. Youth risk
behavior surveillance e United States, 2011. MMWR Surveillance
Summaries 61, 1e162.

Ebel, R.L., 1961. Must all tests be valid? American Psychologist 16,

640e647.

Economidou, D., Pelloux, Y., Robbins, T.W., Dalley, J.W., Everitt, B.J.,
2009. High impulsivity predicts relapse to cocaine-seeking after
punishment-induced abstinence. Biological Psychiatry 65, 851e856.
Eisenhardt, M., Leixner, S., Lujan, R., Spanagel, R., Bilbao, A., 2015a.
Glutamate receptors within the mesolimbic dopamine system mediate
alcohol relapse behavior. Journal of Neuroscience 35, 15523e15538.
Eisenhardt, M., Leixner, S., Spanagel, R., Bilbao, A., 2015b. Quantiﬁca-
tion of alcohol drinking patterns in mice. Addiction Biology 20,
1001e1011.

Ellison, G., Levy, A., Lorant, N., 1983. Alcohol-preferring rats in colonies
show withdrawal, inactivity, and lowered dominance. Pharmacology
Biochemistry and Behavior 18 (Suppl. 1), 565e570.

Ellison, G., 1987. Stress and alcohol intake: the socio-pharmacological

approach. Physiology and Behavior 40, 387e392.

Epstein, L.H., Bulik, C.M., Perkins, K.A., Caggiula, A.R., Rodefer, J.,
1991. Behavioral economic analysis of smoking: money and food
as alternatives. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior 38,
715e721.

Ernst, M., Luciana, M., 2015. Neuroimaging of the dopamine/reward

system in adolescent drug use. CNS Spectrums 20, 427e441.

Ersche, K.D., Jones, P.S., Williams, G.B., Turton, A.J., Robbins, T.W.,
Bullmore, E.T., 2012a. Abnormal brain structure implicated in stim-
ulant drug addiction. Science 335, 601e604.

Ersche, K.D., Turton, A.J., Chamberlain, S.R., Muller, U., Bullmore, E.T.,
Robbins, T.W., 2012b. Cognitive dysfunction and anxious-impulsive
personality traits are endophenotypes for drug dependence. American
Journal of Psychiatry 169, 926e936.

Evans, S.M., Haney, M., Foltin, R.W., 2002. The effects of smoked
cocaine during the follicular and luteal phases of the menstrual cycle
in women. Psychopharmacology (Berlin) 159, 397e406.

Everitt, B.J., Robbins, T.W., 2005. Neural systems of reinforcement for
drug addiction: from actions to habits to compulsion. Nature Neuro-
science 8, 1481e1489.

Everitt, B.J., Wolf, M.E., 2002. Psychomotor stimulant addiction: a neural

systems perspective. Journal of Neuroscience 22, 3312e3320.

Everitt, B.J., Dickinson, A., Robbins, T.W., 2001. The neuropsychological
basis of addictive behaviour. Brain Research. Brain Research Reviews
36, 129e138.

Dong, L., Bilbao, A., Laucht, M., Henriksson, R., Yakovleva, T.,
Ridinger, M., Desrivieres, S., Clarke, T.K., Lourdusamy, A.,
Smolka, M.N., Cichon, S., Blomeyer, D., Treutlein, J., Perreau-

Everitt, B.J., Belin, D., Economidou, D., Pelloux, Y., Dalley, J.W.,
Robbins, T.W., 2008. Review. Neural mechanisms underlying the
vulnerability to develop compulsive drug-seeking habits
and

The Diversity of Addiction Chapter | 31 549

addiction. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society London B:
Biological Sciences 363, 3125e3135.

Fernandez-Ruiz, J.J., de Miguel, R., Hernandez, M.L., Ramos, J.A., 1990.
Time-course of the effects of ovarian steroids on the activity of limbic
and striatal dopaminergic neurons in female rat brain. Pharmacology
Biochemistry and Behavior 36, 603e606.

Fillmore, M.I., Rush, C.R., 2001. Alcohol effects on inhibitory and acti-
vational response strategies in the acquisition of alcohol and other
reinforcers: priming the motivation to drink. Journal of Studies on
Alcohol 62, 646e656.

Foltin, R.W., Fischman, M.W., 1991. Assessment of abuse liability of
stimulant drugs in humans: a methodological survey. Drug and
Alcohol Dependence 28, 3e48.

Fone, K.C., Porkess, M.V., 2008. Behavioural and neurochemical effects
of post-weaning social isolation in rodents-relevance to developmental
neuropsychiatric disorders. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews
32, 1087e1102.

Frank, J., Cichon, S., Treutlein, J., Ridinger, M., Mattheisen, M.,
Hoffmann, P., Herms, S., Wodarz, N., Soyka, M., Zill, P., Maier, W.,
Mossner, R., Gaebel, W., Dahmen, N., Scherbaum, N., Schmal, C.,
Steffens, M., Lucae, S., Ising, M., Muller-Myhsok, B., Nothen, M.M.,
Mann, K., Kiefer, F., Rietschel, M., 2012. Genome-wide signiﬁcant
association between alcohol dependence and a variant in the ADH
gene cluster. Addiction Biology 17, 171e180.

Grifﬁths, R.R., Bigelow, G.E., Liebson, I.A., 1986. Human coffee drink-
ing:
reinforcing and physical dependence producing effects of
caffeine. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics
239, 416e425.

Grifﬁths, R.R., Bigelow, G.E., Ator, N.A., 2003. Principles of initial
experimental drug abuse liability assessment in humans. Drug and
Alcohol Dependence 70, S41eS54.

Grimm, J.W., Hope, B.T., Wise, R.A., Shaham, Y., 2001. Neuro-
adaptation. Incubation of cocaine craving after withdrawal. Nature
412, 141e142.

Grimm, J.W., Shaham, Y., Hope, B.T., 2002. Effect of cocaine and sucrose
withdrawal period on extinction behavior, cue-induced reinstatement,
and protein levels of the dopamine transporter and tyrosine hydrox-
ylase in limbic and cortical areas in rats. Behavioural Pharmacology
13, 379e388.

Hall, F.S., Wilkinson, L.S., Humby, T., Inglis, W., Kendall, D.A.,
Marsden, C.A., Robbins, T.W., 1998. Isolation rearing in rats: pre-
and postsynaptic changes in striatal dopaminergic systems. Pharma-
cology Biochemistry and Behavior 59, 859e872.

Haney, M., Spealman, R., 2008. Controversies in translational research:
drug self-administration. Psychopharmacology (Berlin) 199, 403e419.
Haney, M., Maccari, S., Le Moal, M., Simon, H., Piazza, P.V., 1995.
Social stress increases the acquisition of cocaine self-administration in
male and female rats. Brain Research 698, 46e52.

Franken, I.H., van de Wetering, B.J., 2015. Bridging the gap between the
neurocognitive lab and the addiction clinic. Addictive Behaviors 44,
108e114.

Haney, M., 2009. Self-administration of cocaine, cannabis and heroin in
the human laboratory: beneﬁts and pitfalls. Addiction Biology 14,
9e21.

Galli, G., Wolffgramm, J., 2011. Long-term development of excessive and
treatment

inﬂexible nicotine taking by rats, effects of a novel
approach. Behavioural Brain Research 217, 261e270.

Gallop, R.J., Crits-Christoph, P., Ten Have, T.R., Barber, J.P., Frank, A.,
Grifﬁn, M.L., Thase, M.E., 2007. Differential transitions between
cocaine use and abstinence for men and women. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology 75, 95e103.

Gass, J.T., Olive, M.F., 2008. Glutamatergic substrates of drug addiction

and alcoholism. Biochemical Pharmacology 75, 218e265.

Gawin, F., Kleber, H., 1986. Pharmacologic treatments of cocaine abuse.

Psychiatric Clinics of North America 9, 573e583.

Giancola, P.R., Moss, H.B., Martin, C.S., Kirisci, L., Tarter, R.E., 1996.
Executive cognitive functioning predicts reactive aggression in boys at
high risk for substance abuse: a prospective study. Alcoholism:
Clinical and Experimental Research 20, 740e744.

Gilpin, N.W., 2012. Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) and neuropeptide
Y (NPY): effects on inhibitory transmission in central amygdala, and
anxiety- & alcohol-related behaviors. Alcohol 46, 329e337.

Goeders, N.E., Guerin, G.F., 1994. Non-contingent electric footshock fa-
cilitates the acquisition of intravenous cocaine self-administration in
rats. Psychopharmacology (Berlin) 114, 63e70.

Harden, K.P., Tucker-Drob, E.M., 2011. Individual differences in the
development of sensation seeking and impulsivity during adolescence:
further evidence for a dual systems model. Developmental Psychology
47, 739e746.

Hawkins, J.D., Catalano, R.F., Miller, J.Y., 1992. Risk and protective
factors for alcohol and other drug problems in adolescence and early
adulthood: implications for substance abuse prevention. Psychological
Bulletin 112, 64e105.

Hayton, S.J., Mahoney, M.K., Olmstead, M.C., 2012. Behavioral traits
predicting alcohol drinking in outbred rats: an investigation of anxiety,
novelty seeking, and cognitive ﬂexibility. Alcoholism: Clinical and
Experimental Research 36, 594e603.

Heilig, M., Koob, G.F., 2007. A key role for corticotropin-releasing factor

in alcohol dependence. Trends in Neurosciences 30, 399e406.

Heilig, M., Koob, G.F., Ekman, R., Britton, K.T., 1994. Corticotropin-
releasing factor and neuropeptide Y: role in emotional integration.
Trends in Neurosciences 17, 80e85.

Henniger, M.S., Spanagel, R., Wigger, A., Landgraf, R., Holter, S.M., 2002.
Alcohol self-administration in two rat lines selectively bred for extremes
in anxiety-related behavior. Neuropsychopharmacology 26, 729e736.
Heshmat, S., 2015. Behavioral economics of self-control failure. Yale

Goeders, N.E., 2002. Stress and cocaine addiction. Journal of Pharma-

Journal of Biology and Medicine 88, 333e337.

cology and Experimental Therapeutics 301, 785e789.

Goldman, D., Oroszi, G., Ducci, F., 2005. The genetics of addictions:

uncovering the genes. Nature Reviews Genetics 6, 521e532.

Heyne, A., Wolffgramm, J., 1998. The development of addiction to d-
amphetamine in an animal model: same principles as for alcohol
and opiate. Psychopharmacology (Berlin) 140, 510e518.

Goto, Y., Otani, S., Grace, A.A., 2007. The Yin and Yang of dopamine

Heyne, A., 1996. The development of opiate addiction in the rat. Phar-

release: a new perspective. Neuropharmacology 53, 583e587.

macology Biochemistry and Behavior 53, 11e25.

Grant, J.E., 2008. Impulse Control Disorders. A Clinician’s Guide to
Understanding and Treating Behavioral Addictions, ﬁrst ed. W.W.
Norton & Company, New York. London.

Higley, J.D., Suomi, S.J., Linnoila, M., 1996a. A nonhuman primate
model of type II alcoholism? Part 2. Diminished social competence
and excessive aggression correlates with low cerebrospinal ﬂuid 5-

550 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

hydroxyindoleacetic acid concentrations. Alcoholism: Clinical and
Experimental Research 20, 643e650.

Higley, J.D., Suomi, S.J., Linnoila, M., 1996b. A nonhuman primate
model of type II excessive alcohol consumption? Part 1. Low cere-
brospinal ﬂuid 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid concentrations and dimin-
ished
alcohol
consumption. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research 20,
629e642.

correlate with

excessive

social

competence

Hill, S.Y., Powell, B.J., 1976. Cocaine and morphine self-administration:
rearing. Pharmacology Biochemistry and

effects of differential
Behavior 5, 701e704.

Hill, R.T., 1970. Facilitation of conditioned reinforcement as a mechanism
of psychomotor stimulation. In: Cost, E., Garattini, S. (Eds.), Am-
phetamines and Related Compounds. Raven Press, New York,
pp. 781e795.

Hogarth, L., Attwood, A.S., Bate, H.A., Munafo, M.R., 2012. Acute
alcohol impairs human goal-directed action. Biological Psychology
90, 154e160.

Hokfelt, T., Phillipson, O., Goldstein, M., 1979. Evidence for a dopami-
nergic pathway in the rat descending from the A11 cell group to the
spinal cord. Acta Physiologica Scandinavica 107, 393e395.

Holmes, A., Spanagel, R., Krystal, J.H., 2013. Glutamatergic targets for

new alcohol medications. Psychopharmacology 229, 539e554.

Holter, S.M., Spanagel, R., 1999. Effects of opiate antagonist treatment on
the alcohol deprivation effect in long-term ethanol-experienced rats.
Psychopharmacology (Berlin) 145, 360e369.

Hölter, S.M., Danysz, W., Spanagel, R., 1996. Evidence for alcohol anti-
craving properties of memantine. European Journal of Pharmacology
314, R1eR2.

Homberg,

J.R., van den Akker, M., Raaso, H.S., Wardeh, G.,
Binnekade, R., Schoffelmeer, A.N., de Vries, T.J., 2002. Enhanced
motivation to self-administer cocaine is predicted by self-grooming
behaviour and relates to dopamine release in the rat medial prefron-
tal cortex and amygdala. European Journal of Neuroscience 15,
1542e1550.

Hudson, A., Stamp, J.A., 2011. Ovarian hormones and propensity to drug
relapse: a review. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 35,
427e436.

Hyman, S.E., Malenka, R.C., Nestler, E.J., 2006. Neural mechanisms of
addiction: the role of reward-related learning and memory. Annual
Review of Neuroscience 29, 565e598.

Jacobs, E.A., Bickel, W.K., 1999. Modeling drug consumption in the
clinic using simulation procedures: demand for heroin and cigarettes
in opioid-dependent outpatients. Experimental and Clinical Psycho-
pharmacology 7, 412e426.

Justinova, Z., Goldberg, S.R., Heishman, S.J., Tanda, G., 2005. Self-
administration of cannabinoids by experimental animals and human
marijuana smokers. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior 81,
285e299.

Kabbaj, M., Norton, C.S., Kollack-Walker, S., Watson, S.J., Robinson, T.E.,
Akil, H., 2001. Social defeat alters the acquisition of cocaine self-
administration in rats: role of individual differences in cocaine-taking
behavior. Psychopharmacology (Berlin) 158, 382e387.

Kalivas, P.W., Nakamura, M., 1999. Neural systems for behavioral acti-

vation and reward. Current Opinion in Neurobiology 9, 223e227.

Kalivas, P.W., 2005. How do we determine which drug-induced neuro-
plastic changes are important? Nature Neuroscience 8, 1440e1441.
Katner, S.N., Magalong, J.G., Weiss, F., 1999. Reinstatement of alcohol-
seeking behavior by drug-associated discriminative stimuli after pro-
longed extinction in the rat. Neuropsychopharmacology 20, 471e479.
Katz, J.L., Higgins, S.T., 2003. The validity of the reinstatement model of
craving and relapse to drug use. Psychopharmacology (Berlin) 168,
21e30.

Kelleher, R.T., Morse, W.H., 1968. Determinants of the speciﬁcity of

behavioral effects of drugs. Ergebnisse der Physiologie 60, 1e56.

Kelley, A.E., 2004. Ventral striatal control of appetitive motivation: role in
ingestive behavior and reward-related learning. Neuroscience and
Biobehavioral Reviews 27, 765e776.

Kelly, T.H., Robbins, G., Martin, C.A., Fillmore, M.T., Lane, S.D.,
Harrington, N.G., Rush, C.R., 2006. Individual differences in drug
abuse vulnerability: d-amphetamine and sensation-seeking status.
Psychopharmacology (Berlin) 189, 17e25.

Khantzian, E.J., 1985. The self-medication hypothesis of addictive disor-
ders: focus on heroin and cocaine dependence. American Journal of
Psychiatry 142, 1259e1264.

Kirby, K.N., Petry, N.M., 2004. Heroin and cocaine abusers have higher
discount rates for delayed rewards than alcoholics or non-drug-using
controls. Addiction 99, 461e471.

Klebaur, J.E., Bardo, M.T., 1999. Individual differences in novelty seeking
on the playground maze predict amphetamine conditioned place
preference. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior 63, 131e136.
Koob, G.F., Le Moal, M., 1997. Drug abuse: hedonic homeostatic dys-

regulation. Science 278, 52e58.

Koob, G.F., Le Moal, M., 2001. Drug addiction, dysregulation of reward,

and allostasis. Neuropsychopharmacology 24, 97e129.

Koob, G.F, Le Moal, M., 2005. Neurobiology of Addiction, ﬁrst ed.

Elsevier Science.

Koob, G.F., Volkow, N.D., 2010. Neurocircuitry of addiction. Neuro-

psychopharmacology 35, 217e238.

Koob, G.F., 2009. Neurobiological substrates for

the dark side of
compulsivity in addiction. Neuropharmacology 56 (Suppl. 1), 18e31.
Kosten, T.A., Gawin, F.H., Kosten, T.R., Rounsaville, B.J., 1993. Gender
differences in cocaine use and treatment response. Journal of Sub-
stance Abuse Treatment 10, 63e66.

Krystal, J.H., Petrakis, I.L., Mason, G., Trevisan, L., D’Souza, D.C., 2003.
N-methyl-D-aspartate glutamate receptors and alcoholism: reward,
dependence, treatment, and vulnerability. Pharmacology and Thera-
peutics 99, 79e94.

Kudryavtseva, N.N., Madorskaya, I.A., Bakshtanovskaya, I.V., 1991.
Social success and voluntary ethanol consumption in mice of C57BL/
6J and CBA/Lac strains. Physiology and Behavior 50, 143e146.

Kudryavtseva, N., Gerrits, M.A., Avgustinovich, D.F., Tenditnik, M.V.,
Van Ree, J.M., 2006. Anxiety and ethanol consumption in victorious
and defeated mice; effect of kappa-opioid receptor activation. Euro-
pean Neuropsychopharmacology 16, 504e511.

Kushner, M.G., Wall, M.M., Krueger, R.F., Sher, K.J., Maurer, E.,
Thuras, P., Lee, S., 2012. Alcohol dependence is related to overall
internalizing psychopathology load rather than to particular internal-
izing disorders: evidence from a national sample. Alcoholism: Clinical
and Experimental Research 36, 325e331.

Kalivas, P.W., Volkow, N.D., 2005. The neural basis of addiction: a pa-
thology of motivation and choice. American Journal of Psychiatry
162, 1403e1413.

Kutschera, W., Rom, W., 2000. Ötzi, the prehistoric Iceman. Nuclear In-
struments and Methods in Physics Research Section B: Beam In-
teractions with Materials and Atoms 164e165, 12e22.

Langleben, D.D., Ruparel, K., Elman,

I., Busch-Winokur, S.,
Pratiwadi, R., Loughead, J., O’Brien, C.P., Childress, A.R., 2008.
Acute effect of methadone maintenance dose on brain FMRI response
to heroin-related cues. American Journal of Psychiatry 165, 390e394.
Lesscher, H.M., Spoelder, M., Rotte, M.D., Janssen, M.J., Hesseling, P.,
Lozeman-van’t Klooster, J.G., Baars, A.M., Vanderschuren, L.J.,
2015. Early social isolation augments alcohol consumption in rats.
Behavioural Pharmacology 26, 673e680.

Levesque, D., Gagnon, S., Di Paolo, T., 1989. Striatal D1 dopamine re-
ceptor density ﬂuctuates during the rat estrous cycle. Neuroscience
Letters 98, 345e350.

Leyton, M., Boileau, I., Benkelfat, C., Diksic, M., Baker, G., Dagher, A.,
2002. Amphetamine-induced increases in extracellular dopamine,
drug wanting, and novelty seeking: a PET/[11C]raclopride study in
healthy men. Neuropsychopharmacology 27, 1027e1035.

Lin, J.Y., Arthurs, J., Reilly, S., 2014. Conditioned taste aversion, drugs of
abuse and palatability. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 45,
28e45.

Linsenbardt, D.N., Boehm, S.L., 2014. Alterations in the rate of binge
ethanol consumption: implications for preclinical studies in mice.
Addiction Biology 19, 812e825.

Liu, X., Matochik, J.A., Cadet, J.L., London, E.D., 1998. Smaller volume
of prefrontal lobe in polysubstance abusers: a magnetic resonance
imaging study. Neuropsychopharmacology 18, 243e252.

Madden, G.J., Bickel, W.K., 1999. Abstinence and price effects on de-
mand for cigarettes: a behavioral-economic analysis. Addiction 94,
577e588.

Mantsch, J.R., Katz, E.S., 2007. Elevation of glucocorticoids is necessary
but not sufﬁcient for the escalation of cocaine self-administration by
chronic electric footshock stress in rats. Neuropsychopharmacology
32, 367e376.

Manzo, L., Gomez, M.J., Callejas-Aguilera,

J.E., Donaire, R.,
Sabariego, M., Fernandez-Teruel, A., Canete, A., Blazquez, G.,
Papini, M.R., Torres, C., 2014. Relationship between ethanol prefer-
ence and sensation/novelty seeking. Physiology and Behavior 133,
53e60.

Marchant, N.J., Rabei, R., Kaganovsky, K., Caprioli, D., Bossert, J.M.,
Bonci, A., Shaham, Y., 2014. A critical role of lateral hypothalamus in
context-induced relapse to alcohol seeking after punishment-imposed
abstinence. Journal of Neuroscience 34, 7447e7457.

Marhe, R., Luijten, M., Franken, I.H., 2014. The clinical relevance of
neurocognitive measures in addiction. Frontiers in Psychiatry 4, 185.
Marquenie, L.A., Schade, A., van Balkom, A.J., Comijs, H.C., de
Graaf, R., Vollebergh, W., van Dyck, R., van den Brink, W., 2007.
Origin of the comorbidity of anxiety disorders and alcohol depen-
dence: ﬁndings of a general population study. European Addiction
Research 13, 39e49.

Martinez, D., Broft, A., Foltin, R.W., Slifstein, M., Hwang, D.R.,
Huang, Y., Perez, A., Frankle, W.G., Cooper, T., Kleber, H.D.,
Fischman, M.W., Laruelle, M., 2004. Cocaine dependence and d2
receptor availability in the functional subdivisions of the striatum:
relationship
Neuro-
psychopharmacology 29, 1190e1202.

cocaine-seeking

behavior.

with

Martinez, D., Gil, R., Slifstein, M., Hwang, D.R., Huang, Y., Perez, A.,
Kegeles, L., Talbot, P., Evans, S., Krystal, J., Laruelle, M., Abi-
Dargham, A., 2005. Alcohol dependence is associated with blunted
dopamine transmission in the ventral striatum. Biological Psychiatry
58, 779e786.

The Diversity of Addiction Chapter | 31 551

Marusich, J.A., Bardo, M.T., 2009. Differences in impulsivity on a
delay-discounting task predict self-administration of a low unit
dose of methylphenidate in rats. Behavioural Pharmacology 20,
447e454.

Mayﬁeld, R.D., Harris, R.A., Schuckit, M.A., 2008. Genetic factors
inﬂuencing alcohol dependence. British Journal of Pharmacology 154,
275e287.

McClernon, F.J., Kozink, R.V., Lutz, A.M., Rose, J.E., 2009. 24-h
smoking abstinence potentiates fMRI-BOLD activation to smoking
cues in cerebral cortex and dorsal striatum. Psychopharmacology
(Berlin) 204, 25e35.

McKay, J.R., Rutherford, M.J., Alterman, A.I., Cacciola, J.S., 1996.
Development of the cocaine relapse interview: an initial report.
Addiction 91, 535e548.

McKinney, W.T., 1998. Models of Mental Disorders: A New Comparative

Psychiatry. Springer, US.

McNamara, R., Dalley, J.W., Robbins, T.W., Everitt, B.J., Belin, D., 2010.
Trait-like impulsivity does not predict escalation of heroin self-
administration in the
rat. Psychopharmacology (Berlin) 212,
453e464.

Mehlman, P.T., Higley, J.D., Faucher, I., Lilly, A.A., Taub, D.M.,
Vickers, J., Suomi, S.J., Linnoila, M., 1994. Low CSF 5-HIAA con-
centrations and severe aggression and impaired impulse control in
nonhuman
151,
1485e1491.

primates. American

of Psychiatry

Journal

Merikangas, K.R., McClair, V.L., 2012. Epidemiology of substance use

disorders. Human Genetics 131, 779e789.

Merikangas, K.R., Metha, R.L., Molnar, B.E., Walters, E.E.,
Swendsen, J.D., Aguilar-Gaziola, S., Bijl, R., Borges, G., Caraveo-
Anduaga,
J.J., DeWit, D.J., Kolody, B., Vega, W.A.,
Wittchen, H.U., Kessler, R.C., 1998. Comorbidity of substance use
disorders with mood and anxiety disorders: results of the International
Consortium in Psychiatric Epidemiology. Addictive Behaviors 23,
893e907.

Miczek, K.A., Mutschler, N.H., 1996. Activational effects of social stress
on IV cocaine self-administration in rats. Psychopharmacology (Ber-
lin) 128, 256e264.

Mitchell, M.R., Potenza, M.N., 2014. Recent insights into the neurobi-

ology of impulsivity. Current Addiction Reports 1, 309e319.

Mitchell, M.R., Weiss, V.G., Beas, B.S., Morgan, D., Bizon, J.L.,
Setlow, B., 2014. Adolescent risk taking, cocaine self-administration,
and striatal dopamine signaling. Neuropsychopharmacology 39,
955e962.

Modell, J.G., Glaser, F.B., Cyr, L., Mountz, J.M., 1992. Obsessive and
compulsive characteristics of craving for alcohol in alcohol abuse and
dependence. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research 16,
272e274.

Molander, A., Vengeliene, V., Heilig, M., Wurst, W., Deussing, J.M.,
Spanagel, R., 2012. Brain-speciﬁc inactivation of the Crhr1 gene
inhibits post-dependent and stress-induced alcohol intake, but does
not affect
relapse-like drinking. Neuropsychopharmacology 37,
1047e1056.

Montanari, C., Stendardo, E., De Luca, M.T., Meringolo, M., Contu, L.,
Badiani, A., 2015. Differential vulnerability to relapse into heroin
versus cocaine-seeking as a function of setting. Psychopharmacology
(Berlin) 232, 2415e2424.

Monterosso, J., Piray, P., Luo, S., 2012. Neuroeconomics and the study of

addiction. Biological Psychiatry 72, 107e112.

552 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

Morgan, D., Grant, K.A., Gage, H.D., Mach, R.H., Kaplan, J.R.,
Prioleau, O., Nader, S.H., Buchheimer, N., Ehrenkaufer, R.L.,
Nader, M.A., 2002. Social dominance in monkeys: dopamine D2 re-
ceptors and cocaine self-administration. Nature Neuroscience 5,
169e174.

Morse, A.C., Erwin, V.G., Jones, B.C., 1993. Strain and housing affect
cocaine self-selection and open-ﬁeld locomotor activity in mice.
Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior 45, 905e912.

Nadal, R., Armario, A., Janak, P.H., 2002. Positive relationship be-
tween activity in a novel environment and operant ethanol self-
administration
162,
333e338.

Psychopharmacology

(Berlin)

rats.

in

Nader, M.A., Czoty, P.W., Nader, S.H., Morgan, D., 2012. Nonhuman
primate models of social behavior and cocaine abuse. Psychophar-
macology (Berlin) 224, 57e67.

Neisewander,

J.L., Baker, D.A., Fuchs, R.A., Tran-Nguyen, L.T.,
Palmer, A., Marshall, J.F., 2000. Fos protein expression and cocaine-
seeking behavior in rats after exposure to a cocaine self-administration
environment. Journal of Neuroscience 20, 798e805.

Neisewander, J.L., Peartree, N.A., Pentkowski, N.S., 2012. Emotional
valence and context of social
inﬂuences on drug abuse-related
behavior in animal models of social stress and prosocial interaction.
Psychopharmacology (Berlin) 224, 33e56.

Nestler, E.J., Aghajanian, G.K., 1997. Molecular and cellular basis of

addiction. Science 278, 58e63.

Newlin, D.B., Thomson, J.B., 1990. Alcohol challenge with sons of al-
coholics: a critical review and analysis. Psychological Bulletin 108,
383e402.

Nutt, D.J., Lingford-Hughes, A., Erritzoe, D., Stokes, P.R., 2015. The
dopamine theory of addiction: 40 years of highs and lows. Nature
Reviews Neuroscience 16, 305e312.

O’Brien, C.P., Volkow, N., Li, T.K., 2006. What’s in a word? Addiction
versus dependence in DSM-V. American Journal of Psychiatry 163,
764e765.

O’Brien, J.M., 1980. Alexander and Dionysus:

the invisible enemy.

Annals of Scholarship 1, 83e105.

Olds, J., Milner, P., 1954. Positive reinforcement produced by electrical
stimulation of septal area and other regions of rat brain. Journal of
Comparative and Physiological Psychology 47, 419e427.

O’Leary, T.A., Rohsenow, D.J., Martin, R., Colby, S.M., Eaton, C.A.,
Monti, P.M., 2000. The relationship between anxiety levels and
outcome of cocaine abuse treatment. American Journal of Drug and
Alcohol Abuse 26, 179e194.

Olive, M.F., 2009. Metabotropic glutamate receptor ligands as potential

therapeutics for addiction. Current Drug Abuse Reviews 2, 83e98.

Panlilio, L.V., Goldberg, S.R., 2007. Self-administration of drugs in ani-
mals and humans as a model and an investigative tool. Addiction 102,
1863e1870.

Parker, L.A., 2003. Taste avoidance and taste aversion: evidence for two

different processes. Learning and Behavior 31, 165e172.

Parrott, A.C., 2004. MDMA (3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine) or
ecstasy: the neuropsychobiological implications of taking it at dances
and raves. Neuropsychobiology 50, 329e335.

Parsegian, A., Glen Jr., W.B., Lavin, A., See, R.E., 2011. Methamphet-
amine self-administration produces attentional set-shifting deﬁcits and
alters prefrontal cortical neurophysiology in rats. Biological Psychia-
try 69, 253e259.

Paus, T., 2005. Mapping brain maturation and cognitive development

during adolescence. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 9, 60e68.

Pearson, M., Sweeting, H., West, P., Young, R., Gordon, J., Turner, K.,
2006. Adolescent substance use in different social and peer contexts: a

social network analysis. Drugs: Education, Prevention and Policy 13,
519e536.

Pelloux, Y., Costentin, J., Duterte-Boucher, D., 2004. Differential effects
of novelty exposure on place preference conditioning to amphetamine
and its oral consumption. Psychopharmacology (Berlin) 171,
277e285.

Pelloux, Y., Costentin, J., Duterte-Boucher, D., 2006. Novelty preference
predicts place preference conditioning to morphine and its oral con-
sumption in rats. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior 84,
43e50.

Pelloux, Y., Costentin, J., Duterte-Boucher, D., 2009. Anxiety increases
the place conditioning induced by cocaine in rats. Behavioural Brain
Research 197, 311e316.

Pelloux, Y., Costentin, J., Duterte-Boucher, D., 2015. Differential
involvement of anxiety and novelty preference levels on oral ethanol
consumption
232,
2711e2721.

Psychopharmacology

(Berlin)

rats.

in

Perkins, K.A., Epstein, L.H., Grobe, J., Fonte, C., 1994. Tobacco absti-
nence, smoking cues, and the reinforcing value of smoking. Phar-
macology Biochemistry and Behavior 47, 107e112.

Perkins, K.A., Grobe, J.E., Weiss, D., Fonte, C., Caggiula, A., 1996.
Nicotine preference in smokers as a function of smoking absti-
nence. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior 55, 257e263.
Perry, J.L., Larson, E.B., German, J.P., Madden, G.J., Carroll, M.E., 2005.
Impulsivity (delay discounting) as a predictor of acquisition of IV
cocaine self-administration in female rats. Psychopharmacology
(Berlin) 178, 193e201.

Peters, S., Slattery, D.A., Flor, P.J., Neumann, I.D., Reber, S.O., 2013.
Differential effects of baclofen and oxytocin on the increased ethanol
consumption following chronic psychosocial stress in mice. Addiction
Biology 18, 66e77.

Phillips, G.D., Howes, S.R., Whitelaw, R.B., Robbins, T.W., Everitt, B.J.,
1994a. Isolation rearing impairs the reinforcing efﬁcacy of intravenous
cocaine or intra-accumbens d-amphetamine:
impaired response to
intra-accumbens D1 and D2/D3 dopamine receptor antagonists. Psy-
chopharmacology (Berlin) 115, 419e429.

Phillips, G.D., Howes, S.R., Whitelaw, R.B., Wilkinson, L.S.,
Robbins, T.W., Everitt, B.J., 1994b. Isolation rearing enhances the
locomotor response to cocaine and a novel environment, but impairs
the intravenous self-administration of cocaine. Psychopharmacology
(Berlin) 115, 407e418.

Piazza, P.V., Deminiere, J.M., Le Moal, M., Simon, H., 1989. Factors that
predict individual vulnerability to amphetamine self-administration.
Science 245, 1511e1513.

Piazza, P.V., Deminiere, J.M., Le Moal, M., Simon, H., 1990. Stress- and
pharmacologically-induced behavioral sensitization increases vulner-
ability to acquisition of amphetamine self-administration. Brain
Research 514, 22e26.

Piazza, P.V., Deroche-Gamonent, V., Rouge-Pont, F., Le Moal, M., 2000.
Vertical shifts in self-administration dose-response functions predict a
drug-vulnerable phenotype predisposed to addiction. Journal of
Neuroscience 20, 4226e4232.

Pildaín, L.V., Vengeliene, V., Matthäus, F., 2013. New measurement
criteria for studying alcohol drinking and relapse in rodents. In Silico
Pharmacology 1, 1e10.

Pohorecky, L.A., 2006. Housing and rank status of male Long-Evans rats
modify ethanol’s effect on open-ﬁeld behaviors. Psychopharmacology
(Berlin) 185, 289e297.

Pohorecky, L.A., 2008. Psychosocial stress and chronic ethanol ingestion
in male rats: effects on elevated plus maze behavior and ultrasonic
vocalizations. Physiology and Behavior 94, 432e447.

The Diversity of Addiction Chapter | 31 553

Pohorecky, L.A., 2010. Acute novel stressors modify ethanol intake of
psychosocially stressed rats. Pharmacology Biochemistry and
Behavior 95, 390e400.

Rusby, J.C., Forrester, K.K., Biglan, A., Metzler, C.W., 2005. Relation-
ships between peer harassment and adolescent problem behaviors.
Journal of Early Adolescence 25, 453e477.

Porter, J.N., Olsen, A.S., Gurnsey, K., Dugan, B.P., Jedema, H.P.,
Bradberry, C.W., 2011. Chronic cocaine self-administration in rhesus
monkeys:
impact on associative learning, cognitive control, and
working memory. Journal of Neuroscience 31, 4926e4934.

Potenza, M.N., Hong, K.I., Lacadie, C.M., Fulbright, R.K., Tuit, K.L.,
Sinha, R., 2012. Neural correlates of stress-induced and cue-induced
drug craving: inﬂuences of sex and cocaine dependence. American
Journal of Psychiatry 169, 406e414.

Poulos, C.X., Cappell, H., 1991. Homeostatic theory of drug tolerance: a
general model of physiological adaptation. Psychological Review 98,
390e408.

Poulos, C.X., Le, A.D., Parker, J.L., 1995. Impulsivity predicts individual
susceptibility to high levels of alcohol self-administration. Behav-
ioural Pharmacology 6, 810e814.

Radwanska, K., Kaczmarek, L., 2012. Characterization of an alcohol
in mice. Addiction Biology 17,

addiction-prone phenotype
601e612.

Ramsey, N.F., Van Ree, J.M., 1993. Emotional but not physical stress
enhances intravenous cocaine self-administration in drug-naive rats.
Brain Research 608, 216e222.

Reddy, T.E., Pauli, F., Sprouse, R.O., Neff, N.F., Newberry, K.M.,
Garabedian, M.J., Myers, R.M., 2009. Genomic determination of the
glucocorticoid response reveals unexpected mechanisms of gene
regulation. Genome Research 19, 2163e2171.

Richards, J.M., Plate, R.C., Ernst, M., 2013. A systematic review of fMRI
reward paradigms used in studies of adolescents vs. adults: the impact
of task design and implications for understanding neurodevelopment.
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 37, 976e991.

Rietschel, M., Treutlein, J., 2013. The genetics of alcohol dependence.

Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1282, 39e70.

Roache, J.D., Grifﬁths, R.R., 1985. Comparison of triazolam and pento-
barbital: performance impairment, subjective effects and abuse lia-
bility. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics 234,
120e133.

Russo, E.B., Jiang, H.E., Li, X., Sutton, A., Carboni, A., del Bianco, F.,
Mandolino, G., Potter, D.J., Zhao, Y.X., Bera, S., Zhang, Y.B.,
Lu, E.G., Ferguson, D.K., Hueber, F., Zhao, L.C., Liu, C.J.,
Wang, Y.F., Li, C.S., 2008. Phytochemical and genetic analyses of
ancient cannabis from Central Asia. Journal of Experimental Botany
59, 4171e4182.

Rusted, J.M., Mackee, A., Williams, R., Willner, P., 1998. Deprivation
state but not nicotine content of the cigarette affects responding by
smokers on a progressive ratio task. Psychopharmacology (Berlin)
140, 411e417.

Safari Hajat Aghaii, S., Kamaly, A., Esfahani, M., 2012. Meta-analysis of
individual and environmental factors that inﬂuence People’s addiction
tendencies. International Journal of High Risk Behaviors and Addic-
tion 1, 92e99.

Salimov, R.M., Salimova, N.B., 1993. The alcohol deprivation effect in

hybrid mice. Drug and Alcohol Dependence 187e191.

Sanchez, V., Moore, C.F., Brunzell, D.H., Lynch, W.J., 2013. Effect of
wheel-running during abstinence on subsequent nicotine-seeking in
rats. Psychopharmacology (Berlin) 227, 403e411.

Sanchis-Segura, C., Spanagel, R., 2006. Behavioural assessment of drug
reinforcement and addictive features in rodents: an overview. Addic-
tion Biology 11, 2e38.

Sanchis-Segura, C., Cline, B.H., Marsicano, G., Lutz, B., Spanagel, R.,
2004. Reduced sensitivity to reward in CB1 knockout mice. Psy-
chopharmacology (Berlin) 176, 223e232.

Sanchis-Segura, C., Borchardt, T., Vengeliene, V., Zghoul, T.,
Bachteler, D., Gass, P., Sprengel, R., Spanagel, R., 2006. Involvement
of the AMPA receptor GluR-C subunit in alcohol-seeking behavior
and relapse. Journal of Neuroscience 26, 1231e1238.

Sarkar, D.K., 2012. Circadian genes, the stress axis, and alcoholism.

Alcohol Research 34, 362e366.

Sartor, C.E., Lynskey, M.T., Heath, A.C., Jacob, T., True, W., 2007. The
role of childhood risk factors in initiation of alcohol use and pro-
gression to alcohol dependence. Addiction 102, 216e225.

Robbins, T.W., 1976. Relationship between reward-enhancing and ste-
reotypical effects of psychomotor stimulant drugs. Nature 264,
57e59.

Schank, J.R., Ryabinin, A.E., Giardino, W.J., Ciccocioppo, R., Heilig, M.,
2012. Stress-related neuropeptides and addictive behaviors: beyond
the usual suspects. Neuron 76, 192e208.

Roberts, D.C., Loh, E.A., Vickers, G., 1989. Self-administration of
cocaine on a progressive ratio schedule in rats: dose-response rela-
tionship and effect of haloperidol pretreatment. Psychopharmacology
(Berlin) 97, 535e538.

Schenk, S., Lacelle, G., Gorman, K., Amit, Z., 1987. Cocaine self-
administration in rats inﬂuenced by environmental conditions: impli-
cations for the etiology of drug abuse. Neuroscience Letters 81,
227e231.

Robinet, P.M., Rowlett, J.K., Bardo, M.T., 1998. Individual differences in
novelty-induced activity and the rewarding effects of novelty and
amphetamine in rats. Behavioural Processes 44, 1e9.

Schenk, S., Robinson, B., Amit, Z., 1988. Housing conditions fail to affect
the intravenous self-administration of amphetamine. Pharmacology
Biochemistry and Behavior 31, 59e62.

Robinson, T.E., Berridge, K.C., 1993. The neural basis of drug craving: an
incentive-sensitization theory of addiction. Brain Research. Brain
Research Reviews 18, 247e291.

Robinson, T.E., Berridge, K.C., 2000. The psychology and neurobiology
of addiction: an incentive-sensitization view. Addiction 95 (Suppl. 2),
S91eS117.

Robinson, T.E., Berridge, K.C., 2003. Addiction. Annual Review of

Psychology 54, 25e53.

Rosenwasser, A.M., Fixaris, M.C., Crabbe,

J.C., Brooks, P.C.,
Ascheid, S., 2013. Escalation of intake under intermittent ethanol
access in diverse mouse genotypes. Addiction Biology 18, 496e507.
Rounsaville, B.J., Anton, S.F., Carroll, K., Budde, D., Prusoff, B.A.,
Gawin, F., 1991. Psychiatric diagnoses of treatment-seeking cocaine
abusers. Archives of General Psychiatry 48, 43e51.

Schenk, S., Harper, D.N., Do, J., 2011. Novel object recognition memory:
measurement
issues and effects of MDMA self-administration
following short inter-trial intervals. Journal of Psychopharmacology
25, 1043e1052.

Schifano, F., 2000. Potential human neurotoxicity of MDMA (’Ecstasy’):
subjective self-reports, evidence from an Italian drug addiction centre
and clinical case studies. Neuropsychobiology 42, 25e33.

Schippers, M.C., Binnekade, R., Schoffelmeer, A.N., Pattij, T., De
Vries, T.J., 2012. Unidirectional relationship between heroin self-
administration and impulsive decision-making in rats. Psychophar-
macology (Berlin) 219, 443e452.

Schneider Jr., R., Ottoni, G.L., de Carvalho, H.W., Elisabetsky, E.,
Lara, D.R., 2015. Temperament and character traits associated with
and
the use of

cannabis, cocaine, benzodiazepines,

alcohol,

554 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

hallucinogens: evidence from a large Brazilian web survey. Revista
Brasileria de Psiquiatria 37, 31e39.

Schultz, W., 2000. Multiple reward signals in the brain. Nature Reviews

Neuroscience 1, 199e207.

Selemon, L.D., 2014. Frontal lobe synaptic plasticity in development and
disease: modulation by the dopamine d1 receptor. Current Pharma-
ceutical Design 20, 5194e5201.

Shaham, Y., Stewart, J., 1994. Exposure to mild stress enhances the
reinforcing efﬁcacy of intravenous heroin self-administration in rats.
Psychopharmacology (Berlin) 114, 523e527.

Shaham, Y., Shalev, U., Lu, L., De Wit, H., Stewart, J., 2003. The rein-
statement model of drug relapse: history, methodology and major
ﬁndings. Psychopharmacology (Berlin) 168, 3e20.

Shaham, Y., 1993.

Immobilization stress-induced oral opioid self-
administration and withdrawal in rats: role of conditioning factors
and the effect of stress on “relapse” to opioid drugs. Psychopharma-
cology (Berlin) 111, 477e485.

Shalev, U., Morales, M., Hope, B., Yap, J., Shaham, Y., 2001. Time-
dependent changes in extinction behavior and stress-induced rein-
statement of drug seeking following withdrawal from heroin in rats.
Psychopharmacology (Berlin) 156, 98e107.

Sheldrake, R., McKenna, T.K., Abraham, R., 1998. The Evolutionary
Mind: Conversations on Science, Imagination & Spirit. Monkﬁsh
Book Publishing Company.

Shepard, J.D., Bossert, J.M., Liu, S.Y., Shaham, Y., 2004. The anxiogenic
drug yohimbine reinstates methamphetamine seeking in a rat model of
drug relapse. Biological Psychiatry 55, 1082e1089.

Sher, K.J., 1985. Subjective effects of alcohol: the inﬂuence of setting and
individual differences in alcohol expectancies. Journal of Studies on
Alcohol and Drugs 46, 137e146.

Sillaber, I., Rammes, G., Zimmermann, S., Mahal, B., Zieglgansberger, W.,
Wurst, W., Holsboer, F., Spanagel, R., 2002. Enhanced and delayed
stress-induced alcohol drinking in mice lacking functional CRH1 re-
ceptors. Science 296, 931e933.

Sinclair, J.D., Senter, R.J., 1967. Increased preference for ethanol in rats

following alcohol deprivation. Psychonomic Science 8, 11e12.

Sinclair, J.D., 1971. The alcohol-deprivation effect in monkeys. Psycho-

nomic Science 25, 21e22.

Sinha, R., 2009. Stress and addiction: a dynamic interplay of genes,

environment, and drug intake. Biological Psychiatry 66, 100e101.

Smith, W., 1898. Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities. John

Murray, London.

Sofuoglu, M., Mitchell, E., Kosten, T.R., 2004. Effects of progesterone
treatment on cocaine responses in male and female cocaine users.
Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior 78, 699e705.

Solomon, R.L., Corbit, J.D., 1974. An opponent-process theory of motivation.

I. Temporal dynamics of affect. Psychological Review 81, 119e145.

Somerville, L.H., Jones, R.M., Casey, B.J., 2010. A time of change:
behavioral and neural correlates of adolescent sensitivity to appe-
titive and aversive environmental cues. Brain and Cognition 72,
124e133.

Sonntag, K.C., Brenhouse, H.C., Freund, N., Thompson, B.S., Puhl, M.,
Andersen, S.L., 2014. Viral over-expression of D1 dopamine re-
ceptors in the prefrontal cortex increase high-risk behaviors in adults:
comparison with adolescents. Psychopharmacology (Berlin) 231,
1615e1626.

Spanagel, R., Heilig, M., 2005. Addiction and its brain science. Addiction

100, 1813e1822.

Spanagel, R., Holter, S.M., 1999. Long-term alcohol self-administration
with repeated alcohol deprivation phases: an animal model of alco-
holism? Alcohol and Alcoholism 34, 231e243.

Spanagel, R., Vengeliene, V., 2013. New pharmacological

treatment
strategies for relapse prevention. Current Topics in Behavioral Neu-
rosciences 13, 583e609.

Spanagel, R., Montkowski, A., Allingham, K., Stohr, T., Shoaib, M.,
Holsboer, F., Landgraf, R., 1995. Anxiety: a potential predictor of
vulnerability to the initiation of ethanol self-administration in rats.
Psychopharmacology (Berlin) 122, 369e373.

Spanagel, R., Pendyala, G., Abarca, C., Zghoul, T., Sanchis-Segura, C.,
Magnone, M.C., Lascorz, J., Depner, M., Holzberg, D., Soyka, M.,
Schreiber, S., Matsuda, F., Lathrop, M., Schumann, G., Albrecht, U.,
2005. The clock gene Per2 inﬂuences the glutamatergic system and
modulates alcohol consumption. Nature Medicine 11, 35e42.

Spanagel, R., Noori, H.R., Heilig, M., 2014a. Stress and alcohol in-
teractions: animal studies and clinical signiﬁcance. Trends in Neuro-
science 37, 219e227.

Spanagel, R., Vengeliene, V., Jandeleit, B., Fischer, W.N., Grindstaff, K.,
Zhang, X., Gallop, M.A., Krstew, E.V., Lawrence, A.J., Kiefer, F.,
2014b. Acamprosate produces its anti-relapse effects via calcium.
Neuropsychopharmacology 39, 783e791.

Spanagel, R., 2003. The role of the glutamatergic system in alcohol
addiction. Fortschritte der Neurologie Psychiatrie 71 (Suppl. 1),
S33eS35.

Spanagel, R., 2009. Alcoholism: a systems approach from molecular
physiology to addictive behavior. Physiological Reviews 89, 649e705.
Squire, L.R., Kandel, E.R., 2009. Memory: From Mind to Molecules.

Roberts & Company.

Stein, J.S., Johnson, P.S., Renda, C.R., Smits, R.R., Liston, K.J.,
Shahan, T.A., Madden, G.J., 2013. Early and prolonged exposure to
reward delay: effects on impulsive choice and alcohol
self-
administration in male rats. Experimental and Clinical Psychophar-
macology 21, 172e180.

Stephens, D.N., Duka, T., Crombag, H.S., Cunningham, C.L., Heilig, M.,
Crabbe, J.C., 2010. Reward sensitivity: issues of measurement, and
achieving consilience between human and animal phenotypes.
Addiction Biology 15, 145e168.

Stewart, J., de Wit, H., Eikelboom, R., 1984. Role of unconditioned and
conditioned drug effects in the self-administration of opiates and
stimulants. Psychological Review 91, 251e268.

Stuber, G.D., Sparta, D.R., Stamatakis, A.M., van Leeuwen, W.A.,
Hardjoprajitno, J.E., Cho, S., Tye, K.M., Kempadoo, K.A., Zhang, F.,
Deisseroth, K., Bonci, A., 2011. Excitatory transmission from the
amygdala to nucleus accumbens facilitates reward seeking. Nature
475, 377e380.

Sutker, P.B., Archer, R.P., Allain, A.N., 1978. Drug abuse patterns, per-
sonality characteristics, and relationships with sex, race, and sensation
seeking.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 46,
1374e1378.

Tetrault, J.M., Desai, R.A., Becker, W.C., Fiellin, D.A., Concato, J.,
Sullivan, L.E., 2008. Gender and non-medical use of prescription
opioids:
results from a national US survey. Addiction 103,
258e268.

Thanos, P.K., Tucci, A., Stamos,

J., Robison, L., Wang, G.J.,
Anderson, B.J., Volkow, N.D., 2010. Chronic forced exercise during
adolescence decreases cocaine conditioned place preference in Lewis
rats. Behavioural Brain Research 215, 77e82.

Thiel, K.J., Okun, A.C., Neisewander, J.L., 2008. Social

reward-
conditioned place preference: a model revealing an interaction be-
tween cocaine and social context rewards in rats. Drug and Alcohol
Dependence 96, 202e212.

Thiel, K.J., Sanabria, F., Neisewander, J.L., 2009. Synergistic interaction
between nicotine and social rewards in adolescent male rats. Psy-
chopharmacology (Berlin) 204, 391e402.

Tidey,

cocaine

J.W., Miczek, K.A., 1997. Acquisition of

self-
administration after social stress: role of accumbens dopamine. Psy-
chopharmacology (Berlin) 130, 203e212.

Tiffany, S.T., 1990. A cognitive model of drug urges and drug-use
behavior: role of automatic and nonautomatic processes. Psychologi-
cal Review 97, 147e168.

Timpl, P., Spanagel, R., Sillaber, I., Kresse, A., Reul, J.M., Stalla, G.K.,
Blanquet, V., Steckler, T., Holsboer, F., Wurst, W., 1998. Impaired stress
response and reduced anxiety in mice lacking a functional corticotropin-
releasing hormone receptor 1. Nature Genetics 19, 162e166.

Todd, T.P., Winterbauer, N.E., Bouton, M.E., 2012. Contextual control of
appetite. Renewal of inhibited food-seeking behavior in sated rats after
extinction. Appetite 58, 484e489.

Tsai, G., Gastfriend, D.R., Coyle, J.T., 1995. The glutamatergic basis of

human alcoholism. American Journal of Psychiatry 152, 332.

Tzschentke, T.M., 2007. Measuring reward with the conditioned place
preference (CPP) paradigm: update of the last decade. Addiction
Biology 12, 227e462.

Van Etten, M.L., Anthony, J.C., 2001. Male-female differences in transi-
tions from ﬁrst drug opportunity to ﬁrst use: searching for subgroup
variation by age, race, region, and urban status. Journal of Women’s
Health and Gender-Based Medicine 10, 797e804.

Vanderschuren, L.J., Ahmed, S.H., 2013. Animal studies of addictive
in Medicine 3,

behavior. Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives
a011932.

Vanderschuren, L.J., Everitt, B.J., 2004. Drug seeking becomes compulsive
after prolonged cocaine self-administration. Science 305, 1017e1019.
Vengeliene, V., Bachteler, D., Danysz, W., Spanagel, R., 2005. The role of the
NMDA receptor in alcohol relapse: a pharmacological mapping study
using the alcohol deprivation effect. Neuropharmacology 48, 822e829.
Vengeliene, V., Bilbao, A., Molander, A., Spanagel, R., 2008. Neuro-
pharmacology of alcohol addiction. British Journal of Pharmacology
154, 299e315.

Vengeliene, V., Bilbao, A., Spanagel, R., 2014. The alcohol deprivation
effect model for studying relapse behavior: a comparison between rats
and mice. Alcohol 48, 313e320.

Ventura, R., Morrone, C., Puglisi-Allegra, S., 2007. Prefrontal/accumbal
catecholamine system determines motivational salience attribution to
both reward- and aversion-related stimuli. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 104,
5181e5186.

Vidal-Infer, A., Arenas, M.C., Daza-Losada, M., Aguilar, M.A.,
Minarro, J., Rodriguez-Arias, M., 2012. High novelty-seeking predicts
greater sensitivity to the conditioned rewarding effects of cocaine.
Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior 102, 124e132.

Volkow, N.D., Morales, M., 2015. The brain on drugs: from reward to

addiction. Cell 162, 712e725.

Volkow, N.D., Fowler, J.S., Wang, G.J., Hitzemann, R., Logan, J.,
Schlyer, D.J., Dewey, S.L., Wolf, A.P., 1993. Decreased dopamine
D2 receptor availability is associated with reduced frontal metabolism
in cocaine abusers. Synapse 14, 169e177.

The Diversity of Addiction Chapter | 31 555

Volkow, N.D., Wang, G.J., Fowler, J.S., Gatley, S.J., Ding, Y.S.,
Logan, J., Dewey, S.L., Hitzemann, R., Lieberman, J., 1996.
Relationship between psychostimulant-induced “high” and dopa-
mine transporter occupancy. Proceedings of the National Acad-
emy of Sciences of
the United States of America 93,
10388e10392.

Volkow, N.D., Wang, G.J., Fowler, J.S., Logan, J., Gatley, S.J.,
Hitzemann, R., Chen, A.D., Dewey, S.L., Pappas, N., 1997.
Decreased striatal dopaminergic responsiveness in detoxiﬁed cocaine-
dependent subjects. Nature 386, 830e833.

Volkow, N.D., Wang, G.J., Fowler, J.S., Logan, J., Gatley, S.J., Wong, C.,
Hitzemann, R., Pappas, N.R., 1999. Reinforcing effects of psychos-
timulants in humans are associated with increases in brain dopamine
and occupancy of D(2) receptors. Journal of Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics 291, 409e415.

Volkow, N.D., Wang, G.J., Ma, Y., Fowler, J.S., Zhu, W., Maynard, L.,
Telang, F., Vaska, P., Ding, Y.S., Wong, C., Swanson, J.M., 2003.
Expectation enhances the regional brain metabolic and the reinforcing
effects of stimulants in cocaine abusers. Journal of Neuroscience 23,
11461e11468.

Volkow, N.D., Wang, G.J., Telang, F., Fowler, J.S., Logan, J., Jayne, M.,
Ma, Y., Pradhan, K., Wong, C., 2007. Profound decreases in dopa-
mine release in striatum in detoxiﬁed alcoholics: possible orbitofrontal
involvement. Journal of Neuroscience 27, 12700e12706.

Volpicelli, J.R., Ulm, R.R., Hopson, N., 1990. The bidirectional effects of
shock on alcohol preference in rats. Alcoholism: Clinical and
Experimental Research 14, 913e916.

Walker, Q.D., Schramm-Sapyta, N.L., Caster,

J.M., Waller, S.T.,
Brooks, M.P., Kuhn, C.M., 2009. Novelty-induced locomotion is
positively associated with cocaine ingestion in adolescent rats; anxiety
is correlated in adults. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior 91,
398e408.

Wang, X., Mozhui, K., Li, Z., Mulligan, M.K., Ingels, J.F., Zhou, X.,
Hori, R.T., Chen, H., Cook, M.N., Williams, R.W., Lu, L., 2012.
A promoter polymorphism in the Per3 gene is associated with alcohol
and stress response. Translational Psychiatry 2, e73.

Wilhelm, C.J., Mitchell, S.H., 2008. Rats bred for high alcohol drinking
are more sensitive to delayed and probabilistic outcomes. Genes,
Brain and Behavior 7, 705e713.

Willner, P., Hardman, S., Eaton, G., 1995. Subjective and behavioural
evaluation of cigarette cravings. Psychopharmacology (Berlin) 118,
171e177.

Wolffgramm, J., Heyne, A., 1995. From controlled drug intake to loss of
control: the irreversible development of drug addiction in the rat.
Behavioural Brain Research 70, 77e94.

Yamamoto, T., Nakahata, Y., Tanaka, M., Yoshida, M., Soma, H.,
Shinohara, K., Yasuda, A., Mamine, T., Takumi, T., 2005. Acute
physical stress elevates mouse period1 mRNA expression in mouse
peripheral tissues via a glucocorticoid-responsive element. Journal of
Biological Chemistry 280, 42036e42043.

Zacny, J.P., Bodker, B.K., de Wit, H., 1992. Effects of setting on the
subjective and behavioral effects of d-amphetamine in humans.
Addictive Behaviors 17, 27e33.

Zheng, X., Ke, X., Tan, B., Luo, X., Xu, W., Yang, X., Sui, N., 2003.
Susceptibility to morphine place conditioning: relationship with
stress-induced locomotion and novelty-seeking behavior in juvenile
and adult
rats. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior 75,
929e935.

556 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

Zilberman, M., Tavares, H., el-Guebaly, N., 2003. Gender similarities and
differences: the prevalence and course of alcohol- and other substance-
related disorders. Journal of Addictive Diseases 22, 61e74.

Zimmermann, U.S., Mick, I., Laucht, M., Vitvitskiy, V., Plawecki, M.H.,
Mann, K.F., O’Connor, S., 2009. Offspring of parents with an alcohol
levels of brain alcohol exposure in
use disorder prefer higher

experiments involving computer-assisted self-infusion of ethanol
(CASE). Psychopharmacology (Berlin) 202, 689e697.

Zlebnik, N.E., Anker, J.J., Carroll, M.E., 2012. Exercise to reduce the
escalation of cocaine self-administration in adolescent and adult rats.
Psychopharmacology (Berlin) 224, 387e400.

Chapter 32

Human Variability and the Origins
and Evolution of Language

T.W. Deacon
University of California, Berkeley, CA, United States

INTRODUCTION
Since Darwin’s time, the human language capacity has
been a perennially cited paragon of extreme complexity.
In general, evolutionary biologists assume that there is a
positive correlation between the complexity of functional
adaptive traits and the intensity and duration of natural
selection driving their evolution. Although the role of
selection is unquestionable, especially with respect
to
functional correspondences between an organism’s adap-
tations and its environment, the correlation between the
extent of selective “pressure” and the evolution of func-
tional complexity is not so clear.

The recent resurgence of interest in the contribution of
epigenetic processes to the course of evolutionary change,
popularly known as evo-devo, has begun to focus attention
on other potential sources of complex function and struc-
ture in evolution. These mostly involve the self-organizing
and intra-selection processes that underlie the epigenetic
processes critical for the development of much of the
complex structure that constitutes animal and plant bodies.
Considering the contribution of these processes for pro-
ducing complex functional organization,
in addition to
natural selection, may be particularly informative for un-
derstanding the unusual mental capacities of humans, such
as the capacity for language. This is because brain devel-
opment
is highly dependent upon multiple levels and
phases of epigenetic processes to generate its enormous
complexity. The many interdependent patterns of gene
expression, stem cell proliferation, neurogenesis, apoptosis,
cellular migration,
activity-
dependent competition for synapses that interact to pro-
duce a mammal brain constitute a large repertoire of
epigenetic “tools” available for evolution to modify.
Particularly, then, when considering the evolution of the

extension,

axonal

and

unique and complex neural functions that arose in human
evolution, it is important to consider the contributions of
these formative processes.

With respect to the evolution of the human brain and its
adaptations for language, we need to confront an additional
challenge. Although human brains are unusually large
compared to our closest primate relativesdwell beyond
predictions based on allometric scalingdthis is due to
expansion of neural populations that have unambiguous
homologs in other primates (reviewed in Deacon, 1997). In
other words, no “new” brain structures evolved to support
the distinctive cognitive capacities of the human species,
such as language. Instead, language functions have effec-
tively recruited older neural systems, previously adapted to
serve other functions.

Although it is tempting to ignore the details and simply
attribute the many cognitive differences that separate us from
our ape relatives to an enlarged brain, the distinctiveness of
human mentalitydand especially of languagedargues that
they are not merely products of increased general intelligence
(though a simple correlation between relative brain size and
general intelligence is doubtful).

The language capacity is particularly challenging to
explain because language is an emergent function, meaning
that it is not some prior function just requiring ﬁne-tuning.
Our various inherited vocalizations, such as laughter,
shrieks of fright, and cries of anguish, are comparatively
localized in their neurological control (mostly subcortical),
as are other modes of communication in animals. In com-
parison, language depends on a widely dispersed constel-
lation of cortical systems, each of which can be found in
other primate brains, but evolved for very different func-
tions. These brain systems have become collectively
recruited for
language only because their previously

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00032-6
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

557

558 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

evolved functions overlapped signiﬁcantly with some pro-
cessing demand necessitated by language, though evolved
for quite different functions altogether. Indeed, the neural
structures and circuits involved in the production and
comprehension of language are homologous to structures
found ubiquitously in most monkey and ape brains: old
structures performing unprecedented new tricks.

and

techniques

physiological

And language functions are not merely supported by a
in vivo
few language-specialized cortical areas. Recent
imaging
vastly
have
expanded the list of cortical and subcortical brain structures
involved in the production and comprehension of language.
More than a dozen cortical areas in both cerebral hemi-
spheres, and numerous subcortical nuclei have been shown
to play important roles in language processing. How could
these many diverse and previously distinct brain systems
have become so functionally intertwined and interdepen-
dent in their contributions to this unprecedented mode of
communicating?

A ﬁnal mystery concerns the extent

to which this
dominant form of human communication depends on in-
formation maintained primarily by social
transmission.
Even if we accept the claims of theories postulating an
innate universal grammar, still the vast quantity and high
ﬁdelity of the information constituting even a typical vo-
cabulary stands out as exceedingly anomalous from a
biological point of view. How did such a large fraction of
our communicative capacity wind up being ofﬂoaded onto
social transmission?

Considering the ease with which young children acquire
language and the near impossibility of this for nonhuman
species, there is little doubt that many features of human
brain organization relevant to the language capacity have
evolved under the inﬂuence of natural selection. Identifying
plausible socioecological contexts that may have selec-
tively favored the suite of adaptations relevant to language
communication has been the focus of nearly all theories of
human brain evolution.

As a counterpart to this literature, however, I will focus
instead on the possibility that certaindperhaps cruciald
contributors to this most enigmatic and diagnostic human
difference may have arisen as a consequence of epigenetic
constraints and biases rather than selection favoring adap-
tive improvement
(see also Deacon, 2009, 2010). By
refocusing attention on these less obvious contributions to
the evolutionary process, I am not suggesting that natural
selection mechanisms are inapplicable or subordinate fac-
tors in brain evolution. Only that epigenetic constraints and
biases may have contributed critical formative principles
that must be considered an integral component of a com-
plete theory of brain evolution. But the effects of stabilizing
selection may actually hinder the evolutionary “explora-
tion” of alternative functional synergies, particularly those
that
involve synergistic interactions between previously

independent adaptations. In such cases, relaxation of se-
lection may play an important role in the evolution of
complexity by enabling drift and the consequent partial
degradation of epigenetic processes. This possibility will be
explored later as it may apply to the evolution of the novel
functional synergies underlying language.

Before exploring its possible consequences for human
brain evolution, it is useful to begin with comparatively
simple and well-understood processes of evolutionary
changes due to relaxation of selection (eg, see Olson,
1999). I will begin by reviewing a few paradigm cases of
intragenomic relaxation of selection due to gene duplica-
tion. I will then extend this analysis to explore what I will
call
selection due to the
segmental duplication of body structures. Finally, I will
review examples of relaxation of selection due to extra-
somatic (eg, environmental) duplication of function. These
will provide a general perspective from which the possible
consequences of relaxed selection on human behavior and
brain evolution can be considered, with a particular
emphasis on language.

intrasomatic relaxation of

LEVELS OF RELAXED SELECTION

Intragenomic Relaxed Selection
Gene duplication is a common occurrence in the evolution
of genomes (Ohno, 1970; Ohta, 1994; Van de Peer et al.,
2001). It is probably the major source of new genes in the
course of evolution. It is also a major means by which
cooperative protein complexes arise in evolution (Orgel,
1977; Zhang, 2003). Multiple occurrences of gene dupli-
cation over the course of evolution have produced “fam-
ilies” of structurally and functionally related genes. It may
even be the case that most “new” genes arise as members of
a “lineage” of genes sharing a common ancestral gene
(Walsh, 1995; Zhang, 2003).

During gene duplication, a length of DNA is literally
copied and spliced into the chromosome nearby, possibly
as a result of uneven crossover events during meiotic
replication, viral gene insertion and excision, or some other
intrinsic or extrinsic mechanism that modiﬁes gene repli-
cation. The result of such events is that a nucleotide
sequence may be duplicated that contains intact regulatory
and coding segments for production of a functional protein.
The functional consequence is that there is now two ways
of producing the same protein and its phenotypic effect.
This redundancy can relax selection on the duplicate gene’s
function. Thus, if one of two duplicated genes acquires
mutations that degrade its phenotypic function, it will not
impact the reproduction of the organism (and that modiﬁed
copy) so long as the other copy remains intact. Moreover,
the now mutated gene can continue to acquire mutational
changes, so long as its modiﬁed phenotypic effect is not

Human Variability and the Origins and Evolution Chapter | 32 559

somehow deleterious. Such mutations will thus be effec-
tively or nearly neutral.

The typical consequence of this sort of neutrality with
respect to selection can be described as a “random walk”
away from the original function. The result is the accu-
mulation of arbitrary sequence changes at the genetic level
and a progressively degraded or dedifferentiated contribu-
tion to the phenotype. Presumably, persistent shielding
from any selection effects will eventually lead to complete
loss of function, as in pseudogenes.

This has been the fate of a very large number of genes
in the human genome, which were once associated with a
more acute olfactory sense (eg, Rouquier et al., 1998). It is
estimated that a typical mammal has on the order of 1300
genes encoding distinct olfactory receptor molecules. This
number was radically reduced both in primate and in hu-
man evolution. The human species has had roughly 60% of
these genes degrade to become pseudogenes (Gilad et al.,
2003). This clearly reﬂects very weak, to nearly nonexis-
tent, selection to maintain the numbers and diversity of
these receptor molecules.

But degradation to pseudogene status is not inevitable
for gene duplicates. Because gene duplication can involve
an already functional segment of DNA, slight degrada-
tions of its sequence may only incrementally alter its
phenotypic effects. The progressive degradation of func-
tional speciﬁcity that is likely to result can, however, be
seen as a sort of “exploration” of variants of the original
function. For example, a single protein may require
structural compromises to accommodate its multiple as-
sociations to other molecules, but multiple variant forms
may each evolve speciﬁcity for one or another of these
relationships.

In other words, the duplication, relaxation of purifying
selection, and random walk that results from gene dupli-
cation can provide a kind of exploration of the space of
possible synergistic relationships that can result from a
sort of fractionation of existing functions. This is a recipe
for increasing functional complexity (Lynch and Conery,
2003).

If the prevalence of gene duplication in animal and plant
genomes is any indication, the probability that a given
duplication will result
in a useful fragmentation of an
original function is far from zero. Gene families, consisting
of many paralogous genes (eg, derived from a common
ancestral gene), are widespread in complex organisms and
are often responsible for similar or even synergistic
phenotypic functions. To illustrate this, consider two well-
known examples.

The ﬁrst is the globin gene family, and speciﬁcally the
hemoglobins. The hemoglobin protein complex contained
in red blood cells comprises two varieties of the hemo-
globin proteindalpha and beta hemoglobindeach pro-
duced by a distinct hemoglobin gene. Two alpha- and two

beta-hemoglobin proteins ﬁt together to form a tetrahedral
complex made possible due to the complementary shapes
of
the molecular surfaces forming the interior of the
tetramer with the iron-containing oxygen-binding regions
occupying the “corners” of the tetrahedron. These two
forms of hemoglobin arose from a gene duplication event,
and the ancestral hemoglobin itself arose from duplication
of an ancestral gene for both hemoglobin and myoglobin.
Changes that increased the stability of tetrameric bind-
ing of the two hemoglobin variants appear to have been
favored by natural selection with respect to one another,
probably because of the superior oxygen transport capacity
of the tetrahedral form. In other words, in their evolutionary
random walks through different three-dimensional conﬁg-
urations, the two “sister” versions of hemoglobin retained
their oxygen-binding function while effectively “sampling”
the consequences of this secondary feature of their mo-
lecular shape “explored” via sexual recombination.

This particular combination of alpha and beta hemo-
globins is not, however, present at all stages of
the
mammalian life cycle. In the fetus of a placental mammal,
additional variant beta-hemoglobin forms are expressed,
three of which are termed gamma, delta, and epsilon he-
moglobin. These variants are expressed at different stages
of gestation, and are each coded by a different variant
duplicate of the beta form of the gene, with the entire
family present in a continuous segment of chromosome 11.
These beta-hemoglobin duplication events, which occurred
during the course of placental mammal evolution, have also
given rise to two pseudo-beta hemoglobin genes, which no
longer produce a corresponding protein. The remaining
four beta-hemoglobin genes are expressed at slightly
different times during development in the order epsilon-
gamma-delta-beta.

The functional value of this is related to the fetus’s need
to acquire oxygen from mother’s hemoglobin and yet still
transfer it from blood to its own somatic cells despite
changes in placentation and increasing body size. As a
result, embryonic and fetal hemoglobin requires a different
oxygen-binding afﬁnity over the course of gestation. At
different stages of gestation,
there will be a different
optimal balance of hemoglobin afﬁnities between mother
and
variants
expressed during different phases of gestation enable the
fetus to progressively adapt to this challenge, until at birth
beta hemoglobin becomes the predominant form produced.
Analogous to the complementarity “discovered” due to
alpha/beta duplication, these additional duplications of the
beta-hemoglobin gene led to synergies of
timing and
oxygen-binding afﬁnities that became subject to selection
in the context of internal gestation.

beta-hemoglobin

baby. The

different

In summary, spontaneous gene duplication results in
functional redundancy, thereby reducing the intensity of
purifying selection on each duplicate. Relaxation of

560 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

purifying selection allows variations to persist and accu-
mulate in one duplicate while maintaining the original
function in the other. If accumulated changes result in only
modest degradation of the original functional speciﬁcity,
there is a nonzero probability that pairings of duplicates
will occur that complement each other’s functional differ-
ences resulting in synergistic effects.

Intrasomatic Relaxed Selection
Perhaps the most dramatic example of the duplication,
masking, random walk, and functional complementation
effect is demonstrated by duplication of regulatory genes.
One consequence of this hierarchic recursive genetic rela-
tionship is that changes in one gene can inﬂuence a large
number of other genes in concert. So,
the functional
divergence and interaction effects that result from dupli-
cation of such regulatory genes can be global and systemic,
affecting complex phenotypic traits.

The classic example of regulatory gene duplication ef-
fects involves a family of genes containing a nucleotide
sequence coding for a DNA binding domain called the
homeodomain. A class of such genes called homeobox
genes are responsible for the large-scale segmental orga-
nization of animal body plans (independently discovered by
McGinnis et al., 1984; Scott and Weiner, 1984). In the fruit
ﬂy, they are called HOM genes, and their homologs in
mammals are called Hox genes (though there are a very
large number of more distantly related regulatory genes as
well). These underwent a number of duplications in the
common ancestry,
leading up to the separation of the
arthropod and vertebrate lineages. Because these genes
affect coordinated expression of large suites of other genes
(many of which also have further regulatory functions),
they play a role in producing slightly variant forms of
whole body structures in these animals.

This was ﬁrst demonstrated by recognizing that muta-
tions of these genes produce systematic variations of body
segments in ﬂies, causing out-of-place expression of
structures that normally are segment-speciﬁc, such as legs
expressed where antennae are normally produced. The
discovery that the theme-and-variation logic of the different
insect body segments was correlated with the expression of
different HOM gene duplicates expressed in that segment
has revolutionized the study of development and served as
the keystone insight solidifying the value of the evo-devo
paradigm.

Because HOM/Hox gene duplication expresses itself as
organ duplication, the logic of duplication, relaxed selec-
tion, divergence, and synergistic complementation is
expressed above the genomic level. In arthropods such as
centipedes the corresponding organs (eg, legs) of adjacent
segments are highly similar, but since adjacent legs serve
almost
they can also partially relax

identical functions,

selection on the functional speciﬁcity of one another. This
reduction of the effects of stabilizing selection can lead to
drift of features on one segment away from those on
another.

The structuralefunctional

redundancy provided by
adjacent segments minimizes the probability of catastrophic
loss of function, and it also increases the likelihood that
divergent but complementary functions can develop in
other segments. In various arthropods, such as grasshop-
pers, spiders, lobsters, ﬂies, and so forth, the different ap-
pendages with leg-like form have evolved into specialized
antennae, spinnerets, claws, and many other structures
sharing the same jointed architecture, but modiﬁed to serve
quite distinct functions.

In each of these cases, and despite their different levels
of function, the redundancy of function that results from
duplications signiﬁcantly reduces the improbability of
linkages. Because they
evolving synergistic functional
share a common ancestral
randomly variant
duplicated features of an organism potentially “explore” the
diverse dimensions of the original function. Their under-
lying commonalities also increase the probability that
variant duplicates will fractionate the original function,
thereby increasing the probability of producing synergistic
functional consequences.

function,

The way that

the resulting functional

interactions
exploit combinatorial relationships that were previously
hidden (or inaccessible because purifying selection con-
strained variation) is analogous to Conrad Waddington’s
logic of canalization, in which epigenetic interdependencies
can emerge to become selected in their own right. Like
Waddington’s (1953) notion of a “phenocopy,” a novel
functional capacity that emerges from complementary
combinatorial relationships can become selectively favored
for the synergy that results. Together these effects not only
“explore” adjacent functional possibilities and “capture”
novel higher order synergistic relationships, but they pro-
vide an evolutionary cycle that can generate progressively
more complex forms of adaptation, as each stabilized
synergistic relationship can supply the substrates for new
duplication effects.

Extrasomatic Relaxed Selection
Analogously, ecological and social
factors can also
contribute functional redundancies that relax selection on
selected traits enabling them to vary away from their
original speciﬁcity, potentially shifting to other related
functions or losing function altogether. Because the dupli-
cated function is in this case extrinsic to the organism, loss
of an endogenous capacity requires maintaining access to
this extrinsic factor that now provides it. This may result in
a shift of selection in favor of any traits that aid in main-
taining this relationship.

Human Variability and the Origins and Evolution Chapter | 32 561

the ﬁnal catalyst

A classic example that bridges between the genetic and
environmental effects of relaxed selection is the loss of the
capacity to synthesize ascorbic acid (vitamin C) during the
evolution of the anthropoid primates. Monkeys and apes,
including humans, are among some of the very few
mammals that must obtain ascorbic acid from dietary
sources (Chatterjee, 1973). Most mammals synthesize
their own ascorbic acid. This is the case for rats. In 1994,
Japanese researchers (Nishikimi et al., 1994) sequenced
the gene on chromosome 8 of the rat genome that codes
for
in the metabolic pathway that
endogenously produces ascorbic acid (called l-gulano-
lactone oxidase, abbreviated GULO). They then used the
sequence from this gene to probe the genomes of other
species, including Homo sapiens. What they found was
surprising. Although humans are unable to synthesize
their own ascorbic acid, the human genome includes a
pseudogene that is homologous to the rat GULO. The
GULO pseudogene in humans has accumulated consid-
erable mutational damage, including a frame shift muta-
tion, deletion of a number of exons, and the random
insertion of “stop” codons.

This is evidence that the GULO gene in anthropoid
primates has long been freed from the stabilizing inﬂuence
of natural selection, and that the sequence has effectively
taken a random walk, resulting in complete loss of function.
So what made it functionality redundant and allowed it to
degrade to this extent?

The origin of the anthropoid primates was associated
with a shift from nocturnal insectivory to diurnal frugivory,
as indicated by changes in the size of the orbits and a
change in tooth morphology in the primate fossil record.
The evolutionary implication is that at this point regular
foraging on fruit introduced a semi-reliable extrinsic source
of ascorbic acid into the diet. Under these conditions, se-
lection stabilizing the function of the GULO gene would
have been relaxed by this acquired behavioral adaptation
and the ascorbic acid rich niche that was thereby created.
The eventual complete loss of function of the GULO gene
appears to have been the result, along with the need to
acquire ascorbic acid through diet.

So, the relaxation of selection on this gene would have
inevitably shifted selection to affect a variety of other traits
that help to maintain the availability of this now essential
nutrient. The capacity to judge the ripeness of fruit via the
evolution of three-color vision, or to ﬁnd the sugar-rich and
slightly acidic content of fruit attractive due to changes in
taste receptors, or to metabolize the sugars and tolerate the
ethanol that ripe fruits contain might each have become
important capacities subject to natural selection as a result.
In this way the extrasomatic duplication and degradation of
this gene’s function would have shifted selection onto a
diverse suite of traits that were previously unrelated to the
antioxidant functions of ascorbic acid.

RELAXED SELECTION AND BRAIN
EVOLUTION

Domestication and Relaxed Sexual
Selection
The discontinuities between the basal
forebrain and
midbrain nuclei that control mammalian vocal calls and
the diversely distributed cortical control of human speech
and language comprehension suggest that language abil-
ities were unlikely just the result of selection for more
sophisticated vocal communication alone. Moreover,
the synergistic functional
interdependence among the
diverse cortical systems recruited for language functions
can only have been honed for its contributions to lan-
guage if this synergy was already in place. It is with
respect to this conundrum of accounting for the emer-
gence of a complex novel function before there can be
selection to ﬁne-tune it that a consideration of relaxed
selection may be helpful.

Recent

shift

investigation of a parallel

in both
complexity and neural substrate in birdsong may be able to
shed some light on this. In a comparative study of a long-
domesticated songbird, the Bengalese Finch, and its wild
cousin, the White-Rump Munia, it was discovered that the
domesticated lineage was a far more facile song-learner
with a much more complex and ﬂexible song than its
wild cousin. This was despite the fact that the Bengalese
Finch was bred in captivity for coloration, not singing
(Okanoya, 2004). The domestic/wild difference of song
complexity and song learning in these close ﬁnch breeds
parallels what is found in comparisons between songbird
species that are social song-learners and those that are non-
learners. This difference correlates with a much more
extensive neural control of song in birds that
learn a
complex and variable song by listening to adult singers.
Despite minimal neuroanatomical differences between
these breeds, the domesticate ﬁnch song depends on many
more forebrain structures than does the singing of its wild
cousin.

The fact that this behavioral and neural complexity can
arise spontaneously without speciﬁc breeding for song
complexity is a surprising ﬁnding since it
is generally
assumed that song complexity evolves under the inﬂuence
of intense sexual selection and selection for species iden-
tiﬁcation in the wild. These sources of selection would have
been relaxed by domestication. One intriguing interpreta-
tion is that the relaxation of natural and sexual selection on
singing paradoxically was responsible for song elaboration
in Bengalese Finches. In brief, with song becoming irrel-
evant
territorial defense, mate
attraction, predator avoidance, and so on, degrading mu-
tations and existing deleterious alleles affecting the speci-
ﬁcation of the wild stereotypic song would not have been

to species identiﬁcation,

562 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

weeded out. The result would likely be degradation of
innate biases controlling song production.

Degradation of innate song structure constraints would
result in both a more variable song and songs that are more
susceptible to nongenetic inﬂuences. On the one hand, if
song structure is no longer strictly controlled by motor
biases and an innately pre-speciﬁed auditory song template,
other linked brain systems could begin to play a biasing
role in song production. With innate sensori-motor biases
weakened, auditory experience, social context,
learning
biases, and attentional factors can all begin to inﬂuence
singing. Since learning from social experience can play a
much larger role in song structure once innate constraints
are relaxed, a number of forebrain systems involved in
motor learning (analogous to premotor cortex and striatum
in mammals brains) have become involved. The result is
that the domestic song is more variable, more complicated,
and more inﬂuenced by social experience.

Language Analogs to the Changes in Finch
Song Control
The change in song control as a result of relaxed selection
in the domesticate ﬁnch is paralleled by a number of fea-
tures associated with the shift from innate calls to language
in the hominin lineage. Like the domesticated ﬁnch, many
more brain systems
inﬂuence human communicative
behavior than in the communicative behaviors of our close
primate relatives. Human language evolution involved a
shift from largely innate subcortically mediated vocal and
gestural communications to a primarily cortically mediated
and more widely distributed interdependent system of brain
regions. In addition, such as the ﬁnch, there has been a
signiﬁcant shift from a genetically constrained behavioral
capacity to a comparatively ﬂexible behavioral capacity in
which a signiﬁcant fraction of structural speciﬁcation is
sociallydnot geneticallydtransmitted.

These analogies suggest a novel approach to the riddle
of explaining how language capacities could have recruited
a multisystem functional synergy among cortical systems.
In both cases, it seems likely that a reduction in the innate
constraints affecting vocal communication has led to the
involvement of previously unrelated neurological systems.
Indeed, this freedom from constraint may have been an
essential precondition for being able to correlate learned
vocal behaviors with the wide diversity of objects, events,
properties, and relationships that language is capable of
referring to.

Of course the human case is unlike the ﬁnch example in
a number of important respects. Most obviously, language
provides a capacity for symbolic communication, whereas
birdsong primarily provides indices of sex, maturity, spe-
cies identity, and so forth. And, perhaps more importantly,
the novel synergistic neurological relationships that support

language functions have almost certainly have been subject
to selection for their contribution to language and its central
role in promoting cooperative social organization during
recent hominin evolution. The ﬂexible socially-acquired
songs of the domesticated ﬁnch are, in contrast, not obvi-
ously subject
to selection to augment and ﬁne-tune
communicative functions (though this is a topic that
could be explored in future research).

Probably the clearest evidence for a relaxation effect is
provided by infant babbling in humans. This unprecedented
tendency to freely play with vocal sound production occurs
with minimal innate constraint on what sound can follow
what sound (except for physical constraints on vocal sound
generation). Babbling also occurs in contexts of compara-
tively low arousal, whereas laughter, crying, or shrieking
are each produced in comparatively speciﬁc high arousal
states and with speciﬁc contextual associations. This
reduction of innate arousal and contextual constraint on
vocal communication opens the door for numerous other
inﬂuences to begin to play a role.

Other behavioral parallels include the following: freeing
vocalization from an association with speciﬁc emotional
states (as remains the case of non-language communica-
tions such as laughter and sobbing); equalization of tran-
sition biases from sound to sound (also highly constrained
in human innate vocalizations); an increased inﬂuence of
auditory learning for vocalization, which has become an
indispensable feature of human language transmission since
the vocal repertoire that deﬁnes a given language is almost
entirely determined by social transmission; the reduction of
human innate call types and communicative speciﬁcity,
along with the development of human-speciﬁc “calls” (like
laughter and sobbing) and prosodic features of speech that
complement
language by
providing emotional/arousal information.

the symbolic functions of

The extensive dependency of language on socially
transmitted information suggests that a signiﬁcant degree of
genetic control of brain development relevant to language
has also likely been “ofﬂoaded” to this extrinsic source of
information. This hypothesis is, of course, almost diamet-
rically opposite to claims that the human language capacity
depends on highly specialized innate constraints on possible
syntactic structures, as was originally proposed by the
linguist Noam Chomsky (1968). However, a signiﬁcant role
for loss of innate speciﬁcation during the evolution of the
language capacity is not inconsistent with the presence of a
wide array of ancillary adaptive changes in brain function
that contribute to the ease of language acquisition and use.
Similar to the ancillary adaptations for color vision and taste
preferences that evolved in response to primate dependence
on extrinsically provided ascorbic acid,
to a
dependence on socially transmitted vocal communication
has almost certainly had secondary reorganizing effects on
the evolution of many other brain functions.

the shift

Human Variability and the Origins and Evolution Chapter | 32 563

Ancillary adaptations that may have evolved to help
stabilize and maintain this extrinsic epigenetic information
source may include an enhancement of verbal short-term
memory, a more developed capacity for transfer learning,
a strong predisposition to engage in vocal mimicry,
enhancement of
joint attention-recruitment by gaze-
following and pointing behavior, and an increased capac-
ity for empathy and for inferring the mental states of others.
These and other changes in cognitive functions that support
this novel communicative capacity need not be language-
speciﬁc to contribute synergistically to making it a highly
robust and canalized mental function. Yet, they can all be
counted as part of a suite of “language adaptations.” Once
the reproductive advantages of symbolically transmitted
knowledge and social organization became reliable, there
would certainly have been selection favoring not only the
stabilization of this unprecedented neural synergy but se-
lection favoring any of these ancillary traits that could help
to optimize language acquisition and function. Seen from
this vantage point, many converging factors appear likely to
have played a formative role in the evolution of this unique
social-cognitive-biological phenomenon once this novel
synergy became available.

CONCLUSIONS AND POSSIBLE
IMPLICATIONS
So what follows from the possibility that the unique com-
bination of traits that support our language capacities and
our dependence on social transmission are consequences of
both relaxed selection and shift of selective pressure onto
new functions? Considering the possibility of a signiﬁcant
role for relaxed selection in our evolutionary past forces us
to consider that we may not be genetically augmented apes
with numerous genetic and neural improvements that make
us better than our cousins. It suggests rather that many
features we have considered adaptive “improvements”
might better be understood as consequences of degenera-
tive processes producing greater ﬂexibility and less
dependence on genetic control.

For paleontologists, geneticists, and anthropologists,
this analysis also poses some interesting new research
questions. What conditions or circumstances in hominin
evolution could have been the source for relaxation of se-
lection leading to this shift of function? What sort of ge-
netic evidence is there to support relaxation of selection
rather than increased directional selection on language
functions? And what might be the secondary consequences
of an evolutionary past characterized by extensive relaxa-
tion of selection and the ofﬂoading of once innate capac-
ities onto social transmission processes?

In the case of the domesticated ﬁnch,

in
neurological control of vocalization and the ofﬂoading of
control of song structure to social transmission processes

the shift

is hypothesized to be the result of relaxation of sexual
selection. Evidence for a major shift in the role of sexual
selection in hominin evolution is provided by the signiﬁ-
cant reduction in sexual dimorphism in body size during
the transition from Australopithecus to Homo. This
roughly followed the emergence of the ﬁrst Oldowan
stone tool technology two and a half million years ago, as
well as the ﬁrst signiﬁcant increase in relative brain size
above typical ape levels. In my 1997 book, The Symbolic
Species, I argued that foraging for animal remains with
stone tools required a form of cooperative behavior that
was able to control
the intrinsically disruptive innate
predispositions associated with mate competition and
offspring care. Ofﬂoading some degree of control over
these social-sexual behaviors onto socially transmitted
constraints would thereby have initiated a phase of relaxed
sexual selection.

There is also genetic evidence for relaxed selection in
our lineage. For example, in an analysis of nearly 14,000
loci, Bakewell et al. (2007) found that more genes under-
went positive selection in chimpanzee evolution than in
human evolution, and that “. despite a generally higher
nonsynonymous substitution rate in humans. these ob-
servations are explainable by the reduced efﬁcacy of natural
selection in humans.” Wang et al. (2006) identiﬁed “. 80
nonprocessed pseudogenes that were inactivated in the
human lineage after its separation from the chimpanzee
lineage.” They ﬁnd that some of these loss-of-function ef-
fects have been subject to positive selection and speculate
on the way these losses may be supportive of a “less-is-
more” adaptive response. And McLean et al. (2011) re-
ported that there has been extensive human-speciﬁc loss of
non-coding regulatory regions of the human genome that
are highly conserved in chimpanzees and other mammals.
They identify 511 such deletions in humans that are
enriched near genes associated with hormonal and neural
functions, and which are distributed across all human
chromosomes (with the exception of the Y chromosome).
This suggests that there has been a signiﬁcant loss and/or
shift of regulatory control within the human genome as
compared to our primate and mammal relatives. These
ﬁndings are suggestive evidence for widespread relaxation
of selection in the human lineage. It is particularly inter-
esting from our perspective to note that a large fraction of
these deletions are associated with genes involved in hor-
monal and neurological functions.

Finally, considering the synergistic consequences of
intrasomatic relaxed selection effects due to organ-level
duplication, discussed earlier,
is not unreasonable to
suggest
that human cortical expansion itself may have
contributed to a relaxation-synergy effect.
Increase in
cortical area sizes could have enabled a related form of
functional duplication that enabled increased fractionation
and diversiﬁcation of existing functions without loss of

it

564 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

processing efﬁciency. This too could have been an aid to
the evolution of novel synergistic linkages among cortical
functions along with increased ﬂexibility and variability. In
this respect, there is also recent evidence for relaxed genetic
control of cortical organization in human brains compared
with chimpanzees (eg, Gómez-Roblesa et al., 2015).

Would it be too humbling to see ourselves as some-
what genetically degenerate, neurologically dediffer-
entiated apes? Reframing humanness
in biologically
degenerate terms does not, as we have shown, deny that
we are in many respects more complex, both neurologi-
cally and behaviorally than other ape species. Moreover,
the dedifferentiating effects of relaxed selection may help
to explain certain other enigmatic features of human na-
ture, such as our susceptibility to manipulation by sym-
bolic
and cultural
traditions. For example, the nearly universal determination
of human reproductive arrangements and mate choice by
cultural
tradition and kinship agreements suggests that
even a considerable fraction of control over our social-
sexual behaviors has been ofﬂoaded to socially trans-
mitted symbolic processes.

instilled by religious

inﬂuences

REFERENCES

Bakewell, M., Shi, P., Zhang, J., 2007. More genes underwent positive
selection in chimpanzee evolution than in human evolution. PNAS
104, 7489e7494.

Chatterjee, I.B., 1973. Evolution and the biosynthesis of ascorbic acid.

Science 182, 1271e1272.

Chomsky, N., 1968. Language and Mind. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,

Inc., New York.

Deacon, T., 1997. The Symbolic Species: The Coevolution of Language

and the Brain. W. W. Norton & Co, New York.

Deacon, T., 2009. Relaxed selection and the role of epigenesis in the
evolution of
J.H.,
Robinson, S.R. (Eds.), Oxford Handbook of Developmental Behav-
ioral Neuroscience.

In: Blumberg, M.S., Freeman,

language.

Deacon, T., 2010. A role for relaxed selection in the evolution of the

language capacity. PNAS 107, 9000e9006.

Gilad, Y., Man, O., Paabo, S., Lancet, D., 2003. Human speciﬁc loss of

olfactory receptor genes. PNAS 100, 3324e3327.

Gómez-Robles, A., Hopkins, W.D., Schapiro, J., Sherwood, C.C., 2015.
Relaxed genetic control of cortical organization in human brains
compared with chimpanzees. PNAS 112, 14799e14804.

Lynch, M., Conery, J.S., 2003. The origin of genome complexity. Science

302, 1401e1404.

McGinnis, W., Levine, M.S., Hafen, E., Kuroiwa, A., Gehring, W.J., 1984.
A conserved DNA sequence in homoeotic genes of the Drosophila
Antennapedia and bithorax complexes. Nature 308, 428e433.

McLean, C.Y., Reno, P.L., Pollen, A.A., Bassan, A.I., Capellini, T.D.,
et al., 2011. Human-speciﬁc loss of regulatory DNA and the evolution
of human-speciﬁc traits. Nature 471, 216e219.

Nishikimi, M., Fukuyama, R., Minoshima, S., Shimizu, N., Yagi, K.,
1994. Cloning and chromosomal mapping of the human nonfunctional
gene for L-gulono-gammalactone oxidase, the enzyme for L-ascorbic
acid biosynthesis missing in man. The Journal of Biological Chem-
istry 269, 13685e13688.

Ohno, S., 1970. Evolution by Gene Duplication. Springer, Berlin.
Ohta, T., 1994. Further examples of evolution by gene duplication revealed

through DNA sequence comparisons. Genetics 138, 1331e1337.

Okanoya, K., 2004. The Bengalese Finch: a window on the behavioral
neurobiology of birdsong syntax. Annals of the New York Academy
of Sciences 1016, 724e735.

Olson, M.V., 1999. When less is more: gene loss as an engine of evolu-
tionary change. The American Journal of Human Genetics 64, 18e23.
Orgel, L.E., 1977. Gene duplication and the origin of proteins with novel

functions. Journal of Theoretical Biology 67, 773.

Rouquier, S., Taviaux, S., Trask, B., Brand-Arpon, V., van den Engh, G.,
et al., 1998. Distribution of olfactory receptor genes in the human
genome. Nature Genetics 18, 243e250.

Scott, M.P., Weiner, A.J., 1984. Structural relationships among genes that
control development: sequence homology between the Antennapedia,
tarazu loci of Drosophila. PNAS 81,
Ultrabithorax, and fushi
4115e4119.

Van de Peer, Y., Taylor, J.S., Braasch, I., Meyer, A., 2001. The ghost of
selection past: rates of evolution and functional divergence of anciently
duplicated genes. Journal of Molecular Evolution 53, 436e446.

Waddington, C.H., 1953. Genetic assimilation of an acquired character.

Evolution 7, 118e126.

Walsh, J.B., 1995. How often do duplicated genes evolve new functions?

Genetics 139, 421e428.

Wang, X., Grus, W.E., Zhang, J., 2006. Gene losses during human origins.

PloS Biology 4, 366e377.

Zhang, J., 2003. Evolution by gene duplication: an update. Trends in

Ecology & Evolution 18, 292e298.

Chapter 33

Human Evolution and Progress

F.J. Ayala
University of California, Irvine, CA, United States

INTRODUCTION

Progress presents itself as an obvious attribute of the
evolutionary process. Early organisms that lived on earth
were no more complex than some bacteria, archaea,
and blue-green algae. Three billion years later,
their
descendants include orchids, bees, peacocks, and human
beings, which appear to be more complex, advanced, or
progressive than their primitive ancestors.

Upon reﬂection the issue becomes less obvious, because
what do we mean when we say there has been progress in
the evolutionary process? Some evolutionary lineages do
not appear progressive at all: living bacteria are not very
different from their ancestors of two or three billion years
earlier. In addition, extinction can hardly be progressive;
yet, most evolutionary lineages have become extinct. Still
more, organisms may be more progressive than others with
respect
to other
features. For example, bacteria are able to synthesize all
their own components and obtain the energy they need for
living from inorganic compounds; human beings depend on
other organisms.

to some features but not with respect

Aristotle and other philosophers of classical Greece put
forward the notion that living organisms can be classiﬁed in
a hierarchy going from lower to higher forms. A similar
view is implicit in the Bible. The creation of the world as
described in the book of Genesis contains the explicit
notion that some organisms are higher than others, and it
implies that living things can be arranged in a sequence
from the lowest to the highest, which is man. The Bible’s
narrative of
the creation reﬂects the common sense
impression that earthworms are lower than ﬁsh and birds,
and the latter lower than man. The idea of a “ladder of life”
rising from amoeba to man is present, explicitly or
implicitly, in all pre-evolutionary biology (Lovejoy, 1960
[1936]).

The theory of evolution adds the dimension of time
and genetic continuity, or history,
to the hierarchical
classiﬁcation of living things. The transition from bacteria
to humans could now be seen as a natural, progressive
development through time from simple to gradually more
complex organisms. The expansion and diversiﬁcation of
life could also be judged as progress; some form of advance
seems obvious in the transition from one or only a few
kinds of living things to the several million species living
today.

The idea of progress, applied to human history or to the
world of nature, does not appear until the Renaissance. The
philosophers of ancient Greece, including Aristotle, saw the
world in terms of eternal cycles. It is only in the 16th
century that appear the ﬁrst ideas about the possibility of
progress in the history of the world and of humankind. The
idea of progress, associated to the increase in knowledge,
becomes ﬁrst entertained at that time. The idea of progress
becomes associated with the notions of change, develop-
ment, or direction (Bury, 1932).

THE LADDER OF LIFE

Aristotle (384e322 BCE) is ﬁttingly recognized as one of
the great philosophers of Greek Antiquity, known for his
works on logic, epistemology, metaphysics, ethics, and
politics. He qualiﬁes as well as a great scientist, the ﬁrst
biologist in the history of the world, who dissected a variety
of animals and described in detail the development of the
chicken embryo from egg to hatching. During his three
years in the Aegean island of Lesbos (345e342) he
investigated all sorts of marine and lacustrine organisms,
from coral reefs and mollusks to ﬁsh, as well as land
animals. In his numerous zoological works, such as The
Generation of Animals and others, Aristotle mentions 500
animal species, a large number relatively to the knowledge

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00033-8
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

565

566 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

of the time (Leroi, 2014). Aristotle developed a system of
classiﬁcation of animals, recognizing nine groups included
in two large categories: animals with blood and without
blood. He classiﬁed the animals with blood into ﬁve
groups: mammals, birds, amphibians, reptiles, and ﬁshes
and divided the animals without blood into cephalopods,
crustaceans, insects, and a fourth group that would include
the rest of the animals. Aristotle’s classiﬁcation compares
favorably with the classiﬁcation by Linnaeus, 21 centuries
later, who recognized only six kinds of animals: mammals,
birds,
insects, and worms. Aristotle
considered some animals more complex or more advanced
than others, but he believed in the immutability of species,
not in their evolution, and thus he did not see the difference
between lower and higher animals as the outcome of a
process of change or progress over time.

reptiles, ﬁshes,

Among the philosophers of ancient Greece, some traces
of evolutionary thinking can be found in Anaximander
(610ec.547 BCE), who proposed that animals could be
transformed from one kind into another, but without
implying that the changes would represent advancement or
what we might now call progress. A shadow of natural
selection can be imagined in Empedocles (490e430 BCE),
who speculated that animals would be made up of various
combinations of preexisting parts, so that successful
combinations would result in the animals we know, while
unsuccessful ones would not persist.

Judaism, Christianity, and Islam account for the origin
of the world as the handiwork of an omniscient God. The
Bible speaks of higher and lower organisms and manifests
humans at the top of all living organisms. Some early
church fathers, like Gregor of Nazianzus (c.329e390) and
Augustine (354e430) maintained that not all species of
plants and animals were created as such by God; rather,
some had developed in historical
times from creatures
created earlier by God. Their motivation was not scientiﬁc
but religious. Some species may have come into existence
only after the Noachian ﬂood because it would have been
impossible to hold representatives of all species in a single
vessel, such as Noah’s Arch.

Aristotle’s notion that there is a sort of a natural ladder,
a gradual succession of increasing complexity in the living
world, from plants to animals to humans, was elaborated by
Albert Magnus, around 1260, “the ﬁrst modern European to
study Aristotle’s zoology” (Leroi, 2014, p. 276). Albert’s
notion that nature proceeds by small
steps became
commonplace by the early 17th century and prevailed into
the 18th century. It became for Linnaeus in his Philosophia
botanica of 1751 a methodological principle: natura non
facit saltum, that is, nature does not make jumps. The
notion that there is a Ladder of Nature or Chain of Being
became temporalized, according to Arthur O. Lovejoy, and
“must perforce be reinterpreted so as to admit of progress in
general” (Lovejoy, 1960 [1936], p. 246).

THE IDEA OF PROGRESS

In the 17th century, Francis Bacon (1561e1626) formu-
lated a program for the advancement of knowledge, the
notion that progress in knowledge could contribute to
improve the human condition. The true purpose of
knowledge, according to Bacon, was to improve human
life, to provide new inventions and developments, and in
the case of the natural sciences, to deﬁne the supremacy of
human life over the rest of nature. The true purpose of
knowledge is not to pleasure the mind, or to establish
the superiority of some individuals over others,
their
reputation, or power, but rather to advance the beneﬁt,
power, and domain of humanity over the rest of the
universe. Bacon advances a notion of progress focused
upon the human capacity to advance knowledge that
would serve for mankind’s beneﬁt. Starting with the
evidence provided by our senses, and taking advantage of
technological
that
knowledge could become increasingly more certain. The
purpose of technology is to increase human knowledge
and thus contribute to mankind’s progress. These ideas
would become the core of a general doctrine of progress
that would be developed over the ensuing centuries (Ruse,
1996).

developments, Bacon

thought

The Aristotelian and traditional notion that organisms
can be classiﬁed in a hierarchy from lower to higher
becomes further entrenched in the 17th and 18th centuries:
the notion of a scala naturae, ranging from the inanimate
world to the lower and then the higher animals and humans
(Lovejoy, 1936). The chain of being is, nevertheless,
perceived as static, that it was created as perfect so that any
modiﬁcation would be considered as harm or deterioration.
Gradually, however, in the late 18th to early 19th century
the notion of human progressdepitomized by Condorcet’s
Sketch for a Historical Picture of
the
Human Mind (1795) in France, Adam Smith’s The Wealth
of Nations (1776) in Britain, and G.W.F. Hegel’s Philos-
ophy of Nature (1817) in Germanydbecame extended to
the world of life, so that some organisms are considered
more advanced or more progressive than others.

the Progress of

Progress as an attribute of the living world reaches an
early climax with the publication in 1809 of Philosophie
Zoologique, (“Philosophical Zoology”) by the great French
naturalist Jean-Baptiste Lamarck (1744e1829). Lamarck
proposed the ﬁrst broad theory of evolution: progress as an
immanent attribute of the evolutionary process. Organisms
evolve through eons of time from lower to higher forms, a
process still going on and always culminating in human
beings. As organisms become adapted to their environ-
ments through their habits, modiﬁcations occur. Use of an
organ or structure reinforces it; disuse leads to obliteration.
The characteristics acquired by use and disuse would be
inherited. Organisms repeatedly evolve in a ﬁxed sequence

of progressive transitions. Today’s worms will advance
gradually, always eventually culminating in human beings.
The notion that evolution is always progressive is not
part of Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural selection.
Darwin knew that numerous species became extinct,
without leaving descendants, and that many others have not
changed for eons of time. “Some of the most ancient
Silurian animals, as the Nautilus, Lingula, etc., do not differ
much from living species; and it cannot on my theory be
supposed, that these old species were the progenitors of all
the species of the orders to which they belong, for they do
not present characters in any degree intermediate between
them” (Darwin, 1859, p. 306). Notable proponents of
evolutionary progress included Ernst Haeckel, The Evolu-
tion of Man (1896, and Fig. 33.1) and Herbert Spencer,
“Progress: its law and cause” (1852) and First Principles
(1862; see also Richards, 1988).

DEFINITION OF PROGRESS

The meaning of statements like “Progress has occurred in
the evolutionary sequence leading from bacteria to
humans” or “The evolution of organisms is progressive” is
not immediately obvious. Such expressions may simply
mean that evolutionary sequences have a time direction, or
even more simply that they are accompanied by change.
The term “progress” may be clariﬁed by comparing it with
other related terms used in biological discourse. These
terms are “change,” “evolution,” and “direction.”

The term “change” means alteration, whether in the
position, the state, or the nature of a thing. Progress implies
change, but not vice versa; not all changes are progressive.
The molecules of oxygen and nitrogen in the air of a
room are continuously changing positions, but
such
changes would not generally be regarded as progressive.
The mutation of a gene from a functional allelic state to
a nonfunctional one is a change, but deﬁnitely not a
progressive one.

“Evolution” and “progress” can also be distinguished,
although both imply that sustained change has occurred.
Evolutionary change is not necessarily progressive. The
evolution of a species may lead to its own extinction, a
change that is not progressive, at least not for that species.
Progress can also occur without evolutionary change.
Assume that in a given region of the world the seeds of a
certain species are dormant because of a prolonged
drought; after a burst of rain the seeds germinate and give
origin to a population of plants. This change might be
labeled progressive for
the species, even though no
evolutionary change need to have taken place.

The concept of “direction” implies that a series of
changes have occurred that can be arranged in a linear
sequence so that elements in the later part of the sequence
are further from early elements of the sequence than

Human Evolution and Progress Chapter | 33 567

intermediate elements are. Directional change may be
uniform or not, depending whether every later member of
the sequence is further displaced than every earlier member
(“uniform” change), or whether directional change occurs
only on the average (“net” change). Nonuniform or net (see
later) directional change occurs when the direction of
change is not constant; some elements in the sequence may
represent a change of direction with respect to the imme-
diately previous elements, but
later elements in the
sequence are displaced further than earlier ones on the
average.

“Directionality” is sometimes equated with “irrevers-
ibility” in discussions of evolution: the process of evolution
is said to have a direction because it
is irreversible.
Biological evolution is irreversible (except perhaps in some
trivial sense, as when a previously mutated gene mutates
back to its former allelic state; or when a gene increases
in frequency for some time, but decreases in later
generations). Direction, however,
implies more than
irreversibility. Consider a new pack of cards with each suit
arranged from ace to ten, then knave, queen, king, and with
the suits arranged in the sequence of spades, clubs, hearts,
and diamonds. If we shufﬂe the cards thoroughly, the order
of the cards will change, and the changes will be irrevers-
ible by shufﬂing. We may shufﬂe again and again until the
cards are totally worn out, without ever restoring the
original sequence. The change of order in the pack of cards
is irreversible but not directional.

Directional changes occur in the inorganic as well as the
organic world. The second law of thermodynamics, which
applies to all processes in nature, describes sequential
changes that are directional, and indeed, uniformly direc-
tional. Within a closed system, entropy always increases;
that
is, a closed system passes continuously from less
probable to more probable states. The concept of direction
applies to what in paleontology are called “evolutionary
trends.” A trend occurs in a phylogenetic sequence when a
feature persistently changes through time in the members of
a sequence. Trends are common occurrences in all fossil
sequences that are sufﬁciently long to be called “sustained”
(Simpson, 1953).

The concept of direction and the concept of progress are
distinguishable. Consider the trend in the evolutionary
sequence from ﬁsh to man toward a gradual reduction in
paleontological time of the number of dermal bones in the
skull roof, or the trend toward increased molarization in the
last premolar that occurred in the phylogeny of the Equidae
from the early Eocene (Hyracotherium)
to the early
Oligocene (Haplohippus). These trends indeed represent
directional change, but it is not obvious that they should be
labeled progressive; to do this, we would have to agree that
the directional change had been for the better in some
sense. That is, to consider a directional sequence progres-
sive, we need to add an evaluation, namely that
the

568 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

FIGURE 33.1 Ernst Haeckel’s (1834e1919) tree of life showing a scala naturae from protozoa to mammals, with humans at the apex (1896, vol. 2,
p. 188).

condition of the latter members of the sequence represents,
according to some standard, a melioration or improvement.
The directionality of the sequence can be recognized and
accepted without any such evaluation being added.
Progress implies directional change, but not vice versa.

Evolution, direction, and progress all imply a historical
sequence of events that exhibit a systematic alteration of a
property or state of the elements in the sequence. Progress
occurs when there is directional change toward a better state
or condition. The concept of progress, then, contains two
that directional change has
elements: one descriptive,
occurred;
the
change represents betterment or improvement (Ayala, 1988,
2000). Gould (1988) has argued that the idea of progress
should be replaced by an “operational notion of direction-
ality,” so that the evaluative component be avoided.

(¼evaluative),

the other axiological

that

The notion of progress requires that a value judgment be
made about what is better and what is worse, or what is
higher and what is lower, according to some axiological
standard. But contrary to the belief of some authors
(Ginsberg, 1944; Lewontin, 1968), the axiological standard
of reference need not be a moral one. Moral progress is
possible, but not all forms of progress are moral. The
evaluation required for progress may be one of better
versus worse, or higher versus lower, but not necessarily
one of right versus wrong. “Better” may simply mean more
efﬁcient, more abundant, or more complex, without
connoting any reference to moral values or standards.

One may, then, deﬁne progress as “systematic change in
a feature belonging to all the members of a sequence in
such a way that posterior members of the sequence exhibit
an improvement of that feature.” More simply, it can be
deﬁned as “directional change toward the better.” Similarly,
regress or retrogression is directional change for the worse.
The two elements of the deﬁnition, namely directional
change and improvement according to some standard, are
jointly necessary and sufﬁcient
the occurrence of
progress.

for

Directional change, as well as progress, may be
observed in sequences that are spatially rather
than
temporally ordered. Clines are examples of directional
change recognized along a spatial dimension. In evolu-
tionary discourse, however, historical sequences are of
greatest interest.

KINDS OF PROGRESS

To seek further clariﬁcation of the concept of progress and
its application in evolutionary biology, it is necessary to
distinguish among various kinds of progress. This can be
accomplished according to either one of the two essential
elements of the deﬁnition. I shall later refer to types of
progress differentiated on the basis of axiological standards
of reference. Now, I shall make two distinctions that relate

Human Evolution and Progress Chapter | 33 569

to the descriptive element of the deﬁnition, that is, the
requirement of directional change. The ﬁrst distinction
takes into account
the direction by
distinguishing between “uniform” and “net” progress. The
second distinction refers to the scope of the sequence
considered and differentiates between “general” and
“particular” progress.

the continuity of

Uniform progress takes place whenever every later
member of the sequence is better than every earlier member
of the sequence according to a certain feature. This may be
formally stated as follows. Let mi be the members of the
sequence,
temporally ordered from 1 to n, and let pi
measure the state of the feature under evaluation. There is
uniform progress if it is the case for every mi and mj that
pj > pi for every j > i.

Net progress does not require that every member of the
sequence be better than all previous members of the
sequence and worse than all its successors; it requires only
that
later members of the sequence be better, on the
average, than earlier members. Net progress allows for
temporary ﬂuctuations of value. Formally, if the members
of the sequence, mi, are linearly arranged over time, net
progress occurs whenever the regression (in the sense used
in mathematical sequences) of p on time is signiﬁcantly
positive. Some authors have argued that progress has not
occurred in evolution because no matter what standard is
chosen, ﬂuctuations can always be found in every
evolutionary lineage. This argument is valid against the
occurrence of uniform progress, but not against
the
existence of net evolutionary progress.

Notice also that neither uniform nor net progress
requires that progress be unlimited, or that any speciﬁed
goal will be surpassed if the sequence continues for a
sufﬁciently long period of time. Progress requires a gradual
improvement in the members of the sequence, but the rate
of improvement may decrease with time. According to the
deﬁnition given here, it is possible that the sequence tends
asymptotically toward a deﬁnite goal, which is continu-
ously approached but never reached.

The distinction between uniform and net progress is
similar but not identical to the distinction between uniform
and perpetual progress proposed by Broad (1925) and
Goudge (1961). Perpetual progress, as deﬁned by Broad,
requires that
the maximum of value increases, and the
minimum does not decrease with time. In the formulation
given earlier, Broad’s perpetual progress requires that for
every mi there is at least one mj (j > i) such that pj > pi.
This deﬁnition has the undesirable feature of requiring that
the ﬁrst element of the sequence be the worst one and the
last element the best one. Neither of these two requirements
is made in my deﬁnition of net progress. Also the term
“perpetual” has connotations
that are undesirable in
the discussion of progress. The distinction between
uniform and net progress is made implicitly, although never

570 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

formally stated, by Simpson (1949), who applies terms like
“universal,” “invariable,” “constant,” and “continuous” to
the kind of progress that I have called uniform (although he
also uses these terms with other meanings).

With respect to the scope of the sequence considered,
progress can be either general (or universal) or particular.
General (or universal) progress is that which occurs in all
historical sequences of a given domain of reality and from
the beginning of the sequences until their end. Particular
progress is that which occurs in one or several but not all
historical sequences, or that which takes place during part
but not all of the duration of the sequences.

General progress would have occurred in evolution only
if there were some feature or standard according to which
progress can be predicated of the evolution of all life from
its origin to the present. If progress is predicated of only
one or several, but not all, lines of evolutionary descent, it
is a particular kind of progress. Progress that embraces only
a limited span of time from the origin of life to the present
is also a particular kind of progress.

Some writers have denied that evolution is progressive
on the grounds that not all evolutionary lineages exhibit
advance. Some evolutionary lineages, like those leading to
certain parasitic forms, are retrogressive by certain
standards; and many have lineages that have become
extinct without issue. These considerations are valid against
a claim of general progress, but not against claims of
particular forms of progress.

PROGRESS AS A BIOLOGICAL CONCEPT

I have argued that the notion of progress is axiological,
and therefore, it cannot be a strictly scientiﬁc term: value
judgments are not part and parcel of scientiﬁc discourse,
which is characterized by empirically testable hypotheses
and objective descriptions. Some authors have claimed,
however, that there are biological criteria of progress that
are “objective” and do not involve value judgments. I
will brieﬂy review the efforts in this regard of three
distinguished biologists: J.M. Thoday, M. Kimura, and
J.S. Huxley.

is essential

Thoday (1953, 1958) has pointed out the obvious fact
that survival
to life. Therefore, he argues,
progress is the increase in ﬁtness for survival, “provided
only that ﬁtness and survival be deﬁned as generally as
possible.” According to Thoday, ﬁtness must be deﬁned in
reference to groups of organisms that can have common
descendants; these groups he calls “units of evolution.”
A unit of evolution is what population geneticists call a
Mendelian population;
inclusive Mendelian
population is the species. The ﬁtness of a unit of evolution
is deﬁned by Thoday as “the probability that such a unit of
evolution will survive for a long period of time, such as
108 years, that is to say will have descendants after the

the most

lapse of that time.” According to Thoday, evolutionary
changes, no matter what other results may have been
produced, are progressive only if
they increase the
probability of leaving descendants after long periods of
time. He correctly points out that this deﬁnition has the
advantage of not assuming that progress has in fact
occurred, an assumption that vitiates other attempts to
deﬁne progress as a purely biological concept.

The deﬁnition of progress given by Thoday has been
criticized because it apparently leads to the paradox that
progress is impossible, in fact, that regress is necessary
since any group of organisms will be more progressive than
any of their descendants. Assume that we are concerned
with ascertaining whether progress has occurred in the
evolutionary transition from a Cretaceous mammal to its
descendants of 100 million (108) years later. It is clear that
if the present-day mammal species has a probability, P, of
having descendants 108 years from now,
the ancestral
mammal species will have a probability no smaller than P
of leaving descendants after 2  108 years from the time of
the
their existence (Ayala, 1969). The probability that
ancestral species will leave descendants 2  108 years after
their existence will be greater than P if it has any other
living descendants besides the present-day mammal with
which we are comparing it. As Thoday (1970) himself has
pointed out, such criticism is mistaken, since it confuses the
probability of survival with the fact of survival. The a priori
probability that a given species will have descendants after
a given lapse of time may be smaller than the a priori
probability that any of its descendants will leave progeny
after the same length of time.

There is, however, a legitimate criticism of Thoday’s
deﬁnition of progress, namely, that it is not operationally
valid. Suppose that we want to ﬁnd out whether one of
today’s mammal species is more progressive than its
Cretaceous ancestor. We should have to estimate, ﬁrst, the
probability that today’s mammal will leave descendants
after a given long period of time; then, we should have to
estimate the same probability for the Cretaceous species.
Thoday has enumerated a variety of components that
contribute to the ﬁtness of a population as deﬁned by him.
These components are adaptation, genetic stability, genetic
ﬂexibility, phenotypic ﬂexibility, and the stability of the
environment. But
is by no means clear how these
components could be quantiﬁed nor by what sort of
function they could be integrated into a single parameter. In
any case, there seems to be no conceivable way in which
the appropriate observations and measurements could be
made for the ancestral species. Thoday’s deﬁnition of
progress is extremely ingenious, however, it lacks opera-
tional validity. If we accept his deﬁnition, there seems to be
no way in which we could ascertain whether progress has
occurred in any one line of descent or in the evolution of
life as a whole.

it

Another attempt to consider evolutionary progress as a
purely biological notion has been made by Motoo Kimura
(1961), by deﬁning biological progress as an increase in the
amount of genetic information stored in the organism. This
information is encoded, at least for the most part, in the
DNA of the nucleus. The DNA contains the information
that
the
development and behavior of the individual. By making
certain assumptions, Kimura has estimated the rate at which
genetic information accumulates in evolution. He calculates
that in the evolution of “higher” organisms genetic infor-
mation has accumulated from the Cambrian to the present
at an average of 0.29 bits per generation.

in interaction with the environment directs

This method of measuring progressive evolution by the
accumulation of genetic information is vitiated by several
ﬂaws. First, since the average rate of accumulation of
information is allegedly constant per generation, it follows
that organisms with a shorter generation time will have
accumulated more information, and therefore are more
progressive than organisms with a longer generation time.
The evolution of mice, moles, and bats would necessarily
be more progressive than horses, whales, and humans. A
second ﬂaw is that Kimura is not measuring how much
genetic information has been accumulated in any given
organism. Rather, he assumes that genetic information
gradually accumulates with time and he then proceeds to
estimate the rate at which genetic information could have
accumulated. The assumption that more recent organisms
have more genetic information and that, therefore, they are
more progressive than their ancestors is unwarranted, and it
completely invalidates Kimura’s attempt
to measure
evolutionary progress. There is, at least at present, no way
of measuring the amount of genetic information present in
any one organism. Finally, the decision to consider the
accumulation of genetic information as progressive requires
a value judgment; it is not a biologically compelling notion.
Julian Huxley (1942, 1953) has argued that the biologist
should not attempt to deﬁne progress a priori, but rather he
should “proceed inductively to see whether he can or
cannot ﬁnd evidence of a process which can be legitimately
called progressive.” He believes that evolutionary progress
can be deﬁned without any reference to values. Huxley
proposes ﬁrst to investigate the features that mark off the
“higher” from the “lower” organisms. Any evolutionary
process is considered progressive in which the features that
characterize higher organisms are achieved. But Huxley,
like Kimura, assumes that progress has in fact occurred,
and that certain living organisms, especially humans, are
more progressive than others. Classifying organisms as
“higher” or “lower” requires an evaluation. Huxley has not
succeeded in avoiding reference to an axiological standard.
The terms that he uses in his various deﬁnitions of progress,
like “improvement,” “general advance,” “level of efﬁ-
ciency,” etc., are all in fact evaluative.

Human Evolution and Progress Chapter | 33 571

IS EVOLUTION UNIVERSALLY
PROGRESSIVE?

No attempt to deﬁne progress as a purely biological concept
has succeeded. This is understandable in view of the analysis
of the concept that I developed earlier. The concept of
progress is evaluative and, hence, one cannot ascertain
whether progress has occurred without ﬁrst choosing a
standard against which progress or improvement will be
assessed. Two decisions are required. First, we must choose
the objective feature according to which the events of objects
are to be ordered. Second, a decision must be made as to
what pole of the ordered elements represents improvement.
These decisions involve a subjective element, but
they
should not be arbitrary. Biological knowledge should guide
them. There is a criterion by which the validity of a standard
of reference can be judged. A standard is valid if it enables us
to say illuminating things about the evolution of life. How
much of the relevant information is available, and whether
the evaluation can be made more of less precisely, should
also inﬂuence the choice of values.

It is fairly apparent that there is no standard by which
uniform progress can be said to have taken place in the
evolution of life. Changes in direction, slackening, and
reversals have occurred in all evolutionary lineages, no
matter what features are considered (Simpson, 1949, 1953).
The question, then, is whether net progress has occurred in
the evolution of life and in which sense.

The next question is whether there is any criterion of
progress by which net progress can be said to be a general
feature of evolution; or whether
identiﬁable progress
applies only to particular lineages or in particular periods.
One conceivable standard of progress is the increase in the
amount of genetic information stored in the organisms
(Kimura, 1961). Net progress would have occurred if or-
ganisms living at a later time would have, on the average, a
greater content of genetic information than their ancestors.
One difﬁculty, insuperable at least for the present, is that
there is no way in which the genetic information present in
an organism can be measured. We could choose the
ShannoneWeaver solution, as Kimura (1961) has done, by
regarding all the DNA of an organism as a linear sequence
of messages made up of groups of three-letter words (the
codons) with a four-letter alphabet (the four DNA nucleo-
tides). But the amount of information is not simply related
to the amount of DNA, since we know that many
DNA sequences are repetitive, and even much of the non-
repetitive DNA may not store information in the nucleotide
sequence. In any case, what we know about the size of the
genome in organisms makes it unlikely that increase of
genetic information could be a general feature of the
evolution of life.

However, the accumulation of the genetic information
as a standard of progress can be understood in a different

572 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

way. Progress can be measured by an increase in the kinds
of ways in which the information is stored and as an in-
crease in the number of different messages encoded.
Different species represent different kinds of messages;
individuals are messages or units of information. Thus
understood, whether an increase in the amount of infor-
mation has occurred reduces to the question of whether life
has diversiﬁed and expanded. This has been recognized by
Simpson (1949) as the standard by which, what I call
general progress, has in fact occurred in the evolution of
life. According to Simpson, we can ﬁnd out about evolution
as a whole whether there has been a “tendency for life to
expand, to ﬁll in all the available spaces in the livable
environments, including those created by the process of that
expansion itself.”

There are at least four different though related criteria
by which the expansion of life can be measured: (1)
expansion in the number of kinds of organisms, that is, the
number of species,
(2) expansion in the number of
individuals, (3) expansion in the total bulk of living matter,
and (4) expansion in the total rate of energy ﬂow. Increases
in the number of individuals or of their bulk may be a
mixed blessing, as it is the case now for the human species,
but they can be a measure of biological success. By any one
of the four standards of progress enumerated, it appears,
according to Simpson (1949), that net progress has been a
general feature of the evolution of life.

Reproduction provides organisms with the potentiality
to multiply exponentially: each organism is capable of
producing, on the average, more than one progeny
throughout
its lifetime. The actual rate of increase in
numbers is a net result of the balance between the rate of
births and the rate of deaths of the population. In the
absence of environmentally imposed restrictions,
that
balance is positive; populations have an intrinsic capacity
to grow ad inﬁnitum. Since the ambit in which life can exist
is limited, and since the resources to which a population has
access are even more limited, the rate of expansion rapidly
decreases to zero, or becomes negative, or alternates
between positive and negative periods.

least

the supply of

two ways. First,

The tendency of life to expand encounters constraints of
various sorts. The expansion is limited by the environment
in at
resources
accessible to the organisms is limited. Second, favorable
conditions necessary for multiplication do not always
occur. Predators, parasites, and competitors, together with
the various parameters of the environment embodied by the
term “weather,” are the main factors interfering with the
multiplication of organisms even when the resources are
available. Drastic and secular changes in the weather, as
well as geological events, lead at times to vast decreases in
the size of some populations and even the whole of life.
Because of these constraints, the tendency of life to expand
has not always succeeded. Nevertheless, it appears certain

that life has, on the average, expanded throughout most of
its history.

About 1.5 million species now living have been
described and named. Current estimates place the number
of living species between 5 and 30 million, with most of the
unidentiﬁed animal species being beetles and other insects.
Although it is difﬁcult to estimate the number of plant
species that existed in the past (since well-preserved plant
fossils are rare),
the number of animal species can be
roughly estimated. Approximately 150,000 animal species
live in the seas today, probably a larger number than the
total number that existed in the Cambrian (say, about
500 million years ago) when no animal or plant species
lived on the land. Animal
life on land began in the
Devonian (some 400 million years ago). The number of
animal land species is probably at a maximum now, even if
we exclude insects. Insects make up about three-quarters of
all known animal species, and about half of all species if
plants are included. Insects did not appear until the early
Carboniferous, some 350 million years ago. The number of
living insect species has become probably greater in recent
times (before the Anthropocene extinctions) than it ever
was before. It seems likely that, at least on the average, a
gradual increase in the number of species has characterized
the evolution of life (Simpson, 1949, 1953).

themselves

The number of species expands by a positive feedback
process. The greater the number of species, the greater the
number of environments that are created for new species to
exploit. Once there were plants, animals could come into
existence, and the animals
sustain large
numbers of species of other animals that prey on them, as
well as of parasites and symbionts. Thomas Huxley likened
the expansion of life to the ﬁlling of a barrel. First, the
barrel is ﬁlled with apples until it overﬂows; then pebbles
are added up to the brim; the space between the apples and
the pebbles can be packed with sand; water is ﬁnally poured
until it overﬂows (see Huxley and Huxley, 1947). His point
is that with diverse kinds of organisms the environment can
be ﬁlled in more effectively than with only one kind. But
Huxley’s analogy neglects one important aspect of life,
namely that the space available for occupancy by other
species is increased rather than decreased by some addi-
tions. A more appropriate analogy would have been that of
a balloon or an expanding barrel.

It

is difﬁcult

to estimate the number of individuals
living on the earth today with any reasonable approxima-
tion, even if we exclude microorganisms. The mean
number of individuals per species has been estimated to be
around 2  108, but
like Drosophila
willistoni, the tropical fruit ﬂy with which I worked for
several decades, may consist of more than 1016 individuals,
and there are more than one million insect species (Ayala
et al., 1972). The number of individuals of Euphausia
superba, the small krill eaten by whales, may be greater

species

some

than 1020. It seems certain that there are more individual
animals and plants living today, and their bulk is greater
than it was in the Cambrian. Very likely, they have become
greater in recent geological times than they were at most
times since the beginning of life. This is more so if we
include the large number and enormous bulk of the human
population and of all the plants and animals cultivated by
humans for their own use. Eluding microorganisms, it is
probable that
living individuals has
increased, on the average, through the evolution of life.
About the abundance of microorganisms, there is little that
can be said with conviction. On the whole, an increase in
the total bulk of living matter is even more likely than an
increase in numbers because larger organisms have gener-
ally appeared later in time.

the number of

It seems likely that the rate of energy ﬂow has increased
in the living world faster than the total bulk of matter. One
effect of organisms on the world is to retard the dissipation
of energy. Green plants do, indeed, store radiant energy
from the sun that would otherwise be converted into heat.
The inﬂuence of animals goes partially in the opposite
direction: the living activities of animals dissipate energy,
since their catabolism exceeds their anabolism (Lotka,
1945), but they store energy derived from plants that might
have otherwise dissipated into heat. Animals provide a new
path through which energy can ﬂow and, moreover, their
interactions with plants increase the total rate of ﬂow
through the system. An analogy can be used to illustrate
this outcome. Suppose that a modern highway with three
lanes in each direction connects two large cities. The need
to accommodate an increase in the rate of travel ﬂow can be
accomplished either by addition of more lanes to the
highway or by increasing the speed at which the trafﬁc
moves on the highway. In terms of the “carrying capacity”
of the highway, these two approaches appear, at ﬁrst sight,
to work in opposite directions, but together they increase
the total ﬂow of trafﬁc on the highway.

EVOLUTIONARY PROGRESS

I have argued previously that the concept of progress in-
volves an evaluation of better versus worse relative to some
standard of reference. Many standards of reference can be
chosen according to which it is possible to measure the
evolutionary process of the kind I have called “particular,”
that is, progress that obtains only in certain evolutionary
lineages and usually only for a limited span of time. The
numerous writers on evolutionary progress have usually
proceeded by identifying one or another attribute as the
criterion of progress and have then expanded on how
progress has occurred in evolution according to the
particular standard chosen. These discussions are often
enlightening in that
the
evolutionary process that are particularly meaningful from

they bring about aspects of

Human Evolution and Progress Chapter | 33 573

a certain perspective and enhance our understanding of the
process. A common deﬁciency in some of these discussions
is the stated or implicit conviction that the criterion of
progress has been discovered, often accompanied by a lack
of awareness that progress is a value-laden concept rather
than a strictly scientiﬁc one.

I shall now mention some criteria that have been the
subjects of thoughtful discussion on evolutionary progress.
I will then, by way of illustration, deal in somewhat greater
detail with one speciﬁc criterion of evolutionary progress:
advances in the ability of organisms to obtain and process
information about the state of the environment.

Simpson (1949) has examined several criteria according
to which evolutionary progress can be recognized in
particular sequences. These criteria include dominance,
invasion of new environments, replacement, improvement
in adaptation, adaptability and possibility of
further
progress,
the
environment, increased structural complexity, increase in
general energy or level of vital processes, and increase in
the range and variety of adjustments to the environment.
For each of these criteria, Simpson has shown in which
evolutionary sequences, and for how long, progress has
taken place.

increased specialization,

control over

Bernard Rensch (1947) and Julian Huxley (1942, 1953)
have examined other lists of characteristics that can be used
as standards of particular forms of progress. Ledyard
Stebbins (1969) has written a provocative essay proposing
a law of “conservation of organization” that accounts for
evolutionary progress as a small bias toward increased
complexity of organization. Simon Conway Morris (2003)
has argued that, under natural selection, progress is a
necessary attribute of the evolutionary process, culminating
in intelligent humans. I (Ayala, 1974, 1982, 1988) have
examined elsewhere in some detail
the increase in the
ability of organisms to obtain and process information
about the environment, as a criterion of progress that is
particularly relevant
to human evolution; among the
differences that mark off humans from all other animals,
perhaps the most
is that humans greatly
developed the ability to perceive the environment and to
react ﬂexibly to it. George Williams (1966) has examined,
mostly critically, several criteria of progress. Two brief but
incisive discussions of the concept of progress can be found
in G.J. Herrick (1956) and Theodosius Dobzhansky (1970).
A philosophical study of the concept of progress has been
made by T.A. Goudge (1961). Two splendid multi-
authored collections with widespread points of view are
G.A. Almond, M. Chodorow, and R.H. Pearce, eds.,
Progress and Its Discontents (1982) and M.H. Nitecki, ed.,
Evolutionary Progress (1988). The most extensive learned
exploration of the issue of evolutionary progress is Michael
Ruse’s Mondad to Man: The Idea of Progress
in
Evolutionary Biology (1996). A more concise elaboration,

fundamental

574 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

yet historically informative and conceptually subtle, as well
a profound, can be found in Chapter 4 (“Progress,”
p. 99e127) of Ruse’s The Philosophy of Human Evolution
(2012).

There is no need to examine here all the standards of
progress that have been formulated by the authors just
mentioned, nor to explore additional criteria. Writings
about biological progress have involved much disputation
concerning (1) whether the notion of progress belongs in
the realm of scientiﬁc discourse, (2) what criterion of
progress is “best,” and (3) whether progress has indeed
taken place in the evolution of life.

These controversies can be solved once the notion of
progress is clearly established, as I have done earlier. First,
the concept of progress involves an evaluation of good
versus bad, or of better versus worse. The choice of a
standard by which to evaluate organisms or their features is
to a certain extent subjective. However, once a standard of
progress has been chosen, decisions concerning whether
progress has occurred in the living world, and what
organisms are more or less progressive, can be made
following the usual standards and methods of scientiﬁc
discourse. Second, there is not standard of progress that is
“best” in the abstract or for all purposes. The validity of any
one criterion of progress depends on whether the use of that
standard leads to meaningful statements concerning the
evolution of life. Which standard or standards are prefer-
able depends on the particular context or purpose of the
discussion. Third, the distinction between uniform and net
progress makes it possible to recognize the occurrence of
biological progress even though every member of a
sequence or of a group of organisms may not always be
more progressive than every previous member of the
sequence or than every member of some other group of
organisms. Fourth,
the distinction between general and
particular progress allows one to recognize progress that
may have occurred in particular groups of organisms, or
during limited periods in the evolution of life, but not in all
of them.

PROGRESS AND HUMAN
CONSCIOUSNESS

Once one realizes that recognition of progress is only
possible after a value judgment has been made as to which
will be the standard against which progress is to be
measured (and hence,
there is not a standard of
progress, or one that is best for all purposes) it becomes
possible to seek standards of progress that may yield
valuable insights into the study of the evolution of life.

that

I shall now, by way of illustration, discuss progress
according to a particular standard of reference: the ability of
an organism to obtain and process information about the
environment. I can see two reasons that make this criterion

of progress especially meaningful (although not, I reiterate,
the most meaningful, because no criterion exists that is best
for all purposes). First, the ability to obtain information
about
the environment and to react accordingly is an
important adaptation because it allows the organism to seek
out suitable environments and resources and to avoid
unsuitable ones. Second, it is because the ability to perceive
the environment, and to integrate, coordinate, and react
ﬂexibly to what
is perceived, has attained its highest
development in mankind. This incomparable advancement
is perhaps the most fundamental characteristic that sets
apart Homo sapiens from all other animals. Symbolic
language, complex social organization, control over the
environment, the ability to envisage future states and to
work toward them, values, and ethics are developments
made possible by man’s greatly developed capacity to
obtain and organize information about
the state of the
environment. This capacity has ushered in mankind’s new
mode of adaptation. Whereas other organisms become
genetically adapted to their environments, humans create
environments to ﬁt their genes. It is thus that mankind has
spread over the whole planet in spite of its physiological
dependence on a tropical or subtropical climate.

the

environment. The

Increased ability to gather and process information
about the environment is sometimes expressed as evolution
toward “independence from the environment.” This latter
expression is misleading. No organism can be truly
independent of
evolutionary
sequence, ﬁsh to amphibian to reptile, allegedly provides an
example of evolution toward independence from an
aqueous environment. Reptiles, birds, and mammals are
indeed free of the need for water as an external living
medium, but their lives depend on the conditions of the
land. They have not become independent of the environ-
ment, but they have rather exchanged dependence of one
environment for dependence on another.

The notion of “control over the environment” also has
been associated with the ability to gather and use infor-
mation about the state of the environment. However, true
control over the environment occurs to any substantial
extend only in the human species. All organisms interact
with the environment, but they do not control it. Burrowing
a hole in the ground or building a nest in a tree, like the
construction of a beehive or a beaver dam, does not
represent control over the environment except in a trivial
sense. The ability to control the environment started with
the australopithecines (or at least, with Homo habilis and
other early Homo species), some of the earliest organisms
that may be called human: some were able to produce
devices to manipulate the environment
in the form of
rudimentary pebble and bone tools. The ability to
obtain and process information about
the conditions
of the environment does not provide control over the
environment, but rather it enables the organisms to avoid

unsuitable environments and to seek suitable ones.
It
has developed in many organisms because it is a useful
adaptation.

Some selective interaction with the environment occurs
in all organisms. The cell membrane of a bacterium permits
certain molecules but not others to enter the cell. Selective
molecular exchange occurs also in the inorganic world; but
this can hardly be called a form of information processing.
Certain bacteria when placed on an agar plate move about
in zig-zag pattern, which is almost certainly random. The
most rudimentary ability to gather and process information
about the environment may be found in certain single-
celled eukaryotes (¼organisms with a true nucleus). A
Paramecium follows a sinuous path as it swims, ingesting
the bacteria that
it meets
unfavorable conditions, like unsuitable acidity or salinity in
the water, the Paramecium checks its advance, turns and
starts in a new direction. Its reaction is purely negative. The
Paramecium apparently does not seek its food or a
favorable environment, but
it simply avoids unsuitable
conditions.

it encounters. Whenever

Euglena, also a single-cell organism, exhibits a some-
what greater ability to process information about
the
environment. Euglena has a light-sensitive spot by means
of which it can orient itself toward the light. Euglena’s
motions are directional;
it not only avoids unsuitable
environments, but
it actively seeks suitable ones. An
amoeba represents further progress in the same direction; it
reacts to light by moving away from it, and it also actively
pursues food particles.

An increase in the ability to gather and process infor-
mation about the environment is not a general characteristic
of the evolution of life. Progress has occurred in certain
evolutionary lines but not in others. Today’s bacteria are
not more progressive by this criterion than their ancestors
of three billion years ago. In many evolutionary sequences,
some very limited progress took place in the very early
stages, without further progress through the rest of their
history. In general, animals are more advanced than plants;
vertebrates are more advanced than invertebrates; mammals
are more advanced than reptiles, which are more advanced
than ﬁsh. The most advanced organism by this criterion is
doubtless the human species (Darwin, 1871).

The ability to obtain and to process information about
the environment has progressed little in the plant kingdom.
Plants generally react to light and to gravity. The geotro-
pism is positive in the root, but negative in the stem. Plants
also grow toward the light; some plants like the sunﬂower
have parts that follow the course of the sun through its daily
cycle. Another tropism in plants is the tendency of roots to
grow toward water. The response to gravity, to water, and
to light
is basically due to differential growth rates; a
greater elongation of cells takes place on one side of the
root or stem than on the other side. Gradients of light,

Human Evolution and Progress Chapter | 33 575

gravity, or moisture are the clues that guide these tropisms.
Some plants react also to tactile stimuli. Tendrils twine
around what they touch; Mimosa and carnivorous plants
like the Venus ﬂytrap (Dionaea) have leaves that close
upon being touched.

The ability to obtain and process information about the
environment is mediated in multicellular animals by the
nervous systems. The simplest nervous system occurs in
coelenterate hydras, corals, and jellyﬁshes. Each tentacle of
a jellyﬁsh reacts only if it
is individually and directly
stimulated. There is no coordination of the information
gathered by different parts of
the animal. Moreover,
jellyﬁshes are unable to learn from experience.

A limited form of coordinated behavior occurs in the
echinoderms, such as the starﬁshes and sea urchins.
Whereas coelenterates possess only an undifferentiated
nerve net, echinoderms possess a nerve net, a nerve ring,
and radial nerve cords. When the appropriate stimulus is
encountered, a starﬁsh reacts with direct and uniﬁed actions
of the whole body.

The most primitive form of a brain occurs in certain
organisms like planarian ﬂatworms, which also have
numerous sensory cells and eyes without
lenses. The
information gathered in these sensory cells and organs is
processed and coordinated by the central nervous system
and the rudimentary brain; a planarian worm is capable of
some variability of responses and of some simple learning.
That
the same stimuli will not necessarily always
produce the same response.

is,

Planarian ﬂatworms have progressed further

than
starﬁshes in the ability to gather and process information
about the environment, and the starﬁshes have progressed
further than sea anemones and other coelenterates. But
none of these organisms has gone very far by this criterion
of progress. The most progressive groups of organisms
among the invertebrates are the cephalopods and arthro-
pods, but the vertebrates have progressed much further than
any invertebrates.

Among the ancestors of both the arthropods and the
vertebrates, there were organisms that, like the sponges,
lacked a nervous system. These ancestors evolved through
a stage with only a simple network, whereas later stages
developed a central nervous system and eventually a
rudimentary brain. With further development of the central
nervous system and of the brain, the ability to obtain and
process information from the outside progressed much
further. The arthropods, which include the insects, have
complex forms of behavior. Precise visual, chemical, and
acoustic signals are obtained and processed by many
arthropods, particularly in their search for food and in their
selection of mates.

Vertebrates are generally able to obtain and process
much more complicated signals and to produce a
much greater variety of responses than the arthropods.

576 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

The vertebrate brain has an enormous number of associa-
tive neurons with an extremely complex arrangement.
Among the vertebrates, progress in the ability to deal with
environmental information is correlated with increase in the
size of the cerebral hemispheres and with the appearance
and development of the “neopallium.” The neopallium is
involved in association and coordination of all kinds of
impulses from all receptors and brain centers. The larger
brain of vertebrates, compared to that of invertebrates,
permits them also to have a large number of neurons
involved
storage or memory. The
neopallium appeared ﬁrst in the reptiles. In the mammals, it
has expanded to become the cerebral cortex, which covers
most of the cerebral hemispheres. The cerebral cortex in
humans
the
hemispheres in a complex pattern of folds and turns. When
organisms are measured by their ability to process and
obtain information about
the environment, mankind is,
indeed, the most progressive organism on earth.

is particularly large,

compressed over

in information

I would once more reiterate that there is nothing in the
evolutionary process that makes the criterion of progress I
have just followed best or more objective than others. It may
be useful because it
illuminates certain features of the
evolution of life. Other criteria may help to discern other
features of evolution, and thus be worth examining. Partic-
ular organisms will appear more of
less progressive
depending on the standard that is used to evaluate progress.
Mankind is not the most progressive species by many criteria.
By some standards, humans are among the bottom rungs of
the ladder of life, for example, in the ability to synthesize their
own biological components from inorganic resources.

It may be properly questioned whether anything is
gained by speaking of evolutionary progress rather than of
evolutionary advancement or of directional change. The
term “advancement” also involves an evaluation and would
therefore be subject
to the same pitfalls as “progress”
(although it seems to elicit weaker emotional disclaimers
than progress does). “Directional change,” however, is not
an axiological concept and, thus, it may be treated as other
strictly scientiﬁc terms (Gould, 1988, 1997).

seems

The notion of progress

to be irrevocably
ingrained among the thinking categories of modern man
and, hence,
likely to continue being used in biology,
particularly in reference to the evolutionary progress.
Indeed, Ruse (1996)
in his monumental masterpiece,
Monad to Man: The Idea of Progress in Evolutionary
Biology, has argued that the concept of progress pervades
all evolutionary writings, from Darwin to the present. I
have,
to
demythologize it. I have argued that “progressive” is an
evaluative term that demands a subjective commitment to a
particular standard of value. Awareness of this makes it
possible to speak of progress in evolution without implying
the conclusion that humans are the most progressive

therefore, attempted to clarify the concept

organisms. As I have suggested, by some biologically
meaningful standards of progress, they are not.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

I believe that the concept of progress as I have deﬁned it
and the distinctions I have made may also be useful in the
ﬁelds of cultural anthropology and, more generally, human
history (Hoagland and Burhoe, 1962; Almond et al., 1982).
It may be the case that much knowledge in these ﬁelds is
largely value-free, but we can predicate progress of human
historical events only by introducing value judgments.
However, once this is recognized, it becomes possible to
seek criteria of progress that will yield valuable insights in
the study of human history.

Claims that progress has occurred in human history
need not imply that progress is universal, inevitable, or
unlimited. Like biological progress, cultural progress may
have occurred in some societies but not others, during
certain periods rather than forever, and it may be subject to
certain limits rather than able to proceed without bounds.
Where and how progress has taken place are matters for
investigation, which, once a criterion of progress has been
selected, can proceed according to the normal standards of
scholarly inquiry.

REFERENCES

Almond, G.A., Chodorow, M., Pearce, R.H. (Eds.), 1982. Progress and Its

Discontents. University of California Press, Berkeley.

Ayala, F.J., Powell, J.R., Tracey, M.L., Mourao, C.A., Perez-Salas, S.,
1972. Enzyme variability in the Drosophila willistoni group. IV.
Genic variation in natural populations of Drosophila willistoni. Ge-
netics 70, 113e139.

Ayala, F.J., 1969. An evolutionary dilemma: ﬁtness of genotypes versus
ﬁtness of populations. Canadian Journal of Genetics and Cytology 11,
439e463.

Ayala, F.J., 1974. The concept of biological progress. In: Ayala, F.J.,
Dobzhansky, T. (Eds.), Studies in the Philosophy of Biology. Uni-
versity of California Press, Berkeley, pp. 339e355.

evolutionary

concept of progress.

Ayala, F.J., 1982. The

In:
Almond, G.A., Chodorow, M., Pearce, R.H. (Eds.), Progress and Its
Discontents. University of California Press, Berkeley, pp. 106e124.
Ayala, F.J., 1988. Can “progress” be deﬁned as a biological concept? In:
Nitecki, M.H. (Ed.), Evolutionary Progress. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, pp. 75e96.

Ayala, F.J., 2000. The limits of knowledge and the hope for progress. In:
Herrmann, R.L. (Ed.), God, Science & Humility. Ten Scientists
Consider Humility Theology. Templeton Foundation Press, Philadel-
phia and London, pp. 131e152.

Broad, C.D., 1925. The Mind and Its Place in Nature. Kegan Paul,

London.

Bury, J.B., 1955 [1932]. The Idea of Progress. An Inquiry into Its Growth

and Origin. Dover Publications, New York.

Condorcet, M.J.A.N.C., 1956 [1795]. Sketch for a Historical Picture of the

Progress of the Human Mind. Noonday Press, New York.

Human Evolution and Progress Chapter | 33 577

Conway Morris, S., 2003. Life’s Solution: Inevitable Humans in a Lonely

Lotka, A.J., 1945. The law of evolution as a maximal principle. Human

Universe. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Biology 17, 167e194.

Darwin, C., 1859. On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection.

Lovejoy, A.O., 1960 [1936]. The Great Chain of Being. A Study in the

John Murray, London.

Darwin, C.R., 1871. The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex.
John Murray, London (Also: Appleton and Company, New York, 1971).
Dobzhansky, T., 1970. Genetics of the Evolutionary Process. Columbia

History of an Idea. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Nitecki, M.H., 1988. Evolutionary Progress. University of Chicago Press,

Chicago.

Rensch, B., 1947. Evolution above the Species Level. Columbia Univer-

University Press, New York and London.

sity Press, New York.

Ginsberg, M., 1944. Moral Progress. Frazer Lecture at the University of

Glasgow. Glasgow University Press, Glasgow.

Goudge, T.A., 1961. The Ascent of Life. University of Toronto Press,

Toronto.

Gould, S.J., 1988. On replacing the idea of progress with an operational
(Ed.), Evolutionary

notion of directionality.
Progress. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 319e338.

In: Nitecki, M.H.

Richards, R.J., 1988. The moral foundations of the idea of evolutionary
progress: Darwin, Spencer, and the Neo-Darwinians. In: Nitecki, M.H.
(Ed.), Evolutionary Progress. University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
pp. 129e148.

Ruse, M., 1996. Monad to Man. The Idea of Progress in Evolutionary

Biology. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Ruse, M., 2012. The Philosophy of Human Evolution. Cambridge

Gould, S.J., 1997. Full House. The Spread of Excellence From Plato to

University Press, New York.

Darwin. Harmony, New York.

Simpson, G.G., 1949. The Meaning of Evolution. Yale University Press,

Haeckel, E., 1896. The Evolution of Man, vols. 2 (Appleton, New York).
Hegel, G.W.F., 1970 [1817]. Philosophy of Nature. Oxford University

Press, Oxford.

New Haven.

Simpson, G.G., 1953. The Major Features of Evolution. Columbia

University Press, New York.

Herrick, G.J., 1956. The Evolution of Human Nature. The University of

Smith, A., 1937 [1776]. The Wealth of Nations. Modern Library, New

Texas Press, Austin.

York.

Hoagland, H., Burhoe, R.W. (Eds.), 1962. Evolution and Man’s Progress.

Columbia University Press, New York.

Huxley, T.H., Huxley, J.S., 1947. Touchstone for Ethics. Harper, New

York.

Huxley, J.S., 1942. Evolution, the Modern Synthesis. Harper, New York.
Huxley, J.S., 1953. Evolution in Action. Harper, New York.
Kimura, M., 1961. Natural selection as the process of accumulating genetic

Spencer, H., 1852. Progress: its law and cause. Westminster Review 67,
244e267. Reprinted in 1868. Essays: Scientiﬁc, Political and
Speculative. Williams and Norgate, London, vol. 1, pp. 1e67.
Spencer, H, 1862. First Principles. Williams and Norgate, London.
Stebbins, G.L., 1969. The Basis of Progressive Evolution. University of

North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill.

Thoday, J.M., 1953. Components of ﬁtness. Symposia of the Society for

information in adaptive evolution. Genetical Research 2, 127e140.

the Study of Experimental Biology 7 (Evolution), 96e113.

Lamarck, J.-B., 1809. Philosophie Zoologique. Duminil-Lesueur, Paris
(English Translation: Elliot, H. 1914. The Zoological Philosophy.
Macmillan, London.).

Thoday, J.M., 1958. Natural Selection and biological progress.

In:
Barnet, S.A. (Ed.), A Century of Darwin. Allen and Unwin, London.
Thoday, J.M., 1970. Genotype versus population ﬁtness. Canadian Journal

Leroi, A.M., 2014. The Lagoon. How Aristotle Invented Science. Viking,

of Genetics and Cytology 12, 674e675.

New York.

Williams, G.C., 1966. Adaptation and Natural Selection. Princeton

Lewontin, R.C., 1968. The concept of evolution. In: Sills, D.L. (Ed.),
International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, vol. 5. Macmillan
Co. and Free Press, London and New York.

University Press, Princeton.

Chapter 34

Culture, Brain, and Behavior:
The Implications of Neural Plasticity
and Development on Social Contexts
and Political Structures

R. McDermott
Brown University, Providence, RI, United States

The human mind and brain display remarkable plasticity
and develop in a particularly social context within larger
cultural environments. In this way, the human mind, and
human nature, evolve in constant interactive interaction
with larger social and cultural processes. Neither the ge-
netic and biological processes, nor cultural institutions, are
ﬁxed or static; rather, they each reciprocally shape and
inform each other in rich, ongoing, and dynamic ways. This
chapter seeks to examine some of the recent work that has
been done at the intersection of these forces, and hopefully
enlighten how a more comprehensive understanding of
these processes can shed light on producing a more optimal
convergence between nature and nurture for the beneﬁt of
those most vulnerable to misalignment between these
processes.

This chapter is organized around four central themes
related to this broader topic. Clear overlap exists between
these issues, and the distinctions between them often appear
artiﬁcial or imposed. Other forms of organization are
certainly equally legitimate. However, for purposes of
investigation, these topics serve as focal points of inquiry.
The ﬁrst section explores which aspects of brain function
are likely to be most susceptible to cultural conditioning,
and which might prove most resistant. The second part
examines the interaction between genetic predispositions
and various motivational drives, examining how various
environmental
inputs can help reconstitute, shape, and
otherwise inform basic biological processes. The third
question investigates the reverse process, inquiring into the

ways cultural practices can affect gene expression, epige-
netic processes, through development and other environ-
mental inputs. Finally, special attention will be given to the
interaction of cultural and developmental processes across
levels of analysis. Because of the pressing and pervasive
nature of this concern, most of the speciﬁc applications,
implications,
discussion
throughout are focused on the emergence and nature of
mental illness.

ramiﬁcations

and

of

this

THE INTERACTION OF BRAIN AND
CULTURE
Any successful evolutionary process must allow for inputs
from the environment to signal important repeated chal-
lenges and opportunities to an organism. For this reason,
we would expect the human brain to be attentive to such
information, especially over the course of early develop-
ment, precisely because such cues provide critical input
about
the individual will
encounter, whether it be characterized by abundance or
deprivation, support or abuse. These environmental inputs
help trigger the expression or suppression of particular
genetic capacities; and while each individual may possess
remarkable plasticity, hard boundaries around particular
capacities will exist. Take height as an example: good
nutrition and care will allow a person to maximize their
potential, but there will be an absolute genetic limit to how
tall a given individual can grow to be, even under the best

the kind of environment

that

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00034-X
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

579

580 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

of circumstances. However, it is worth inquiring into which
to be most heavily
mental processes we would expect
inﬂuenced by various environmental
factors, such as
nutrition in the example just provided, and which would we
expect to remain more universal in manifestation, or more
likely moved to ﬁxation and thus relatively impervious to
cultural variation across time and space.

This section examines this question in three speciﬁc
ways. First, an overview of the interaction between brain,
culture, and behavior is provided, with an eye to the most
pressing questions and problems confronting our under-
standing of this area of inquiry. Second, various approaches
to the way in which culture might shape brain structures is
discussed. Finally, the implications and application of this
approach for mental health research and treatment are
described.

Culture, Mind, and Behavior
In his popular book, The Better Angels of our Nature,
Steven Pinker (2011) argues that we are living in possibly
the most peaceful time in our history. He documents the
decline in violence over the course of human history, and
he delves into some of the evolutionary reasons for why
and how this transformation has taken place. In so doing,
he posits deep psychological mechanisms that he argues
constitute innate, universal aspects of human nature. And
although this is not his central question or concern, he
leaves open the exact structure and function of these deep
mechanisms. Yet, clearly if outcomes have changed over
time, and have been inﬂuenced by large-scale social rev-
olutions such as the Enlightenment, as he argues, then
these innate aspects of human nature clearly interact with
environmental, social, and cultural variables to produce
this valuable and important decline in human violence
over time. So how are we to think about the interaction of
these human universals with cultural factors, whether on a
large-scale like the Enlightenment, or the domestication of
animals and the growth of agriculture, or on a smaller
scale,
including the birth of political and economic
institutions?

Experience is patterned by culture, and, as a result, the
mind may be shaped by various cultural variables to a
greater extent than we imagine. This culturally patterned
behavior and experience can, in turn, literally inﬂuence
patterns of connectivity within the brain. We know, for
example, that something as seemingly simple and ordi-
narily as learning to play chess or the piano can, in fact,
inﬂuence, shape, and change patterns of brain connectivity
in just this way. And if learning a game or a musical in-
strument can accomplish such a task, imagine what learning
a set of complex religious beliefs or political principles
might entail. Indeed, in this way, the brain may be a crucial
site for the accumulation of cultural information over a

relatively long span of time. It literally houses our cultural
history within our skull.

But before exploring this topic further,

it might be
useful to ﬁrst clarify our deﬁnitions. There are, for example,
many different meanings of culture. What do I mean by the
use of the term? When I refer to culture, I intend to
encompass the meaning, values, and lay theories and
practices, or scripts, which unite, and may even govern, a
group of people that adhere to them. This typically includes
at least three critical elements: (1) values, or the general
goals or personal states that are endorsed by a given cul-
ture; (2) practices, or those scripts and behavioral routines
that are designed to achieve those culturally endorsed goal
states; and (3) psychological
tendencies, which sustain
active participation in those cultural tasks.

A model that incorporates cultural into the evolution of
the brain might be referred to as a neuro-cultural interaction
model, where the brain is understood as a crucial site that
accumulates cultural
information (Kitayama and Uskul,
2011). In this way, the process involved in incorporating
culture into psychological mechanisms becomes funda-
mentally behavioral rather than merely cognitive in nature.
What would be required for such a deep interaction to
take place over time in such a way that these psychological
mechanisms can become instantiated in genetic structure?
A few factors must necessarily be logically involved. First,
the cultural features themselves likely take place at a macro
level, but could involve large-scale economic, political,
ecological, and societal factors. Climate change or large-
scale social mobility from drought, famine, or natural di-
sasters might also qualify in this realm, especially if they
help precipitate population change through in-migration,
genetic drift, recombination, assortative mating, or other
ecological conditions.
In addition, a society’s cultural
values, tasks, and practices are developed and designed to
achieve consensually agreed upon cultural values. People in
that culture then repeatedly engage in a select set of cultural
tasks, depending on what a given situation or environment
may call for at a particular time and place. These practices
may then lead to long-term changes in collective patterns of
neural activity that facilitate the perpetuation of these cul-
tural practices. These now psychologically instantiated
patterns of connectivity can reproduce the spontaneous
enactment or reenactment of culturally scripted behaviors
when such behaviors are called for given particular envi-
ronmental opportunities or constraints. The manifestation
of these practices thus helps establish individual identity
within the group, and it establishes a person’s reputation as
a member of a particular coalitional community. This
advertising and acknowledgement of coalitional status is
key not only to cultural continuity, but also to the beneﬁts
that derive from such membership, including cooperative
ventures and mating opportunities. Without such commu-
nity ties, individuals as social animals are less likely to

survive in the face of harsh environmental conditions and
predation. In turn, the biological adaptivity of a given set of
cultural practices then can be evaluated by their relative
reproductive success.

In this way, the feedback loop that inﬂuences repro-
duction, as well as prosperity through cooperative ventures,
can change cultural practices and identity formation and
enculturation over time. This can result
in neuroplastic
changes in the brain itself, as both an afﬁrmation of self-
identity and coalitional status, but also to enhance indi-
vidual well-being. Biological changes can result across
generations as various aspects of cultural practice either
enhance or
survival and
reproduction.

the probability of

inhibit

Good evidence in support of this argument comes from
studies of differences between individuals from cultures
traditionally depicted as valuing independence, such as
Western culture, and those differentially valuing interde-
pendence, such as eastern cultures. These are understood to
represent foundational values and provide the wellspring
source for many practices within each respective culture. In
a functional imaging study, Zhu et al. (2007) found that
culture affected the functional neuroanatomy of people
from different cultures in the domain of self-representation.
They showed that Western subjects showed differential
brain activation patterns for judgments about the self and
mother, while Chinese used the same structures to think
about self and mother, showing that culture values around
individuation resulted in notable differences in patterns of
brain activation.
How might

these different processes emerge? Such
practices clearly involve both an element of choice as well
as culture inﬂuence. Over time, people imbued in an in-
dependent culture come to invest themselves in choices that
are made largely in private, whether as a result of intrinsic
motivation or cognitive dissonance, whereas those who
grow up in an interdependent culture differentially invest
themselves in choices made in public, choices which need
to be publically anchored before they can exert an impact
on motivation, and thus have impact on the self. These
patterns may develop early, and be moderated by rein-
forcement through very subtle social cues, such as eye gaze
from caretakers, and surveillance regarding when children
are watched or not watched based on what they are doing.
In this way, brain response can be modulated by social cues
in the eyes; such cultural practices can thus automatically
replicate themselves as they become deeply ingrained at an
unconscious level, yet predicted by patterns of social
reinforcement. These patterns may differ by domain, and
self-representation represents only one potential area, but
social and socio-emotional relations are likely imprinted in
this way early on, and thus may be less malleable to
environmental change over time as an individual reaches
adulthood. In this way, culture becomes embedded into

Culture, Brain, and Behavior Chapter | 34 581

im-
evolution by helping individuals achieve biological
peratives such as early social support, attachment
that
facilitates mating, and parental bonding that optimizes
child-rearing. Thus, cultural acquisition becomes a critical
way in which people prepare themselves for the repro-
ductive market.

Culture and Brain Structure
The brain may be the proximal cause of any given
behavior, but culture still exerts a durable inﬂuence on
behavior as well. And as just noted, social identity can
cause durable changes in the brain as well. Han et al. (2013)
discuss just these phenomena in their cultural neuroscience
approach to the biosocial nature of the human brain.
Building on an earlier deﬁnition she had put forth with
Chiao and Ambady (2007), Chiao (2010, p. 109) deﬁned
cultural neuroscience as an “interdisciplinary ﬁeld bridging
cultural psychology, neurosciences and neuro-genetics that
explains how the neurobiological processes, such as genetic
expression and brain function, give rise to cultural values,
practices and beliefs as well as how culture shapes neuro-
biological processes across macro- and micro-time scales.”
And increasing evidence has been demonstrating the
various ways in which cultural background and upbringing
inﬂuence neural substrates in differential ways, at both high
and lower levels of cognition (Han and Northoff, 2008;
Worthman et al., 2010).

There are at least two domains in which culture can be
represented in the brain, and it can exert different properties
in each (Richerson and Boyd, 2008). First, culture can help
organize brain structures,
through a long history of
coevolution between the human brain and social structures.
Indeed, there are large brain areas that have adapted to
taking on cultural components, including learning intrinsi-
cally motivated domains such as language acquisition, so-
cial organization, and the use of technology such as tools.
Second, culture can reorganize brain structures that may
have evolved for different purposes. After all, the brain is
highly plastic, and even over a shorter history of ostensible
coevolution with cultural practices, various aspects of brain
function have been recast for new but related purposes. For
example, learning that requires extrinsic motivation may
have emerged in several domains, including reading and
writing as by-products of language, and more complex
forms of social organization, as may occur in egalitarian
states.

Gene-cultural coevolution will

tend to convert and
reorganize brain structures into more organized ones
through processes of exaptation. Coevolution between
genes, brains, and culture represents an ongoing process
(Richerson and Boyd, 2008; Cochran and Harpending,
2009; Chiao, 2009) with continual reciprocal
iteration.
Autism can be seen as a model for representing what

582 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

coevolution has accomplished because treatment requires
teaching a set of social rules that appear automatically and
occur spontaneously in those who are unaffected.

in observational

Nevertheless, although culture remains highly complex
and variable, its transmission must remain based on efﬁ-
cient mechanisms of social learning. This can take place
through various mechanisms, such as processes of imita-
tion (Tomasello et al., 1993; Tomasello, 1993), including
biased imitation and joint attention (Carpenter and Toma-
sello, 1995; Tomasello, 1999) and social learning (Nagell
et al., 1993). One of the most interesting and productive
methods of investigating the acquisition of culture has
involved the comparison between monkeys and young
human children in various aspects of social
learning
(Drayton and Santos, 2014; Leimgruber et al., 2014;
Rosatiet al., 2014). This work illustrates not only the
evolutionary bases of some forms of social learning in
humans, but it also points to important discrepancies be-
tween what monkeys do and what humans do. In some
cases, young children’s tendency to imitate can make them
less efﬁcient than monkeys in various problem solving
tasks. Whiten et al. (1996) examined contrasts between
chimpanzees and humans
learning.
McElreath et al. (2008), using both an evolutionary model
as well as experimental tests, demonstrate the individuals
employ both payoff information as well as information
about frequency in making their strategic decisions about
which social information to utilize. Using an fMRI study,
Vogt et al. (2007) demonstrated that various aspects of the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex were involved in selecting
and integrating existing functions within the mirror neuron
system in processes of imitation. Keysers and Gazzola
(2010, 2014) provide additional evidence implicating the
role of mirror neurons in facilitating processes of social
learning, including the ability to engage in joint action, and
utilize projection to enhance mind reading capacity. Bloom
(2002) argues that this mind reading ability allows for
word learning as one aspect of a broader
inferential
mechanism that also potentiates the ability to represent
others’ mental states. In another magnetic resonance im-
aging (MRI) study, Dehaene et al. (2010) show that liter-
acy, attained either in childhood or adulthood, literally
changes cortical organization, providing profound evi-
dence that culture can change the structure, as well as the
function of human nature. Of course, this work acknowl-
edges that
including
dysfunctions such as dyslexia, as well as differences in
learning to read and write, or connect the object recogni-
tion system to the referential language system. Marinkovic
et al.
(2003) explored the relationship between these
auditory and visual systems in trying to map the repre-
sentation of object recognition. They found that
these
systems really take place in different parts of the brain but
come together in the language center. Anderson (2010)

large individual differences exist,

posits that neural reuse models can help explain how brain
circuits that evolved for one use can be exploited and
redeployed for other uses to help explain how such pro-
cesses of cortical reorganization could take place, sug-
gesting some application not only for understanding the
effect of literacy on cortical reorganization, but also other
cultural acquisition processes such as tool use.

This critical work outlines very speciﬁc aspects of
cultural learning, and how they take place within the human
brain. But if we broaden out to return to Pinker’s larger
point, which instigated this section, regarding what
is
deeply universal in human nature, many take this point to
imply an almost unalterable nature of human mind. Yet the
human mind remains a product of evolution, and this un-
derstanding requires a shared assumption that the human
mind is alterable over time, in constant interaction with
environmental variables. So, how do we deﬁne ﬂexibility
and malleability of the mind? And what kind of time line
would this require? Even more to the current point, can
sociocultural inﬂuences reorganize the very mechanisms by
which we learn culture itself? Can, or should, we learn how
to transmit culture differently?

One of the interesting points in this regard relates to
how social support can affect the interaction between genes
and culture. If we learn culture in part through the ways that
we imitate and interact with others, then the degree and
kind of social support involved in these processes becomes
critical. Yet, there is some evidence that cultural differences
exist in social support seeking, with emotional social sup-
port seeking being more normative in Western cultures like
the United States than in other cultures in East Asia, in
particular, indicating that variance, rather than universality,
may drive at least some aspects of cultural adoption and
transmission. Luo and Han (2014), Luo et al. (2015), and
Han and Ma (2015) found that the expression of a poly-
morphism on the oxytocin receptor (rs53576) predicted
processes of both social support seeking and emotion
regulation. Those Americans with the AA type used more
emotional suppression than those with the GG type,
although the opposite pattern was found among Koreans.
Similarly, Americans with the GG type sought more
emotional social support than those with the AA type, but
only under conditions of distress; Koreans did not display
any such differences in social support seeking by genotype.
Such differences suggest not only that behavioral pheno-
types may differ across cultures, but that culture itself can
moderate behavioral outcomes associated with particular
genotypes. This suggests that when a person experiences a
basic need or psychological tendency, it can be expressed
differently depending on culture because that disposition
responds to the environment differently depending on
where we are and what kind of social and ecological
reinforcement we receive for the expression or suppression
of various behaviors.

Cultureegene coevolution thus demonstrates one way
in which behavior can affect both brain structure and
function. But what is the point of studying the brain if we
already know a person’s behavior? Precisely because the
brain can indicate more proximate mechanisms about how
cultural information comes to be stored in the mind, the
brain serves as a physical repository of cultural information
and provides information about how culture and mind
interact to produce the behavior we witness.

If brain activity is mediated by social context, then MRI
studies may be able to provide some information about
some of the ways in which such processes take place,
especially by comparing before and after images occurring
across some intervention. However, such inferences may
provide only weak evidence, since the inferred region of
putative operation in the brain can make a huge difference
in the interpretation of subsequent data received. Depend-
ing on the question of interest, other methods may prove
more useful. Such approaches might include genome-wide
association studies; however, genetic effects often exist at
very small sizes, often only in interaction, and thus require
population samples in the thousands, which can limit some
kinds of investigations due to ﬁnancial or logistical limi-
tations. Pooling across consortiums might allow for the
incorporation of greater ethnic diversity in samples, while
in-depth proﬁling and phenotyping of a more limited
number of individuals may allow for an investigation of
more novel genetic contributors, rendering trade-offs in
both time and money inevitable in these kind of
investigations.

What do we learn by adding brain phenotyping into an
equation designed to understand the sources of human
nature? Is such categorization better than other kinds of
behavioral measures? Brain phenotyping can provide a
certain level of information that would be hard to get from
behavior alone, and it can help make predictions about
what various brain regions tell us. We can then use that
information as a signature that allows us to examine related
processes in that region. By obtaining more information on
pathways of brain connectivity and location with regard to
particular processes, or behavioral outcomes, we can better
understand the psychological mechanisms that entrain
various kinds of behavior.

These processes are neither simple nor reductionist. It is
not that genes cause behavior directly, or that culture af-
fects genes directly, because more is involved than a simple
mapping across levels of analysis, but examining the rela-
tionship between genes, culture, and behavioral outcomes
of interest can allow us to begin to try to illuminate the
ways that genes worm their way up in inﬂuence, just as
culture drills down its inﬂuence simultaneously. Complex
behaviors are likely produced by different mechanisms
involving multiple systems across various levels of orga-
nization;
the level of complexity is geometric, not

Culture, Brain, and Behavior Chapter | 34 583

arithmetic in nature. Observers are inevitably reductionist
when making attributions about other people’s areas. But if
we want to learn more about the biological substrates of
behavior, and how these factors might facilitate or limit
human expression and experience, we need to mix levels of
analysis in examining outcomes of interest. The challenge
is not to confound explanations across various levels of
analysis. And the question is how to do this without
becoming too reductionist, or too mired in the political
implications and associations of
reductionism. This is
important because studying the distribution of various ge-
netic factors across a population, or between populations,
can be meaningful for investigating where and how com-
mon variance may be adaptive and useful in one context,
moot in a second, and perhaps dysfunctional in a third.

Culture and the Human Brain
If there are functional as well as anatomical changes in the
brain as a function of cultural experience, as the afore-
mentioned work suggests,
then what are the critical
developmental periods for cultural
inﬂuence on such
changes? One of the challenges in exploring this question
relates to the paucity of longitudinal brain imaging work,
which makes it difﬁcult to track the evolution of these
processes over developmental time.

just

However, some things are known. It has been well
established that neural plasticity is a common experience of
the brain (Hubel and Weisel, 1962; Hirsch and Spinelli,
1970). In addition, training, as well as experience, affects
the anatomical structure of the brain. In a famous study of
jugglers, Draganski et al. (2004) showed context-dependent
learning produced not
functional but anatomical
changes in the brain by demonstrating changes in the part
of the brain associated with processing complex visual
motion. Thus, experience modulates brain structure and
anatomy. As a result, it becomes possible to conceptualize
culture as an experience that inﬂuences the brain in pro-
longed and profound ways. Thus, we would expect to see a
strong inﬂuence of culture on the brain. However, it is
possible that different cultural systems affect which do-
mains would beneﬁt from conserving plasticity and which
might be better served by moving to ﬁxation or extin-
guishing altogether. Features present in the early environ-
ment may help inform such practices at an individual level,
but
these experiences would not necessarily expand or
generalize into larger cultural changes, although it
is
certainly possible that larger cultural changes are instigated
in part by such shifts, particularly if they occur among
multiple members around the same time. One can imagine
that greater tolerance for diverse sexual practices might
have emerged in this fashion.

If we expect this, where would be expect to see it? How
would we expect to observe such effects? And what do we

584 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

mean by culture? Is it malleable? How do we divide it into
meaningful sections for investigation independent of the
brain that processes and reproduces it? Is the brain the seat
of all thought, feeling, and action? Should we pay more
attention to what is going on inside the head than what is
going on in the world around us? Or should more attention
and effort be focused on theorizing about the nature of
context and culture independent of brain science?

Importantly, cultural values themselves help shape our
interpretation of research on the brain and culture (Markus
and Kitayama, 2010). Speciﬁcally, we exist and work at a
watershed cultural moment that has produced a different
and shared notion of what it is to be a person. Western
culture and civilization has built one model of a person, and
we live within the historical legacy of that notion. This
idea, going back at least to Descartes (1637), constructs an
autonomous bounded image of an individual as a thinker;
this notion has infused our science, so that when we think
of a person we think of a thinker, a disembodied person
who exists separate from their environment, work, and
cultural context. He operates separately from others,
thinking, not doing, moving, feeling, or engaging. This
notion has established our traditional and historical legacy
and grounds the assumptions that scientists have largely
worked with across many generations. But this vision has
morphed dramatically. Now, science shares the view that
the unit of analysis needs to be a person (brain) in constant
interaction with his or her environment, and it recognizes
the needs to study that entire cycle in an ongoing and
reciprocal way. We now understand that a person and his or
her brain is shaped, conditioned, and changed by many
aspects of the environmental context, including other peo-
ple, and in turn, it continually evolves and shapes those
structures, environments, and others as well. As a result,
our unit of analysis is shifting, and our interpretations have
begun to change as well, as we come to recognize the
malleable nature of the person and how each individual
depends on, and needs, their environment to be complete.
Yet, this view of humans as interdependent, social, rela-
tional, malleable individuals who engage in constant
neuronal recycling to recruit and reuse biological structures
in a dynamic cycle between genes and environments does
not yet represent the popular press, or even the informed
public’s notion of human nature.

So, this makes it difﬁcult to think about how best to
examine and interpret the meaning and function of the
aforementioned neural plasticity in a broader cultural
context. The brain can display large-scale changes in con-
nectivity as a result of training and experience, as mentioned
earlier, but that need not imply local functional differences.
However, such local changes can nonetheless result in larger
change as well. In particular, there are at least two different
kinds of connectivity: physical, which can sometimes be
detected using MRI technology, and functional, which can

be examined using diffuser tensor imaging, which cannot
give physical connectivity information. There should be
detectable differences in connectivity, but this may not
necessarily indicate whether or not these differences are real
or true. Is physical connectivity correlated with cultural
difference? Can you manipulate functional connectivity?
What areas co-vary or coactivate? What regions of the brain
cooperate under different circumstances (for example,
resting versus task speciﬁc)? If culture makes a difference,
does it make a difference to resting state? If so, that would
suggest that culture can induce a global change in connec-
tivity, not simply transient, task-dependent changes. If it
does make a difference in task connectivity based on
embedded culture, how might this change over time, and
what might be the underlying mechanisms for such change
over time?

Clearly neuro-genesis is not restricted to children, but it
occurs in adults as well, demonstrated perhaps most
famously in the study of hippocampi in taxi drivers in
London, whose representations of spatial size increased as a
function of their job (Maguire et al., 2006). This study
showed that particular environments can cause changes in
certain areas of the brain. In addition, various develop-
mental phases certainly precipitate profound changes,
including puberty, pregnancy, or menopause, and age alone
affects both the brain and the experience of culture. Sex
hormones prove critical in puberty, producing secondary
features and synaptic pruning. Paus et al. (1999) show in-
creases in white matter in the brain during adolescence, and
gradual maturation that supports speech and motor func-
tions. So, clearly, the brain is adapted for variation and
ﬂexibility both in biology and in interaction with local
ecology, and these facets enlighten our understanding of
how people acquire and enact culture.

Culture shapes how we want to feel and how we deﬁne
health and illness. In particular, culture shapes what we
think of as normal, thus inﬂuencing how clinicians assess,
treat, and deﬁne mental health and mental illness. After all,
culture shapes illness, how we deﬁne it, and how it is
expressed. Disorder manifests differently across cultures,
and there is rarely, if ever, a single biological marker for a
particular mental illness (Jansma et al., 2004; Zhang and
Raichle, 2010). In short, culture deﬁnes the disease, not
simply affecting its expression. Thus, clinicians need to
think about how a particular mental
illness is situated
within the larger culture context and how particular ill-
nesses some to be deﬁned by culture because the same
illness can play out differently across different cultures:
what looks odd in an American context will differ from an
Asian one. And even within certain cultures, differences
can emerge; behavior that looks normal in one subgroup
can appear quite extreme in another, as can be seen in
comparing Amish to normal American subcultures, for
example. And huge individual variance can exist even

within speciﬁc cultural contexts. But, regardless, culture
affects the assessment, deﬁnition, and treatment of mental
illness, and treatment itself varies within particular cultural
contexts. Clinical assessments need to take culture into
account in assessing illness if they are to be comprehensive
and accurate.

it

Yet, we know almost nothing about the intergenera-
tional transfer of notions of ideal emotional experience and
expression across immigrant population and how that af-
fects parentechild communication. But
is certainly
possible, if not likely, that such interactions might switch
the circuitry of underlying behavior depending on cultural
context and patterns of parental interaction. And certainly
methodological challenges are presented by history and
experience that can be transgenerational in nature. Rather,
we often use highly nonrepresentative samples to make our
characterizations of human nature in what has become
known as the science of WIERDs (white, industrialized,
educated, rich, and democratic). Whether this sample rep-
resents the broader cultural group we are trying to under-
stand remains an open question.

GENETIC PREDISPOSITIONS AND
MOTIVATIONAL DRIVES
One of the ﬁrst questions that needs to be addressed in
examining the interaction between genetics and culture
revolves around whether or not evidence exists that positive
selection has occurred around particular functions or be-
haviors. Wang et al. (2006), using a 1.6 million single
nucleotide protein (SNP) genotype data set, found evidence
for such positive selection using an innovative linkage
disequilibrium decay technique to demonstrate such selec-
tion in 1.6% of SNPs. Replicating these ﬁndings with an
independently generated sample of one million SNPs, they
locate evidence for genetic selection in areas such as
hostepathogen interactions, reproduction, DNA and pro-
tein metabolism, and neural function. None of these areas
should be surprising, since all these dynamics would have
presented repeated challenges that humans would have
needed to overcome across time and space to survive and
ﬂourish.

Successful mechanisms and strategies would be ex-
pected to reach ﬁxation and achieve uniformity over time,
except for a few mutations as a result of normal transient
injuries and in-migrations. The question then becomes
whether such genetic instantiations can become highly
geographically differentiated. Big differences in vital areas
such as vision or metabolism would not be expected to
occur often or randomly, because such difference should
not occur by chance, but rather as a result of positive se-
lection on the basis of ecological variability, as might be
expected to occur in skin pigmentation based on degree of
sun exposure.

Culture, Brain, and Behavior Chapter | 34 585

For evidence of a more universal effect of positive
natural selection on signiﬁcant behavioral traits, we would
look for similar effects in different places. Of course the
interaction of genetics and culture represent subtle, itera-
tive, and interacting processes, and recent evidence sug-
gests that the rate of human evolution has been accelerating
over time, at least partly as a function of increased popu-
lation; changes in culture and ecology affect human de-
mographic growth, and vice versa (Hawks et al., 2007).
Cochran and Harpending (2009) argue that these changes
have become exponential over the last 10,000 years as
humans have changed their environments and thus radically
changed their ecology as well. Speciﬁcally, they examine
how changes such as increased lactose tolerance and dis-
ease resistance allowed Europeans to formulate a new way
of life. In particular, such forces as the domestication of
livestock and the development of agriculture intertwine
with human biology to spur more rapid genetic changes
over time.

Of course, mutations in genes do not always serve to
improve the ability of humans to survive, but such muta-
tions are, by deﬁnition, unlikely to survive across many
generations. According to Rogers and Harpending (1992),
the number of mutations that appear
in a population
respond to selection pressures as a linear function of the
number of people in that population, so as the population
grows, it accelerates the number of possible new mutations,
creating opportunities to respond to selection pressures that
are not present in the context of smaller populations. With
environmental change, most new mutations do not survive.
It is, after all, easy for mutations to damage things, and
much rarer to witness mutations making things better for
humans, on average. As a result, most new mutations do
not survive, although sometimes there can be an advantage
to a decrease in some genes, or an advantage to heterozy-
gosity, as when extreme selection pressures can produce
such outcomes with diseases such as sickle cell anemia or
thalassemia in response to the threat of malaria, or cystic
ﬁbrosis protecting against typhoid fever. In other words,
some mutations that help you reproduce faster in some
geographic areas do not necessarily help you survive in
other environments. In this way, evolution can give with
one hand and take away with another.

Cultural Neuroscience: CultureeGene
Interactions on Brain and Behavior
The preceding discussion raises an important question. If
environment can inﬂuence biology, then what aspects of
the environment matter? Many aspects of an environment
or culture could potentially exert an inﬂuence on human
biology in an inﬂuential and reciprocal manner. Potentially
anything from living in an urban versus a rural environment
to variants in religious beliefs and practices could affect

586 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

human behavior in decisive ways that could affect biology.
Indeed, human virtues that designate good or bad, beautiful
or ugly, also help create practices that help formulate crit-
ical aspects of social and ecological environments. What do
we know about culture, and how it might integrate with
environments in meaningful ways? How does culture in-
ﬂuence our neurological representations of the self? How
do we map cultural values to neural processes, using some
combination
and
advanced neuroimaging or genetic studies (Chiao, 2009)?
How might we examine how ﬂuctuations in neural func-
tioning might be shaped, affected, or otherwise modulated
by cultural values (Chiao, 2010)?

appropriate

surveys

of

culturally

Many of our scientiﬁc models remain constrained by
our samples, and prevent us from being able to fully delve
into the ways that internal versus external representations
and maps of the world, or the mapping of physical envi-
ronment or mental states to biological ones help shape,
cultureebiology in-
instigate,
teractions. The recognition of the simultaneous temporal
and spatial
interactions in development have led to
increased focus on the way neuroplasticity allows for the
interplay of culture and biology in shaping brain and
behavior across the entire lifespan (Li, 2003).

and sustain dynamic

Such diversity in the shaping of brain and culture
obviously offers some important beneﬁts, but it simulta-
neously places demands on an individual to try to achieve
understanding and communication across the inevitable
gulf in human experiential reality, thus placing a premium
on the need for empathic processes to overcome such
challenges (Hein and Singer, 2008).

Diversity represents a kind of adaptation to allow for
humans to survive and thrive across a wide variety of
ecological and social contexts across time and space that
takes place across multiple levels of analysis (Chiao and
Ambady, 2007; Chiao, 2009). Such ﬂexibility in human
development helps potentiate the cultureegene coevolution
processes that help shape brain, behavior, and culture, and
allow them to vary in ways that may prove differentially
beneﬁcial. For example, Chen et al. (1999) showed that
different populations differed in their propensity to carry
the long variant of the dopamine D4 receptor (DRD4),
which has been associated with novelty seeking. They seek
to tie this variance to propensity for migration among
nomadic versus sedentary populations. Variants on this
receptor (DRD4/7R) may have provided advantages to
nomadic populations by affecting body mass index, which
could prove critical to survival in chronically undernour-
ished populations, such as nomadic tribes (Eisenberg et al.,
2008). If certain people who are then predisposed toward
such novelty seeking were then placed in sedentary jobs,
the risk for what then becomes labeled hyperactivity and
obesity becomes obvious, although the advantage of that
predisposition in the context of a different
set of

environmental pressures also remains clear. Similarly,
Green et al. (2008) found a relationship between variants in
COM-T and egalitarian versus despotic tendencies not
dissimilar from that found in primates. Such variance could
provide insight
into who leads and who follows in-
migration patterns, among other outcomes related to lead-
ership patterns. In this way, it becomes possible to see how
mapping cultural to genetic features can help inform the
evolution of human behavior in the context of genee
environment interplay.

One of the constant pressures most likely to have sha-
ped various aspects of cultureegene coevolution would
relate to pathogens and the need to avoid contamination and
infection, and this would have always varied by location, as
indeed it does now. Some areas are more susceptible to
certain kinds of pathogens than others because of temper-
ature, local pests, and other factors. Fincher et al. (2008)
tested the notion that cross-cultural differences in important
human behaviors differ by the rate of pathogens in local
environments by examining cultural variation in individual
versus collectivist values. They suggest that cultural values
privileging collectivism would enforce practices such as
ethnocentrism and conformity that would have reduced the
likelihood of transmission of pathogens, and therefore they
would be expected to be more prevalent in areas that his-
torically had experienced higher rates of pathogens. And
indeed, controlling for other factors, they ﬁnd this to be the
case. Similarly, Fincher and Thornhill (2008) make a
similar argument to account for greater religious diversity
in areas with higher pathogen rates. They suggest that areas
with dense pathogens select for behaviors that encourage
in-group sociality, outgroup avoidance, and limited inter-
action across groups. Because such isolation and strict
boundaries lead to more groups being established, those
areas with more pathogens should foster a greater diversity
in cultural practices such as religion, and indeed this is what
they ﬁnd in both traditional and modern cultures.

In important extension of this argument to the realm of
mental health, Chaio and Blizinsky (2009) found a rela-
tionship between genetic variance on the serotonin trans-
porter gene (5HTTLPR) and cultural values along the
individualistecollectivist cultural continuum examined by
Fincher et al. (2008) with regard to pathogens. They found
that collectivist cultures were more likely to possess the
short form of the allele, which as with Fincher et al. (2008)
can be predicted by the historical prevalence of pathogens.
Interestingly, those who carried the short form of the allele
showed lower rates of mood disorders in the context of
collectivist cultures, suggesting that culture can provide a
buffering effect for those who might otherwise be at
increased risk for such disorders. This is consistent with
ﬁndings reported by Canli and Lesch (2007), who reported
a relationship between genetic variants on this transporter
gene and processes involved in emotion regulation and

social cognition, showing how life stress can modify its
functioning in the brain. Culture would certainly serve to
either exacerbate or ameliorate the role of life stress in the
functioning of all kinds of activities in the brain.

This work demonstrates that the short allele on the se-
rotonin transporter shows greater prevalence in east Asian
regions where disease and pathogens were more prevalent
historically, and this variant of the allele appears to work to
protect the population from mood disorders in the context
of collectivist cultures. But this social regulation may work
too well in other contexts, causing adjustment problems
when it appears within the context of more individualist
the parenteinfant remains a rela-
cultures. Importantly,
tionship exceedingly important in determining the impact
of this allele in humans and monkeys: with bad parenting,
the short allele leads to risk, but with good parenting, it
leads to adaptive outcomes. The allele works to affect an
individual’s sensitivity to culture; and parenting style is
passed intergenerationally by nongenetic factors as well as
genetic factors. A person can have the short version of the
allele and be good parent. But most people parent accord-
ing to the kind of parenting they experience, causing
increased risk in children that are exposed to both genetic
and nongenetic risk factors in terms of mood disorders.

Studies that attempt to relate cultural traits to genetic
inﬂuences can be very challenging to pursue. It can be very
difﬁcult to identify associations between cultural factors
and genetic traits, both within much less across pop-
ulations. Using information from genome-wide association
tests both within and across populations,
it would be
important to identify how culture interacts with identity and
other aspects of brain function to inform the delicate and
sophisticated reciprocal interaction between brains, culture,
and behavior. Nonetheless, as these studies demonstrate,
cultural values can shape neural representations, and neural
processes can systematically differ as a function of cultural
values and forces.

Research Implications
Examining the effect of the various phenomena raised
earlier is not always easy or straightforward. The effects of
environment and experience are not at all the same; the
latter is more personalized. Stimuli does not always map
well
to experience, and how environmental factors as
opposed experiential ones are measured will likely differ.
And, to complicate things further, neural plasticity in the
brain can shift as a result of both developmental factors and
vary with social and cultural context, including in the ways
described earlier.

Exposure to various aspects of the environment does
not happen randomly either.
into
different environments, friendship networks, and experi-
ences. And while culture and such factors as ethnicity can

Individuals

select

Culture, Brain, and Behavior Chapter | 34 587

affect these selections, so can genetic factors. For example,
those who are more predisposed to fear will be less likely to
engage in risky activities. These choices around self-
selection into various environments and networks can
affect outcomes of interest as well.

it

rats,

That does not mean that

is not worth trying to
investigate the human brain. Some aspects of brain
morphology can provide a window into an individuals’
history. Evidence from the visual cortex of
for
example, shows that rats from more complex environments
have more synapses per neuron than those from less com-
plex environments, showing that the brain adapts to the
demands, constraints, and opportunities of given environ-
ments (Sirevaag and Greenough, 1987). People seem to
show similar plasticity as well. Research has shown how
experience and training can change the brain, as a famous
study of juggling shows (Dragansku et al., 2004). In other
words, brains change as a result of the environments to
which they are exposed.

fear

Importantly, brains are not only shaped by environ-
ments and experiences but also other people. Blais et al.
(2008) showed that culture even shapes something previ-
ously thought to be as universal as facial processing. In
their study,
they found that while White Caucasians
showed the typical attention to eyes and mouth, east Asians
paid more attention to the center of the face. Jack et al.
(2009) show the complexity involved in adequately ac-
counting for cultural divergences in facial expression and
recognition. They show that people from East Asia, by
relying on culturally speciﬁc decoding strategies that overly
persist in paying attention to the eyes, have a hard time
differentiating facial expressions of
from disgust,
calling into question the purported universality involved in
the recognition of the facial expression of emotion and
emotion signaling. Observers can learn about meaningful
cultural differences from examining divergent patterns of
brain activation and comparing groups based on ethnicity,
culture, etc., to help deduce and infer certain information
about which aspects of social cues and emotions have been
processed by individuals looking at faces and other body
parts such as hand movements (Grosbras and Paus, 2006).
Problems often arise in examining as well as explaining
cultural differences, however, because large swaths of the
general population think and believe that genetic effects are
ﬁxed, and so most people assume that there is no point in
investigating anything because even if identiﬁed, genetic
effects cannot be changed. And yet, the profound plasticity
of the brain over the course of development and across
experiences betrays the deep naïveté in such a view.

Part of the way to overcome such incorrect perceptions
involves seeking to more fully educate the population about
genetic variation and what it means. It is important for the
public to understand that variation between continents in
genetic accounts for about 9% of variation, while 91% of

588 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

variance appears within continents. Thus, there is more
variation within than between populations. However,
behavior, especially culturally conditioned mating norms,
can and does affect genetic structure. In cultures that
commonly practice cousin marriage, for example, espe-
cially ﬁrst cousin marriage, children display high levels of
homozygosity,
leading to a much higher prevalence of
disease. This can prove very expensive from a public health
standpoint. Furthermore, much of variation at the level of
expression does not result from genetic causes; epigenetic
processes control and regulate such of this expression,
especially over the course of time, suggesting a strong
environmental modulation of gene expression over time
(Fraga et al., 2005).

It is early days in seeking to understand these processes,
but scholars need a more careful evaluation of what factors
contribute to such variation in expression. Epigenetics
studies offer very few cases of transgenerational phenom-
enon. So how can scholars begin to determine the modes of
transmission for complex cultural phenomena that do not
appear to have a genetic basis, such as religion? When the
majority of the genome does not code for structure, and the
majority of genes under positive natural selection regulate
the operation of other genes, scholars need to ﬁgure out
how genetic transmission affect the rules by which epige-
netic processes operate.

With regard to the positive effects of natural selection,
there is a difference between knowing that some feature or
factor affects ﬁtness and knowing how it works. Where
does it originate? What are the circumstances in which it
was originally adaptive? How does it
translate across
generations or ecologies? Epigenetics could be important in
connecting maternal effects across generations, but how
would might epigenetics affect time scale across genera-
tions? Such factors would have to depend, at least in part,
on the stability and regularity of environments, and the
consistency with which environmental cues and triggers
signaled particular challenges, contingencies,
incentives,
and outcomes. Culture becomes important because it helps
program us about what to do in particular environments.
However, if people rely on such environmental stability to
make choices, and those circumstances shift,
then the
foundational mechanism for making decisions will atrophy
over time.

When scholars typically examine a locus of selection to
investigate mechanisms of genetic transmission, the focus
is on DNA and its relationship to some outcome, disease, or
behavior. In this sense, genetic analysis is traditionally
applied to a contiguous stretch of DNA, and functionally
focused on a locus of selection. But precisely because of
the vast degree of neural complexity and plasticity involved
in geneeenvironment interaction, we need to broaden the
public understanding of what a gene is. Genetic inheritance
is complex, and the mechanisms that allow genes to be

expressed, including the vast array of epigenetic mecha-
nisms, not just the identiﬁcation of base pair sequences,
need to be incorporated into our explanations. And from
this perspective, culture becomes a form of epigenetic
sequence. Cognition extends to the environment, and
functionality of behaviors within a given cultural context
can prove very important for survival.

In examining the effect of culture on genetic trans-
mission, and exploring the interaction between genes and
environment, one of the key questions revolves around
exactly how plastic is the human genome? Does culture
affect its plasticity? Cultural inﬂuences do not require gene
plasticity, but self-selection of individuals into particular
environments or social networks as a result, in part, of
genetic dispositions can inﬂuence the ways that various
culture forms redound within any given individual’s
biology.

Some complications can arise as a result of these in-
ﬂuences, however. It is possible, for example, to have the
same environment in which two different populations exist
and thus end up with different responses. Lactose intoler-
ance provides but one example of
this phenomenon
demonstrating that coevolution can happen without neces-
sarily inviting determinism; lactose tolerance was not pre-
served in Mongolia despite dairy in the form of yogurt and
cheese remaining important dietary staples. The same ge-
notype can produce different phenotype selections within a
population,
just as different adaptations can sometimes
result in the same effect.

In short, while structural DNA may code for amino
acids that make exons that make protein, and may be the
most difﬁcult to change, other regulatory factors such as
epigenetic processes are where most of the action is pre-
cisely because it is these mechanisms that help determine
what aspects of the genetic code are expressed or not in any
given context. Note that the same genes that help explain
current variation in some outcome of interest need not be
the same ones that caused the historical variation in those
outcomes. In this way, proper characterization of descrip-
tive expression alone, while important, cannot provide the
foundational basis for the development of accurate causal
models.

CULTURAL PRACTICES AND LONG-TERM
EFFECTS ON GENE EXPRESSION AND
EPIGENETIC PROCESSES
We can learn a great deal about geneeenvironment inter-
play in the context of developing humans from examining
their development
in nonhuman primates. In this area,
Steve Suomi and colleagues have conducted some truly
remarkable and enlightening work to examine the effect
of parenting behavior on social adjustment in monkeys

(Harlow and Suomi, 1971, 1974; Mineka and Suomi, 1978;
Newman et al., 2005; Suomi and Harlow, 1972; Suomi,
1991, 2006; Suomi et al., 1970, 1975, 1976).

settings,

interact

In naturalistic

individual differences

in
temperament, genes, and environment
to shape
individual developmental trajectory in monkeys, just as in
humans. In some illuminating work, some infant rearing
practices were manipulated. When this happened, 20% of
the monkeys demonstrated fear in the face of novel stimuli,
and they showed elevated levels of cortisol as measured in
their hair. Such responses had a highly heritable compo-
nent, and uptight monkeys were at risk for depression and
anxiety disorders. In addition, 5% showed impulsivity and
would do stupid things socially, which would elicit
aggression, showing inappropriate aggression as well.
Elevated aggression showed biological characteristics as
well, including deﬁcits in serotonin metabolism.

These monkeys live in large social groups called
troops that exhibit the same basic social structures. Several
have matrilineal family groups where the males leave at
puberty, and all males then work their way into other
troops. In rhesus monkeys, multiple dominance hierar-
chies exist in each troop, and within each family by age.
Hierarchy in males within a troop is based on seniority,
but it really revolves around alliances, with high-ranking
females being the ones who carry real clout within
group. Therefore, hierarchy among infants roughly reﬂects
the position of their mother. Therefore, these monkeys
need to keep the recent social history of their troop straight
to keep track of their own social hierarchy. Monkeys who
are good at doing this, do well in the group; otherwise,
they do not survive. For the ﬁrst month after birth, mon-
keys remain in constant contact with their mother and
form an attachment bond, which they then use to explore
from this secure base. About 20% remain with their
mother at 6 months. During this period, the presence of the
mother is very important to the monkey, and the infant
becomes quite upset if the mother is gone; the child will
not explore or begin interaction with peers. This time is
critical for the infant to learn to polish their behavioral
skills. They develop problems with reproduction and
problems with aggression if they are denied access to play
during this period. Because monkeys copulate year round,
most infants have many peers available.

In these experiments, some monkeys were taken from
their mothers and reared in a nursery with other monkeys
like themselves until they reached about 6e7 months old,
when they were then put back in with mother-reared kids.
Monkeys raised in peer environments developed hyper-
attachments to each other and displayed other dysfunc-
tions;
they showed less exploration than mother-reared
monkeys, and their play repertoires were never as intense
or complex as mother-reared infants. Moreover, peer-raised
infants proved more fearful, and they displayed elevated

Culture, Brain, and Behavior Chapter | 34 589

cortisol under conditions of challenge;
they were more
impulsive and aggressive, and they showed deﬁcits in se-
rotonin, with less serotonin binding, and more alcohol
consumption. In short, such monkeys appear to provide an
animal model for the development of anxiety, depression,
substance abuse, and attachment disorders in humans.
Further, they showed structural and functional differences
in their brains in areas affecting behavioral and emotional
regulation. Upon genome-wide association tests,
these
monkeys displayed many genes that were differentially less
methylated than genetically identical mother-reared mon-
keys. Overall, peer-raised monkeys showed a difference in
4400 genes in their chromosomes, representing one-ﬁfth of
their entire genome. Most of these differences appeared in
serotonin, hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, and
vasopressin levels but not in T cells in the immune system.
In short, early rearing affected everything in gene expres-
sion. In addition, there were some notable sex differences
in behavioral output, with females more anxious after pu-
berty, but not before, and males more aggressive overall
than mother-raised infants.

So,

and emotion regulation outcomes,

if early environments are really important

in
determining overall main effects on a wide variety of
behavioral
even
affecting differential methylation, what is going on in good
mothering? In short, good mothering involves intense face-
to-face gazing and interaction and lip-smacking with in-
fants. These behaviors begin to drop out around 3 weeks of
age when the infant begins to explore social world. In
short, good mothering provides buffering, while bad
mothering (ie, those mothers who did not engage in such
interactive behaviors) produced children who appeared
indistinguishable from peer-raised monkeys. Interestingly,
some monkeys appear
to be able to overcome bad
parenting if they are put in a stable supportive environ-
ment, especially during puberty.

Culture and Gene Regulation in Humans
Why can you run an experiment with monkeys and see
huge effect and, by contrast, in free-range human beings get
few effects? Where is the heritability? The major reason for
this variability lies in the fact that experiments can be very
powerful in stabilizing experience. But experience is often
highly regulated, and humans are great at being masters of
our own species. Humans optimize phenotypes. We often
use the same phenotypes to reshape our environments, and
our capacity to do so often depends on the ability of the
environment to change our biology in response to local
ecological constraints and opportunities. In addition, we
can use our internal individual changes to self-select into
different environments. These choices will not necessarily
reverse our evolutionary heritage, but this ability to over-
come our own evolutionary history does mean humans can

590 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

play with, and like, instrument differently than one other,
and still end up with same song even though each person
produces their own song in it different way with different
tones and pitches.

One of the amazing ways in which we achieve a sense
of consistency with ourselves over time is that we often
experience ourselves, on a day-to-day basis, barring injury
or illness, as being the same person living in the same body,
on average. In fact, there is a rather huge discontinuity
between how we experience our bodies as stable biological
worlds, in the world but separate from it, and the reality that
in fact our bodies are ﬂuid and permeable. The basis for
such ﬂuidity lies in the fact that the typical half-life of
protein is about 80 days, which means that for every day of
life, we each have to replace 1% of ourselves. We are not
the constant physical being we often experience ourselves
to be; rather, we are continually in the process of regen-
erating ourselves. How does this happen? It happens
through the regulated expression of genes, but that process
is highly contingent. Just because you have genes does not
mean each one is actively at work every instant. Stretches
of DNA get transcribed to become RNA, which then builds
proteins that inﬂuence behavior. And indeed, ﬂuidity comes
from that experience, although most genes are silent, and
while we most often experience the self as stable and in-
dependent, the molecular self is ﬂuid and permeable. But
this ﬂuidity and constant regeneration allows the capacity
for various aspects of the environment to get into and
change the body. And the social environment can also serve
to regulate gene expression. Not all genes are on most of
the time; indeed, most genes are off most of time, and they
need to be turned on by some environmental exigency,
internal or external, to operate. While there is some logic to
the notion that genes make up the self, some of these genes
are necessarily responsive to the environment, and the so-
cial environment in particular changes the expression of
genes.

In other words, social interaction helps shape body, and
social isolation causes many difﬁculties in basic biological
processes as a result. Indeed, subjective social isolation has
an effect on gene expression in the immune system (Cole
et al., 2007). This process of social isolation works in
profound and pervasive ways to inform individuals about
their environment through the body. In this way, social
indicators and processes provide a signal
transduction
pathway by which an individual comes to recognize
whether they face an environment of threat or safety,
abundance or deprivation, support or abuse. This infor-
mation travels down through the central nervous system;
indeed, this is precisely the kind of information regarding
threat and safety that brains were made to understand and
interpret. Brains were built precisely so that human biology
could respond to threats defensively. But as George Kelley
and Harry Stack Sullivan noted long ago, subjective

construal is key to everything, because it is only through
such subjective construal, mediated by culture, that the
nature of threat or safety can be properly assessed within a
given social environment and speciﬁc ecological setting.

This is the reason why we often do not ﬁnd relation-
ships between observed behavioral differences and reported
(or, more likely, self-reported) factors. What is perceived is
more critical
to biological signaling than what appears
objective. In addition, there is also often a bias in self-
report. Therefore, much of what exists in people’s heads
does not appear in observable behaviors. Indeed, that is
often why we use fMRI to help us assess what is going on
in people’s heads when they make decisions. They need not
be lying to be incapable of accessing all the many processes
that occur between perception and response. Social roles
regulate the genome in incredible, complex ways: receptors
talk to transcription factors; many talk to more than one;
there is a high degree of network complexity that gets
delivered back to the genome. This means if you can
remodel a stream of information at time 1 and change its
characteristics, the events at time 1 can literally restructure
who you are. Those proteins hang around for 80 days,
leaving you a slightly different person, exhibiting a slightly
different response to the world. This means that your re-
action to a different environmental stimulus at time 2 is
different than it would be had you encountered it before
time 1, or had someone else with a different life history
encountered it at time 2 (Cole, 2009). Thus, personal his-
tory becomes a self-generating process at both a biological
and molecular level, constituting a recursive developmental
model. Just as evolution represents a history of the species,
personal gene expression embodies the evolution of DNA
gene expression proﬁles and offers an adaptive history of
the personal environmental ﬂux we are confronting.

In this way, social experience can remodel experience
through a process of recursive regeneration. For example,
Miller et al. (2009) show that children who grow up in
lower socioeconomic circumstances show increase risk of
many forms of chronic illness in their 50s and 60s as a
result of basic biological defenses than children who grow
up in richer environments. What proves adaptive in one
situation might not work in another. For example, children
who are more sensitive to angry faces might beneﬁt in vi-
olent neighborhoods, while such tendencies might predis-
pose those same individuals for greater risk of depression
and anxiety later in life. Sloan et al. (2007) demonstrate
how social stress provides a plausible mechanism by which
environmental inputs modulate the functioning of the im-
mune system in response to pathogen threat. Weaver et al.
(2006) show that, as with Steve Suomi’s monkeys,
maternal care provides another environmental input that
can affect mood in adulthood. They ﬁnd that social factors
can remodel gene expression that leaves ﬁngerprints on the
biology of organisms in the future. This process is

surprisingly enduring and happens
surprisingly fast.
Therefore, lifestyle looms large in the kinetic response to
stress.

On the other hand, such effects can exert remarkable
persistence. As Miller et al. (2009) and others demonstrate,
the effects of past socioeconomic status can dominate
current SES, and the residual ﬁngerprints of past social
assault can leave enduring effects.

In effect, within this model, culture expresses itself as a
central nervous systememediated interpretation of envi-
ronment. Culture provides context for the psychological
mediators such as threat, uncertainty or social isolation
which culture can regulate through its effect on neural re-
sponses to environmental stimuli. With disadvantageous
upbringing and developmental imprinting that portends a
dangerous, deprived, or lonely world, self-perpetuating
recursions can keep individuals in a defensive psycholog-
ical state with enormously detrimental physical and mental
consequences in an otherwise objectively benign world.
Culture transforms social phenomena like emotion and
motivation into signals that follow transduction pathways
across the neuroendocrine system to mediate these effects.
Important avenues for future research involve further ex-
amination of which genes are most sensitive to cultural
effects, as well as investigation of which features of culture
are more inﬂuential on genetic structures. For example,
some genetic polymorphisms might
render some in-
dividuals more sensitive or more resistant to cultural in-
ﬂuences on gene expression (Cole et al., 2010).

Just like monkeys, humans are collective social animals.
We need other people, and culture provides some of the
rules and norms that guide social interaction within a col-
lective context. If culture breaks up social integration, then
humans end up ﬁghting against the basic wiring diagram
we are all born with. To the extent humans are at odds with
their culture, costs to mental health can accrue, even pro-
ducing illness or contributing to early morbidity or
mortality.

Adaptation, Embodiment, and Ecology
Humans have killed off all competitors; we are the only
survivor of the genus Homo. As a result, we have wiped out
a lot of diversity, so we need to pay attention to adaptation.
We are designed to live and be in culture. Humans cannot
make it alone, without culture; if an individual cannot live
in culture, he peripheralizes himself, and in so doing
essentially commits suicide. Humans need to make it so-
cially to survive physically. As a result, we keep a keen eye
on local ecology, assessing deﬁnable features that can be
quantiﬁed.

But what

is this meaning-making machine we call
culture? How do we operationalize it in practice, not as
scholars, but as individuals seeing to negotiate the social

Culture, Brain, and Behavior Chapter | 34 591

world? The key aspect of adaptation to local environments
is the recognition that human bodies come prepared to
interact with the environment. In short, to maximize pros-
pects for survival, the individuals are born environmentally
expectant; physically and genetically, the body knows that
the environment is always going to have information crit-
ical for survival. As a result, we have evolved and embody
a huge number of mechanisms designed to capture and
utilize that information, and a series of quite sophisticated
strategies designed to map information from the environ-
ment to decide what is relevant for the body’s needs. Some
information we do not pay attention to at all, some we use
parts of, and some captivates all our attention. And various
pathways exist by which each organism decides what is
important and how to respond. These kind of ﬁltering and
strategizing mechanisms are critical to prioritize the stimuli
that is most relevant for survival and ﬁtness. This is because
the amount of information in the world is unlimited, time is
short, and resources are limited. The mind may not be able
to understand and process it all, but the body has been
designed and honed over evolutionary time to be able to tell
us what we need to know; the body tells us all we need to
know about what we have endured in life and what we need
to maximize our chances for survival.

Why have bodies been designed to take on this task?
What is the organism trying to do? Every person is mortal,
but genes are potentially immortal, and so bodies are
designed to orient adaptive expectations to maximize
prospects for reproductive ﬁtness and success. Vigilance
along multiple dimensions is energetically expensive and
demanding, so systems that can monitor and ﬁlter ﬁtness-
related inputs in an automatic, unconscious, privileged,
and effective manner will outperform alternative designs.
These goals can also overlap with conscious desires in
ways that appear normal to help individuals ﬁnd their place
in the world and properly calibrate their added value. A
panoply of diversity exists in the human species, and there
are many combinatorial possibilities in which people can
engage to successfully inhabit a variety of environments.
And the trade-offs that individuals chose in deciding what
is important to focus on in the present, as opposed to which
goals to pursue in the future, become very important de-
terminants of reproductive success.

And, indeed, there are alternative life history strategies
by which different people can try to accomplish the similar
goal of reproductive success. Some people are not afforded
the same social skills and resources that others possess, and
when individuals are not able to develop these skills, it can
become a larger issue for the collective. These outcomes
often follow a fetal origins process that can include the
intergenerational
increased risk. For
example, low birth weight girls are at increased risk of
depression after puberty (Worthman and Kuzara, 2005;
Costello et al., 2007). This pattern is similar to that seen in

transmission of

592 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

developmental risk factors for other chronic illnesses such
as cardiovascular disease and diabetes. In these cases, low
birth weight becomes a proxy measure for suboptimal in-
trauterine conditions. Adjustments that fetuses make to
survive gestation may present delayed risk of later illness
and depression when the person encounters stress for which
they are poorly prepared to adapt because of earlier com-
pensations made to ensure survival. In this way, low birth
weight provides one measure of an individual’s increased
risk of environmental sensitivity. Worthman and Kuzara
posit that the HPA axis operates not only to mediate im-
mediate sources of stress, but it also works to allocate re-
sources across the life span involving gestational, postnatal,
and adult outcomes and pressures. Indeed, drawing on
earlier foundational work by Whiting (1977), Worthman
(2010) demonstrated how the recognition of the power of
early developmental environments can be usefully inte-
grated with knowledge of local ecological environments to
help illuminate our understanding of variations both within
and between populations.

These local cultural variants can have powerful and
profound inﬂuences on health outcomes, for example.
Drawing on earlier work examining cultural consensus by
Romney et al. (1987), Dressler and Bindon (2000) exam-
ined the relationship between blood pressure and culture in
African Americans in the American South. They found a
strong alignment between cultural consonance social sup-
port and blood pressure. To the extent that individuals buy
into their culture but do not, in turn, live up to it, depression
and cardiovascular risk result. Similarly,
in examining
maternal risk from postpartum hemorrhage in Bangladesh,
Hruschka et al. (2008) found that culture presents a menu
of options for treatment whereby not one size ﬁts all. In this
way, it becomes possible to see the strong and diverse
demands placed on culture itself, which has to take a wide
range of individuals and allow as many as possible to grow
up and make meaning for decades within society. This
represents a gigantic exercise, requiring both tremendous
complexity and ﬂexibility in the functioning of culture and
how alternatives are accommodated within those con-
straints. All cultures have to tell you how to make a life,
how to meet basic daily needs, ﬁnd social support, and stay
on track.

Cultures are less good at providing guidance when
things do not go as planned and individuals are thrown off
track by their heritage, development, or experience, as
could happen, for example, in the case of children forced
into child soldiering. And in fact, no one has looked at the
inﬂuence of historical trauma on gene expression, although
interesting work has shown the risk for diabetes and other
chronic illnesses among mothers who gave birth during the
famine in Belgium in 1943e45; those effects have been
shown to last at least across two generations (Roseboom
et al., 2001). Brown et al. (2006, 2009) and Ryan et al.

(2009) have developed a useful and robust scale to assess
how the life history trajectory of youth including structural
conditions and social processes affects important outcomes
such as risk for mental illness.

Of course, individuals are not merely passive recipients
of culture, so it is equally important to examine how we
shape experience of our own culture actively. For example,
one factor that repeatedly emerges as important for resil-
ience is the involvement of a singular caring adult; an in-
dividual’s ability to locate and make full and proper use of
such a resource can prove critical to development.

Of course, individuals as well as the community of
cells within any given individual face constant resource
allocation challenges. At the cellular level, local circuits
can be devoted to a particular task, or broader networks
can be organized into different patterns to achieve different
results. In this way, neural organization and adaptation can
be examined in the context of such organization and the
web of dependencies that constitute them. Mapping some
behaviors to circuits may help uncover those that might be
easier or harder to change, or where change might be more
destabilizing for the whole organism depending on how
neural structures work together, or shifts that may occur in
the face of
re-
sources. Moreover, different behaviors become more
salient and critical at different ages, for example during
puberty or childbirth. It is very important to trace the ef-
fects of such critical periods on the way in which changes
to resources may prove more or less disruptive to the
overall organism.

increased or decreased environmental

Of course, none of this is to say that the genes them-
selves are irrelevant. Indeed, founder effects are important,
as is genetic drift,
in explaining genetic differences in
populations. But cultural adaptation to such differences also
exerts a critical force. In this way, populations get stuck
with a set of gene frequencies and then they have to adapt
to those changes in ways that are not selective. Cultural
responses can help develop better adaptations to facilitate
effective intersocial
interaction with regard to some
particular predispositions as opposed to others. In other
words, culture can modify the effect of genes. Genes may
represent the cards we are dealt, but culture provides the
games you play with those cards. And if you miss your
allocation of cards from the start, either as a result of
biology or environment, you may not be able to ﬁnd or buy
others later on, and thus may be left out of the important
reproductive game altogether.

In sum, cultural and developmental context and gene
important and complex processes.
expression represent
And developmental
time frames can prove especially
critical. In a complex world, everything is always chang-
ing, and our response to those changes also depends on
genetic expression. Thus, we need to seek to better
understand the speciﬁc nature of genetic expression within

particular cultural contexts because culture can increase
or decrease genetic sensitivity to a wide variety of envi-
ronmental factors. Humans need to remain ﬂexible and
able to change over the course of development, while the
timing and impact of genetic changes from macro to
micro take place simultaneously and internally. As a
result, all humans experience multiple levels of challenge
in striving to increase their capacity through the various
stages of development. For each individual, the goal is not
identical or static. Rather, the ideal outcome takes place
within a particular and speciﬁc cultural context. Huge
cultural variations are not connected to genetic ones, and
this means that culturally appropriate ways to respond
to, and interpret, biological exigencies will differ and must
be properly integrated into the particular meaning system
for each culture to maximize health and reproductive
success. Each individual has to decide what behavior
they need to undertake, and understand what
that
behavior means given their preferred outcome. That is the
essence of adaptation within the context of cultureegene
coevolution.

INTERACTION OF CULTURE AND
DEVELOPMENT
Human behavior takes place across multiple levels of
analysis that need to be integrated to provide a more
comprehensive understanding of development across the
life span. As noted earlier, multiple levels of organization
can produce parallel convergence. And emergent organi-
zation can result from the reciprocal determinism that en-
gages both biology and culture.

Genes are selected by environments, even across the
course of a single lifetime. For example, testosterone level
predicts sexual advances in nonhuman primates, just as the
number of available women predicts the level of testos-
terone in nearby males. This simple illustration shows the
principle of reciprocal determinism in action by demon-
strating how bottom-up and top-down inﬂuences can
operate simultaneously, and by showing how environ-
mental forces affect brain function and physiology.

However, this notion of multiple determinism can prove
critically difﬁcult and problematic in undertaking the
practical aspects of multilevel analysis. If, for example,
multiple phenotypes combine to determine the interaction
of genes, environment, and epigenetic inﬂuences in wild,
the very large samples may be needed to identity small but
replicable effects across a population. The risk then lies in
the overgeneralization of the putative importance of a
particular genetic or neural variable contributing to how
things work. And a partial sample may not necessarily be
representative of the large population or culture. Achieving
precision in this process can take a lot of time to narrow the
mapping of patterns of circuits and conﬁgurations to

Culture, Brain, and Behavior Chapter | 34 593

behavioral outcomes of interests, especially because genes,
much like chemistry, can operate differently computation-
ally when combined with others genes whose function and
purpose we may not fully understand yet.

So how do social and environmental exposures get
under our skin to affect our risk for illness or other out-
comes? And how might culture mediate and inﬂuence that
process? Culture on the ground is a very real process. Its
structure affects how people respond to various constraints,
incentives, opportunities, and challenges. We can change
culture by changing people within culture, although that
certainly may prove extremely difﬁcult and would entail
thorny political questions about who decides what
to
change and why. Yet culture changes itself constantly. It is
continually produced and reproduced by its practitioners
through many recursive processes, practices, and behav-
ioral cascades. Many of these reproductions center around
power dynamics, and they identity politics that are largely
context based. Intervention designed to help children adapt
more successfully might strive to take advantage of the
very recursive nature of culture. Culture requires a deeper
understanding of the exquisitely social manifestation of
behavioral cascades. After all, culture represents a shared
manifestation of representations that are embedded in deep
context-speciﬁc meaning. It thereby becomes the process
by which individuals engage their brain, which produces
and reproduces both biological and cultural changes in
tandem, and in reaction. This is the very reason why cul-
tures in many forms can perpetuate across time and shape,
manifesting both ﬂexibility and endurance.

Examining the interaction between biology, culture, and
development allows us to question what otherwise might
appear the most natural to us. Yet various cultures present
multiple competing messages about how to be a person.
And small interventions can refocus attention through these
deeply recursive processes of change. Micro-environment
changes accrue beneﬁts from the speciﬁc context
in
which they draw meaning; the fact that culture is deep and
recursive does not mean that small interventions cannot
work to improve health outcomes across generations,
particularly if they are generated within and perpetuated by
these deeply recursive cultural processes that produce and
shift meaning across generations.

Just as the vast majority of genetic variance occurs
within and not between populations, the same occurs in
cultural contexts such as neighborhood research. So then
the question becomes what can you do to examine the
sources within culture variation and how best to explore
disparities and variation within the group. What dimensions
of variation should be investigated? After all, environ-
mental events have many dimensions. How do these ﬁt
within the context of a given conceptual frame? Can
scholars traction the instability of a given environment to
help sort people by how genotype inﬂuences them and offer

594 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

purchase on potentially buffering aspects of psychosocial
development? Additional challenges occur because out-
comes associated with risk and resilience vary with timing
and environment; being poor when an individual is young
appears to matter more for important outcomes such as
educational achievement. Early poverty can impose weight
for life.

Similarly, events that occur later in life can also affect
meaningful biological outcomes as well. For example,
status matters in achieving health. In the famous Marmot
et al. (1991) Whitehall study of civil servants in England
involving the exact same good health care system, all cause
morbidity and mortality outcomes varied as a function of
status. Furthermore, such differences later in life could be
accounted for by the social class of the individual at age 5.
From a research perspective, the question then becomes
how to tie the brain, culture, and behavior together to
explain larger cultural variations within groups rather than
simply between groups. Many cultural changes are exog-
enously imposed, and it might be possible to take advan-
tage of exogenous changes to look at
the interaction
between brains and environment. Obviously, culture must
have genetic basis, but genes function in such a way that
they interact with culture. And, as noted before, speciﬁc
types of genes have founder effects that produce path de-
pendency cascades within certain individuals and contexts
and provide background for certain cultures to sustain
themselves across time and space. Coevolution between
genes and culture happens precisely because of this deep
and mutually recursive interaction of genes and environ-
ments. In this way, different evolutionary contexts and
ecologies make it possible to create different cultures that
develop in certain times and places as guided by speciﬁc
ecological and environmental pressure.

However, once instantiated, these cultures can take on a
life of their own and replicate independent of the original
forces that may have help co-create them. Many cultural
evolution processes are driven by variation. Over time,
culture gets naturalized and becomes as unconscious as
many biological processes such as breathing, although
similar conscious attention may be able to control elements
of both. However, moral investment often comes with the
naturalization and institutionalization of cultural codes, and
these can take on not only religious and political overtones,
but
they also become shaped by power dynamics and
preferences among those with resources and status within
societies. Hierarchies can then operate to sustain dynamic
processes that serve to beneﬁt those in positions of power,
or those who hold sway over the coercive instruments of
power, within necessarily redounding to others within a
society. While the risk of overthrow can emerge when
egalitarian norms are not enforced (Boehm and Boehm,
2009), large cultural biases such as the sexual subjugation
of women can perpetuate when large numbers beneﬁt
reproductively by their maintenance.

And, indeed, lots of cultural traits become institution-
alized, and certain deviations within them are sanctioned;
however, the same process does not happen with genes.
Humans cannot choose their parents, and early effects can
have enormous and enduring impact; however, we do get to
choose at least some of our social network, and even when
you cannot change gene expression and methylation, some
work suggests that ﬁnding a supportive social network can
help overcome early deﬁcits. However, if individuals return
to bad environments, risks may return, and even healthy
genetic structures may not be able to overcome these
detriments.

CONCLUSION
New tools designed to investigate the functioning of the
brain, such as functional MRI, offer potentially powerful
avenues by which to explore various mental processes as
they interact with environmental input. However, observers
also need to remain aware of the possibility that witnessed
activations are epiphenomenal, and multiple techniques
need to be employed to see what is real and what is not. To
inject causality to determine the unique contribution of a
given region, it is important to understand the limitation of
various methodologies. Otherwise, ﬁndings may just
contribute to the noise. To begin to understand the complex
interplay of brains, culture, and behavior, it is important to
understand what is happening physiologically. What does
any given signal mean? However, it also important to keep
the large view in mind, and to strive to map psychophysi-
ology and behavior to larger cultural process to begin to
understand how genes map into and onto larger cultural
processes.

In this way, it becomes important to map out systems.
Rational models of human behavior and those driven by
subconscious goals designed to maximize prospects for
reproductive success are not analogous. Yet,
the latter
models are where the action lies. And in this regard, animal
models can be useful, but it is also important to recognize
the ways in which humans are distinct as well as similar to
animals. Humans, for example, appear to be the only ani-
mals who are really good at imitation. Nonetheless, we can
use animal modes to get at basic processes and principles
that we can then test in humans for concordances and
discrepancies.

In the larger exploration of the interaction between
biology, genes, culture, brain, and behavior, a few recurring
themes emerge across a variety of relevant species using a
diverse array of methods. Child-rearing practices matter
and can be used, in part, to help characterize various cul-
tures and to make inferences about their preferred forms of
social organization. If parents or children suffer from early
disadvantages or detriments, those effects can last a long
time, and they can be very difﬁcult to overcome. Such in-
dividuals,
in short, can have a bad time in life.

Experiencing multiple or severe traumatic early life events
can produce horrible effects depending on an individual’s
particular genetic predisposition in interaction with the
environmental circumstances they encounter. Some genetic
polymorphisms serve important roles in forging culture,
and many cultural practices need to be selected from a
repertoire of options. Therefore, a feedback loop exists
between biology and culture that can extend across a range
of generations. And the evidence appears overwhelming
that
in signiﬁcant and decisive
ways with particular parenting practices to either support or
harm children within given cultural contexts.

these processes interact

As discussed earlier, genes are not ﬁxed, but rather
their expression remains plastic depending on various as-
pects of early development and cultural context. Gene by
environment models to explain all kinds of behaviors and
outcomes are now ubiquitous, but real biological processes
can be traced back to the very molecular development of
the gene and how its architecture changes in response to
stimuli. Such architectural change, especially early in life,
leads to changes in the gene that result from outside forces
and stimuli; these effects derive in large part from culture.
These effects represent environmental effects on gene
expression and myelination. And these effects can be
lifelong and involve the intergenerational transmission of
experientially derived information. As with the Dutch
mothers who gave birth during tremendous famine, and
whose children and grandchildren experienced increased
risk of diabetes as a result, this genetic transformation
can occur in absence of the environmental
that
spawned it.

input

Like weather, each human represents a large dynamic
system that can change on a dime. There will always be a
great deal of missing data as we seek to uncover and un-
derstand the complex and interactive ways in which genes,
brain, behavior, and culture evolve and manifest. But, in the
end, the reality is that we each exert way more control over
our own biology than does our DNA. We have the ability to
change the architecture of life, and personal will and
character can win out over the destructive inﬂuence of
negative life events every time. Culture provides each of us
with a menu of options from which we can choose our
behavior, and culture can shape and change our reactions to
the dishes we order. But ultimately, we each have the
ability and personal freedom to ﬁnd our own ingredients in
the form of resources and social networks that provide
support and devise a recipe appropriate for the making of
our own life within our own rich and unique context.

REFERENCES

Anderson, M.L., 2010. Neural reuse: a fundamental organizational prin-
ciple of the brain. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 33 (04), 245e266.
Blais, C., Jack, R.E., Scheepers, C., Fiset, D., Caldara, R., 2008. Culture

shapes how we look at faces. PLoS One 3 (8), e3022.

Culture, Brain, and Behavior Chapter | 34 595

Bloom, P., 2002. Mindreading, communication and the learning of names

for things. Mind & Language 17 (1e2), 37e54.

Boehm, C., Boehm, C., 2009. Hierarchy in the Forest: The Evolution of

Egalitarian Behavior. Harvard University Press.

Brown, R.A., Worthman, C.M., Costello, E.J., Erkanli, A., 2006. The Life
Trajectory Interview for Youth (LTI-Y): method development and
psychometric properties of an instrument to assess life-course models
and achievement. International Journal of Methods in Psychiatric
Research 15 (4), 206e215.

Brown, R.A., Kuzara, J., Copeland, W.E., Costello, E.J., Angold, A.,
Worthman, C.M., 2009. Moving from ethnography to epidemiology:
lessons learned in Appalachia. Annals of Human Biology 36 (3),
248e260.

Canli, T., Lesch, K.P., 2007. Long story short: the serotonin transporter in
emotion regulation and social cognition. Nature Neuroscience 10 (9),
1103e1109.

Carpenter, M., Tomasello, M., 1995. Joint attention and imitative learning
in children, chimpanzees, and enculturated chimpanzees. Social
Development 4 (3), 217e237.

Chen, C., Burton, M., Greenberger, E., Dmitrieva, J., 1999. Population
migration and the variation of dopamine D4 receptor (DRD4) allele
frequencies around the globe. Evolution and Human Behavior 20 (5),
309e324.

Chiao, J.Y., Ambady, N., 2007. Cultural neuroscience: parsing univer-
sality and diversity across levels of analysis. In: Kitayama, S.,
Cohen, D. (Eds.), Handbook of Cultural Psychology, pp. 237e254.
New York.

Chiao,

J.Y., Blizinsky, K.D., 2009. Cultureegene coevolution of
individualismecollectivism and the serotonin transporter gene. Pro-
ceedings of
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2009.1650.

Chiao, J.Y. (Ed.), 2009. Cultural Neuroscience: Cultural Inﬂuences on Brain

Function: Cultural Inﬂuences on Brain Function, vol. 178. Elsevier.

Chiao, J.Y., 2010. At the frontier of cultural neuroscience: introduction to
the special issue. Social, Cognition and Affective Neuroscience 5,
109e110.

Cochran, G., Harpending, H., 2009. The 10,000 Year Explosion: How

Civilization Accelerated Human Evolution. Basic Books.

Cole, S.W., Hawkley, L.C., Arevalo, J.M., Sung, C.Y., Rose, R.M.,
Cacioppo, J.T., 2007. Social regulation of gene expression in human
leukocytes. Genome Biol 8 (9), R189.

Cole, S.W., Arevalo, J.M., Takahashi, R., Sloan, E.K., Lutgendorf, S.K.,
Sood, A.K., Sheridan, J.F., Seeman, T.E., 2010. Computational
identiﬁcation of geneesocial environment interaction at the human
IL6 locus. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107 (12),
5681e5686.

Cole, S.W., 2009. Social regulation of human gene expression. Current

Directions in Psychological Science 18 (3), 132e137.

Costello, E.J., Worthman, C., Erkanli, A., Angold, A., 2007. Prediction from
low birth weight to female adolescent depression: a test of competing
hypotheses. Archives of General Psychiatry 64 (3), 338e344.

Dehaene, S., Pegado, F., Braga, L.W., Ventura, P., Nunes Filho, G.,
Jobert, A., Dehaene-Lambertz, G., Kolinsky, R., Morais,
J.,
Cohen, L., 2010. How learning to read changes the cortical networks
for vision and language. Science 330 (6009), 1359e1364.

Descartes, R., 2006. Discourse on method (1637). The Philosophical

Works of Descartes 1, 92.

Draganski, B., Gaser, C., Busch, V., Schuierer, G., Bogdahn, U., May, A.,
2004. Neuroplasticity: changes in grey matter induced by training.
Nature 427 (6972), 311e312.

596 PART | II Psychology, Behavior and Society

Drayton, L., Santos, L.R., 2014. Understanding interspecies variation in
primate prosocial behavior: insights from capuchin monkeys (Cebus
apella). Behavioral Sciences 4, 87e101.

Hubel, D.H., Wiesel, T.N., 1962. Receptive ﬁelds, binocular interaction
and functional architecture in the cat’s visual cortex. The Journal of
Physiology 160 (1), 106e154.

Dressler, W.W., Bindon, J.R., 2000. The health consequences of cultural
consonance: cultural dimensions of lifestyle, social support, and
arterial blood pressure in an African American community. American
Anthropologist 102 (2), 244e260.

Eisenberg, D.T., Campbell, B., Gray, P.B., Sorenson, M.D., 2008.
Dopamine receptor genetic polymorphisms and body composition in
undernourished pastoralists: an exploration of nutrition indices among
nomadic and recently settled Ariaal men of northern Kenya. BMC
Evolutionary Biology 8 (1), 173.

Fincher, C.L., Thornhill, R., 2008. Assortative sociality, limited dispersal,
infectious disease and the genesis of the global pattern of religion
diversity. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences
275 (1651), 2587e2594.

Fincher, C.L., Thornhill, R., Murray, D.R., Schaller, M., 2008. Pathogen
prevalence predicts human cross-cultural variability in individualism/
collectivism. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences
275 (1640), 1279e1285.

Fraga, M.F., Ballestar, E., Paz, M.F., Ropero, S., Setien, F., Ballestar, M.L.,
Heine-Suñer, D., Cigudosa, J.C., Urioste, M., Benitez, J., Boix-
Chornet, M., Sanchez-Aguilera, A., Ling, C., Carlsson, E.,
Poulsen, P., Vaag, A., Stephan, Z., Spector, T.D., Wu, Y.Z., Plass, C.,
Esteller, M., 2005. Epigenetic differences arise during the lifetime of
monozygotic twins. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America 102 (30), 10604e10609.

Green, A.E., Munafò, M.R., DeYoung, C.G., Fossella, J.A., Fan, J.,
Gray, J.R., 2008. Using genetic data in cognitive neuroscience: from
growing pains to genuine insights. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 9
(9), 710e720.

Grosbras, M.H., Paus, T., 2006. Brain networks involved in viewing angry

hands or faces. Cerebral Cortex 16 (8), 1087e1096.

Han, S., Ma, Y., 2015. A cultureebehaviorebrain loop model of human

development. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 19 (11), 666e676.

Han, S., Northoff, G., 2008. Culture-sensitive neural substrates of human
cognition: a transcultural neuroimaging approach. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience 9 (8), 646e654.

Han, S., Northoff, G., Vogeley, K., Wexler, B.E., Kitayama, S.,
Varnum, M.E., 2013. A cultural neuroscience approach to the biosocial
nature of the human brain. Annual Review of Psychology 64, 335e359.
Harlow, H.F., Suomi, S.J., 1971. Social recovery by isolation-reared
monkeys. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 68 (7),
1534e1538.

Harlow, H.F., Suomi, S.J., 1974.

Induced depression in monkeys.

Behavioral Biology 12 (3), 273e296.

Hawks, J., Wang, E.T., Cochran, G.M., Harpending, H.C., Moyzis, R.K.,
2007. Recent acceleration of human adaptive evolution. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 104 (52), 20753e20758.

Hein, G., Singer, T., 2008. I feel how you feel but not always: the empathic
brain and its modulation. Current Opinion in Neurobiology 18 (2),
153e158.

Hirsch, H.V., Spinelli, D.N., 1970. Visual experience modiﬁes distribution
of horizontally and vertically oriented receptive ﬁelds in cats. Science
168 (3933), 869e871.

Hruschka, D.J., Sibley, L.M., Kalim, N., Edmonds,

J.K., 2008.
When there is more than one answer key: cultural theories of post-
partum hemorrhage in Matlab, Bangladesh. Field Methods 20 (4),
315e337.

Jack, R.E., Blais, C., Scheepers, C., Schyns, P.G., Caldara, R., 2009.
Cultural confusions show that facial expressions are not universal.
Current Biology 19 (18), 1543e1548.

Jansma, J.M., Ramsey, N.F., Van Der Wee, N.J.A., Kahn, R.S., 2004.
Working memory capacity in schizophrenia: a parametric fMRI study.
Schizophrenia Research 68 (2), 159e171.

Keysers, C., Gazzola, V., 2010. Social neuroscience: mirror neurons

recorded in humans. Current Biology 20 (8), R353eR354.

Keysers, C., Gazzola, V., 2014. Hebbian learning and predictive mirror
neurons for actions, sensations and emotions. Philosophical Trans-
actions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 369 (1644),
20130175.

Kitayama, S., Uskul, A.K., 2011. Culture, mind, and the brain: current evi-
dence and future directions. Annual Review of Psychology 62, 419e449.
Leimgruber, K.L., Ward, A.F., Widness, J., Norton, M.I., Olson, K.R.,
Gray, K., Santos, L.R., 2014. Give what you get: capuchin monkeys
(Cebus apella) and 4-year-old children pay forward positive and
negative outcomes to conspeciﬁcs. PLoS One 9 (1), e87035. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0087035.

Li, S.C., 2003. Biocultural orchestration of developmental plasticity across
levels: the interplay of biology and culture in shaping the mind and
behavior across the life span. Psychological Bulletin 129 (2), 171.

Luo, S., Han, S., 2014. The association between an oxytocin receptor gene
polymorphism and cultural orientations. Culture and Brain 2 (1), 89e107.
Luo, S., Ma, Y., Liu, Y., Li, B., Wang, C., Shi, Z., Li, X., Zhang, W.,
Rao, Y., Han, S., 2015. Interaction between oxytocin receptor poly-
morphism and interdependent culture values on human empathy.
Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 10 (9), 1273e1281.

Maguire, E.A., Woollett, K., Spiers, H.J., 2006. London taxi drivers and
bus drivers: a structural MRI and neuropsychological analysis. Hip-
pocampus 16 (12), 1091e1101.

Marinkovic, K., Dhond, R.P., Dale, A.M., Glessner, M., Carr, V.,
Halgren, E., 2003. Spatiotemporal dynamics of modality-speciﬁc and
supramodal word processing. Neuron 38 (3), 487e497.

Markus, H.R., Kitayama, S., 2010. Cultures and selves A cycle of mutual
constitution. Perspectives on Psychological Science 5 (4), 420e430.
Marmot, M.G., Stansfeld, S., Patel, C., North, F., Head, J., White, I.,
Brunner, E., Feeney, A., Smith, G.D., 1991. Health inequalities
among British civil servants: the Whitehall II study. The Lancet 337
(8754), 1387e1393.

McElreath, R., Bell, A.V., Efferson, C., Lubell, M., Richerson, P.J.,
Waring, T., 2008. Beyond existence and aiming outside the labora-
tory: estimating frequency-dependent and pay-off-biased social
learning strategies. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B:
Biological Sciences 363 (1509), 3515e3528.

Miller, G.E., Chen, E., Fok, A.K., Walker, H., Lim, A., Nicholls, E.F.,
Cole, S., Kobor, M.S., 2009. Low early-life social class leaves a
biological
residue manifested by decreased glucocorticoid and
increased proinﬂammatory signaling. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 106 (34), 14716e14721.

Mineka, S., Suomi, S.J., 1978. Social separation in monkeys. Psycholog-

ical Bulletin 85 (6), 1376.

Nagell, K., Olguin, R.S., Tomasello, M., 1993. Processes of social
learning in the tool use of chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) and hu-
man children (Homo sapiens). Journal of Comparative Psychology
107 (2), 174.

Newman, T.K.,

Syagailo, Y.V., Barr, C.S., Wendland,

J.R.,
Champoux, M., Graessle, M., Suomi, S.J., Higley, J.D., Lesch, K.P.,
2005. Monoamine oxidase A gene promoter variation and rearing
experience inﬂuences aggressive behavior in rhesus monkeys. Bio-
logical Psychiatry 57 (2), 167e172.

Paus, T., Zijdenbos, A., Worsley, K., Collins, D.L., Blumenthal, J.,
Giedd, J.N., Rapoport, J.L., Evans, A.C., 1999. Structural maturation
of neural pathways in children and adolescents: in vivo study. Science
283 (5409), 1908e1911.

Culture, Brain, and Behavior Chapter | 34 597

Suomi, S.J., 1991. Early stress and adult emotional

reactivity in
rhesus monkeys. The Childhood Environment and Adult Disease
171e188.
Suomi, S.J., 2006. Risk, resilience, and gene environment interactions in
rhesus monkeys. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1094
(1), 52e62.

Tomasello, M., Savage-Rumbaugh, S., Kruger, A.C., 1993. Imitative
learning of actions on objects by children, chimpanzees, and encul-
turated chimpanzees. Child Development 64 (6), 1688e1705.

Pinker, S., 2011. The Better Angels of Our Nature: Why Violence Has

Tomasello, M., 1993. It’s imitation, not mimesis. Behavioral and Brain

Declined, vol. 75. Viking, New York.

Sciences 16 (04), 771e772.

Richerson, P.J., Boyd, R., 2008. Not by Genes Alone: How Culture

Tomasello, M., 1999. The human adaptation for culture. Annual Review of

Transformed Human Evolution. University of Chicago Press.

Anthropology 509e529.

Rogers, A.R., Harpending, H., 1992. Population growth makes waves in
the distribution of pairwise genetic differences. Molecular Biology
and Evolution 9 (3), 552e569.

Romney, A.K., Batchelder, W.H., Weller, S.C., 1987. Recent applications
of cultural consensus theory. American Behavioral Scientist 31 (2),
163e177.

Rosati, A.G., Wobber, V., Hughes, K., Santos, L.R., 2014. Comparative
developmental psychology: how is human cognitive development
unique? Evolutionary Psychology 12, 448e473.

Roseboom, T.J., Van Der Meulen, J.H., Ravelli, A.C., Osmond, C.,
Barker, D.J., Bleker, O.P., 2001. Effects of prenatal exposure to the
Dutch famine on adult disease in later life: an overview. Molecular
and Cellular Endocrinology 185 (1), 93e98.

Ryan, S., Franzetta, K., Schelar, E., Manlove, J., 2009. Family structure
history: links to relationship formation behaviors in young adulthood.
Journal of Marriage and Family 71 (4), 935e953.

Sirevaag, A.M., Greenough, W.T., 1987. Differential rearing effects on rat
visual cortex synapses.: III. Neuronal and glial nuclei, boutons, den-
drites, and capillaries. Brain Research 424 (2), 320e332.

Sloan, E.K., Capitanio, J.P., Tarara, R.P., Mendoza, S.P., Mason, W.A.,
Cole, S.W., 2007. Social stress enhances sympathetic innervation of
primate lymph nodes: mechanisms and implications for viral patho-
genesis. The Journal of Neuroscience 27 (33), 8857e8865.

Suomi, S.J., Harlow, H.F., 1972. Social rehabilitation of isolate-reared

monkeys. Developmental Psychology 6 (3), 487.

Suomi, S.J., Harlow, H.F., Domek, C.J., 1970. Effect of repetitive infant-
infant separation of young monkeys. Journal of Abnormal Psychology
76 (2), 161.

Suomi, S.J., Eisele, C.D., Grady, S.A., Harlow, H.F., 1975. Depressive
behavior in adult monkeys following separation from family envi-
ronment. Journal of Abnormal Psychology 84 (5), 576.

Suomi, S.J., Collins, M.L., Harlow, H.F., Ruppenthal, G.C., 1976. Effects
of maternal and peer separations on young monkeys. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry 17 (2), 101e112.

Vogt, S., Buccino, G., Wohlschläger, A.M., Canessa, N., Shah, N.J.,
Zilles, K., Eickhoff, S.B., Freund, H.-J., Rizzolatti, G., Fink, G.R.,
2007. Prefrontal
in imitation learning of hand
actions: effects of practice and expertise. Neuroimage 37 (4),
1371e1383.

involvement

Wang, E.T., Kodama, G., Baldi, P., Moyzis, R.K., 2006. Global landscape
of recent inferred Darwinian selection for Homo sapiens. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
103 (1), 135e140.

Weaver, I.C., Meaney, M.J., Szyf, M., 2006. Maternal care effects on the
hippocampal transcriptome and anxiety-mediated behaviors in the
offspring that are reversible in adulthood. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 103 (9),
3480e3485.

Whiten, A., Custance, D.M., Gomez, J.C., Teixidor, P., Bard, K.A., 1996.
Imitative learning of artiﬁcial fruit processing in children (Homo sa-
piens) and chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes). Journal of Comparative
Psychology 110 (1), 3.

Whiting, J.W., 1977. A model for psychocultural research. Culture and

Infancy: Variations in the Human Experience 29e48.

Worthman, C.M., Kuzara, J., 2005. Life history and the early origins of
health differentials. American Journal of Human Biology 17 (1),
95e112.

Worthman, C.M., Plotsky, P.M., Schechter, D.S., Cummings, C.A. (Eds.),
2010. Formative Experiences: The Interaction of Caregiving, Culture,
and Developmental Psychobiology. Cambridge University Press.

Worthman, C.M., 2010. The ecology of human development: evolving
models for cultural psychology. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology
41 (4), 546e562.

Zhang, D., Raichle, M.E., 2010. Disease and the brain’s dark energy.

Nature Reviews Neurology 6 (1), 15e28.

Zhu, Y., Zhang, L., Fan, J., Han, S., 2007. Neural basis of cultural

inﬂuence on self-representation. Neuroimage 34 (3), 1310e1316.

Chapter 35

Adaptive Signiﬁcance of Ethics and
Aesthetics

F.J. Ayala
University of California, Irvine, CA, United States

There is grandeur in this view of life, with its several
powers, having been originally breathed into a few forms or
into one; and that, whilst this planet has gone cycling on
according to the ﬁxed law of gravity, from so simple a
beginning endless forms most beautiful and most wonderful
have been, and are being, evolved.

Charles Darwin, On the Origin of Species
[1859, p. 490, ﬁrst ed.]

I fully subscribe to the judgment of
those writers who
maintain that, of all the differences between man and the
lower animals, the moral sense or conscience is by far the
most important.

Charles Darwin, The Descent of Man
[1871, Chapter 3, p. 67]

INTRODUCTION

is,

Ethics is a human universal. People have moral values:
that
they accept standards according to which their
conduct is judged: either right or wrong, or good or evil.
The particular norms by which moral actions are judged
vary to some extent from individual to individual, and
from culture to culture (although some norms, like not to
kill, not to steal, and to honor one’s parents, are widespread
and perhaps universal), but value judgments concerning
human behavior are passed in all cultures. This universality
raises the questions whether the moral sense is part of
human nature, one more dimension of our biological
makeup; and whether ethical values may be the product of
biological evolution, rather than being given by religious
and cultural traditions.

I will deﬁne moral behavior for the present purposes as
the actions of a person who takes into account in a sym-
pathetic way the impact the actions have on others. A related
deﬁnition is advanced by David Copp in The Oxford
Handbook of Ethical Theory (2006, p. 4): “[W]e can take a
person’s moral beliefs to be the beliefs she has about how to
live her life when she takes into account in a sympathetic
way the impact of her life and decisions on others.” Altruism
may be deﬁned in a similar way as, for example, “unselﬁsh
regard for or devotion to the welfare of others” (Webster’s
New Collegiate Dictionary, 10th ed.). Altruism, however, is
usually taken to imply some cost to the altruist for the
beneﬁt of others, and this is the sense in which “altruism”
will be used here. I will use the term “ethical behavior” as a
synonym of “moral behavior,” and “morality” and “ethics”
as synonyms of each other, except when explicitly noted or
contextually obvious that they are used with a somewhat
different meaning. Some authors use morality or “virtue
ethics” in a broader sense that would include good feelings
in regard to others and that exclude inappropriate thoughts
or desires, such as entertaining sexual desires for somebody
else’s wife or wishes that something harmful would happen
to others. So long as these thoughts or desires are not
transformed into actions, they will not be included in my use
of morality. Actions that may be thought to be evil or sinful
in some moral systems, such as masturbation, will not be
included either in my use of morality, so long as the actions
have no consequences for others.

There are many theories concerned with the rational
grounds for morality, such as deductive theories that
seek to discover the axioms or fundamental principles
that determine what
is morally correct on the basis of
direct moral
intuition; or theories, such as like logical
positivism or existentialism that negate rational foundations

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00035-1
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

601

602 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

of morality, reducing moral principles to social decisions or
to emotional and other irrational grounds. After the publi-
cation of Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural selection,
several philosophers as well as scientists attempted to ﬁnd in
the evolutionary process the justiﬁcation for moral behavior.
Aristotle and other philosophers of classical Greece and
Rome, as well as many other philosophers throughout the
centuries, held that humans hold moral values by nature. A
human is not only Homo sapiens, but also Homo moralis.
But biological evolution brings about two important issues:
timing and causation. We do not attribute ethical behavior
to animals (surely, not to all animals and not to the same
extent as to humans, in any case). Therefore, evolution
raises distinctive questions about the origins and tenets of
moral behavior. When did ethical behavior come about in
human evolution? Did modern humans have an ethical
sense from the beginning? Did Neandertals hold moral
values? What about Homo erectus and Homo habilis? And
how did the moral sense evolve? Was it directly promoted
by natural selection? Or did it come about as a by-product
of some other attribute (such as rationality) that was the
direct target of selection? Alternatively, is the moral sense
an outcome of cultural evolution rather than of biological
evolution?

DARWIN AND THE MORAL SENSE

Two years after returning from his trip in the HMS Beagle
(1826e1831), Darwin began gathering contemporaneous
literature on human moral behavior, including such works
as William Paley’s The Principles of Moral and Political
Philosophy (1785), which he had encountered earlier while
a student at the University of Cambridge, and the multi-
volume Illustrations of Political Economy by Harriet Mar-
tineau, published in 1832e1834. These two authors, like
other philosophers of the time, maintained that morality was
a conventional attribute of humankind, rather than a natu-
rally determined human attribute, using an argument often
exploited in our days: the diversity of moral codes.

The proliferation of ethnographic voyages had brought
to light the great variety of moral customs and rules. This is
something Darwin had observed in South America among
the Indian populations. But this apparent dispersion had not
distracted him. He would eventually develop a more
complex and subtle theory of the moral sense than those
contemporaneous authors; a theory that, implicitly at least,
recognized moral behavior as a biologically determined
human universal but with culturally evolved differences.
For Darwin the ethnographic diversity of moral customs
and rules came about as an adaptive response to the envi-
ronmental and historical conditions, unique in every
different place, without necessarily implying that morality
was an acquired rather than natural human trait.

A variable adaptive response could derive from some
fundamental capacity: a common substrate unique for the
whole human race but capable of becoming expressed in
diverse directions. Darwin did not attribute the univer-
sality of morality to supernatural origin, but rather saw it
as a product of evolution by natural selection. The pres-
ence of a universal and common foundation, endowing
humans with an ethical capacity, was
for Darwin
compatible with different cultures manifesting different
stages of moral evolution and with different sets of moral
norms.

Darwin’s ﬁrst sustained discussion of morality is in
chapter 3 of The Descent of Man (1871, pp. 67e102), and
his two most signiﬁcant points concerning the evolution of
morality are stated early in the chapter: (1) that moral
behavior is a necessary attribute of advanced intelligence
as it occurs in humans, and thus that moral behavior is
biologically determined; and (2) that the norms of morality
are not biologically determined but a result of human
collective experience, or human culture as we would now
call it.

After the two initial paragraphs of Chapter 3, which
assert that the moral sense is the most important difference
“between man and the lower animals” (see quotation
from earlier in this chapter), Darwin states his view that
moral behavior is strictly associated with advanced intel-
ligence: “The following proposition seems to me in a high
degree probablednamely,
that any animal whatever,
endowed with well-marked social instincts, would inevi-
tably acquire a moral sense or conscience, as soon as its
intellectual powers had become as well developed, or
nearly as well developed, as in man” (pp. 68e69). Darwin
is afﬁrming that
is a
necessary consequence of high intellectual powers, such as
exist in modern humans. Therefore, if our intelligence is
an outcome of natural selection, the moral sense would be
as well an outcome of natural selection. Darwin’s state-
ment further implies that the moral sense is not by itself
directly promoted by natural selection but only indirectly
as a necessary consequence of high intellectual powers,
which are the attributes that natural selection is directly
promoting.

the moral sense, or conscience,

MORAL BEHAVIOR VERSUS MORAL
NORMS

Darwin also states that even if some animal could achieve a
human-equivalent degree of development of its intellectual
faculties, we cannot conclude that it would also acquire
exactly the same moral sense as ours. “I do not wish to
maintain that any strictly social animal, if its intellectual
faculties were to become as active and as highly developed
as in man, would acquire the same moral sense as ours.

Adaptive Signiﬁcance of Ethics and Aesthetics Chapter | 35 603

[T]hey might have a sense of right and wrong, though led
by it to follow widely different lines of conduct” (Darwin,
1871, p. 70). These statements imply that, according to
Darwin, having a moral sense does not by itself determine
what the moral norms would be: which sorts of actions
might by sanctioned by the norms and which ones would be
condemned.

This distinction is important. Indeed, it is a distinction
central to the theory I will be advancing herein. Much of
the historical controversy, particularly between scientists
and philosophers, as to whether the moral sense is or is not
biologically determined has arisen owing to a failure to
make the distinction. Scientists often afﬁrm that morality
is a human biological attribute because they are thinking
of the predisposition to pass moral judgment: that is, to
judge some actions as good and others as evil. Some
philosophers, such as William Paley and Harriet Marti-
neau, as well as many contemporary philosophers, argue
that morality is not biologically determined, but rather
comes from cultural traditions or from religious beliefs,
because they are thinking about moral codes, the sets of
norms that determine which actions are judged to be good
and which are evil. They point out that moral codes vary
from culture to culture and, therefore, are not biologically
predetermined.

I consider this distinction fundamental (Ayala, 1987,
2010). Thus, I’ll argue that the question of whether ethical
behavior is biologically determined may refer to either one
of the following two issues. First,
is the capacity for
ethicsdthe proclivity to judge human actions as either
right or wrongddetermined by the biological nature of
human beings? Second, are the systems or codes of ethical
norms accepted by human beings biologically determined?
A similar distinction can be made with respect to language.
The question whether the capacity for symbolic creative
language is determined by our biological nature is different
from the question whether the particular language we
speakdEnglish, Spanish, Chinese, etc.dis biologically
determined, which in the case of language obviously it
is not.

The distinction between the predisposition to judge
certain sorts of actions as either morally good or evil and
the norms according to which we determine which actions
are good and which actions are evil, has afﬁnity with the
distinction made by moral philosophers between meta-
ethics and normative ethics. The subject of metaethics is
why we ought to do what we ought to do, while normative
ethics tells us what we ought to do. I will propose that the
moral evaluation of actions emerges from human ratio-
nality, or, in Darwin’s terms, from our highly developed
intellectual powers. Our high intelligence allows us to
anticipate the consequences of our actions with respect to
other people and, thus, to judge them as good or evil in

terms of their consequences for others. But I will propose
that
the norms according to which we decide which
actions are good and which actions are evil are largely
culturally determined, although conditioned by biological
predispositions.

DARWINIAN AFTERMATH

selection,

the law of

(1820e1903) was among the ﬁrst
Herbert Spencer
philosophers seeking to ﬁnd the grounds of morality in
biological evolution. In The Principles of Ethics (1893),
Spencer seeks to discover values that have a natural
foundation. Spencer argues that
the theory of organic
evolution implies certain ethical principles. Human conduct
must be evaluated, like any biological activity whatsoever,
according to whether it conforms to the life process;
therefore, any acceptable moral code must be based on
natural
struggle for existence.
According to Spencer, the most exalted form of conduct is
that which leads to a greater duration, extension, and
perfection of life; the morality of all human actions must be
measured by that standard. Spencer proposes that, although
exceptions exist, the general rule is that pleasure goes with
that which is biologically useful, whereas pain marks
what is biologically harmful. This is an outcome of natural
selection;
thus, while doing what brings pleasure and
avoiding what is painful, organisms improve their chances
for survival. With respect to human behavior, we see that
we derive pleasure from virtuous behavior and pain from
evil actions, associations which indicate that the morality of
human actions is also founded on biological nature.

Spencer proposes as the general rule of human behavior
that anyone should be free to do anything that they want, so
long as it does not interfere with the similar freedom to
which others are entitled. The justiﬁcation of this rule is
found in organic evolution: the success of an individual,
plant, or animal depends on its ability to obtain that which
it needs. Consequently, Spencer reduces the role of the state
to protecting the collective freedom of individuals so that
they can do as they please. This laissez-faire form of
government may seem ruthless, because individuals would
seek their own welfare without any consideration for others
(except for respecting their freedom), but Spencer believes
that it is consistent with traditional Christian values. It
may be added that, although Spencer sets the grounds of
morality on biological nature and on nothing else, he
admits that certain moral norms go beyond that which is
biologically determined;
these are rules formulated by
society and accepted by tradition.

Social Darwinism,

in Spencer’s version or in some
variant form, was fashionable in European and American
circles during the latter part of the 19th century and the
early years of the 20th century, but
it has few or no

604 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

distinguished intellectual followers at present. Spencer’s
critics include the evolutionists Julian Huxley and C.H.
Waddington, who, nevertheless, maintain that organic
evolution provides grounds for a rational justiﬁcation of
ethical codes. For Julian Huxley (1953; Huxley and
Huxley, 1947), the standard of morality is the contribution
that actions make to evolutionary progress, which goes
from less to more advanced organisms. For Waddington
(1960), the morality of actions must be evaluated by their
contribution to human evolution.

Huxley and Waddington’s views are based on value
judgments about what is or is not progressive in evolu-
tion. But, contrary to Huxley’s claim, there is nothing
objective in the evolutionary process itself (ie, outside
human considerations;
see Ayala, 1982, 1987; and
Chapter 34 in this book) that makes the success of
bacteria, which have persisted as such for more than
2 billion years and which consist of a huge diversity of
species and astronomic numbers of
less
desirable than that of the vertebrates, even though the
latter are more complex. The same objection can be
raised against Waddington’s human evolution standard of
biological progress. Are the insects, of which more than
one million species exist, less desirable or less successful
from a purely biological perspective than humans or any
other mammal species? Waddington fails to demonstrate
why the promotion of human biological evolution by
itself should be the standard to measure what is morally
good.

individuals,

Numerous philosophers as well as scientists have
sought to give accounts of moral behavior as an evolu-
tionary outcome (eg, Ayala and Arp, 2010; Blackmore,
1999; Hauser, 2006; Maienschein and Ruse, 1999; Ruse,
1995; Sober and Wilson, 1998; Wilson, 2012). Particularly
notable are the contributions of Edward O. Wilson
(1975, 1978, 1998), founder of sociobiology as an inde-
pendent discipline engaged in discovering the biological
foundations of all social behavior. Wilson and other
sociobiologists, as well as the derivative subdisciplines of
evolutionary psychology (eg, Barkow et al., 1992) and
memetics (Blackmore, 1999), have sought
to solve the
naturalistic fallacy by turning it on its head. They assert that
moral behavior does not exist as something distinct from
biological, or biologically determined, behavior. As Ruse
and Wilson (1985) have asserted, “Ethics is an illusion
[italics added] put in place by natural selection to make us
good cooperators” (p. 50). I shall return later to these
sociobiological and related proposals.

MORAL BEHAVIOR AS RATIONAL
BEHAVIOR

The ﬁrst proposition I will advance here, fully consistent
with Darwin’s ideas, is that humans, because of their high

intellectual powers, are necessarily inclined to make moral
judgments and to accept ethical values: that is, to evaluate
certain kinds of actions as either right or wrong. The claim I
make is that moral behavior is a necessary outcome of the
biological makeup of humans, a product of their evolution.
This view would fall within the metaethical theories known
as deontological or rational. It is the exalted degree of
rationality that we humans have achieved that makes us
moral beings. Humans are Homo moralis because they are
Homo rationalis.

it

remains

sense,

rationality.

This thesis does not imply that the norms of morality
are also biologically determined or that they are unambig-
uous consequences of our
Independent of
whether or not humans have a biologically determined
moral
to be ascertained whether
particular moral prescriptions are in fact determined by
the biological nature of humans or whether they are prod-
ucts of cultural evolution, either chosen by society or
established by religious beliefs, or even selected according
to individual preferences. Even if we were to conclude that
people cannot avoid having moral standards of conduct, it
might be that the choice of the particular standards used for
judgment would be arbitrary or a product of cultural
evolution. The need for having moral values does not
necessarily tell us what the moral values should be, like the
capacity for language does not determine which language
we shall speak.

their eminent

I will ﬁrst argue that humans are ethical beings by
their biological nature: that humans evaluate their behavior
as either right or wrong, moral or immoral, as a conse-
quence of
intellectual capacities, which
include self-awareness and abstract thinking. These intel-
lectual capacities are products of the evolutionary process,
but they are distinctively human. Thus, I will assert that
ethical behavior
is not causally related to the social
behavior of animals, including kin selection and the so-
called “reciprocal altruism.”

A second argument that I will put forward is that the
moral norms according to which we evaluate particular
actions as either morally good or morally bad (as well as
the grounds that may be used to justify the moral norms)
are products of cultural evolution, not of biological
evolution. The norms of morality belong, in this respect, to
the same category of phenomena as political and religious
institutions, or the arts, sciences, and technology, as well as
the particular languages we speak. The moral codes, like
these other products of human culture, are often consistent
with the biological predispositions of the human species.
But many moral norms are formulated independently of
biological necessity or predisposition, simply because they
do not have necessary biological consequences. Biological
welfare (survival and reproduction)
is not obviously
determinant of all ethical norms in any given society or
culture.

Adaptive Signiﬁcance of Ethics and Aesthetics Chapter | 35 605

Moral codes, like any other cultural system, depend on
the existence of human biological nature and must be
consistent with it, in the sense that they could not coun-
teract it without promoting their own demise. Moreover,
the acceptance and persistence of moral norms is facili-
tated whenever
they are consistent with biologically
conditioned human behaviors. But the moral norms are
independent of such behaviors in the sense that some
norms may not favor, and may hinder, the survival and
reproduction of
the individual and its genes, which
processes are the targets of biological evolution. Discrep-
ancies between accepted moral rules and biological sur-
vival are, however, necessarily limited in scope or would
otherwise lead to the extinction of the groups accepting
such discrepant rules.

CONDITIONS FOR ETHICAL BEHAVIOR

I will now refer to the moral sense in its strict meaning
as the evaluation of some actions as virtuous, or morally
good, and others as evil, or morally bad. Morality in this
sense is the urge or predisposition to judge human actions
as either right or wrong in terms of their consequences for
other human beings. In this sense, humans are moral beings
by nature because their biological constitution determines
the presence in them of the three necessary conditions for
ethical behavior. These conditions are (1) the ability to
anticipate the consequences of one’s own actions; (2) the
ability to make value judgments; and (3)
the ability
to choose between alternative courses of action. These
abilities exist as a consequence of the eminent intellectual
capacity of human beings. Notice, as I will discuss further,
that I am not taking the position known as utilitarianism,
because I am not claiming that maximizing the beneﬁts to
others, and to as many others as possible, is the ultimate
standard by which the morality of actions should be
determined.

The ability to anticipate the consequences of one’s
own actions is the most fundamental of the three conditions
required for ethical behavior. Only if I can anticipate that
pulling the trigger will shoot the bullet, which in turn will
strike and kill my enemy, can the action of pulling the
trigger be evaluated as nefarious. Pulling a trigger is not in
itself a moral action; it becomes so by virtue of its relevant
consequences. My action has an ethical dimension only if I
do anticipate these consequences.

The ability to anticipate the consequences of one’s
actions is closely related to the ability to establish the
connection between means and ends: that is, of seeing a
means precisely as a means, as something that serves a
particular end or purpose. This ability to establish the
connection between means and their ends requires the
ability to anticipate the future and to form mental images of
realities not present or not yet in existence.

The ability to establish the connection between means
and ends happens to be the fundamental
intellectual
capacity that has made possible the development of human
culture and technology. An evolutionary scenario, seem-
ingly the best hypothesis available, proposes that
the
remote evolutionary roots of this capacity to connect means
with ends may be found in the evolution of bipedalism,
which transformed the anterior limbs of our ancestors from
organs of locomotion into organs of manipulation. The
hands thereby gradually became organs adept
for the
construction and handling of objects for hunting and other
activities that improved survival and reproduction: that is,
which increased the reproductive ﬁtness of their carriers.
Eventually, our ancestors of about 2 Ma advanced from
using as tools existing objects, such as a stone or a wooden
stick, to making tools themselves. The construction of tools
depends not only on manual dexterity, but on perceiving
them precisely as tools, as objects that help to perform
certain actionsdthat is, as means that serve certain ends or
purposes: a knife for cutting, an arrow for hunting, an
animal skin for protecting the body from the cold.
According to this evolutionary scenario, natural selection
promoted the intellectual capacity of our bipedal ancestors
because increased intelligence facilitated the perception of
tools as tools, and therefore their construction and use, with
the ensuing amelioration of biological
survival and
reproduction.

The development of the intellectual abilities of our
ancestors took place over several million years, gradually
increasing the ability to connect means with their ends
and, hence, the possibility of making ever more complex
tools serving more remote purposes. According to the
theory I am proposing, the ability to anticipate the future,
essential for ethical behavior, is therefore closely associ-
ated with the development of the ability to construct tools,
an ability that has produced the advanced technologies of
modern societies and that is largely responsible for the
success of humans as a biological species.

is the ability to make value judgments,

The second condition for the existence of ethical
behavior
to
perceive certain objects or deeds as more desirable than
others. Only if I can see the death of my enemy as
preferable to his survival (or vice versa) can the action
leading to his demise be thought of as moral. If the
consequences of alternative actions are neutral with
respect to value, an action cannot be characterized as
ethical. Values are of many sorts: not only ethical, but
also aesthetic, economic, gastronomic, political, and so
on. But in all cases, the ability to make value judgments
depends on the capacity for abstraction: that is, on the
capacity to perceive actions or objects as members of
general classes. This makes it possible to compare objects
or actions with one another and to perceive some as more
desirable than others. The capacity for abstraction

606 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

requires an advanced intelligence such as it exists in
humans and in them alone.

The model I am advancing here does not necessarily
imply the ethical theory known as utilitarianism (or, more
generally, consequentialism). According to “act conse-
quentialism,” the rightness of an action is determined by the
value of its consequences, so that the morally best action in
a particular situation is the one the consequences of which
would have the most beneﬁt to others. I am proposing that
the morality of an action depends on our ability (1) to
anticipate the consequences of our actions, and (2) to pass
value judgments about such consequences. But I am not
asserting that
the morality of actions is exclusively
measured in terms of how beneﬁcial their consequences
will be to others.

is not a moral action:

The third condition necessary for ethical behavior is
the ability to choose between alternative courses of
actions. Pulling the trigger can be a moral action only if
you have the option not to pull it. A necessary action
beyond conscious control
the
circulation of the blood or the process of food digestion is
not a moral action. Whether there is free will is a question
much discussed by philosophers, and the arguments are
long and involved (for example, Ruse, 2006). Here, I will
advance two considerations that are commonsense evi-
dence of the existence of free will. One is personal
experience, which indicates that the possibility to choose
between alternatives is genuine rather than only apparent.
The second consideration is that when we confront a
given situation that requires action on our part, we are
able mentally to explore alternative courses of action,
thereby extending the ﬁeld within which we can exercise
our free will.

In any case, if there were no free will, there would be no
ethical behavior; morality would only be an illusion. A
point to be made, however, is that free will is dependent on
the existence of a well-developed intelligence, which
makes it possible to explore alternative courses of action
and to choose one or another in view of the anticipated
consequences.

ADAPTATION OR EXAPTATION?

I will now consider explicitly two issues that are largely
implicit in the previous section. I have proposed that the
moral sense emerges as a necessary implication of our high
intellectual powers which allow us to anticipate the
consequences of our actions and evaluate such conse-
quences. But is it the case that the moral sense may have
been promoted by natural selection in itself and not only
indirectly as a necessary consequence of our exalted
intelligence? The question in evolutionary terms is whether
the moral sense is an adaptation or, rather, an exaptation.
Evolutionary biologists deﬁne exaptations as features of

organisms that evolved because they served some particular
function, but are later co-opted to serve a different function,
which was not originally the target of natural selection. The
new function may replace the older function or coexist
together with it. Feathers seem to have evolved ﬁrst for
conserving temperature, but were later co-opted in birds
for ﬂying. The beating of the human heart is an exaptation
used by doctors to diagnose the state of health, although
this is not why it evolved in our ancestors. The issue at
hand is whether moral behavior was directly promoted by
natural selection, or rather, whether it is a consequence of
our exalted intelligence, which was the target of natural
selection, because it made possible the construction of
tools. Art,
literature, religion, and many other human
cultural activities might also be seen as exaptations that
came about as consequences of high intelligence and tool
making.

The second issue is whether some animals, apes, or
other nonhuman primates, for example, may have a moral
sense, however incipient, either as directly promoted by
natural selection or as a consequence of
their own
intelligence.

The position that I’ll argue here is that

the human
moral sense is an exaptation, not an adaptation. The moral
sense consists of judging certain actions as either right or
wrong; not of choosing and carrying out some actions
rather than others, or evaluating them with respect to their
practical consequences. It seems unlikely that making
moral judgments would promote the reproductive ﬁtness of
those judging an action as good or evil. Nor does it seem
likely that there might be some form of incipient ethical
behavior that would then be further promoted by natural
selection. The three necessary conditions for there being
ethical behavior are manifestations of advanced intellectual
abilities.

It,

indeed,

rather seems that

the target of natural
selection was the development of the advanced intellectual
capacities. This was favored by natural selection because
the construction and use of tools improved the strategic
position of our biped ancestors. In the account I am
advancing here, once bipedalism evolved and after tool
using and tool making became practical, those individuals
more effective in these functions had a greater probability
of biological success. The biological advantage provided
by the design and use of tools persisted long enough so that
intellectual abilities continued to increase, eventually
yielding the eminent development of intelligence that is
characteristic of H. sapiens.

ALTRUISM AND GROUP SELECTION

A related question is whether morality would beneﬁt a
social group within which it is practiced, and, indirectly,
individuals as members of the group. This seems likely to

The capacity for ethics is an outcome of gradual
evolution, but it is an attribute that only exists when the
underlying attributes (ie, the intellectual capacities) reach
an advanced degree. The necessary conditions for ethical
behavior only come about after
the crossing of an
evolutionary threshold. The approach is gradual, but the
conditions only appear when a degree of intelligence is
reached such that
the formation of abstract concepts
and the anticipation of the future are possible, even though
we may not be able to determine when the threshold
was crossed. Thresholds occur
in other evolutionary
developmentsdfor example, in the origins of life, multi-
cellularity, and sexual reproductiondas well as in the
evolution
self-awareness.
Thresholds also occur in the physical world: for example,
water heats gradually, but at 100
C boiling begins and the
transition from liquid to gas starts suddenly. Surely, human
intellectual capacities came about by gradual evolution.
But when looking at the world of life as it exists today, it
would seem that there is a radical breach between human
intelligence and that of other animals. The rudimentary
cultures that exist in chimpanzees (Whiten et al., 1999,
2005) do not imply advanced intelligence as it is required
for moral behavior.

thinking


and

of

abstract

be the case if indeed moral judgment would inﬂuence
individuals to behave in ways that increase cooperation, or
beneﬁt the welfare of the social group in some waydfor
example, by reducing crime or protecting private property.
This brings about
the issue of whether there is group
selection in humans and the related issues of kin selection
and inclusive ﬁtness, which I will discuss later in this
chapter.

Altruistic behavior is generally not favored within a
particular animal population because mutations that favor
selﬁsh over altruistic behavior will be favored by natural
selection within the population, so that selﬁsh alleles may
drive out altruistic alleles. However, it may be the case that
populations with a preponderance of altruistic alleles will
survive and spread better than populations consisting of
selﬁsh alleles. This would be group selection. But typically
there are many more individual organisms than there are
populations, and individuals are born, procreate, and die at
the rate of
rates much higher than populations. Thus,
multiplication of
is
likely to be much higher than the rate at which altruistic
populations multiply relative to predominantly selﬁsh
populations.

selﬁsh individuals over altruists

is relevant

There is, however, an important difference between
in this respect.
animals and humans that
Namely,
the ﬁtness advantage of selﬁsh over altruistic
behavior does not apply to humans, because humans can
understand the beneﬁts of altruistic behavior (to the group
and indirectly to them) and thus adopt altruism and protect
it, by laws or otherwise, against selﬁsh behavior that
harms the social group. As Darwin wrote in The Descent
of Man:

It must not be forgotten that, although a high standard of
morality gives but a slight or no advantage to each
individual man and his children over the other men of the
same tribe, yet that an advancement in the standard of
morality and an increase in the number of well-endowed
men will certainly give an immense advantage to one
tribe over another.

Darwin (1871, p. 159)

The theory of sociobiology advances a ready answer to
the second question raised earlier: whether morality occurs
in other animals, even if only as a rudiment. The theory of
kin selection, sociobiologists argue, explains altruistic
behavior, to the extent that it exists in other animals as well
as in humans. I will propose, however, that moral behavior
properly so does not exist, even incipiently, in nonhuman
animals. The reason is that the three conditions required for
ethical behavior depend on an advanced intelligenced
which includes the capacities for free will, abstract thought,
the futuredsuch as it exists in
and anticipation of
H. sapiens and not in any other living species. It is the case

Adaptive Signiﬁcance of Ethics and Aesthetics Chapter | 35 607

that certain animals exhibit behaviors analogous with
those resulting from ethical actions in humans, such as the
loyalty of dogs or the appearance of compunction when
they are punished. But such behaviors are either genetically
determined or elicited by training (conditioned responses).
Genetic determination and not moral evaluation is also
what is involved in the altruistic behavior of social insects
and other animals. I will argue later that biological altruism
(altruismb) and moral altruism (altruismm) have disparate
causes: kin selection in altruismb, regard for others in
altruismm.

The question remains: when did morality emerge in the
human lineage? Did H. habilis or H. erectus have morality?
What about the Neandertals, Homo neanderthalensis? It is
difﬁcult to determine when in hominid evolution morality
emerged. The advanced degree of rationality required for
moral behavior may only have been reached at the time
when creative language came about, and perhaps in
dependence with the development of creative language.
When creative language may have come about in human
evolution is, however, a question discussed elsewhere in
this book (see Chapter 33).

WHENCE MORAL CODES?

Moral behavior, I have proposed, is a biological attribute of
H. sapiens, because it is a necessary consequence of our
biological makeup, namely, our high intelligence. But
moral codes, I will argue, are products not of biological
evolution, but of cultural evolution.

608 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

It must ﬁrst be stated that moral codes, like any other
cultural systems, cannot survive for long if they are outright
contrary to our biology. The norms of morality must be
consistent with biological nature because ethics can only
exist in human individuals and in human societies. One
might therefore also expect, and it is the case, that accepted
norms of morality will promote behaviors that increase the
biological ﬁtness of those who behave according to them,
such as child care. But the correlation between moral norms
and biological ﬁtness is neither necessary nor indeed al-
ways the case: some moral precepts common in human
societies have little or nothing to do with biological ﬁtness
and some moral precepts are contrary to ﬁtness interest.

Before going any further,

it seems worthwhile to
consider brieﬂy the proposition that the justiﬁcation of the
codes of morality derives from religious convictions and
only from them. There is no necessary or logical connection
between religious faith and moral values, although there
usually is a motivational or psychological connection.
Religious beliefs do explain why people accept particular
ethical norms, because people are motivated to do so by
their religious convictions. But in following the moral and
other dictates of one’s religion, one is not rationally justi-
fying the moral norms that one accepts. It may, of course,
be possible to develop such rational
for
example, when a set of religious beliefs contains proposi-
tions about human nature and the world, from which a
variety of ethical norms can be logically derived. Indeed,
religious authors, including, for example, Christian theo-
logians, do often propose to justify their ethics on rational
foundations concerning human nature. But in this case, the
logical justiﬁcation of the ethical norms does not come
from religious faith as such, but from a particular (religious)
conception of the world; it is the result of philosophical
analysis grounded on religious premises.

justiﬁcation:

It may well be that the motivational connection between
religious beliefs and ethical norms and other values is the
decisive one for the religious believer. But this is true in
general: most people, religious or not, accept a particular
set of values for social reasons, without trying to justify
them rationally by means of a theory from which the moral
norms can be logically derived. They accept the values that
prevail in their societies, because they have learned such
norms from parents, school, or religious and other author-
ities. The question remains: how do moral codes come
about?

The short answer is, as already stated, that moral codes
are products of cultural evolution, a distinctive human
mode of evolution that has surpassed the biological mode,
because it is a more effective form of adaptation; it is faster
than biological evolution, and it can be directed. Cultural
evolution is based on cultural heredity, which is La-
marckian, rather than Mendelian, so that acquired charac-
teristics are transmitted. Most important, cultural heredity

does not depend on biological inheritance, from parents to
children, but is transmitted among individuals of the same
or different generations, without biological bounds. A
cultural mutation, an invention (think of the laptop com-
puter, the cell phone, or rock music), can be extended to
millions and millions of
individuals in less than one
generation.

Darwin’s Chapter 5 of The Descent of Man (1871) is
entitled, “On the Development of the Intellectual and Moral
Faculties during Primeval and Civilized Times.” There, he
writes:

There can be no doubt that a tribe including many members
who, from possessing in a high degree the spirit of patri-
otism, ﬁdelity, obedience, courage, and sympathy, were
always ready to give aid to each other and to sacriﬁce
themselves for the common good, would be victorious over
most other tribes; and this would be natural selection. At all
times throughout the world tribes have supplanted other
tribes; and as morality is one element in their success, the
standard of morality and the number of well-endowed men
will
(pp.
159e160)

thus everywhere tend to rise and increase.

Darwin is making two important assertions. First, mo-
rality may contribute to the success of some tribes over
others; moral behavior amounts to natural selection in the
form of group selection. Second, the standards of morality
will
tend to improve over human history, because the
higher the standards of a tribe, the more likely the success
of the tribe. This assertion depends on which standards are
thought to be “higher” than others. If the higher standards
are deﬁned by their contribution to the success of the tribe,
then the assertion is circular. But Darwin asserts that there
are some particular standards that,
in his view, would
contribute to tribal success: patriotism, ﬁdelity, obedience,
courage, and sympathy.

SOCIOBIOLOGY’S ACCOUNT OF MORAL
BEHAVIOR

Darwin was puzzled by the social organization and
behavior of hymenopterans: bees, wasps, ants, and termites.
Consider Meliponinae bees, with hundreds of species
across the tropics. These stingless bees have typically
single-queen colonies with hundreds to thousands of
workers. The queen generally mates only once. The worker
bees toil, building the hive and feeding and caring for the
eggs and larvae, even though they themselves are sterile
and only the queen produces progeny. Assume that in some
ancestral hive, a gene arises that prompts worker bees to
behave as they now do. It would seem that such a gene
would not be passed on to the following generation because
such worker bees do not reproduce. But such inference
would be erroneous.

Adaptive Signiﬁcance of Ethics and Aesthetics Chapter | 35 609

Meliponinae bees, like other hymenopterans, have a
haplo-diploid system of reproduction. Queen bees produce
two kinds of eggs: some are unfertilized and develop into
males (which are therefore haploiddie, they carry only one
set of genes); others are fertilized (hence, are diploiddie,
they carry two sets of genes) and develop into worker bees
and occasionally into a queen. W.D. Hamilton (1964)
demonstrated that with such a reproductive system the
queen’s daughters share in three-quarters of their genes
among them, whereas the queen’s daughters and their
mother share in only one-half of their genes. Hence, the
worker-bee genes are more effectively propagated by
workers caring for their sisters than if they would produce
and care for their own daughters. Natural selection can thus
explain the existence in social
insects of sterile castes,
which exhibit a most extreme form of apparently altruistic
behavior by dedicating their life to care for the progeny of
another individual, the queen.

In 1975,

Hamilton’s discovery solved the mystery that had
puzzled Darwin and had continued puzzling specialists in
hymenopteran biology and other evolutionists for some-
what more than a century.
the notable ant
specialist Edward O. Wilson published Sociobiology: The
New Synthesis, a treatise appropriately considered the
founding document of the new discipline of sociobiology.
The last chapter of the book concerned the social organi-
zation of human societies, with the telling title “Man: From
Sociobiology to Sociology,” and with sections dedicated to
“Culture, Ritual, and Religion” and “Ethics.” The ﬁrst
sentence of the “Ethics” section startled many readers:
“Scientists and humanists should consider together the
possibility that the time has come for ethics to be removed
temporarily from the hands of the philosophers and bio-
logicized” (p. 562). Wilson (1975, 1978, 1998), like other
sociobiologists (Alexander, 1979; Barash, 1977; see also
Kitcher, 1985; Ruse, 2000, 2006, 2010, 2012; Sober, 1993;
Sober and Wilson, 1998), sees that sociobiology may
provide the key for ﬁnding a naturalistic basis for ethics.

According to Wilson (1975), “The requirement for an
evolutionary approach to ethics is self-evident. It should
also be clear, for example, that no single set of moral
standards can be applied to all human populations, let alone
all sex-age classes within each population. To impose a
uniform code is therefore to create complex, intractable
moral dilemmas” (p. 564). Moral pluralism is, for Wilson,
“innate.” It seems, therefore, that, according to Wilson,
biology helps us at the very least to decide that certain
moral codes (eg, all those pretending to be universally
applicable) are incompatible with human nature and
therefore unacceptable.

However, Wilson (1978) goes further when he writes:
behaviordlike
for
“Human
response which drive and guide itdis the
emotional
circuitous technique by which human genetic material has

capacities

the

deepest

been and will be kept intact. Morality has no other dem-
onstratable ultimate function [italics added]” (p. 167). How
is one to interpret this statement? It is possible that Wilson
is simply giving the reason why ethical behavior exists at
all; his proposition would be that humans are prompted to
evaluate morally their actions as a means to preserve their
genes, their biological nature. But this proposition is, in my
view, erroneous. Human beings are by nature ethical beings
in the sense I have expounded: they judge morally their
actions because of their innate ability for anticipating the
consequences of their actions, for formulating value judg-
ments, and for free choice. Human beings exhibit ethical
behavior by nature and necessity, rather than because such
behavior would help to preserve their genes or serve any
other purpose.

Wilson’s statement may alternatively be read as a
justiﬁcation of human moral codes: the function of these
would be to preserve human genes. But this would entail
the naturalistic fallacy1 and, worse yet, would seem to
justify a morality that most people detest. If the preserva-
tion of human genes (be those of the individual or of the
species) is the purpose that moral norms serve, Spencer’s

1. The “naturalistic fallacy” (Moore, 1903) consists in identifying what
“is” with what “ought to be.” This error was pointed out already by Hume
(1740/1978):

In every system of morality which I have hitherto met with I have
always remarked that the author proceeds for some time in the
ordinary way of reasoning.when of a sudden I am surprised to
ﬁnd, that instead of the usual copulations of propositions, is and is
not, I meet with no proposition that is not connected with an ought
or ought not. This change is imperceptible; but is, however, of the
last consequence. For as this ought or ought not express some new
relation or afﬁrmation, it is necessary that it should be observed
and explained; and at the same time a reason should be given, for
what seems altogether inconceivable, how this new relation can
be a deduction from others, which are entirely different
from
it. (p. 469)

The naturalistic fallacy occurs whenever inferences using the
terms “ought” or “ought not” are derived from premises that do not
include such terms but are rather formulated using the connections
“is” or “is not.” An argument cannot be logically valid unless the
conclusions only contain terms that are also present in the premises.
To proceed logically from that which “is” to what “ought to be,” it
is necessary to include a premise that justiﬁes the transition between
the two expressions. But this transition is what is at stake, and one
would need a previous premise to justify the validity of the one
making the transition, and so on in a regression ad inﬁnitum. In
other words, from the fact that something is the case, it does not
follow that it ought to be so in the ethical sense; is and ought belong
to disparate logical categories. Because evolution has proceeded in
a particular way, it does not follow that course is morally right or
desirable. The justiﬁcation of ethical norms on biological evolution,
or on any other natural process, can only be achieved by intro-
ducing value judgments, human choices that prefer one rather than
other object or process. Biological nature is in itself morally neutral.

610 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

Social Darwinism would seem right;
racism or even
genocide could be justiﬁed as morally correct, if they were
perceived as the means to preserve those genes thought to
be good or desirable and to eliminate those thought to be
bad or undesirable. Surely Wilson is not intending to justify
racism or genocide.

I believe that what Wilson and other sociobiologists are
saying is something else, something of great philosophical
import that has been stated, with characteristic verve and
clarity, by Michael Ruse (Ruse, 2010; Ruse and Wilson,
1985): “To be blunt, my Darwinism says that substantive
morality is a kind of illusion [italics added], put in place by
our genes, in order to make us good social cooperators.”
Ruse proceeds to explain why the illusion of ethics is a
powerful adaptation:

I would add that the reason why the illusion is such a
successful adaptation is that not only do we believe in
substantive morality, but we also believe that substantive
morality does have an objective foundation. An important
part of
the phenomenological experience of substantive
ethics is not just that we feel that we ought to do the right
and proper thing, but that we feel that we ought to do the
right and proper thing because it truly is the right and
proper thing.

Ruse (2010, p. 309)

The deceit perpetrated on us by our genes is complete:
“There are in fact no foundations, but we believe that in
some sense there are” (Ruse, 2010, p. 309).

that

Why do “selﬁsh genes” move us to act altruistically and
behave in ways that seem morally right? The answer
comes, according to sociobiologists, from the theory of kin
selection that explains the altruism of haplo-diploid insects
and much more, as well as from other related theoretical
constructs such as inclusive ﬁtness and reciprocal altruism.
The sociobiologist’s argument concerning normative ethics
is not
the norms of morality can be grounded in
biological evolution but rather that evolution predisposes us
to accept certain moral norms, namely,
those that are
consistent with the objectives of natural selection. It is
because of this predisposition that human moral codes
sanction patterns of behavior similar to those encountered
in the social behavior of animals. According to sociobiol-
ogists, the commandment to honor one’s parents, the incest
taboo, the greater blame usually attributed to the wife’s
adultery than to the husband’s, and the banning or restric-
tion of divorce are among the numerous ethical precepts
and practices that endorse behaviors that are promoted by
natural selection. Sociobiologists reiterate their conviction
that science and ethics belong to separate logical realms;
that one may not infer what is morally right or wrong from
a determination of how things are or are not in nature. They
avoid the naturalistic fallacy by the drastic move of denying

that ethical behavior exists as an activity with different
causation than any other activities or traits simply deter-
mined by our genes. Ethical behavior
is simply an
expression of our genes and a direct consequence of natural
selection as it adapts humans, as well as other organisms, to
their environments.

ALTRUISM: BIOLOGICAL AND MORAL

Evolutionists had for years struggled to ﬁnd an explanation
for the apparently altruistic behavior of animals. When a
predator attacks a herd of zebras, adult males attempt to
protect the young in the herd instead of ﬂeeing, even if they
are not their progeny. When a prairie dog sights a coyote, it
will warn other members of the colony with an alarm call,
even though doing so draws attention to itself and increases
its own risk. Darwin tells the story of adult baboons
protecting the young.2 Examples of altruistic behaviors of
this kind can be multiplied. But to speak of animal altruism
is to claim not that explicit feelings of devotion or regard
are present
for
the welfare of others at their own risk just as humans are
expected to do when behaving altruistically.

that animals act

in them, but

rather

The problem is precisely how to justify such behaviors
in terms of natural selection. Assume, for example, that in a
certain species there are two alternative forms of a gene
(two alleles), of which one but not the other promotes
altruistic behavior. Individuals possessing the altruistic
allele will risk their life for the beneﬁt of others, whereas
those possessing the nonaltruistic allele will beneﬁt from
the altruistic behavior of their partners without risking
themselves. Possessors of the altruistic allele will be more
likely to die or fail
to reproduce, and the allele for
altruism will therefore be eliminated more often than the
nonaltruistic allele. Eventually, after some generations, the
altruistic allele will be completely replaced by the non-
altruistic one. But then, how is it that altruistic behaviors
are common in animals without
the beneﬁt of ethical
motivation? The explanation comes from the theory of kin
selection.

To ascertain the consequences of natural selection it is
necessary to take into account a gene’s effects not only on a

2. Brehm encountered in Abyssinia a great troop of baboons who were
crossing a valley: some had ascended the opposite mountain, and some
were still on the valley: the latter were attacked by the dogs, but the old
males immediately hurried down from the rocks, and with mouths widely
opened, roared so fearfully, that the dogs precipitately retreated. They
were again encouraged to the attack; but by this time all the baboons had
reascended the heights, excepting a young one, about six months old, who,
loudly calling for aid, climbed on a block of rock and was surrounded.
Now one of the largest males, a true hero, came down again from the
mountain, slowly went to the young one, coaxed him, and triumphantly led
him awaydthe dogs being too much astonished to make an attack.
(Darwin, 1971, p. 124).

Adaptive Signiﬁcance of Ethics and Aesthetics Chapter | 35 611

particular individual but also on all individuals possessing
that gene, as in the explanation of the social organization of
bees and other hymenopterans. When considering altruistic
behavior, one must take into account not only the costs for
the altruistic individual, but also the beneﬁts for other
possessors of the same allele. Zebras live in herds where
individuals are blood relatives. This is also the case for
baboon troops. A gene prompting adults to protect the
defenseless young would be favored by natural selection if
the beneﬁt (in terms of saved individuals that are carriers of
that gene) is greater than the cost (due to the increased risk
or other costs of the protectors). An individual that lacks the
altruistic gene and carries instead a nonaltruistic one will
not incur a cost or risk its life, but the nonaltruistic gene is
partially eradicated with the death of each defenseless
relative.

It follows from this line of reasoning that the more
closely related the members of a herd, troop, or animal
group are, the more altruistic behavior should be present.
This seems to be generally the case. Consider parental care.
Parental care is most obvious in the genetic beneﬁts it
entails. Parents feed and protect their young because each
child has half the genes of each parent: the genes are pro-
tecting themselves, as it were, when they prompt a parent to
care for its young. That is why parental care is widespread
among animals.

Sociobiologists point out that many of the moral norms
commonly accepted in human societies sanction behaviors
also promoted by natural selection, such as the command-
ment to honor one’s parents and the incest taboo, as pointed
out earlier in this chapter. Once again, the sociobiologist’s
argument is that human ethical norms are sociocultural
correlates of behaviors fostered by biological evolution.
Ethical norms protect such evolution-determined behaviors
as well as being speciﬁed by them.

The

arguments,

however,

sociobiologists’

are
misguided (Ayala, 2010). Consider altruism as an example.
Altruism in the biological sense (altruismb) is deﬁned in
terms of the population genetic consequences of a certain
behavior. Altruismb is explained by the fact that genes
prompting such behavior are actually favored by natural
selection (when inclusive ﬁtness is taken into account),
even though the ﬁtness of the behaving individual
is
decreased. But altruism in the moral sense (altruismm) is
explained in terms of motivations: a person chooses to risk
his or her own life (or incur some cost) for the beneﬁt of
somebody else. The similarity between altruismb and
altruismm is only with respect to the consequences: an
individual’s chances are improved by the behavior of
another individual who incurs a risk or cost. The underlying
causations are completely disparate: the ensuing genetic
beneﬁts in altruismb; regard for others in altruismm. As
Darwin put it, the altruistic behavior of a baboon and a
human are similar
they both beneﬁt other

in that

individuals, but they differ in that humans carry out an
assessment, which baboons do not. Humans make moral
judgments as a necessary consequence of their eminent
intellectual abilities. Their judgments, as well as the moral
norms on which they are based, are not always accompa-
nied by biological gain.

Parental care is a behavior generally favored by natural
selection, which may also be present in virtually all codes
of morality, from primitive to more advanced societies.
There are other human behaviors sanctioned by moral
norms that have biological correlates favored by natural
selection. One example is monogamy, which occurs in
some animal species but not in many others. It is also
sanctioned in many human cultures, but surely not in all.
Polygamy is accepted in some current human cultures and
surely was more so in the past. Food sharing outside the
mothereoffspring unit rarely occurs in primates, with the
exception of chimpanzees and capuchin monkeys, although
even in chimpanzees, food sharing is highly selective and
often associated with reciprocity. A more common form of
mutual aid among primates is coalition formation; alliances
are formed in ﬁghting other conspeciﬁcs, although these
alliances are labile, with partners readily changing partners.
One interesting behavior, associated with a sense of
justice, or equal pay for equal work, has been described by
Sarah Brosnan and Frans de Waal (2003; see also de Waal,
1996)
in the brown capuchin monkey, Cebus paella.
Monkeys responded negatively to unequal rewards in ex-
changes with a human experimenter. Monkeys refused to
participate in an exchange when they witnessed that a
conspeciﬁc had obtained a more attractive reward for equal
effort.

Is the capuchin behavior phylogenetically related to
the human virtue of justice? This seems unlikely, since
similar behavioral patterns have not been observed in
other primates, including apes, phylogenetically closer to
humans. Moreover,
it was later shown that capuchin
monkeys reject a food reward when a more attractive
reward is visible to the monkeys, whether
this more
attractive reward is offered to other monkeys or is simply
present within their sight. Cannibalism is practiced by
chimps, as well as by human cultures of the past. Do we
have a phylogenetically acquired predisposition to canni-
balism as a morally acceptable behavior? This seems
unlikely. Moral codes arise in human societies by cultural
evolution. The moral codes that lead to successful societies
tend to be widespread.

Since time immemorial, human societies have experi-
mented with moral systems. Some have succeeded and
spread widely through humankind,
like the Ten Com-
mandments, although other moral systems persist
in
different human societies. Many moral systems of the past
have surely become extinct because they were replaced
or because the societies that held them became extinct.

612 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

The moral systems that currently prevail in humankind are
those that were favored by cultural evolution. They were
propagated within particular societies for reasons that
might be difﬁcult to fathom, but that surely must have
included the perception by individuals that a particular
moral system was beneﬁcial for them, at least to the extent
that it was beneﬁcial for their society by promoting social
stability and success. Acceptance of some precepts in
many societies is reinforced by civil authority (eg, those
who kill or commit adultery will be punished) and by
religious beliefs (God is watching and you’ll go to hell if
you misbehave). Religious, legal, and political systems, as
well as belief systems, are themselves outcomes of cultural
evolution.

GENEeCULTURE COEVOLUTION

A different explanation of the evolution of the moral sense
has been advanced by proponents of the theory of genee
culture coevolution (Richerson and Boyd, 2005; Strimling
et al., 2009; Richerson et al., 2010; see also Greene et al.,
2001; Haidt, 2007). It is assumed that cultural variation
among tribes in patriotism, ﬁdelity, sympathy, and other
moralizing behaviors may have occurred incipiently in
early hominid populations, starting at least with H. habilis.
This cultural variation may have, in turn, selected for genes
that endowed early humans with primitive moral emotions.
Primitive moral emotions would in turn have facilitated the
evolution of more advanced cultural codes of morality.
Repeated rounds of geneecultural coevolution would have
gradually increased both the moral sense itself and the
systems of moral norms. That is, the evolution of morality
would have been directly promoted by natural selection in a
process where the moral sense and the moral norms would
have coevolved.

The geneeculture coevolution account of the evolution
of morality is, of course, radically different from the theory
I have advanced earlier in this chapter, in which moral
behavior evolved not because it increased ﬁtness, but as a
consequence of advanced intelligence, which allowed
humans to see the beneﬁts that adherence to moral norms
bring to society and to its members. The extreme variation
in moral codes among recent human populations and the
rapid evolution of moral norms over short time spans (see
later in this chapter) would seem to favor the explanation I
have proposed. Geneeculture coevolution would rather
lead to a more nearly universal system of morality, which
would have come about gradually as our hominin ancestors
gradually evolved toward becoming H. sapiens.

Empathy, or the predisposition to mentally assimilate
the feelings of other
recently been
extensively discussed in the context of altruistic or moral
behavior. Incipient forms of empathy seem to be present in
other animals. In humans, increasing evidence indicates

individuals, has

that we automatically simulate the experiences of other
humans (Gazzaniga, 2005, pp. 158e199, 2008). Empathy
is a common human phenomenon, surely associated with
our advanced intelligence, which allows us to understand
the harms or beneﬁts that affect other humans, as well as
their associated feelings. Empathic humans may conse-
quently choose to behave according to how their behavior
will impact those for whom we feel empathy. That is,
human empathy occurs because of our
advanced
intelligence. Humans may choose to behave altruistically,
or not, that is, morally or not, in terms of the anticipated
consequences of their actions to others.

The question remains, when did morality emerge in the
human lineage? Did H. habilis or H. erectus have morality?
What about the Neandertals, H. neanderthalensis? When
in hominid evolution morality emerged is difﬁcult
to
determine. As pointed out earlier, the capacity for ethics is
an outcome of gradual evolution, but it only comes about
when the underlying attributes (ie, the intellectual capac-
ities) reach an advanced degree. When in human evolu-
tionary history this threshold was reached would seem
impossible to determine, at least at the current state of
knowledge.

One additional observation is that

the norms of
morality, as they exist in any particular culture, are felt to
be universal within that culture. Yet, similarly as other
elements of culture, they are continuously evolving, often
within a single generation. As Steven Pinker has pointed
out, western societies have recently experienced the
moralization and amoralization of diverse behaviors.
Thus, “smoking has become moralized.now treated as
immoral.At the same time many behaviors have become
amoralized, switched from moral
failings to lifestyle
choices. They include divorce,
illegitimacy, working
mothers, marijuana use and homosexuality” (Pinker,
2002, p. 34). Acceptance by individuals or groups of
particular sets of moral norms is often reinforced by civil
authority (eg, those who kill or commit adultery will be
punished) and by religious beliefs (God is watching and
you’ll go to hell
is worth
noticing that the legal and political systems that govern
human societies, as well as the belief systems held by
religion, are themselves outcomes of cultural evolution, as
it has eventuated over human history, particularly over the
last few millennia.

if you misbehave). But

it

AESTHETICS

Aesthetics
is a term forged by Alexander Gottlieb
Baumgarten (1714e1762) to refer to a philosophy of taste
and beauty, but the appreciation of beauty transcends the
German Enlightenment. Indeed, the capacity for appreci-
ating beauty, the aesthetic qualities of objects, motions, and
sounds is a human universal; all human groups possess this

Adaptive Signiﬁcance of Ethics and Aesthetics Chapter | 35 613

competence. The capacity for producing aesthetic items is
also universal: sculptors, painters, dancers, and musicians
are pervasive in all human cultures and historical epochs.
However, appreciating aesthetic attributes goes beyond
producing them in two respects. First, artists or producers
of beauty make up a small fraction of individuals in
human groups; on the contrary spectators are numerous.
This difference becomes, nevertheless, reduced, or even
eliminated, if we extend the production of beauty beyond
those who might be considered professional artists to the
decoration or furniture of a home,
the preparation and
presentation of food for a meal, and singing or dancing
in the course of ordinary life. A second difference is that it
is possible to appreciate aesthetic qualities in natural ob-
jects and events, such as a sunset or sunrise, a snow
covered mountain, a forest, or bird songs (Cela-Conde and
Ayala, 2007).

An important difference between ethics and aesthetics
is that ethical values are considered, by and large, objec-
tive, while aesthetic values are considered much more
subjective. Individuals within a given culture, and largely
across cultures, usually agree about what is necessarily
wrong and what is absolutely right, while qualifying an
object or song as beautiful tolerates considerably more
diversity of opinion: de gustibus non est disputandum
(Benardini, 2015).

fossil

nor

It

records

archaeological

It does not seem possible to determine the phylogenetic
origin of the human capacity for appreciating beauty.
Neither
provide
convincing evidence to ascertain the appearance of this
competence.
is not possible to determine whether
spectators with the ability to appreciate landscapes, mo-
tions, or songs existed in previous human species, or when
in the evolution of H. sapiens or H. neanderthalensis the
capacity to appreciate beauty came about. It seems that the
best we might be able to do is to determine when human
artisans ﬁrst started to produce objects or activities with
aesthetic qualities, and conclude that the appreciation of
beauty would already be present among their human
partners.

Ascertaining when the production of objects with
aesthetic attributes ﬁrst came about in human evolution is
less elusive than ascertaining when the appreciation of
beauty ﬁrst appeared, but even so it is far from obvious.
The Paleolithic polychromies representing bison and horses
in the caves of Altamira or Lascaux are doubtless art works,
but what about the bifacial symmetric hand axes made by
H. erectus 1 Ma and earlier, and even the ﬁrst recognizable
stone tools produced by H. habilis as early as 2.5 Ma?
We’ll ﬁrst explore the production of objects doubtless
produced to serve useful purposes, such as hand axes, and
leave unanswered for the very early of such useful objects
whether aesthetic considerations may have played a role in
their design.

The start of the Paleolithic, or “Old Stone Age,” is
deﬁned precisely by the appearance of the ﬁrst stone
tools, around 2.6 Ma, associated in turn with H. habilis,
which is the ﬁrst species of Homo, named habilis,
precisely for their ability, ﬁrst in human evolution, to
construct tools. The Paleolithic lasted until the Neolithic
12e10 ka,
the “Modern Stone Age” or Holocene that
lasted until about 2000 years BCE, when modern history
starts.

Paleolithic history is often recognized by a succession
of stages or cultures, characterized by distinct tools and
other products of human activity and named after localities
where the characteristic human objects were found.
Successively, these cultures are known as Oldowan (named
after the Olduvai site in Tanzania), from about 2.5 Ma until
about 1.5 Ma; Acheulan (named after the St. Acheul site
from about 1.5 Ma until 150e120 ka,
in France),
encompassing African and European H. erectus and archaic
H. sapiens; Mousterian, 150e120 ka until about 40 ka,
with H. neanderthalensis and H. sapiens in Europe;
succeeded by the Aurignacian culture, lasting from about
40 to about 18 ka, during which clearly deﬁned artistic
expressions appear as decorations on cave walls; and then
the Magdalenian, with the highest artistic expression of
the Paleolithic, from 18 to 10 ka, coinciding with the
peak of the Würm glaciation,
the last one and most
severe impacting our planet. The last three cultures are
designated after the French sites of Le Moustier, Aurignac,
and La Magdalene.

OLDOWAN AND ACHEULEAN
CULTURES

Olduvai Gorge (Tanzania) has been a source of numerous
hominin fossils since the middle of the 20th century.
Although Olduvai Gorge is not
the ﬁrst place in
which stone tools were found, it gave name to the earliest
known lithic industry: Oldowan culture. A lithic industry
can be described as a set of diverse stones manipulated
by hominins to obtain tools to cut, scrape, or hit. They
are diverse tools obtained by hitting pebbles of different
hard materials. Silex, quartz, ﬂint, granite, and basalt are
some of the materials used for tool making. In the Oldowan
culture, the size of the round-shaped cores is variable, but
they usually ﬁt comfortably in the hand; they are tennis
ballesized stones. Many tools belonging to different
traditions ﬁt within these generic characteristics. What
speciﬁcally identiﬁes Oldowan culture is that its tools are
obtained with very few knocks, sometimes only one. The
resultant
tools are misleadingly crude in appearance,
although it
the stones with enough
precision to obtain cutting edges and efﬁcient ﬂakes
(Fig. 35.1).

is not easy to hit

614 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

1

2

3

0

0

5

2

1

10 cm.

4 in.

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

FIGURE 35.1 Oldowan tools. 1e3: Lava choppers; 4e10, quarcite ﬂakes. Drawing by Leakey, M.D., 1971. Olduvai Gorge 3. Excavations in Beds I and
II 1960e1963. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Adaptive Signiﬁcance of Ethics and Aesthetics Chapter | 35 615

The idea we have of their function depends on the way
we interpret the adaptation of hominins that used them. The
most important tools would be the hand axes that allow
hitting a cranium or femur hard enough to break it. But for
butchering almost whole animals, ﬂakes would be the
essential tools.

The Oldowan culture was not restricted to Olduvai.
Stone tools have also been found at Kenyan and Ethiopian
sites, some older than Olduvai, such as Gona in the Middle
Awash region (Ethiopia), where some ﬁndings extend back
to 2.6e2.5 Ma. Other Ethiopian sites include Hadar and
Ono and, just south of them but already in Kenya, the
Lokalalei site in West Turkana, sites dated 2.0e2.3 Ma,
which collectively have yielded thousands of stone tools.
The dates for these sites are compatible with the attribution
of their stone tools to H. habilis. The oldest H. habilis
fossils from the Afar region in Ethiopia have been dated
between 2.75 and 2.80 Ma (Villmoare et al., 2015;
DiMaggio et al., 2015).

The issue arises as to what sort of knowledge was
possessed by the H. habilis hominins who produced these
stone tools. There can be little doubt that they had acquired
some capacity for abstract knowledge and for forming
images of realities not present, manifest in the construction
of tools that would be used at a later time, for purposes not
immediately present. However,
the tools were crude,
showing no evidence of any aesthetic intention (Fig. 35.2).
This would change later, during the ensuing Acheulan

culture, where symmetric, carefully designed hand axes
were produced that betray an appreciation of beauty. Their
creators were other, more developed hominin species,
which include H. erectus, H. neanderthalensis and,
perhaps, archaic H. sapiens.

The transition, described by Mary Leakey (1975), from
Oldowan tools to a different and more advanced industry,
the Acheulean culture, can be observed in Olduvai.
Acheulean tools made with great care were identiﬁed for
the ﬁrst time at the St. Acheul site (France). Acheulean
culture appeared in East Africa slightly over 1.5 Ma, and
extended to the rest of the Old World to a greater or lesser
degree until around 0.3 Ma. Its most characteristic element
is the biface, “teardrop shaped in outline, biconvex in cross-
section, and commonly manufactured on large (more than
10 cm) unifacially or bifacially ﬂaked cobbles, ﬂakes, and
slabs” (Noll and Petraglia, 2003). But
the term biface
corresponds to a form of manufacture rather than to a tool.
Bifaces led to different utensils, such as those shown in
Fig. 35.3.

Mary Leakey (1975) described the transition from
Oldowan culture to Acheulean culture as gradual. Subse-
quent studies, as argued by Isaac (1969) have convincingly
shown that the improvement of the necessary techniques to
go from the Oldowan to the Acheulean traditions could not
have taken place gradually. A completely new type of
manipulation would have appeared with Acheulean culture,
a true change in the way of carrying out the operations
involved in tool making.

The cultural sequence identiﬁed by Mary Leakey
involved a three-stage transition (Table 35.1):
(1975)
ﬁrst,
the evolution of progressively more sophisticated
techniques within the Oldowan culture itself; second, the
coexistence of Oldowan and Acheulean tools; and third, the
the former, and further development
disappearance of
of Acheulean techniques.
Isaac (1969) described that
sequence in terms of four cultural-stratigraphical associa-
tions,
to the youngest, as Oldowan,
developed Oldowan,
upper
lower Acheulean,
Acheulean.

from the oldest

and

To what extent can the Acheulean tradition be consid-
ered a continuation or a rupture regarding Oldowan? Was
developed Oldowan a transition phase toward subsequent
cultures? The required technique to execute the Acheulean
bifaces is different from Oldowan in several features. The
ﬁrst difference is the succession of strikes required to
produce a hand axe, which contrasts with the few and
unorganized strikes required to manufacture a protobiface.
The production of very long oval ﬂakes (more than 10 cm),
characteristic of Acheulean techniques, is its key difference
from the advanced Oldowan traditions. The shape of those
long ﬂakes is not very different from the bifaces them-
selves. This is why Isaac (1969) suggested that they could
be transformed into hand axes without too much effort.

FIGURE 35.2 Flake production by the Oldowan technique. Picture from
Plummer, T., 2004. Flaked stones and old bones: biological and cultural
evolution at the dawn of technology. Yearbook of Physical Anthropology
47, 118e164.

616 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

(A)

(C)

(B)

0

5

cm

0

5

cm

(D)

0

5

cm

0

5

cm

FIGURE 35.3 Bifaces destined to different uses. (A) cleaver; (B) hand axe; (C) knife; and (D) pick. From Noll, M.P., Petraglia, M.D., 2003. Acheulean
bifaces and early human behavioral patterns in East Africa and south India. In: Soressi M., Dibble, H.L. (Eds.), Multiple Approaches to the Study of
Bifacial Technologies. University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology, Philadelphia, pp. 31e53.

TABLE 35.1 Cultural Sequence at Olduvai
Established by Mary Leakey (1975, Modiﬁed)

Beds

Masek

IV

Age in Ma

0.2

0.7e0.2

Middle
part of III

Middle
part of II

I and lower
part of II

1.5e0.7

1.7e1.5

1.9e1.7

Number of
Pieces

187

686

979

99

683

537

Industries

Acheulean

Acheulean

Developed
Oldowan C

Acheulean

Developed
Oldowan A

Oldowan

The appearance of the technique for producing ﬂakes
suddenly changed the possibilities for tool manufacture.

Given that

the production of those ﬂakes involves
starting from large cores, the availability of quarries with
such raw materials can determine important differences in

the cultural content of different sites. The manipulation of
large blocks of material (mostly lava and quartzite) to
produce long ﬂakes seems to have been the turning point
for the development of the Acheulean culture. It would also
have involved risk for those who had to manipulate stones
of large size (Schick and Toth, 1993).

The most advanced Acheulean stage includes hand axes
with such symmetrical and carefully elaborated edges
that they must have required the so-called soft-hammer
technique (Fig. 35.4), which uses softer hammers than the
cores themselves, such as wood or bone. Knapping with
such a tool allowed more precise control and certainly
required more time. Schick and Toth (1993) have provided
a detailed description of the process.

Three events are usually considered to have taken place
together during the evolution of early- and middle-
Pleistocene hominins:
the appearance of H. erectus,
Acheulean culture, and the ﬁrst migration of hominins out
of the African continent. The usual interpretation suggests
that these three events are related. Leaving Africa con-
fronted hominins with climates colder than the Rift’s.
Adaptation to those extreme conditions was made possible
by cultural novelties, such as the control of ﬁre. The
adaptation was achieved by erectus-grade hominins,
associated with Acheulean culture.

Adaptive Signiﬁcance of Ethics and Aesthetics Chapter | 35 617

(A)

(C)

(B)

(D)

(E)

(F)

FIGURE 35.4 Levallois technique. Phases in the construction of a tool by ﬂake removal. (A) Preparation of an adequately shaped core; (B) and
(C) removal of ﬂakes; (D) the prepared platform is obtained; (E) a last blow with a soft hammer separates the tool from the core (F). Drawings from http://
www.hf.uio.no/iakh/forskning/sarc/iakh/lithic/LEV/Lev.htm.

The central element of Acheulean culture, the hand axe,
is absent in many early European sites with signs of human
presence (Italy, France, Germany, Czech Republic, and
Spain). It was not until a second colonizing wave, which
took place about half a million years ago, that Acheulean
hand axes were introduced. Sites corresponding to this time
interval include Torralba and Ambrona (Spain); St. Acheul
and Abbeville (France); Swanscombe, Boxgrove, and
Hoxne (England); and Torre di Pietra and Venosa-
Notarchirico (Italy).

MOUSTERIAN CULTURE AND
NEANDERTALS

Mousterian culture (c. 100e40 ka) is the lithic tool tradition
that evolved from Acheulean culture during the middle
Paleolithic. It was followed by the Aurignacian technical
and artistic explosion (40e18 ka), with tools and decorated

objects that contrast sharply with the Mousterian and earlier
cultures. Mousterian culture includes controversial features,
including objects clearly created with a decorative inten-
tion. Participants were H. neanderthalensis, as well as
modern H. sapiens.

Mousterian tool-making techniques produced tools that
were much more specialized than Acheulean ones;
the
Mousterian tools were given a form before sharpening their
edges. The most typical Mousterian tools found in Europe
and the Near East are ﬂakes produced by means of the
Levallois technique, which were subsequently modiﬁed to
produce diverse and shaper edges. Objects made from bone
are less frequent, but up to 60 types of ﬂake and stone
foil can be identiﬁed, which served different functions
(Bordes, 1979).

The Levallois technique appeared during the Acheulean
period, and was used thereafter. Its pinnacle was reached
during the Mousterian culture. This technique produces

618 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

ﬂakes or foils with a very precise shape from stone cores
that serve as raw material. The cores must ﬁrst be carefully
prepared by trimming their edges, removing small ﬂakes
until the core has the correct shape. Thereafter, with the last
blow, the desired ﬂake, a Levallois point for instance, is
obtained (Fig. 35.4). The ﬁnal results of the process, which
include points, scrapers, among many other instruments,

are subsequently modiﬁed to sharpen their edges. The
amazing care with which the material was worked consti-
tutes, according to Bordes (1953), evidence that these tools
were intended to last for a long time in a permanent living
location. They also seem to reﬂect an aesthetic intention.
Tools obtained by means of the Levallois technique are
typical of European and Near-East Mousterian sites.

FIGURE 35.5 Mousterian hand axes from Mezmaiskaya Cave (Caucasus). Figure from Doronichev, V., Golovanova, L., 2003. Bifacial tools in the
lower and middle Paleolithic of the Caucasus and their contexts. In: Soressi, M., Dibble, H.L. (Eds.), Multiple Approaches to the Study of Bifacial
Technologies. Museum of Archaelogy and Anthropology. Philadelphia, PA, pp. 77e107.

Adaptive Signiﬁcance of Ethics and Aesthetics Chapter | 35 619

Bifaces, on the contrarydso abundant
in Acheulean
sitesdare scarce. The difference has to do mostly with the
manipulation of the tools; scrapers were already produced
using Acheulean, and even Oldowan, techniques.

Most European and Near-East sites belonging to the
Würm glacial period contain Mousterian tools (named after
the Le Moustier site, Dordogne, France). The archaeolog-
ical richness and sedimentary breadth of some of these
sites,
like La Ferrassie, La Quina, and Combe-Grenal,
grants them a special interest for studying the interaction
between cultural utensils and adaptive responses. Similar
Mousterian utensils have appeared in the Near East, at
Tabun, Skuhl, and Qafzeh.

The identiﬁcation between the Mousterian culture and
H. neanderthalensis has been considered so consistent
that, repeatedly, European sites yielding no human spec-
imens, or with scarce and fragmented remains, were
attributed to Neandertals on the sole basis of the presence
of Mousterian utensils. Despite the difﬁculties inherent in
associating a given species with a cultural tradition, it was
thought to be beyond a doubt that Mousterian culture was
part of the Neandertal identity. Scrapers and Levallois
points, which were very similar to the typical European
ones, turned up also in Near-East sites (Bar-Yosef and
Vandermeersch, 1993). Neandertals also lived there, of
course (Fig. 35.5), but in contrast with European sites, a
distinction could not be drawn between localities that had
housed Neandertals and anatomically modern humans
solely on the grounds of the cultural traditions. The more
systematic distinction between Neandertale
or
Mousterian and Cro-MagnoneChâtelperronian (or Auri-
gnacian, or Magdalenian) helped to clarify the situation in
Europe. But it could not be transferred to the Near East,
where sites occupied by Neandertals and those inhabited
by anatomically modern humans, proto-Cro-Magnons,
yielded the same utensils of the Mousterian tradition.

less

least

This implies several things. First, that cultural sharing
in
was common during the middle Paleolithic, at
Levant sites. Second, that during the initial stages of their
occupation of the eastern shore of the Mediterranean,
anatomically modern humans made use of the same utensils
as Neandertals. Hence, it seems that, at the time, there was
no technical superiority of modern humans over Neander-
tals. The third and most important implication has to do
with the inferences that can be made because Neandertals
and H. sapiens shared identical tool-making techniques.
The production of Mousterian tools required complex
mental capabilities. Were Neandertal cognitive abilities as
complex as those currently characteristic of our own spe-
cies? Some authors have argued in favor of high cognitive
capacities in Neandertals, arguing that other kinds of items
were, indeed, indications of Neandertal aesthetic, religious,
symbolic, and even maybe linguistic, capacities. Numerous
Neandertal burials can be interpreted as a functional

response to the need of disposing of the bodies, even if only
for hygienic reasons. But they could also be understood as
the reﬂection of transcendent thinking, beyond the simple
human motivation of preserving the bodies of deceased
loved ones, probably reﬂecting symbolic and even religious
intentions.

key

to

the

symbolic

thought

A possible

of
H. neanderthalensis could come from stone and bone
objects belonging to the Mousterian tradition. Making tools
to use them in one way or another requires a capacity to
formulate objectives and anticipate behaviors. Beyond their
utility, Acheulean hand axes
are beautiful objects
(Fig. 35.6). Were these tools created with the intention of
being beautiful? Bifaces could be an early manifestation of
the evolution of preferences for lateral symmetry. It is true
that
tools and, more so,
Mousterian tools turned into beautiful objects, artistic
representations for us, who live hundreds of thousands of
years after the objects were manufactured. But were they
also so perceived, at least to some extent, by those who
manufactured them? Can a gradual and slow evolution

the Acheulean symmetrical

FIGURE 35.6 Hand axe from Isimila (Tanzania, c.300,000 year). As
Tomas Wynn observed, this artifact has congruent symmetry in three
dimensions. Illustration from Wynn, T., 2002. Archaeology and cognitive
evolution. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 25, 389e402.

620 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

toward more advanced symbolic objects be documented?
Or, rather, did symbolic expression and perception come
about relatively suddenly, late in human evolution?

SYMBOLISM AND AESTHETICS:
AURIGNACIAN AND MAGDALENIAN
CULTURES

The symmetry of Acheulean hand axes could be consid-
ered as a possible indication of symbolism. The earliest of
these tools are about 1.5 million years old (Leakey, 1975).
Realistic representations, such as the Altamira, Lascaux,
Chauvet, and other cave paintings from Spain and France
were made toward the end of the upper Pleistocene, about
14,000 years ago. There is an enormous time gap between
these two cultural manifestations (symmetry and realistic
painting). Within this gap, there is the Mousterian culture,
described earlier, characteristic of the European middle
Paleolithic, ranging from about 100,000 to 40,000 years
ago. The ensuing Aurignacian (c. 40e18 ka) and the
Magdalenian (c. 18e10 ka) cultures include drawings,
engravings, and paintings with unquestionable intentional
aesthetic and symbolic characteristics, much beyond the
symbolism and beauty that might be attributed to the
Mousterian and earlier cultures.

are plenty of hypothetical speculations and models of the
evolution of language, but this is a matter that will not be
pursued here (see Chapter 33 in this book.)

The appearance of cave art since early in the Auri-
gnacian period and culminating during the Magdalenian,
seems “explosive” from our distance of several thousand
years. An extensive monograph by the distinguished
painter and muralist Joaquín Vaquero Turcios (1995)
provides detailed historical and artistic analysis of cave art,
particularly wall paintings. He has identiﬁed 72 caves,
distributed into eight
regions in Northern Spain and
Southern France (Fig. 35.7). Best known are Altamira and
El Castillo in region 2 (Cantabria, Spain), Lascaux in re-
gion 5 (Dordogne-Gironde, France), and Chauvet in region
8 (Ardèche, France). All the caves seem to have experi-
enced two distinct periods of artistic activity,
the ﬁrst
around 40e34 ka and the second around 18e14 ka. Why
these two periods of activity and why at relatively similar

There are two mutually exclusive hypotheses about the
process that led to the massive production of artistic rep-
resentations unquestionably charged with symbolism: the
gradual and explosive models. The former argues that the
capacity to appreciate Acheulean beautiful forms evolved
gradually and continuously, leading to the great abundance
of late-Paleolithic artistic objects. This gradual model does
not refer to an origin of art. This origin is thought to be
fuzzy, widespread in space and continuous in time. Ac-
cording to this model, the initial manifestations of that
origin were scarce; slowly, over a long period of time, they
became progressively generalized. On the contrary, the
explosive model of the appearance of the symbolism
characteristic of art argues that it appeared fairly suddenly
during the late Paleolithic, and that it is exclusively an
attribute of modern humans. The great cognitive trans-
formation evinced in the upper-Paleolithic artistic explo-
sion must have included different capacities for adaptation
in our ancestors. Several authors have suggested coevo-
lutionary
and
communicative abilities. Some of these models (Davidson
and Noble, 1989) have put forward the hypothesis that
relates the origin of art itself, and not just the general
language. They
cultural sequence, with the origin of
believe
that drawing requires prior
communication.
Drawing later transformed communication into language.
Davidson and Noble (1989) argue that pictorial represen-
tations are halfway between reality and language. There

cultural manufactures

sequences

of

FIGURE 35.7 The seven central
regions of Paleolithic cave art:
(1) Asturias; (2) Cantabria; (3) País Vasco; (4) Dordogne (Lot and Tarn);
(5) Dordogne (Gironde); (6) Dordogne (Charente and Yonne); (7) Aragon
and Estern Pyrenees; (8) Garde, Ardèche, Ain. The caves of Altamira and
El Castillo are in region 2; Lascaux is in region 5; Chauvet is in region 8.
After Vaquero Turcios, J., 1995. Maestros Subterráneos. Celeste Ediciones,
S.A., Madrid, p. 21.

Adaptive Signiﬁcance of Ethics and Aesthetics Chapter | 35 621

times in all caves is not known. One consideration is the
overlap with the Würm glaciation, which reached its cli-
max around 16 ka. Caves may have served as occasional
refuge, as well as places for social, and perhaps religious,
interaction.

smoke

One footnote that deserves attention is illumination.
How did the artists, as well as visitors over many years,
manage to have light
in the depth of caves, often
hundreds of
from the cave entrance, where no
sunlight or any conceivable form of natural light could
reach? Wax and various fats were the most common
forms of lighting before modern times. But most fat or
wax candles produce smoke that would have made it all
but impossible to paint or to draw, and visitors would
have obliterated with their
any paintings
decorating the walls. Vaquero Turcios (1995) discovered
that bone marrow, particularly from the calves of cattle
and other
large mammals, burns without producing
smoke. Small handheld stones covered with lumps of
bone marrow and with an ignited wick could provide
lighting for hours at a time (Fig. 35.8). The ﬁre
was started by rubbing stones or wood sticks against
each other. Vaquero Turcios (1995) has shown how the
artists changing their position around a particular spot
could suitably illuminate it, and at
times provide
vantage points
identifying irregularities on the
walls that could be used to represent different animal
forms.

feet

for

The Aurignacian cave paintings are mostly red ochre
stencils of human hands and dot alignments with
different conﬁgurations and difﬁcult-to-ascertain symbol-
ism; sometimes the hand stencils and the dots are associ-
ated on the same wall with sketched and often incomplete
animal designs, some of which may have been added
later, during the Magdalenian period (Fig. 35.9). The
Magdalenian paintings of the great “cave Sistine chapels,”

FIGURE 35.9 Fragment of the “Panel of the Hands,” on the ceiling of a
low cavern in El Castillo. The hand stencils start near the ﬂoor; the
incomplete bison would have been added later. After Vaquero Turcios, J.,
1995. Maestros Subterráneos. Celeste Ediciones, S.A., Madrid, p. 105.

particularly those of Altamira (Figs. 35.10 and 35.11),
Chauvet, and Lascaux are polychrome paintings of superb
artistic value, even though their symbolism beyond their
decorative value remains obscure. Some may have served
conjuring, magic, or even religious purposes.

FIGURE 35.8 A ﬁre lamp. Over the stone, lumps of bone marrow
(nearly exhausted) and the protruding wick. After Vaquero Turcios, J.,
1995. Maestros Subterráneos. Celeste Ediciones, S.A., Madrid, p. 25.

FIGURE 35.10 Drawing in black and white of the ceiling of one of the
main caverns in Altamira. The bison, horses, deer, and boar are painted in
vivid colors, with prevailing red ochre. Approximate sizing is provided by
the added drawing of the artist himself. After Vaquero Turcios, J., 1995.
Maestros Subterráneos. Celeste Ediciones, S.A., Madrid, p. 140.

622 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

FIGURE 35.11 Cover of J. Vaquero Turcios’ book (1995) about
Paleolithic art, showing from Altamira a bison with the head turned.
Translations: title, Underground Masters: Techniques of Paleolithic Art.
Bottom right: “A close view of cave art, its creators and the techniques
they used.”

REFERENCES

Alexander, R., 1979. Darwinism and Human Affairs. University of

Bernardini, P.L., 2015. A note on the ethical value of aesthetics. Ndias

Quarterly 3 (2), 19.

Blackmore, S., 1999. The Meme Machine. Oxford University Press,

Oxford.

Bordes, F., 1953. Nodules de typologie paléolithique I. Outils musteriens à
fracture volontaire. In: Bulletin de la Societé Préhistorique Française
50 Paris, vol. 1. Société préhistorique française.

Bordes, F., 1979. Typologie du Paléolithique ancien et moyen, vol. 1.

CNRS, Paris.

Brosnan, S., de Waal, F., 2003. Monkeys reject unequal pay. Nature 425,

297e299.

Cela-Conde, C.J., Ayala, F.J., 2007. Human Evolution. Trails from the

Past. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Copp, D., 2006. The Oxford Handbook of Ethical Theory. Oxford Uni-

versity Press, Oxford.

Darwin, C., 1859. On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection.

John Murray, London.

Darwin, C., 1871. The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex.
John Murray, London (Also: Appleton and Company, New York,
1971).

Davidson, I., Noble, W., 1989. The archaeology of perception. Current

Anthropology 30, 125e155.

de Waal, F., 1996. Good Natured: The Origins of Right and Wrong in
Humans and Other Animals. Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
MA.

DiMaggio, E.N., Campisano, C.J., Rowan, et al., 2015. Late Pliocene
fossiliferous sedimentary record and the environmental context of
early Homo from Afar, Ethiopia. Science 347 (6228), 1355e1359.

Doronichev, V., Golovanova, L., 2003. Bifacial tools in the lower and
middle Paleolithic of the Caucasus and their contexts. In: Soressi, M.,
Dibble, H.L. (Eds.), Multiple Approaches to the Study of Bifacial
Technologies. Museum of Archaelogy
and Anthropology,
pp. 77e107. Philadelphia, PA.

Gazzaniga, M.S., 2005. The Ethical Brain. Dana Press, New York.
Gazzaniga, M.S., 2008. Human. The Science Behind What Makes Us

Unique. HarperCollins, New York.

Greene,

J.D., Sommerville, R.B., Nystrom, L.E., Darley,

J.M.,
Cohen, J.D., 2001. An fRMI investigation of emotional engagement in
moral judgment. Science 293, 2105e2108.

Washington Press, Seattle.

Haidt, J., 2007. The new synthesis in moral psychology. Science 316,

Ayala, F.J., 1982. The

evolutionary concept of progress.

In:
Almond, G.A., Chodorow, M., Pearce, R.H. (Eds.), Progress and
Its Discontents. University
Press, Berkeley,
pp. 106e124.

of California

998e1002.

Hamilton, W., 1964. The genetical evolution of social behavior. Journal of

Theoretical Biology 7, 1e51.

Hauser, M., 2006. Moral Minds: How Nature Designed Our Universal

Ayala, F.J., 1987. The biological roots of morality. Biology and Philoso-

Sense of Right and Wrong. Harper, New York.

phy 2, 235e252.

Hume, D., 1740/1978. Treatise of Human Nature. Oxford University

Ayala, F.J., 2010. What the biological sciences can and cannot contribute
to ethics. In: Ayala, F.J., Arp, R. (Eds.), Contemporary Debates in
Philosophy of Biology. Wiley-Blackwell, Chichester, West Sussex,
UK, pp. 316e336.

Press, Oxford.

Huxley, J., 1953. Evolution in Action. Harper, New York.
Huxley, T., Huxley, J., 1947. Touchstone for Ethics. Harper, New York.
Isaac, G.L., 1969. Studies of early cultures in East Africa. World

Ayala, F.J., Arp, R. (Eds.), 2010. Contemporary Debates in Philosophy of

Archaeology 1, 1e28.

Biology. Wiley-Blackwell, Chichester, West Sussex, UK.

Kitcher, P., 1985. Vaulting Ambition: Sociobiology and the Quest for

Bar-Yosef, O., Vandermeersch, B., 1993. El hombre moderno de Oriente

Human Nature. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

medio. Investigación y Ciencia 201, 66e73.

Barash, D., 1977. Sociobiology and Behavior. Elsevier, New York.
Barkow, J., Cosmides, L., Tooby, J., 1992. The Adapted Mind: Evolu-
tionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture. Oxford University
Press, Oxford.

Leakey, M.D., 1971. Olduvai Gorge 3. Excavations in Beds I and II

1960e1963. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Leakey, M.D., 1975. Cultural patterns in the Olduvai sequence. In:
the Australopithecines.

(Eds.), After

Butzer, K.W.,
Mouton, The Hague, pp. 477e493.

Isaac, G.L.

Adaptive Signiﬁcance of Ethics and Aesthetics Chapter | 35 623

Maienschein, J., Ruse, M., 1999. Biology and the Foundations of Ethics.

Ruse, M., Wilson, E.O., 1985. The evolution of ethics. New Scientist 108,

Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

50e52.

Martineau, H., 1832e1834. Illustrations of Political Economy. in 9 vols,

Schick, K.D., Toth, N., 1993. Making Silent Stones Speak. Simon &

third ed. Charles Fox, London.

Schuster, New York.

Moore, G., 1903. Principia Ethica. Cambridge University Press,

Sober, E., 1993. Philosophy of Biology. Westview Press, Boulder and San

Cambridge.

Francisco.

Noll, M.P., Petraglia, M.D., 2003. Acheulean bifaces and early human
behavioral patterns in East Africa and south India. In: Soressi, M.,
Dibble, H.L. (Eds.), Multiple Approaches to the Study of Bifacial
Technologies. University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology
and Anthropology, Philadelphia, pp. 31e53.

Paley, W., 1785. The Principles of Moral and Political Philosophy.

Exshaw, Dublin.

Sober, E., Wilson, D., 1998. Unto Others: The Evolution and Psychology

of Unselﬁsh Behavior. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.

Spencer, H., 1893. The Principles of Ethics. Williams and Norgate,

London.

Strimling, P., Enquist, M., Eriksson, K., 2009. Repeated learning makes
cultural evolution unique. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 106, 13870e13874.

Pinker, S., 2002. The Blank Slate: The Modern Denial of Human Nature.

Vaquero Turcios, J., 1995. Maestros Subterráneos. Celeste Ediciones.

Viking, New York.

S.A., Madrid.

Plummer, T., 2004. Flaked stones and old bones: biological and cultural
evolution at the dawn of technology. Yearbook of Physical Anthro-
pology 47, 118e164.

Villmoare, B., Kimbel, W.H., Seyoum, C., et al., 2015. Early Homo at
2.8 Ma from Ledi-Geraru, afar, Ethiopia. Science 347 (6228),
1352e1355.

Richerson, P.J., Boyd, R., 2005. Not by Genes Alone. How Culture
Transformed Human Evolution. University of Chicago Press, Chicago
and London.

Richerson, P.J., Boyd, R., Henrich, J., 2010. Gene-culture coevolution
in the age of genomics. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of
the United States of America 107 (Suppl. 2),
8985e8992.

Ruse, M., 1995. Evolutionary Naturalism. Routledge, London.
Ruse, M., 2000. The Evolution Wars: A Guide to the Controversies.

Waddington, C.H., 1960. The Ethical Animal. Allen and Unwin, London.
Webster’s New Collegiate Dictionary, tenth ed., 1998. Merriam-Webster,

Springﬁeld, MA.

Whiten, A., Goodall, J., McGrew, W., et al., 1999. Cultures in chimpan-

zees. Nature 399, 682e685.

Whiten, A., Horner, V., de Waal, F., 2005. Conformity to cultural norms of

tool use in chimpanzees. Nature 437, 737e740.

Wilson, E.O., 1975. Sociobiology, the New Synthesis. Belknap Press,

Cambridge.

ABC-CLIO, Santa Barbara, CA.

Wilson, E.O., 1978. On Human Nature. Harvard University Press,

Ruse, M., 2006. Darwinism and its Discontents. Cambridge University

Cambridge, MA.

Press, Cambridge.

Wilson, E.O., 1998. Consilience: The Unity of Knowledge. Knopf,

Ruse, M., 2010. The biological sciences can act as a ground for ethics. In:
Ayala, F.J., Arp, R. (Eds.), Contemporary Debates in Philosophy of
Biology. Wiley-Blackwell, Malden, MA, pp. 297e315.

New York.

Wilson, E.O., 2012. The Social Conquest of Earth. Norton/Liveright,

New York.

Ruse, M., 2012. The Philosophy of Human Evolution. Cambridge

Wynn, T., 2002. Archaeology and cognitive evolution. Behavioral

University Press, Cambridge.

and Brain Sciences 25, 389e402.

Chapter 36

The Politics of Human Nature

M. Kronfeldner
Central European University, Budapest, Hungary

INTRODUCTION

The normal state for human beings is to be white, male
heterosexuals. All others do not participate fully in human
nature.

L’espèce, c’est moi.

Hull, 1986, p. 7

Sahlins, 2008, p. 2

social

it

inclusion/exclusion:

An important political function of the vernacular concept
of human nature is
is
involved in regulating who is “us” and who is “them,” a
process by which some people are dehumanized, ie, regarded
as not participating fully in what it means to be human, as
David Hull (1986) already stressed in his famous critique of
the concept of human nature. This paper claims that dehu-
manization shows the concept of human nature to be a
conceptual blank mold, a concept that is purely functional:
it is ﬁlledddepending on contextdwith different content,
but always with what those speaking consider to be their
the political
“essential” characteristics. Across context,
dehumanization function remains constant, even if
the
content (what it means to be human) varies. It is in that sense
that “l’espèce, c’est moi,” as Marshall Sahlins (2008) wrote
in his recent critique of the concept of human nature.

I distinguish between two ways of addressing the pol-
itics of human nature. There is, ﬁrst, the politics of human
nature that is as a matter of fact regularly derived from the
concept of human nature. This refers to dehumanization
and possible further political functions of the concept, such
as an equality-establishing function (via the concept of
human rights), a constraining function (ie, which life forms
are possible for humans), or a responsibility-deferral
function (via the idea that one is forced by human nature
to do this or that). Dehumanization is the sole subject of

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00036-3
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

this chapter. Second, there is the politics that can be phil-
osophically justiﬁed with reference to human nature. I will
not address this second issue at all, it being about whether
political views can legitimately be based on knowledge
about human nature. I rather assume that there is no justi-
ﬁcation in the name of human nature for speciﬁc political,
economic, or social ideas, systems, etc. All we can derive
from knowledge about humans are “some constraints on the
possible development and behavior of the human organ-
ism,” as John Dupré (2011, p. 162) stressed.1

In the following, I will show that the concept of human
nature facilitates dehumanization independent of the con-
tent transported with “what it means to be human.”

Section “Dehumanization” introduces dehumanization
in a systematic manner. After providing some historical
evidence in section “Evidence From History, Cultural
Anthropology and Social Psychology,” I will introduce a
distinction between two forms of dehumanization in
section “Two Forms of Dehumanization, From Explicit to
Implicit” and add a short history of how dehumanization
has been conceptualized in historical, ethnological, and
psychological scholarship. The result, presented in sec-
tion “Functional Perspective Necessary,” is a functional
account of the concept of human nature: the content of
what
the
it means to be human may well vary, but
functiondthat it facilitates dehumanizationdendures.

DEHUMANIZATION

Dehumanization would not happen without a concept of
human nature (ie, broadly understood: what it means to be

1. See also Reydon (2014) for a convincing, non-exhaustive taxonomy and
critique of modes of “arguments from human nature” (as he calls them),
arguments justifying speciﬁc political systems.

625

626 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

human) in the minds of those that dehumanize others.2
Dehumanization can be deﬁned as follows: an evaluative
stance (merely cognitive or also behavioral) toward other
humans that involves drawing a line between individuals or
groups (as in-group/out-group) according to an assumed
concept of what it means to be human.

Thus, even if all forms of dehumanization (that target a
group of people) are cases of in-group favoritism (ie, out-
group bias), not all forms of in-group favoritism are cases
of dehumanization. Fast changing peer-group fashion codes
might be an example of in-group favoritism without a
connection to the concept of human nature. To count as a
case of dehumanization, the process of inclusion/exclusion
must have something to do with the concept of being
human.

Dehumanization comprises three dimensions:3

1.

2.

It involves, ﬁrst, holding a seemingly factual belief (eg,
a projection or an overgeneralization, as in standard
stereotyping) with respect
to “being human,” eg, a
belief that “Jews are evil people and ruling the world,”
that “women are childlike and therefore not fully hu-
man,” or that “Black men are aggressive rather than
civilized and therefore not fully human.”
It involves, second, an emotive evaluation leading to
prejudice (eg, pity, disdain, superiority, fear, anger, or
envy) as a cognitive stance.

3. Third, the cognitive-evaluative stance can have behav-
ioral consequences. It can lead to diverse kinds of
discrimination (ie, the social exclusion of ethnic groups,
women, homeless people, etc.) and violence (eg, rape,
war, genocide). Thus, socially important issues such
as racism, sexism, eugenics, disability, poverty, as
well as violence-related issues such as genocide and
other forms of atrocity related to group conﬂicts are
connected with dehumanization.

Dehumanization further commonly involves two con-
trasts, one between animals and humans and one between
machines and humans. Humans are not like other animals,
and they are not like machines. Consequently, there is
animalistic dehumanization and mechanistic dehumaniza-
tion, as Haslam (2006) calls these two basic forms of
dehumanization that he suggests occur repeatedly and in
various contexts. Smith (2011) sets a very narrow focus on

cases of dehumanization that lead to aggressive behavior
against those being dehumanized. He distinguishes dehu-
manization from:

l objectiﬁcation (being regarded as object rather than

subject);

l de-individualization (being regarded as an exemplar for
a stereotype rather than an individual) (Smith, 2011,
pp. 26e29).

Since objectiﬁcations can be regarded as a speciﬁc
mechanistic form of dehumanization, and since de-
individualization is a precondition for dehumanization,
feeding into the ﬁrst dimension, I rather opt for a broader
focus and terminology. Dehumanization in the broad sense
(as used here) includes a variety of forms of dehumaniza-
tion. If one were to choose Smith’s narrower meaning, then
one would too easily overlook the systematic connections
between objectiﬁcation, de-individualization, and his nar-
row animalistic dehumanization. And it is these connec-
tions that social psychologists, studying dehumanization
systematically, are interested in, when they use dehuman-
ization in the rather broad sense used here.4

Dehumanization does not require essentialist thinking
or even the use of the term “human nature,” even though
essentialist thinking and the language of human “nature”
facilitates dehumanization.5 What it does require is some
vernacular concept of human nature, some understanding of
what it descriptively means to be human.6

Given that dehumanization requires a concept of human
nature, that concept thus plays a political role in interethnic
conﬂicts and in a diversity of forms of dominance and
oppression. What we think about human nature inﬂuences
the way in which we treat other beings who we consider as
being “not human” or “less human.” We do not just employ
the concept of human nature for “us”; we regularly use it to
deny humanness to “them,” eg, to out-groups or subgroups
like women, behaviorally deviant people, strangers, pa-
riahs, or enemies.

EVIDENCE FROM HISTORY, CULTURAL
ANTHROPOLOGY, AND SOCIAL
PSYCHOLOGY

Historians, cultural anthropologists and social psycholo-
gists have accumulated plenty of evidence of this darker,

2. That broad meaning of “human nature” can be further speciﬁed in a
variety of ways. See Kronfeldner et al. (2014). Here, it will be primarily
understood either as a descriptive concept, referring to a set of properties
characteristic of the group of people called “humans,” or as a classiﬁcatory
concept, referring to properties (and be they relational) that make an in-
dividual human in the classiﬁcatory sense, ie, that decide about member-
ship in the kind. These two meanings match two kinds of dehumanization:
property- and heritage-related forms of dehumanization.
3. This ordering has been inspired by Mejias (2006).

4. See, for instance, Haslam (2006).
5. See Kronfeldner (2016), on why the language of human “nature”
matters. A detailed argumentation for the claim that dehumanization
happens even without essentialist
thinking has to wait for another
occassion.
6. See Footnote 2 for different ways of understanding the concept of hu-
man nature, including the anti-essentialist, minimal descriptive one of
“what it means to be human” used here.

social side of the concept of human nature. In this section, I
will present this evidence in an exemplary manner, with a
focus on animalistic dehumanization. I will start with an
example of dehumanization from the history of philosophy,
namely the dehumanization of women as part of Aristote-
lian philosophy. I will then add a second contemporary
example, the dehumanization of Africans and Amerindians.

Example 1.
Human nature in Aristotle can be understood as refer-
ring to the human life form, which is not only the form
(contrasted with matter) but also the end (telos) of human
ﬂourishing. Within that frame, deviations are conceived as
not fully realizing the form of the type (because of some
interference). Aristotelian essentialism thus implied that
variations in a species (eg, Homo sapiens) are deviations of
a type. They are regarded as inferior to those more closely
realizing the form, since form is norm within such an ac-
count. Women, for instance, were for Aristotle (infamously
in Politics, Book 1, 1252ae1260b) such inferior de-
viations, deviations from human nature, and hence inferior
to the free men representing the type.

To conceive of certain kinds of people being further
away from a speciﬁc life form of a species involves making
a distinction between proper and improper kinds of devel-
opmental causes. If a female is produced during repro-
duction, as Aristotle writes in the Generatione Animalium
(GA 767b7e25), then “[n]ature has in a way departed from
the type.” He acknowledges that for sexually reproducing
species it is a “natural necessity” that some females are
produced. But he also holds that when they are produced,
the embryo is “deﬁcient,” since if “the generative secretion
in the catamenia is properly concocted,
the movement
imparted by the male will make the form of the embryo in
the likeness of itself.”7 (The form of the embryo in Aris-
totle’s picture is due to the male semen alone; women
contribute matter only). Without any interfering causes,
there would be no variation and only well-functioning
Greek men, who had been conceived as realizing in full
grandeur the nature of being human, or, in other words,
representing the natural state of being human.

Aristotle still regarded women (despite their being
ie, as
deviants) as (what we now call) Homo sapiens,
partaking in the same species as Greek men, as Deslauriers
(1998) and Witt (2005) stress. It seems that variability
within humankind did not prevent Aristotle from including
the deviants as members of that one humankind, and
consequently as partaking in the same human nature. The
deviants were same same, but different (as an Asian idiom
goes). (Subsequently, we will therefore distinguish between
a form of dehumanization that concerns species member-
ship and one that concerns exhibited properties.)

7. I am using the translation from Arthur Platt, which is part of the original
Oxford edition (ed. by Ross, 1912).

The Politics of Human Nature Chapter | 36 627

This

in Aristotle’s

explanatory schema

thinking
involved teleological thinking. As Neil Roughley (2011,
p. 13) describes it, “nature in this sense has dispositional to-
be-realisedness, ie, in the absence of defeating conditions,
the natural entity will realize its full and speciﬁc form.”
Consequently, the deviants (women in the example, but for
Aristotle also the slaves and Barbarians of the ancient
Greek world) were less human.

The explanatory schema was also essentialist in the
sense that it picked out some features (such as rationality)
as essential and contrasted them with other features that
were deemed to be negligible for the essence of being
human. In terms of the three dimensions of dehumaniza-
tion, we can describe the case as follows: it is a case of (1)
attributing more or less of humanness to a particular group
in an overgeneralized manner that (2) very likely involved
some emotional evaluation and (3) deﬁnitely had some
behavioral consequences since men were supposed to be
the masters of women and women had relatively limited
rights in ancient Greek society.

In the 19th century, not much had changed, except the
interpretation of the properties women were believed to
lack, and the essentialist metaphysics beneath. Gustave Le
Bon, for instance, founder-ﬁgure of social psychology,
part of the craniologist movement and thus far from
Aristotle’s metaphysics, wrote: “In the most intelligent
races, as among the Parisians, there are a large number
of women whose brains are closer in size to those of
gorillas than to the most developed male brains. This
inferiority is so obvious that no one can contest it for
a moment; only its degree is worth discussion. All
psychologists who have studied the intelligence of
women, as well as poets and novelists, recognize today
that
inferior forms of human
evolution and that they are closer to children and savages
than to an adult, civilized man. They excel in ﬁckleness,
inconstancy, absence of thought and logic, and incapacity
to reason. Without doubt there exist some distinguished
women, very superior to the average man, but they are as
exceptional as the birth of any monstrosity, as,
for
example, of a gorilla with two heads; consequently, we
may neglect them entirely.”8

they represent

the most

I assume (and hope) that such a radical and explicit
dehumanization is unlikely to arise in contemporary sci-
ence. Yet, women are still regularly dehumanized, even if
often only implicitly and not necessarily with respect to
rationality or with respect to rationality alone.9 The prop-
erties change, but the dehumanization endures. In addition,
other humans are dehumanized with respect to still different

8. Often quoted in feminist literature, after Gould (1978, p. 365).
9. For a general discussion of dehumanization and women, see Jaggar
(1983), Nussbaum (1995), Haste (2000), and Mikkola (2011, 2016). For an
empirical study, see Eyssel and Hegel (2012) and Koepke et al. (2014).

participants were not aware of priming faces. Completion
of the Modern Racism Scale and the Motivation to Control
Prejudice Scale were used to make sure that the results were
independent of individual differences in explicit anti-Black
prejudice or attitudes about prejudice. The results are
illustrated in Fig. 36.1.

When primed with Black faces (black columns), fewer
frames are needed to identify the ape images compared to
non-ape images, and compared to when study participants
are not primed (grey columns). When primed with White
faces (white columns), more frames are needed to recognize
the ape images compared to the non-ape images, and
compared to when study participants are not primed (grey
column). Images of Black faces facilitate ape recognition.
Further experiments added the following points: ﬁrst, the
effect is bidirectional (images of apes also facilitate atten-
tion to Black faces) and, second, the effect is speciﬁc for
Black people (rather than a general out-group bias, since
analogous tests with Asian faces did not show the same
results). By using colorless line drawings, they tried to rule
out
the effect was due to simple
perceptual color matching. By also testing associations with
other animals (eg, big cats such as lions that are also ste-
reotypically perceived as being aggressive), they tried to
rule out that what they were observing was simply an as-
sociation with aggression, rather than a speciﬁc Black-ape
association. Yet, aggression seems to play a role in the
speciﬁc Black-ape association.

the possibility that

In two further studies, Goff et al. sought to establish
whether also judgment (rather than only perception and

628 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

properties, eg, people of color with respect to aggression, as
the next example illustrates. The contentdthe essential
properties picked outdmight well change, but the function
of dehumanization endures.

Example 2.
Cases explicitly likening Africans and Amerindians
(indigenous groups of North and South America) to great
apes might be even more well-known by now than cases
explicitly likening women to apes. The likening of Africans
and Amerindians to apes is a form of dehumanization that
is especially important in the context of colonialism and
prevalent well into (if not way beyond) the 19th century, a
time when abolitionists like the Darwin family were
ﬁghting racism. After Columbus’s landfall in 1492, Span-
iards hacked off natives’ limbs, burned them alive and
threw babies to the Spaniards’ dogs. Some complained, eg,
the Jesuit priest Montensinos, who asked “Are these not
men? Have they not rational souls?” Even in the 16th
century, humanist scholars such as Giordano Bruno and the
alchemist Paracelsus, among others, denied a shared
ancestry of their people with those Amerindians, regarding
them as non-Adamic in origin (as not descending from
Adam, the common denominator of the Judeo-Christian-
Islamic androcentrism), or by regarding them as homunculi:
beings with a human body but no soul.10 In the 19th cen-
tury, when Charles Darwin was traveling on the Beagle, it
was still common in certain areas of the world to regard in
particular Afro-American people as a separate species, an
intermediate step between brutes and humans, as Desmond
and Moore (2009) report in their new biography on Darwin.
Darwin, as a member of a family ﬁghting for the abolition
of slavery, also had a “sacred cause” to write his Origin of
Species: to develop a theory of evolution that relied on
common descent in order to show that the racism under-
pinning slavery was scientiﬁcally wrong.

Implicitly, the association between “Black” people and
apes is still active today, as Goff et al. (2008) demonstrate
in a set of experiments. Their ﬁrst experiment, a degraded
object test, already showed an implicit bias that they name
the “Black-ape facilitation effect.” Study participants are
ﬁrst subliminally primed with black, white, and neutral
faces. They then have to recognize degraded line drawings
of animals that gradually become easier to identify. The
prediction is (for White as well as non-White study par-
ticipants): “exposure to the Black male faces would facili-
tate identiﬁcation of the ape images, whereas exposure to
the White male faces would not.” Debrieﬁng conﬁrmed that

10. The quotation from Montesinos and further references regarding that
history can be found in Smith (2011, p. 77ff), also with respect to the
famous month-long debate between Sepúlveda, an Aristotelian scholar
defending the notion that indigenous people are natural slaves, and Bar-
tolomé de Las Casas, defending their status as equally human. For a
in-depth study of likening people to apes, see Hund et al. (2016).

FIGURE 36.1 Results of the degraded object test study. The original
caption says: “Mean frame number at which the animal could be detected
as a function of animal type and race prime (Study 1). Error bars represent
the average standard error
for each condition.” From Goff, P.A.,
Eberhardt, J.L., Williams, M.J., Jackson, M.C., 2008. Not yet human:
implicit knowledge, historical dehumanization, and contemporary conse-
quences. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 94, 296.

cognition) is inﬂuenced by the Black-ape association. First,
they studied whether priming with ape images and big cat
images inﬂuences the judgment whether police violence
against suspects (shown to study participants in a video) is
justiﬁed. The results (among other things) showed that
violence against Black people was more likely to be
regarded as justiﬁed, when participants were primed with
ape images. Their ﬁnal, historical (rather than experimental)
study on death sentences in Philadelphia between 1979 and
1999 adds evidence in the same vein. Goff et al. (2008,
p. 304) conclude with respect to the latter: “Black de-
fendants are more likely to be portrayed as apelike in news
coverage than White defendants and that this portrayal is
associated with a higher probability of state-sponsored
executions.”

TWO FORMS OF DEHUMANIZATION,
FROM EXPLICIT TO IMPLICIT

I take it that in the 21st century it is unlikely that some-
body explicitly regards other people as (1) members of a
different species or as (2) like apes. Thus, explicitly
denying (1) membership in humankind and (2) humanness
should be rather rare. An exception, at least for (2), is
propaganda and caricature, as in the following famous

FIGURE 36.2 Army poster encouraging US soldiers to enlist in the
army. The enemy was WW1 Germany. Ca. 1917 (public domain, picture at
Harry Ranson Center, University of Texas, Austin).

The Politics of Human Nature Chapter | 36 629

poster that combined the dehumanization of women and
enemies simultaneously (Fig. 36.2).

In addition to a very likely ongoing explicit dehuman-
ization in propaganda and caricature, people might still
implicitly be regarded in all kinds of contexts as less human
in the two forms just mentioned, ie, as less human: (1) in
heritage (heritage-related dehumanization) or
(2) with
respect to humanness, ie, with respect to properties such as
rationality or civility versus aggression or any other puta-
tive “essential” property of being human (property-based
dehumanization). In such an implicit form, (1) member-
ship in humankind or (2) instantiation of “essential” prop-
erties is not denied, but graded.

Given these two forms of animalistic dehumanization,
the results, especially of the last two studies by Goff et al.
(2008) can be explained either by (1) a heritage-based
exclusion attitude of Black-means-apelike-means-less-
human-by-heritage-and-therefore-not-as-much-protected-
by-human-rights or by (2) a speciﬁc triadic association
of Black-means-apelike-means-aggressive-and-therefore-
exhibiting-less-humanness.
I concede the difﬁculty of
deciding which form of dehumanization is taking place, but
the important issue is that they both can happen and can be
distinguished from each other.

I thus conclude that implicit dehumanization in both
these forms is still among us and likely to be very wide-
spread. I take the evidence accumulated in social psy-
chology, reviewed in Haslam and Loughnan (2014), to
conﬁrm this.

FUNCTIONAL PERSPECTIVE NECESSARY

Before I add theoretical background from historical,
ethnological, or psychological scholarship, let me draw a
ﬁrst philosophical conclusion: the content of the concept of
human nature (eg, that rationality is part of human nature,
or that other animals are aggressive and humans civilized)
changes historically and varies between people and scien-
tiﬁc contexts. The aforementioned examples illustrate the
following:

l a change from Aristotelian metaphysics to the craniolo-
gist movement with respect to the dehumanization of
women;

l a change from colonial dehumanization of Amerindians
to the

as non-Adamic in heritage or as homunculi,
Black-ape facilitation effect;

l ways in which different traits can be used to liken peo-
ple to apes. (Recall the list from Le Bon for women and
compare it with the role of aggressiveness in the Black-
ape facilitation effect.)

Despite changes in content, the concept of human na-
ture has not changed its function, namely social inclusion/
exclusion, ie, including this kind of people and excluding

630 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

that kind of people, regulating who is “us” and who is
“them.” That means the function of the concept endures,
even if the content may well vary.

A philosophy of science point of view on the concept of
human nature should thus not restrict itself to the content of
the concept of human nature as such (since it changes
throughout history anyway). It should acknowledge the
function the concept plays in the social realm. After all, the
function is much more stable across contexts.

I take the results of other experimental studies on
dehumanization in social psychology to converge on such a
functional perspective, despite differences in details, as
described in overview by Haslam and Loughnan (2014).11
I also take the history of theorizing about dehumanization
to also conﬁrm that functional perspective. David Hume (in
his Treatise, as part of his analysis of love and hate, Book
II, Part 2, Sect. 3) has already discussed sympathy as a bias
that favors members of one’s own group and dehumanizes
others. The anthropologist and sociologist Graham Sumner
(1906, pp. 12e15) then established “ethnocentrism” as a
technical
term for a dehumanizing out-group bias and
stressed how widespread it is, since “[a]s a rule, it is found
that nature peoples call
themselves ‘men.’ Others are
something elsedperhaps not deﬁneddbut not real men”
(Sumner, 1906, p. 14). Examples Sumner mentioned for the
(1) heritage-related form of dehumanization were Carib-
beans, Kiowa, Lapps, Greenland Eskimos, and Tunguses.
Others, he writes, exhibit a less strong dehumanizing
ethnocentrism, by believing in various kinds of superiority,
ie, that others are less human in sense (2) speciﬁed earlier.
Sumner mentions Ainos, Jews,
the Chinese, Greeks,
Romans and Arabs of antiquity. Lévi-Strauss (1952, p. 12)
then, famously, put the mindset of ethnocentrism as fol-
lows: “Humanity is conﬁned to the borders of the tribe, the
linguistic group, or even, in some instances, to the village.”
He also stressed a speciﬁc reciprocity, namely the reci-
procity of dehumanization attitudes: “In the Greater Antil-
les, some years after the discovery of America, while the
Spaniards sent out investigating commissions to ascertain
whether or not
the latter were
engaged in the drowning of white prisoners to verify,
through prolonged watching, whether or not their corpses
were subject to putrefaction.”

the natives had a soul,

The Spaniards were skeptical about the humanness of
the natives in terms of them “having a soul,” whereas the
natives were skeptical about the humanness of the Span-
iards in terms of them “having life” (tested by whether the
decaying pattern characteristic for life occurs). The ﬁrst was

a case of animalistic dehumanization, the second a case of
mechanistic dehumanization.

I conclude from all this anthropological and psycho-
logical research: the speciﬁc form of dehumanization varies
with the content, butdagaindthe function of excluding
those regarded as others from being human in the full sense
remains the same. Only such a functional perspective can
explain the reciprocity of dehumanization that Lévi-Strauss
stressed.

Lévi-Strauss fought ethnocentrism as the psychologi-
cal underpinning of racism, which he regarded as being
(in part) responsible for the Holocaust and other war-
related atrocities during WWII. Dehumanization is
clearly involved in some but not necessarily all group-
related violence.12 But as mentioned earlier, dehuman-
ization as understood here does not have to be connected
with violence. It is a much more unbound phenomenon,
much more widespread and often quite implicit, as Goff
et al.’s (2008) studies show. Dehumanization not only
manifests itself in group conﬂicts or other kinds of violent
or oppressive behavior. It is, as I have stressed, every-
where and has consequently to be systematized from a
functional perspective: the details vary (general forms as
well as speciﬁc properties that are regarded as essential
for humanness), but the function of inclusion/exclusion
endures.

The historian Reinhart Koselleck (2006 [1993], p. 279)
concluded from historical material that actually the concept
of “being human” is historically viewed a “blank mold”
(“Blindformel”) only. In contrast to other historical asym-
metric concepts for collectives, such as “Christian” leading
to concepts for enemies (“Feindbegriffe” eg,
the non-
Christians), “human” is a conceptual blank mold (“Blind-
formel”). It is a conceptual blank mold since any group can
ﬁll it with what that group is like and exclude the respective
others as being less human. L’espèce, c’est moi (to use
Sahlins’ ingenious words again), all others are less human.
I take Smith (2013) to agree on this, when he claims that
“being human” is a term that
like
“being here.”13

is indexically used,

CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK

To conclude: dehumanization is ubiquitous, reciprocal, and
there is a central exchangeability of the content of what it
means to be human. The vernacular concept of being
human/human nature has to be understood from a func-
tionalist perspective,
since there is an independence
between the dehumanization function of these concepts and

11. As a side note: this functional perspective also helps to understand why
the concept of human nature has such a great (and even normative)
authority in science. For that topic, see Kronfeldner (2016).

12. For book-length historical and further anecdotal evidence, consult
Smith (2011).
13. An indexical term like “being here” is contrasted with substantive
terms like “water” that stand for speciﬁc substances.

the varying contents that might be ﬁlled into the terms
“being human”/“human nature.” These terms are like
indexicals.

Yet one might ask: doesn’t science give us some
objective content for the concept of being human/human
nature? It does, since any approach from contemporary
science that uses the concept of human nature will try to
remove the indexicality in the vernacular concept. Yet,
these approaches will have their own problems that lead to
an open-ended list of scientiﬁc disagreements, as described
in Kronfeldner (2016). In addition, ﬁlling the concept of
human nature with objective content will not resolve the
politics of human nature. As long as the sciences say
something on heritage or humanness, it holds that these
sciences can be used for each respective form of dehu-
manization,
ie, heritage-based or property-based dehu-
manization. Illustrating this in detail and elaborating on
what follows from this for these sciences needs to be the
subject of future research. The basic point that I want to
make here can be summarized as follows.

Even given that it is regarded as a scientiﬁc fact that all
currently living humans belong to the same one species,
some can be regarded as being less human. Genealogy
allows for grading within the one humankind since a
genealogical relationship can be more or less direct. The
Black-ape facilitation effect can thus be explained by (and
would be predicted) on the sole basis of a belief in a
different or at least more distant heritage of a Black person
to a White person (compared to the genealogical distance
between a White person to another White person). Such a
belief in an individual’s genealogical distance does not need
to rely on phenotypic properties such as skin color, it can go
deeper as in current use of genetic modeling of ancestry.14
Furthermore, it might (but does not have to) involve a belief
in races, separate groups united only indirectly far back in
history by a common human ancestor. Dehumanization can
thus utilize racism in the sense of a belief in human groups
that are genealogically (ie, reproductively) isolated to a
certain degree so that they can now be regarded as real
taxonomic units, as separate groups. If such genealogical
racism combines with a dehumanizing ethnocentrism, same
close heritage is all that would count in such a mindset as a
criterion for being fully human or not. The closer genea-
logically related,
the more human - that would be the
“logic” of that contemporary variant of heritage-based
dehumanization. It is a matter of historical and sociologi-
cal study, whether such a form of dehumanization is still
widespread, but I assume that it can exist and that it is likely
to be the basis of some forms of contemporary racism,
given that genealogy has been used historically for the
dehumanization of ethnic groups with a speciﬁc geographic

14. See Olson (2002) on this issue.

The Politics of Human Nature Chapter | 36 631

in the case of

origin (eg,
the Amerindians or Afro-
Americans as non-Adamic in heritage). As long as gene-
alogy is used for delineating biological kinds, it can be used
to regard some individuals as not human or as less human.
As long as that delineation is politically relevant (which
does not have to be the case but might often be the case),
this dehumanization is politically relevant too.15

If the term human nature means nothing but a set of
properties that are widespread within humankind,
then
these properties can still be differentially applied to out-
siders. Human nature would thus simply refer to contingent
generalizations about humans (eg, that “we” use spoken
language, walk upright, have opposable thumbs). These
generalizations still have dehumanizing potential since
those individuals that do not conform to the generalizations
can still be dehumanized. Any case of ableism or
contemporary eugenics would be a case in point of such
non-essentialist dehumanization.16 As long as the majority
rules (descriptively and socially) in science and society,
those not in the majority can face some discrimination in
terms of being regarded as less human. Thus, dehuman-
ization can take place on the basis of an objective concept
of human nature too. Furthermore, which generalizations
are regarded as important for the respective life form might
well vary across cultures. Since there will always be a
plentitude of properties that are widely shared among
humans, talk about human nature (even in sciences) will
involve a choice of
those properties. As mentioned
elsewhere (Kronfeldner, 2016), an interesting under-
determination results: certain properties can be prioritized
without science giving you any foundation in objective
facts for the priority chosen. Some researchers will high-
light rationality, others morality, still others the opposable
thumb, or some other trait. As in all cases of under-
determination, not only disciplinary focus but also social
values will govern the choice of what is most important for
“being human,” with often no scientiﬁc way of ﬁnding
agreement on the result.

Given that both forms of dehumanization can persist
even given an objective concept of human nature, how can
sciences limit the danger of dehumanization? Given the

15. Where exactly to draw the line (given that genealogy is a transitive
relation) is certainly always a pragmatic and equally politically important
decision, as Hull (1986), Antony (2000), and Proctor (2003) stressed. For
instance, in paleoanthropology, given the lack of evidence, there is a
thorough even though contingent under-determination of theory by data.
Consequently, one can choose to dehumanize the Neanderthals. One can
be more strict (ie, more exclusive) or choose to include them by being less
strict (ie, more inclusive) in drawing the line of where “our” species began.
Given that under-determination, Proctor (2003) has argued, how ex/in-
clusive a society is has an effect on how ex/inclusive the respective
“science” is, highlighting thus an interesting mingling of science and
society.
16. See St. Pierre and Wilson (2016) on eugenics and Wolbring (2008) on
ableism.

632 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

authority in the term “nature” (as described in Kronfeldner,
2016), eliminating the language of “human nature” (to
rather speak of widespread properties or a speciﬁc heritage)
is a suggestion that has been in existence since Hull’s
(1986) famous critique of the concept. Eliminating the
language of human nature might help to keep dehuman-
ization in check, but
its elimination might also have
negative consequences. Only a detailed analysis of how to
balance the risks of misuse and the social and scientiﬁc
prize of elimination can provide a convincing answer to this
question.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

für Geschichte und Theorie der Biologie e.V., at

I want
to thank Alexander Reutlinger for his inspiring critical
thoughts on this paper and Friederike Eyssel as well as Edouard
Machery for their helpful hints and references. Some of the ideas that
ultimately found their way into this paper have been presented as
visiting fellow of the research group on “Twentieth Century His-
tories of Knowledge About Human Variation,” (directed by Ver-
onika Lipphardt, Max Planck Institute for History of Science
(MPIWG) in Berlin), at the 2014 meeting of the Deutsche Gesell-
the 2.
schaft
Workshop of the Society for Women in Philosophy Germany e.V., at
the 2015 meeting of the International Society for History, Philoso-
phy and Social Studies of Biology (ISHPSSB), and at the 2015 hu-
man nature course at
the Central European University (CEU),
Budapest. Many thanks to the audiences present and to the orga-
nizers, especially to Rob Wilson, who co-organized with me the
ISHPSSB session, and to my students, who were such amazing
critics. Special thanks to Veronika Lipphardt and her group for the
kind hospitality at the MPIWG.

REFERENCES

Antony, L.M., 2000. Natures and norms. Ethics 111, 8e36.
Aristotle, 1912. The Works of Aristotle, vol. 5. In: Ross, W.D. (Ed.),

Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Deslauriers, M., 1998. Sex and essence in Aristotle’s metaphysics and
biology. In: Freeland, C.A. (Ed.), Feminist Interpretations of Aristotle.
Pennsylvania State University Press, University Park, PA.

Hull, D.L., 1986. On human nature. PSA: Proceedings of the Biennial

Meeting of the Philosophy of Science 2, 3e13.

Hund, W.D., Mills, C.W., Sebastiani, S., 2016. Simianization: Apes,

Gender, Class, and Race. LIT, Zürich.

Jaggar, A.M., 1983. Feminist Politics and Human Nature. Rowman &

Allanheld, Totowa, NJ.

Koepke, S., Eyssel, F., Bohner, G., 2014. “She deserved it”: effects of
sexism norms, type of violence, and victim’s pre-assault behavior on
blame attributions toward female victims and approval of the ag-
gressor’s behavior. Violence Against Women 20, 446e464.

Koselleck, R., 2006. Feindbegriffe. In: Begriffsgeschichten: Studien zur
Semantik und Pragmatik der politischen und sozialen Sprache. Suhr-
kamp, Frankfurt/Main, pp. 247e284.

Kronfeldner, M., Roughley, N., Toepfer, G., 2014. Recent work on human
nature: beyond traditional essences. Philosophy Compass 9, 642e652.
Kronfeldner, M., 2016. Divide and conquer: the authority of nature and
why we disagree about human nature. In: Lewens, T., Hannon, B.
(Eds.), Why We Disagree About Human Nature. Oxford University
Press, Oxford (forthcoming).

Lévi-Strauss, C., 1952. Race and History. UNESCO, Paris.
Mejias, M., 2006. Staircase of Dehumanization [WWW Document]. URL.
http://resources.mhs.vic.edu.au/mockingbird/downloads/Staircaseof
Dehumanization.pdf.

Mikkola, M., 2011. Dehumanization. In: Brooks, T. (Ed.), New Waves in

Ethics. Palgrave-MacMillan.

Mikkola, M., 2016. The Wrong of Injustice: Dehumanisation and Its Role

in Feminist Philosophy. Oxford University Press, New York.

Nussbaum, M.C., 1995. Aristotle on human nature and the foundations of
ethics. In: Altham, J.E.J., Harrison, R. (Eds.), World, Mind and Ethics:
Essays on the Ethical Philosophy of Bernard Williams. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, pp. 61e104.

Olson, S., 2002. Mapping Human History: Discovering the Past Through

Our Genes. Houghton Mifﬂin, Boston.

Proctor, R.N., 2003. Three roots of human recency: molecular anthro-
the reﬁgured Acheulean, and the UNESCO response to

pology,
Auschwitz. Current Anthropology 44, 213e239.

Reydon, T.A.C., 2014. The evolution of human nature and its implications

for politics: a critique. Journal of Bioeconomics 17, 17e36.

Roughley, N., 2011. Human natures. In: Schleidgen, S., Jungert, M.,
Bauer, R., Sandow, V. (Eds.), Human Nature and Self Design. Mentis,
Paderborn, pp. 11e33.

Sahlins, M., 2008. The Western Illusion of Human Nature. Prickly Para-

digm Press, Chicago.

Desmond, A.J., Moore, J.R., 2009. Darwin’s Sacred Cause: Race, Slavery

Smith, D.L., 2011. Less Than Human: Why We Demean, Enslave, and

and the Quest for Human Origins. Penguin, London.

Exterminate Others. St. Martin’s Press, New York.

Dupré, J., 2011. What is natural about human nature? In: Gethmann, C.F.
(Ed.), Lebenswelt und Wissenschaft. XXI. Deutscher Kongreß für
Philosophie. Kolloquiumsbeiträge. Meiner, Hamburg, pp. 160e171.
Eyssel, F., Hegel, F., 2012. (S)he’s got the look: gender stereotyping of

robots. Journal of Applied Social Psychology 42, 2213e2230.

Goff, P.A., Eberhardt, J.L., Williams, M.J., Jackson, M.C., 2008. Not yet
human: implicit knowledge, historical dehumanization, and contem-
porary consequences. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
94, 292e306.

Gould, S.J., 1978. Women’s brains. New Scientist 364e366.
Haslam, N., Loughnan, S., 2014. Dehumanization and infrahumanization.

Annual Review of Psychology 65, 399e423.

Haslam, N., 2006. Dehumanization: an integrative review. Personality and

Social Psychology Review 10, 252e264.

Haste, H., 2000. Are women human? In: Roughley, N. (Ed.), Being Hu-

man. de Gruyter, Berlin, pp. 175e196.

Smith, D.L., 2013. Indexically yours: why being human is more like being
here than it is like being water. In: Lanjouw, R.C.A. (Ed.), The Politics
of Species: Reshaping Our Relationships With Other Animals. Cam-
bridge University Press, pp. 40e52.

St. Pierre, J., Wilson, R., 2016. Eugenics and disability. In: Devlieger, P.,
Rusch, F., Brown, S., Strickfaden, M. (Eds.), Rethinking Disability.
Garant Publishing.

Sumner, W.G., 1906. Folkways: A Study of the Sociological Importance

of Usage, Manners, Customs, Mores and Morals. Ginn, Boston.

Witt, C., 2005. Form, normativity and gender in aristotle: a feminist
perspective. In: Alanen, L., Witt, C. (Eds.), Feminist Reﬂections on
the History of Philosophy. Springer, Netherlands, pp. 117e136.

Wolbring, G., 2008. The politics of ableism. Development 51, 252e258.

Chapter 37

The Race/Ethnic Debate: An Outsider’s
View

M. Tibayrenc
Maladies Infectieuses et Vecteurs Ecologie, Génétique, Evolution et Contrôle, MIVEGEC (IRD 224-CNRS 5290-UM1-UM2), IRD Center,
Montpellier, Cedex 5, France

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AIM Ancestry informative marker
CV Common variant
HGDP Human genome diversity project
HLA Human leukocyte antigen
LFV Low frequency variant
RV Rare variant
SNP Single nucleotide polymorphism
WGS Whole genome sequencing
La Nature se rit de nos classiﬁcations. “Nature,
although inexhaustible in her combinations, neverthe-
less does not proceed through jumps and jerks; on the
contrary, it is through imperceptibly processed tran-
sitions that she incessantly spins the immense chain of
organized beings; it is through links of an impercep-
tible texture that she binds together all what spreads,
vegetates or breathes. We design classiﬁcations and
methods with great pain and art, and she laughs at
our methods and classiﬁcations.” (French Société
Polytechnique, 1827)

Being neither a social or biological anthropologist, nor a
human geneticist, I can be considered a naïve outsider in
this debate. However, as an MD and the editor-in-chief of a
scientiﬁc journal reporting on human genetic susceptibility
to transmissible diseases (among other topics), I have
closely followed the debate on the medical relevance of
races, ethnic groups, geographical populations, and so
forth. PhD-trained in population genetics and zoology
(parasitology, medical entomology), I have taken a keen
interest in exploring the taxonomical problem of human
genetic diversity within a broad framework based on
comparisons with other living organisms. My view, which I
assume is shared by all biologists, is that human beings
should be studied with the same genetic and evolutionary

it

living creatures. Building speciﬁc
concepts as other
population genetics for humans, isolated from that of other
living creatures, could be grossly misleading. Science
demands comparisons in order to establish general laws
that aim at being as broad as possible. Now, due to tragic
historical events (colonization, eugenics, Nazism),
is
obvious that
the debate on human races cannot be as
smooth as exploring the taxonomy of newts or carabid
beetles. The term “race” (or
the adjective “racial”)
continues to be used by many scientists, both in social
(Eberhardt, 2005; Kubota et al., 2012) and biological
sciences (Belizário, 2013; Need et al., 2009; Risch et al.,
2002; Tang et al., 2005). However,
there is no doubt
that the term is ideologically loaded. The very use of this
term is therefore debatable (see later in this chapter).
Morals, ethics, and politics have much to say in this matter.
However, morals, ethics, and politics should not interfere
with science, and vice-versa. I will try to present below
both the biological and social sides of the debate. The
biological discussion will be limited to the taxonomical and
evolutionary questions underlying the concept of race.
Never-ending debates on compared cognition, IQ, and
sports performance will not be developed in this chapter.
Lastly, since the ﬁeld is controversial, exact, complete
citations will often be used to avoid misunderstandings.

WHERE ARE WE NOW: HUMAN GENETIC
DIVERSITY IN LIGHT OF MODERN
GENOMICS
Chapter 6 speciﬁed the main advances of modern genomics
in human population diversity. Chapter 10 detailed the
medical relevance of this diversity. Only a brief review will
be given here.

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00037-5
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

633

634 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

Modern genomics uses powerful tools that have fallen
in cost considerably in recent years. The sequencing of a
human genome, which required several years in past heroic
times, now requires only a few days, even a few hours
(Kollewe, 2012), and a few 1000 USD. This makes it
possible to sequence the genomes of not only individuals,
but also populations. However, whole-genome sequencing
(WGS) of entire populations remains costly. Populations
can be characterized at
costs with multiple
markers, called single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs).
Today studies using 500,000 to 1 million SNPs are not
exceptional. WGS and modern markers have made it
possible to conﬁrm and considerably reﬁne the results
gathered by pioneering studies from as early as the 1970s
(Lewontin, 1972; Nei, 1978). The main results are as
follows:

lower

1. With

common

genetic markers, most

the
genetic variation is uncovered among individuals of
the same continental group (for example, Europeans).
Genetic variation among continental groups ranges
from 5% to 15% depending on the sample and the
markers used.

of

2. When the genetic differences among populations are
used to compute evolutionary trees, the major conti-
nental groups are clearly evidenced (see Figs. 6.1e6.4
in Chapter 6) whatever population sample and markers
are used, with few differences from one study to
another. The apparent contradiction between proposals
(1) and (2) comes from the fact that the statistics used
in (1) (see “The Fst Argument”) consider each genetic
locus in isolation, while the 5e15% of the loci that
show differences among continental groups are corre-
lated,
they give convergent results
(Edwards, 2003).

is to say,

that

3. The major continental groups uncovered by genetic
markers do not show strict separations and exhibit
some overlapping, often with intermediary populations
(such as Ethiopians).

4. Genetic variation is not strictly clinal. If human popu-
lations were clinal, they would vary continuously and
would be strictly correlated with geographical distance.
Major geographical obstacles (oceans, the Himalayas,
the Sahara) have impacted the clustering pattern
revealed by genetic markers.

5. When modern markers are used, it is possible to reli-
ably assign not only populations, but also individuals
to their geographical origin. Ancestry informative
markers (AIMs) are even able to reliably evaluate the
degree of admixture of any individual and are widely
used in forensic medicine and biomedical research.
6. While most common variants (CVs; frequency 5%)
are found in all major continental groups, most variants
actually correspond to low-frequency variants (LFVs;

and

rare

0.5e5%)

variants

frequency,
(RVs;
frequency, 0.5%). LFVs and RVs play a much
more important role in determining phenotypes and
diseases than CVs. They tend to be geographically
localized, originated recently, and are related to recent,
local adaptations. The rarer they are, the more localized
and recent they tend to be.

7. The massive use of a great number of genetic markers
reveals that major continental groups are far from
being homogeneous and exhibit considerable popula-
tion stratiﬁcation (Russian doll structure; Tibayrenc
and Ayala, 2013). The analysis of
these lesser
populations may have great medical relevance (see
Chapter 10).

8. Modern genomics has shown that most present popula-
tions in the world are the result of complex past
admixtures.

9. Genes involved in disease (both Mendelian diseases
and common diseases; see Chapter 10), as well as
disease-resistance variants, often have an uneven distri-
bution among ancestry groups.

for geographically localized,

10. Lastly, many recent studies have provided convergent
evidence
abundant,
recent adaptation. Much natural selection is assumed
to have acted after the out-of-Africa (OOA) migrations
on populations undergoing different climatic and
diet conditions, submitted to diversiﬁed pathogen
pressures. Natural selection may not have stopped
with the emergence of modern humans 40,000e
50,000 years ago, as was classically thought, but
instead may have strongly impacted human popula-
tions until
recently, and probably still does. The
proposal of recent, localized evolution has been pushed
by two recent popularization books (Cochran and
these
Harpending,
2015). Since
books presented controversial hypotheses
about
cognitive evolution, they have been ﬁercely debated
(de Praconval, 2009; http://shrinkwrapped.blogs.com/
blog/2009/01/a-most-dangerous-book.html; Gelman,
the
2014; Graves, 2014; Marks, 2014). However,
hypothesis
has
been supported by many scientiﬁc publications (see
Chapter 6).

2009; Wade,

adaptation

recent,

local

of

To complement this summary on the results coming out
of modern genomics,
it should be remembered that
morphometric data, in particular dental and craniometric
measures, parallel those of genetics (see Chapter 6). There
is strong variability within major continental groups with
overlapping among them. However, morphometry makes it
possible to accurately identify the geographical origin of
individuals (Edgar, 2009; Ousley et al., 2009; Relethfod,
2009). The classic view that cranial morphology was
poorly
the

inﬂuenced

heritable

strongly

and

by

The Race/Ethnic Debate: An Outsider’s View Chapter | 37 635

environment (Boas, 1912) has been challenged (Sparks and
Jantz, 2002).

THE TAXONOMICAL PROBLEM: ARE
THERE “RACES”?

Semantic Clariﬁcation Is Needed
To answer this question, considerable semantic clariﬁcation
is needed to deﬁne what is understood by the term “race.”
Science begins with clear deﬁnitions, and bad science
enjoys building its deﬁnitions on sand. Unfortunately, as
noted at the beginning of this chapter, “Nature laughs at our
classiﬁcations.” An Editorial in Nature Genetics in 2000
noted that
the terms “race” and “ethnic group” had a
diversity of deﬁnitions. This is also the vision defended by
Edgar (2009). However, the same remark could also be
made for the deﬁnition of “species.” Hey (2001) counted no
fewer than 24 different species concepts. I have highlighted
(Tibayrenc, 2006) the best species concept I know: “a
species is what a wise and competent specialist thinks to be
a species.” This could possibly be applied to the deﬁnition
of race. Actually, when one tries to apply very strict
deﬁnitions to any taxonomical concept, it escapes as fast as
sand slips through your ﬁngers. What are the strict
evolutionary deﬁnitions of classes, orders, families, and
genera? There are none. They are deﬁned only by their
rank.

the concept of

Let Us Speak of Biology Only
To come back to human races, as a start I will
limit
the discussion to the biological deﬁnition of race. In lay
vocabulary,
race may include cultural
aspects that have nothing to do with biology. Sometimes
race, ethnicity, culture, and citizenship are confused
(Betancourt and López, 1993). Vallois (1976) called for
caution when approaching this semantic confusion and
recommended anchoring the race concept in anthropology
on biological grounds only. Interestingly, it is with the goal
of separating these cultural aspects from the biological
aspect that Georges Vacher de Lapouge, considered one of
the fathers of racist thought in Europe (although a socialist),
coined the term of ethnie (ethnic group). According to this
original meaning, an ethnic group is composed of people of
different races (based on the biological meaning) sharing
the same culture. Mersha and Abebe (2015) noted than
Germans and French pertain to the same Caucasian race,
but have a different ethnicity.

Race Detractors Versus Race Realists
When race is restricted to the biological viewpoint, two
opposite positions are encountered: (1) race detractors, who

believe race is a pure social concept and has no biological
reality and (2) race realists (Malik, 2012), who believe race
has some biological reality, is not only a mere vision of the
mind, and could be a usual proxy for biomedical studies.
These are the two polar concepts discussed in the scientiﬁc
community. We will not consider the extremist thought that
claims that race differences, chieﬂy including cognitive
ability, are 100% explained by biology and hence that races
should be (are obviously) hierarchized (ethnomaniacs;
Hooton, 1926). To my knowledge, this view is not defen-
ded by any scientist. The supporters of racial IQ differences
themselves (Arvey et al., 1994; Herrnstein and Murray,
1994; Rushton and Jensen, 2006) recognize that environ-
ment and education play an important role in IQ racial
differences.

Concept (1) is defended by many social scientists and
currently increasing numbers of biologists. The view that
races have no biological reality has been ofﬁcially claimed
by the American Association of Anthropologists’ statement
on race (1998), which asserts that many anthropologists
considered that race was a social concept forged in the 18th
century to justify slavery: “It has become clear that human
populations are not unambiguous, clearly demarcated,
biologically distinct groups. Throughout history when-
ever different groups have come into contact, they have
interbred. The continued sharing of genetic materials has
maintained humankind as a single species. Any attempt to
establish lines of division among biological populations is
both arbitrary and subjective.” This statement did not
reﬂect a consensus of all members of the AAA. However, it
was considered “that it represents generally the contem-
porary thinking and scholarly positions of a majority of
anthropologists.” The view that race has no biological
basis, or at least no satisfactory biological deﬁnition and is
mainly a social construct, was supported by the Nature
Genetics Editorial (2000), and by Baer et al. (2013),
Bamshad et al. (2003), Caspari (2009), Cooper et al.
(2003), Hunley et al. (2009), Jacquard (1982), Jordan
(2008, Chapters 5 and 6), Keita et al. (2004), Lee et al.
(2008), Livingstone (1962), Long et al. (2009), Mersha and
Abebe (2015), Patrinos (2004), Romualdi et al. (2002),
Rose (2009), Rotimi (2004), Schwartz (2001), Templeton
(2012, 2013), Wolpoff (2009), and Yudell et al. (2016).
The famous website of the Public Broadcasting Service
(PBS, 2003; http://www.pbs.org/race/000_General/000_
00-Home.htm) should also be consulted. Mayr (2002)
claimed that race detractors were “obviously ignorant of
modern biology,” which is certainly not the case of the
authors listed above. None of them denied that the human
species was genetically diversiﬁed and that this feature
should be taken into account, in biomedical research in
particular. However,
the biological
concept of race is meaningless. Now, as we will see, the
precise target of these race detractors needs to be clariﬁed

they believed that

636 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

in light of the deﬁnition of race considered. The notion that
human races do not exist has now largely spread out of the
scientiﬁc community. As an example, the French National
Assembly voted on May 16, 2013 to withdraw the term
race from all legal texts. One of the deﬁnitions of race given
by an edition of the Larousse dictionary (2009) goes
without comment: “Category of biological classiﬁcation
and of hierarchization of
the various human groups,
scientiﬁcally aberrant (my emphasis), whose use is at the
origin of the various racisms and their practices.” Would
the “absolute paradigm shift” recommended by Goodman
(2003) therefore be on the way?

Other scientists still do not adhere to this notion. They
consider that race is a reliable biological entity and ﬁnd it a
useful proxy, especially for medicine and biomedical
research. Contemporary scientists who consider the concept
of race as meaningful and informative are Bustamante et al.
(2011), Dobzhansky (1962a, 1973), González Burchard
et al. (2003), Harpending (2002), Huston and Raymond
(2013), Jorde and Wooding (2004), Mayr (2002), Mountain
and Risch (2004), Risch et al. (2002), Shiao et al. (2012),
Tate and Goldstein (2004), Tishkoff and Kidd (2004), and
Woodley (2010). However, some of these scientists avoid
the term race, or use careful quotation marks for it. Of
course the supporters of race-based IQ differences use the
concept of biological race (Arvey et al., 1994; Herrnstein
and Murray, 1994; Rushton and Jensen, 2006). So do
several recent popularizations (Cochran and Harpending,
2009; Leroi, 2005; Sarich and Miele, 2004; Wade, 2015). It
is therefore untrue to state that there is consensus on the
“absolute paradigm shift” (ie, race ¼ biological myth), or
even that
this is a dominant view in the scientiﬁc
community. A 1985 survey proposed the following state-
ment to a variety of scientists: “There are biological races
within the species Homo sapiens.” Among PhD-granted
biologists, 73% agreed, 15% were neutral, and 22%
disagreed. Among PhD-granted physical anthropologists,
the ﬁgures were 50%, 7%, and 42%, respectively (Lieber-
man et al., 1992). Now, in both the race detractors’ and race
realists’ camps (Malik, 2012), the precise meaning of race
must be clariﬁed.

What Are We Talking About?
If we consider the many different meanings of the biolog-
ical concept of race, the main ones are as follows: (1) races
are typologically deﬁned, that is to say, they are clearly
differentiated from each other, with sharp boundaries, and
there is little variation around an ideal type characterizing
each of them; (2) races are phylogenetic lines (phylogeny is
the science that
retraces the evolutionary history of
organisms): they are deﬁned as distinct evolutionary units,
characterized by more or less demanding phylogenetic
criteria; (3) races are subspecies or geographic races. The

typological concept is often presented as the lay deﬁnition
of race. However, I am not sure this has been veriﬁed.
It would seem that there is no uniﬁed folk/lay concept of
race. Authors who speak about this folk concept may omit
to deﬁne it (Pigliucci, 2013). The phylogenetic concept is
used in conservation biology (Avise and Ball, 1990; Avise,
2000, 2004; Templeton, 1999, 2013) and to my knowledge,
it has not been traditionally applied to human populations
in the past. The subspecies concept has been the classic
view of zoology, population genetics, and physical
anthropology (Mayr, 2002; Dobzhansky, 1962a, 1973;
Hooton, 1926; Vallois, 1976).

idea,

refuted the

“modern genetics has

Typological
The typological concept of race (“essentialist” or “classic”)
is the most frequent target of race detractors. This was the
case for the 1998 AAA statement (“human populations are
not unambiguous, clearly demarcated, biologically distinct
groups”); the race concept presented by Gravlee (2009);
Jacquard, Jacob, and Rufﬁé (cited by Taguieff, 1988);
Jordan (2008, Chapters 5 and 6: “the idea of race in its most
extreme form” [my emphasis]); Klarsfeld and Vernier
(1998:
so
widespread no more than a few decades ago, of a funda-
mental division between great races, of clearly distinct
biological essences”); Ousley et al. (2009); Relethford
(2009: “the boundaries in global variation are not abrupt
and do not ﬁt a strict view [my emphasis] of the race
concept”); and Yudell et al. (2016: “commonly deﬁned
racial groups are genetically heterogeneous and lack
clear-cut genetic boundaries”). However, as Mayr (2002)
emphasized, this typological race concept has long been
abandoned in anthropology. It may therefore be counter-
productive to continue to attack this outdated concept.
Incidentally,
it should be noted that describing types
does not imply that variation around the types is to be
neglected. Classic species descriptions are still based on
the thorough analysis of a “type” specimen, which is
deposited in a national reference museum, where specialists
are able to analyze it. However, modern taxonomists are
perfectly aware that many species are highly variable.

Phylogenetic
The phylogenetic race concept has been deﬁned by Avise
and Ball (1990) as follows: “subspecies are groups of
actually or potentially interbreeding populations phyloge-
netically distinguishable from, but reproductively compat-
ible with, other such groups. Importantly, the evidence for
phylogenetic distinction must normally come from the
concordant
independent,
genetically-based traits.” The use of phylogenetic criteria
frequently leads to rejecting the idea that human races have

of multiple,

distributions

The Race/Ethnic Debate: An Outsider’s View Chapter | 37 637

a biological reality (Keita et al., 2004; Templeton, 1999,
2013). As a population geneticist, I have always been
slightly puzzled at the use of a phylogenetic concept, or at
least, too strict a use of it, for races or subspecies. Since by
deﬁnition races feature no genetic isolation mechanisms
(unless they correspond to nascent species: “species in
statu nascendi”; Dobzhansky and Spassky, 1959) and have
been genetically isolated by geographical
separation
only, problems recognizing them through phylogenetic
criteria are not unexpected. As noted by Cracraft (1983),
subspecies (races) cannot have an ontological status as
evolutionary units under the phylogenetic species concept. I
see phylogeny as a useful criterion for characterizing
subspecies, for making clear that they indeed have no strict
limits, and for clarifying their characteristics (degree of
divergence, demographic history, phylogenetic character
mapping; see Chapter 6). However, relying on this criterion
to reject in absolute terms the biological concept of race,
especially when settling demandable quantitative thresh-
olds of divergence (Templeton, 2013), seems debatable.
Such a criterion of divergence threshold is not even used in
the phylogenetic species concept, which states only that “a
species is the smallest diagnosable cluster of individual
organisms within which there is a parental pattern of
ancestry and descent” (Cracraft, 1983). A telling case of the
difﬁculties of using phylogenetic criteria in taxonomy
involves pathogenic microorganisms. As a rule, clones,
strains, and even species of bacteria and parasites exhibit
imperfect genetic isolation. In spite of in-built biological
mechanisms inhibiting genetic exchange among them,
occasional mating, hybridization, and horizontal gene
transfer are observed even among different species of
microbes. Strict cladistic demands
therefore are not
operational in their characterization. Still the fact remains
that clones, strains, and species are a biological reality and
need to be individualized for taxonomical and medical
purposes. A ﬂexible phylogenetic analysis with relaxed
criteria is the adequate means to address the question
(Tibayrenc and Ayala, 2012). Fuzzy limits among clones,
strains, and species of microbes on one hand, and among
human populations on the other hand, obviously do not
have the same evolutionary cause. I am taking this analogy
for comparison purposes only, to illustrate the view that in
both cases, a ﬂexible phylogenetic approach is a more
adequate tool
than classic cladistic analysis. If such a
relaxed phylogenetic method is adopted, human races can
ﬁt the phylogenetic race concept as deﬁned by Avise and
Ball (1990).

Subspeciﬁc
The subspecies race concept
is common to population
genetics, zoology, and physical anthropology. It is at the
antipodes of a typological approach of the question. Indeed,

the subspecies concept
rejects the existence of strict
boundaries between races and of genetic homogeneity
within them. Although concepts and deﬁnitions are not
the same in zoology, population genetics, and physical
anthropology, they overlap substantially, and the common
denominator is strong.

The zoological concept of subspecies remains relevant,
since it is included in the international code of zoological
nomenclature (Lherminier and Solignac, 2005). A subspe-
cies is given a triname, for example, Bos taurus pri-
migenius (the wild ox: aurochs). The zoological deﬁnition
of subspecies is classically based on phenotypic characters
and on the 75% criterion (Amadon, 1949), which states that
75% of the individuals of a population must be separable
from all (100%) individuals of overlapping populations
before granting subspecies status. The criterion retained is
therefore a statistical one. It does not demand that 100% of
the members of subspecies A be distinguishable from 100%
of the members of subspecies B. Mayr (2002) gave the
following deﬁnition: “I deﬁne a ‘geographic race’ or
subspecies as ‘an aggregate of phenotypically similar
populations of a species inhabiting a geographic subdivi-
sion of the range of that species and differing taxonomi-
cally from other populations of that species.’”

to detractor of

Where population genetics is concerned, Dobzhansky
(1962a, 1973)
indisputably viewed human races as
subspecies. This author defended the notion that subspecies
represented not only taxonomical units, but also Mendelian,
evolving populations, with no genetic or phylogenetic
boundaries separating them. It is untrue to state that “His
transformation from defender
the race
concept in biology still resonates” (Yudell et al., 2016). It is
worth citing the very statements of the author: “It does not
follow that races are arbitrary and ‘mere’ inventions.
Race differences are facts of nature which can. be
ascertained objectively” (Dobzhansky, 1962a: p. 268); and:
“It is the contention of a small but vociferous group of
students that mankind is not differentiated into races. I
believe [this contention] is not [justiﬁed]. Mankind is not
homogeneous or uniform. The diversity would still have to
be described, studied, and explained” (Dobzhansky, 1973:
p. 52; published only two years before the author passed
away). Even if Dobzhansky’s concept of race as subspecies
considerably evolved over time (Gannett, 2013), to my
knowledge, he never explicitly rejected it. Hartl (1985)
gave this evocative image of
the population genetics
concept of race: “By way of analogy, the human gene pool
is composed of a number of smaller poolsdpuddlesdlike
the water puddles on a gravel street after a heavy rain, all
interconnected in tiny rivulets through which material ﬂows
from one to the next. If one examines the puddles closely,
one sees that they are not identical. But the differences are
quantitative, not qualitative. The puddles are distinguished
by how much or how little they have of each component

638 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

and not by whether or not they possess the constituent.
No puddle is completely isolated,
so whatever one
puddle has in abundance travels through the rivulets to the
others. Because of this structure, the puddles form one
large, interconnected unit, but a unit with local differences.
The puddles in the analogy represent racesdgroups whose
allele frequencies differ from those of other groups.” Ayala
and Kiger (1984) insisted on the necessity of deﬁning races
based on the frequency of many loci: “races are populations
that have somewhat differentiated gene pools. The differ-
ences among races must involve the gene pool as a whole,
and therefore allelic frequencies at many loci. Differences
in one locus or trait may serve as indicators of overall
genetic differentiation, but alone, they do not constitute a
sufﬁcient fundament for distinguishing among races.” King
& Stansﬁeld’s Dictionary of Genetics (1990) gave the
following deﬁnition for race: “a phenotypically and/or
geographically distinctive subspeciﬁc group, composed of
individuals
inhabiting a deﬁned geographical and/or
ecological region, and possessing characteristic phenotypic
and gene frequencies that distinguish it from other such
groups. The number of racial groups that one wishes to
recognize within a species is usually arbitrary but suitable
for the purposes under investigation.”

Lastly, as noted above, physical anthropology has long
discarded typologism. As early as 1926, Hooton fully
recognized the great variability of each racial
type,
although he insisted on the necessity of describing types (as
species describers still do). Vallois (1976) described all
possible intermediary populations, races and subgroups in
detail within the so-called grand’races. This author there-
fore cannot be accused of typologism, and by the way, of
racism either (Bocquet-Appel, 1996). According to HoSang
(2014), Coon deﬁned races as “breeding populations” and
embraced the idea of geographically deﬁned human sub-
species differentiated in part “by molecular differences in
their regulatory genes.”

So, What Is the Target?
Race detractors, as described above, concentrated their
critiques on the typological race concept, or, to a lesser
extent, on the phylogenetic race concept. The subspecies
concept of human races, which has been the dominant
view in zoology, population genetics, and physical
anthropology for a long time, was much less attacked. As a
broad angle of attack, some race opponents opted for a
general criticism of the concept of subspecies in general,
within which human races would be no more than a
particular case. It
is true that many evolutionists and
geneticists consider that the subspecies is a problematic
taxonomic category, amounting to a mere classiﬁcation
entity that cannot be considered as an evolutionary unit. In
his seminal article on the nonexistence of human races,

Livingstone (1962) noted that
increasing numbers of
scientists were dissatisﬁed with the general concept of
subspecies in zoology. Its limitations, according to him,
should be extended to the human subspecies or races.
When Yudell et al. (2016) state that “phylogenetic and
population genetic methods do not support a priori clas-
siﬁcations of race, as expected for an interbreeding species
like Homo sapiens,” this implies that the criticism can be
extended to any interbreeding species, and therefore, that
the subspecies concept is invalid for any species. Retain-
ing the general concept of subspecies in taxonomy is really
a matter of personal convenience. Any reasonably trained
zoologist knows that subspecies exist. They are the joy of
carabid and cetonid beetle collectors. Are they relevant
taxonomic or evolutionary units? Each scientist can decide
for him- or herself. In taxonomy, there are “splitters” (who
enjoy describing many tiny taxa) and “lumpers” (who
prefer big, fat taxa). It is mainly a matter of tradition. What
seems clear is that major geographical human populations
have neither a typological structure nor sharp boundaries
and they cannot resist an excessively drastic cladistic
assault. However, they do not clash with the phylogenetic
subspecies concept, if this is applied with ﬂexible criteria
with no divergence threshold, and with the subspecies
concept used in zoology, population genetics, and classical
anthropology. Phenotypically, they easily fulﬁll the 75%
criterion (Amadon, 1949). Allele frequency differences
among them are correlated (Edwards, 2003), which fulﬁlls
the criteria proposed by Avise and Ball (1990) and Ayala
and Kiger (1984). Other parameters under debate (Fst,
discreteness) will be presented in greater detail in the next
section.

So, Do Races Exist?
Long and Kittles (2003) stated: “Surprisingly, a great
deal of variation within groups
is compatible with
biological race concepts [i.e., essentialist, populational,
taxonomical,
lineage-based] and therefore partitions of
genetic variation such as those achieved by simple
statistics such as Fst do not provide critical
tests for
the existence of races as deﬁned by biologists. Four de-
cades ago, Frank Livingstone declared the nonexistence
of human races (Livingstone, 1962). It is now time for
geneticists and anthropologists to stop worrying about
what does not exist and to discover what does exist.” Later,
Long et al. (2009) criticized the biological concept of race
according to other criteria (clustering hierarchization). To
decide whether or not races exist is largely a matter of
deﬁnition, criteria selection, and semantic strategy. The
decision between “yes” and “no” is all but self-evident and
cannot
receive a ﬁnal, cast-in-stone answer. Let us
consider some additional debates that will help shed light
onto the controversy.

The Race/Ethnic Debate: An Outsider’s View Chapter | 37 639

IS RACE A SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION?
It undoubtedly is. Having worked close to 20 years in
various parts of
the world (Algeria, French Guiana,
Bolivia, Thailand, the United States), my personal expe-
rience is that the perception and status of races around the
world is eminently variable. However, the identiﬁcation of
races does not vary that much. When major geographical
groups are considered, there are no huge discrepancies
between their classiﬁcation given by Linnaeus (1758:
Africanus, Americanus, Asiaticus, and Europeanus), the
slightly more detailed one by Blumenbach (1806; cited
by Vallois, 1976), Vallois’ grand’races (1976), and
the major continental groups revealed by modern molec-
ular markers (Rosenberg et al., 2002, 2005). Vallois
mistakenly classiﬁed Melanesians with Africans, misled
by a phenomenon of phenotypic convergence (possession
of similar characters in different groups not caused
by common ancestry, but rather, by convergent evolu-
tionary pressures,
like ﬂippers in dolphins and ﬁshes).
Apart from that, his grand’races ﬁt the major continental
groupings. Even the imperfect legal categories of the US
census and the somewhat confusing ones given by the US
Centers for Disease Control (“African American,” “Black,”
“Latino,” “Hispanic,” “Asian” “Asian American,” “Native
American,” “American Indian,” “Alaska Native,” “Native
Hawaiian,” “Paciﬁc Islander,” and “minority”; Burchard
et al., 2015) are far from being totally disconnected from
these groupings. There is something robust
in these
recurrent major classiﬁcations. How many subdivisions
should be distinguished within these major groups is
another story (see the section, “So, How Many Races
(If Any)?”).

Social Constructions or Models?
HoSang (2014) argued that “the observer and not
the
observed declares which differences constitute a racial
group and which do not.” This is beyond any doubt.
However, the same can be said about any taxonomical
effort. It is the observer, not the observed living world, who
decides which (difﬁcult and changing) criteria should be
used to deﬁne species. It is the physician who decides what
should be called “malaria.” Traditional societies of Africa,
according to my anthropologist colleagues, have a different
vision of what “malaria” is. For these societies, each
symptomatic form is a different disease, with a speciﬁc
name. It is our knowledge of the causative agent Plasmo-
dium spp. that led us to build a single, etiological frame-
work for the disease. I would say that, as a social construct,
human races appear
to me less disputable than most
psychiatric symptomatologic frameworks (see Frances,
2013). Psychiatric illnesses have fuzzy boundaries and no
pathognomonic symptoms (signs that allow the diagnosis

of a disease without any doubt). However, the identiﬁcation
of mental disorders is crucial for their treatment. Similarly,
the classiﬁcation of autoimmune disorders is a headache,
with much social construction, hypothetical etiologies,
and few (if any) clear-cut boundaries: dermatomyositis,
Sjögren’s syndrome, systemic lupus, scleroderma, and
vasculitis have overlapping symptoms in some cases.
Physicians
are used to handling imperfect, unclear
categories. The art of medicine is well versed in making
decisions with the information at hand and cannot afford to
wait for ideal concepts. Science, especially biomedical
research, is not the passive contemplation of a magma of
uninterpreted rough data. It is indispensable to describe
categories, even if they are not 100% satisfactory. There is
nothing worse than saying that categories are imperfect,
hence we know nothing. One cannot make do without
models. What HoSang (2014) actually states amounts to
saying that human races are only models. However, this is
the same for virtually all entities conceived by the human
mind, chieﬂy including, as we have seen, pathological
classiﬁcations. We are able to describe and manage the
external world only by designing the least ﬂawed possible
appropriate models. Similarly, when Morning (2014) states
that
the STRUCTURE model and principal component
analysis (computer-based approaches used to visualize
genetic variability in populations) are “statistical artifacts,
shaped by researchers’ techniques and assumptions,” the
same can be said from any scientiﬁc means of analysis,
except crude visual observation. It is desirable to design
models with as few a priori working hypotheses as
possible. This is deﬁnitely the case for the unsupervised
approach of STRUCTURE.

A Complex Interplay Between Social
Construction and Biology
Human races are certainly not self-evident biological
models, even if common sense and everyday experience
seem to suggest it. One is able to give them solid grounding
in science only with considerable scientiﬁc inquiry.
Moreover, different ancestries are by no means neutral from
a sociological point of view. It is clear that the very bio-
logical nature of ancestries is strongly inﬂuenced by the
social constructs we build around them, consciously or not.
Eberhardt (2005) hypothesized that differences in neuro-
imaging and neurofunctioning between “blacks” and
“whites” (the terms used by the author) were probably due
to the different social experiences of the two groups. These
social experiences profoundly differ. In most, if not all,
multiracial societies, in spite of economic progress and
goodwill policies such as afﬁrmative action in the United
States, all things being equal, there still is a correlation
between ancestry and socioeconomic status. This has a
strong impact on the lifestyle and life quality of

640 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

populations: general education, access to health care, diet,
and disease
transmission, with important biological
consequences. A problem I know well is Chagas disease in
South America. It is caused by a parasitic protozoan and
transmitted by blood-sucking true bugs, which proliferate
in precarious habitats. Chagas disease therefore principally
rages in poor suburbs and villages, which parallels the
ancestry-based socioeconomic segregation of most Latin
American countries. Similarly, transmission of tuberculosis
is obviously related to socioeconomic conditions, even if
the genetic diversity of humans and the pathogenic agent
plays a role, as is the case for all transmissible diseases.
Tuberculosis, AIDS, and malaria have been identiﬁed as
the three primary transmissible “diseases of poverty” by the
World Health Organization. Economic differences and
health care disparities are not the only negative experiences
some minorities encounter. Despite all ofﬁcial antiracist
policies, discrimination, or at
least unspoken apartheid,
continues in all multiracial societies. Such sociological
barriers limit the number of interracial marriages, which
reinforces the genetic isolation among groups of different
ancestries (endogamy) and hence impacts the biological
background of different human groups. The percentage of
mixed marriages between European Americans (EURAs)
and African Americans (AFAs) in the United States ac-
cording to the 2000 census was 0.3% in EURAs and 4% in
AFAs (Ousley et al., 2009) only. Sociological reasons are
possibly not alone in explaining this phenomenon, since
biological homogamy (the tendency to select a mating
partner exhibiting phenotypic similarity: tall with tall, short
with short) could interfere. However, culture,
tradition,
socioeconomic status, and color prejudice are most prob-
ably the main barriers against mixed marriages.

Races are social constructs, with important sociological
consequences. However, genetic differences among human
populations are indisputable. Actually, scientists who
totally deny these differences and their possible impact on
health are probably the exception rather than the rule. But
many of them are reluctant to apply the biological concept
of race (again not self-evident) to these differences. Close
collaboration between social scientists and biologists is
therefore more than ever necessary to perfect our view
(model) of human diversity.

THE Fst ARGUMENT
To make a long story short, Fst (see Chapter 6) is a sta-
tistical measurement of genetic differences among pop-
ulations. As explained in Chapters 6 and 10 and earlier in
this chapter, most genetic variation in humans is observed
within major geographical populations. The difference
among major groups is 5e15% only (Lewontin, 1972).
This has been taken as a strong argument by race opponents
to state that differences among geographical groups were

“relatively trivial” (Cavalli-Sforza, 2007). The rough ﬁgure
itself, corroborated by various population samplings and
many genetic markers, is indubitable. The interpretation is
more questionable.

individually as if

A strong criticism was made by Edwards (2003:
“Lewontin’s fallacy”), who observed that Fst considers
the loci were
each genetic locus
independent of each other, while those loci
that show
differences among populations are correlated (their poly-
morphisms go in the same direction). This explains why
population differences can be visualized under the form of
clusters and trees (Chapter 6, Figs. 6.1e6.4). Adding more
genetic loci
to the sample increases the accuracy of
classiﬁcations, while it has minimal effects on Fst: “The
more loci there are in the data set, the more of these cor-
relations there are, and the more information is ignored by
Fst” (Jorde and Wooding, 2004).

Another remark to be made is that phenotypic expres-
sion is not an election by universal genetic suffrage. A few
genes or even only one can play a major role in some
phenotypes, as can nongenic regulatory mechanisms (see
Chapter 6).

Moreover, the markers used to characterize populations
and compute Fst statistics are “neutral” markers, that is to
say, they are assumed to not undergo natural selection. This
is a requirement
for establishing reliable genealogies
among ancestral groups. By their very nature, these neutral
markers have no direct impact on phenotypic expression, as
noted by some race detractors themselves (Cooper et al.,
2003; Fujimura et al., 2014: “we stress that most of these
markers are not in protein encoding genes, so it is unclear
whether they are important for any phenotypic outcomes”).
So the fact that only a minority of these neutral markers
have different frequencies among geographical groups has
no predictive value in terms of the phenotypic differences
among these groups. Fst among neutral markers is low,
while Fst measured for phenotypic variation may be much
higher. For skin pigmentation, it is 0.6e0.9 (Harpending,
2002; Relethford, 2009). Fst for loci that undergo natural
selection also tends to be much higher than Fst for neutral
markers. This discrepancy is actually a classic approach for
detecting such selected loci (Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman,
2003).

It

Fst cannot be considered an absolute measure of
evolutionary divergence.
is strongly inﬂuenced by
several parameters, in particular the founder effect (when a
population is founded by a limited number of individuals
that harbor only a fraction of the total genetic diversity of
the species), population size, and degree of isolation.
Moreno-Estrada et al. (2014) found that the Fst between
two Native Mexican populations (0.132) was higher than
the Fst between Europeans and Chinese populations sur-
veyed in the HapMap (Haplotype Map) project (0.11).
However, there is no doubt that native Mexicans share

The Race/Ethnic Debate: An Outsider’s View Chapter | 37 641

more recent common ancestors
than Europeans and
Chinese do. Similarly, in the parasitic species Plasmodium
falciparum,
the agent of the most malignant form of
malaria, Fst between two populations of Western
Cambodia far exceeds the Fst between Thailandese and
Ghanaian populations, again due to a drastic founder effect
in Cambodian populations of the parasite (Miotto et al.,
2013).
Lastly, Fst values were mostly computed from
common variants (CVs; frequency, 5%). This misses a
signiﬁcant proportion of LFVs (frequency between 0.5%
and 5%) and even more, RVs (frequency below 0.5%).
Modern genomics has revealed that LFVs and RVs were
more abundant than CVs and tended to be population-
speciﬁc,
in proportion to their rarity. Even when the
general Fst is low, 17% of LFVs are found in only one
ancestral group. For RVs, the ﬁgure is 53% (The 1000
Genomes Project Consortium, 2012). Moreover,
is
hypothesized that the role of LFVs and RVs in recent local
adaptation is considerable (see Chapter 6 and “Human
Genetic Diversity in Light of Modern Genomics” in this
chapter). All these important features concerning LFVs and
RVs are missed by current Fst analysis.

it

The classic assertion (PBS, 2003), elaborated from
the Fst debate, that any two individuals from the same
continental group may be genetically more different than
two individuals from two different groups, is not statisti-
cally veriﬁed. This can happen in individual cases, like the
story of Watson’s DNA sequence being closer to an Asian
sequence than to Craig Venter’s sequence (Mersha and
Abebe, 2015). However, a sample size of three is statisti-
cally inadequate. Some outsider Pygmies might be taller
than a few, very short Swedish. This is the exception that
proves the rule: “We recognize that individuals of two
different geographically deﬁned human populations are
more likely to differ at any given site in the genome than
are two individuals of the same geographically deﬁned
population” (Lee et al., 2008).

It can be concluded that, while low Fst values among
major geographical populations are an important popula-
tion genetic feature, this cannot be considered as a ﬁnal
criterion to reject in absolute terms the biological concept
of race (Long and Kittles, 2003).

DISCREPANCIES?
A central argument by Livingstone (1962) to counter
the concept of race, also used by the website of the
Public Broadcasting Service (PBS, 2003), was the non-
concordance between characters, an argument amply used
by Jacquard (1982) as well. If one considers one character,
for example skin color, one obtains a given classiﬁcation of
human groups. If a second character is used, such as lactase
tolerance (this means that adults are able to digest milk), a

a

If

classiﬁcation emerges.

second, different
third
character is taken, for example, human leukocyte antigen
(HLA) polymorphism (a set of genetic traits involved in
immune defenses), a third classiﬁcation is obtained.
However, this reasoning is not valid. Subspecies have never
been deﬁned based on isolated characters, but instead on a
conjunction of characters considered as a whole (see “What
Are We Talking About?” in this chapter). Subspecies can
be identiﬁed by one remarkable trait once their subspeciﬁc
status has been recognized on a range of characters. Even
the examples cited by Jacquard (1982) are not 100%
discordant and show some correspondence. Among people
of a given skin color (incidentally, a phenotype that has
never been used in isolation to scientiﬁcally deﬁne human
groups), the frequency of lactase persistence is not random.
This adaptive trait
in people of European
ancestry (mainly northern Europe) and in some African
pastoralist populations, and virtually absent
in other
populations. HLA polymorphism differs widely among
ancestry groups, so it will not be the same in white-skinned
people as in dark-skinned people. Similarly, skin color, eye
color, hair
texture, cranial morphology, blood group
frequencies, and genetic polymorphisms are not indepen-
dent of each other. When all characters are considered
jointly (not in isolation or in pairs), the evidence for a given
ancestral origin increases. It is astonishing that numerical
taxonomy, which stems from classiﬁcations based on as
many randomly selected characteristics as possible (Sneath
and Sokal, 1973) has not been used, to my knowledge, for
the study of human diversity.

is prevalent

HOMOGENEITY AND BOUNDARIES
Major continental groups are by no means homogeneous.
As discussed in Chapter 6 and at the beginning of this
chapter, they are highly diversiﬁed and stratiﬁed, with a
Russian doll structure. This heterogeneity is due to
geographic distance and geographic obstacles, but also to
cultural barriers, among which language plays an important
role (Cavalli-Sforza et al., 1992; Longobardi et al., 2015).
Moreover, the high genetic heterogeneity of most present
populations is the result of complex passed admixtures
(Hellenthal et al., 2014). This pattern could be called “the
Gobineau’s nightmare.” Indeed, for Arthur de Gobineau
(1853), one of the fathers of racist thought and the Aryan
myth in Europe, crossbreeding (métissage) was the main
source of human decadence. This thorough admixture
pattern ﬁts the early view of Hooton (1926) that “secondary
races” (resulting from long-continued intermixture of two
or more primary races within an area of relative isolation)
constitute most of the present population of the world.

As we have seen, there are no strict boundaries among
the main continental groups, which show clear overlapping.
This
and expected pattern for

commonplace

is

a

642 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

geographical races/subspecies (Malik, 2012). It can even be
observed in the case of true species through the “ring
species” phenomenon (the situation in which two pop-
ulations that do not interbreed live in the same region and
are connected by a geographic ring of populations that can
interbreed). There are many cases in which different
“species” have fuzzy boundaries. Examples are numerous
in triatomine bugs,
the blood-sucking true bugs that
transmit Chagas disease in Latin America (Lent and
Wygodzinsky, 1979). As explained above, there are many
examples of bacterial species that have fuzzy boundaries
(Tibayrenc, 2006). Genetic exchange can even be observed
between bacteria from different genera, such as Escherichia
coli and Salmonella. As we have seen, genetic heteroge-
neity and fuzzy limits allow one to reject the typological
concept of race. However, they do not argue against either
the phylogenetic or the subspecies concepts.

Fuzzy boundaries are the rule rather than the exception
in the material world. In medicine, physicians settle limits
that are assumed to separate the normal from the patho-
logical. Some people who are beyond the cholesterol level
limit deﬁned as normal will be healthy, while other people
within these limits will suffer from the symptoms of
hypercholesterolemia. Setting such limits is always some-
what arbitrary.

There are no strict

limits between day and night,
childhood, adolescence, adulthood, and old age, between
the colors of the spectrum (Klarsfeld and Vernier, 1998).
We use a rich vocabulary to describe the many interme-
diary states
in these categories: dawn, dusk, early
childhood, youth of old age, blue-green, yellow-orange,
and so forth. However, dawn does not become day in a
given fraction of a second, and an adolescent does not
become an adult in a snapshot. The analogy between these
categories and human populations is all the more true when
they do not show perfect continuums (except the color
spectrum). There is not a continuous increase and decrease
of light during the day. The increase and decrease accel-
erate when the sun rises and sets. Aging progresses by
crises
and
phenotypic variation in human populations at the scale of
the whole world do not ﬁt a perfect continuum if
populations are randomly selected. In response to the
famous statement by Livingstone (1962) that “there are no
races, there are only clines,” Dobzhansky (1962b) stated
that these clines were not uniform. Some clustering, mainly
due to major geographical obstacles (the Sahara, oceans,
the Himalayas) is apparent in worldwide populations (see
Chapter 6 and Rosenberg et al., 2005): “Our evolutionary
history is a continuous process of combining the new with
the old, and the end result is a mosaic that is modiﬁed with
each birth and death. This is why the process of using
genetics to deﬁne ‘race’ is like slicing soup: ‘You can cut
wherever you want, but the soup stays mixed’” (cited by

(puberty, menopause). Similarly, genetic

Rotimi, 2004). This is a pleasant metaphor. However, (1)
the human soup is somewhat lumpy; (2) humankind is not
homogeneous like soup. Even if human populations were
perfectly clinal, which is not a consensus view, and is the
object of a fundamental disagreement among physical
anthropologists (Edgar and Hunley, 2009), it would be
informative to slice it up into a limited number of units of
analysis, as we do for the spectrum of colors: nobody thinks
about describing millions of different colors.

is

the local

let us accept

races as subspecies or

SO, HOW MANY RACES ARE THERE
(IF ANY)?
recurrent question and a widely used
This
a
race opponents (Foster, 2004;
absurdum argument of
the
Foucart, 2013). For argument’s sake,
fuzzy phylogenetic
concept of
lineages: how many of them should we count? The high
structuration and Russian doll pattern of human pop-
ulations,
together with the power of modern genetic
markers, make it possible to delimit an inﬁnity of tiny
clusters at
level, for example among British
populations (Leslie et al., 2015). Malik (2012) has poked
fun at the extreme view that the inhabitants of Ithaca and
Albany, New York, could be considered as pertaining to
different races. Dobzhansky himself was in trouble for
giving a ﬁnal answer to this conceptual difﬁculty. His
concept of race as subspecies considerably evolved over
time (Gannett, 2013). However, he clearly stated that “race
differences
biological
phenomena, and discovery of races is a biological problem,
while naming them is a nomenclatorial problem. Whether
races should or should not be named, and if they should,
how many should be recognized is a matter of convenience
and hence, of judgment” (Dobzhansky, 1962b). Given the
widespread mini-clustering of human populations,
is
easily understandable why anthropologists described highly
variable numbers of
races. This is a mere matter of
“splitters and lumpers.” Human races are not
the only
case of nomenclatorial quandary. As I have already
detailed, micropathogens also have a Russian doll structure
(whose evolutionary cause is quite different from that of
human Russian dolls). Trypanosoma cruzi,
the parasite
responsible for Chagas disease, is clearly subdivided into
six major genetic clusters. Some “splitter” colleagues of
mine are eager to equate them with true species. It
is
apparent that some of these clusters are themselves sub-
divided into lesser clusters. Shall we make new species
with these microclusters, and propose that Chagas disease
is caused by 20 or 30 different species? It would be as
absurd as the story about Ithaca and Albany species. The
case of T. cruzi is not unique, since many pathogen species
exhibit the same Russian doll pattern (Tibayrenc and Ayala,
2013).

are

objectively

ascertainable

it

The Race/Ethnic Debate: An Outsider’s View Chapter | 37 643

roles

Tradition and relevance play important

in
describing human races. We have seen that the concept of
four to ﬁve major continental groups has been repeatedly
proposed since Linnaeus’ classiﬁcation (1758). The
groups that emerge from modern genomic data are “more
or less the major races of traditional anthropology” (Leroi,
2005) and “generally correspond to socially recognized
races” (Tishkoff and Kidd, 2004). Vallois (1976) distin-
guished a total of 27 races under his grand’races. There is
in fact no ﬁnal answer to the question of the number of
races. All depends on the question under study, the goals
of the observer, and the level of resolution required. In
many instances, major continental groups are the proxy
retained. For example, in the United States, many studies
compare AFAs versus EURAs. In the multiracial Amer-
ican society, history joined “the most extreme human
phenotypes (Western Europe, West Africa, and East
Asia)” (Edgar, 2009). The HapMap genomic project
(http://hapmap.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) retained this minimal
sampling scheme of the “extreme human phenotypes”
(Africans, Europeans, and Asians). Its sampling has been
used by many teams. However, since recent local adap-
tation appears to be a major feature of human evolution,
where disease study is concerned, approaching pop-
ulations at a much ﬁner level than the major continental
groups may be necessary. A striking example is the
Fulani, a pastoralist people of West Africa who exhibit a
strong resistance to malaria compared to other groups (the
Mossi) who live in the same areas (see Chapter 10). The
biomedical relevance of considering lesser populations
within major continental groups does not mean that all
tiny human groups should be given a race name. Doing
this could be quite confusing.

RACES, SUBSPECIES, AND SPECIES IN
ANIMALS
to draw
As stated in the introduction,
comparisons with other species to better evaluate the
taxonomical status of human populations.

is relevant

it

characteristics,

Dogs come in a wide range of breeds, which are the
result of centuries of targeted selection by breeders. Recent
natural selection in humans appears to have mainly
operated on standing variation (ie, existing variation rather
than new mutations), polygenic
and
regulatory phenomena (see Chapter 6). This means that it
can be compared to a large extent
to the artiﬁcial,
purposeful selection undertaken by dog breeders, which
acts through similar mechanisms. Dog breeds have been
selected not only for their external phenotype, but also for
behavioral characteristics, which can differ greatly from
one breed to another (Sarich and Miele, 2004, Chapter 8).
Dog breeds also differ in their drug sensitivity (Sarich and
Miele, Chapter 7). Contrary to what Jordan (2008, Chapter

10) states, dog breeds are not “extremely homogeneous”
with most genetic differences among breeds rather than
within breeds. Within-breed and between-breed genetic
differences (for common, neutral markers: see “the Fst
argument”) are 65% and 35%, respectively (vonHoldt et al.,
2010). Even if within-group human genetic diversity is
higher, the dog pattern reﬂects the main tendency, namely
that most genetic diversity in dogs is within the breeds, not
between them. This conﬁrms that the Fst argument (see
earlier in this chapter) says little about phenotypic differ-
ences among populations. As taunted by Cochran and
Harpending (2009) in their Chapter 1, the Fst argument
used for human populations applied to dogs would lead to
considering that two Great Danes might exhibit more dif-
ferences than a Great Dane and a Chihuahua.

Subspecies have been described in apes. Templeton
(2013) stated that the race concept was valid in chimpan-
zees, while it was not in humans. This is again a matter of
deﬁnition and criteria. The criterion used here was a
threshold of a phylogenetic divergence of 25% among
races, obviously not fulﬁlled by major human continental
groups. However, Fischer et al. (2006) noted that levels of
sequence divergence and genetic differentiation among
chimpanzee and orangutan subspecies was comparable to
that seen among human populations. The authors noted that
morphological differences among ape subspecies were
small and hard to deﬁne (which is not the case for human
continental groups). Contrary to Templeton (2013), they
concluded by questioning the validity of the subspecies
concept in these apes. Still the fact remains that these ape
subspecies have been described and validated.

Woodley (2010) stated that the observed heterozygos-
ity (a measure of genetic heterogeneity) among human
populations was greater than that of many described animal
subspecies.

The zebu and the polar bear constitute two informative
cases for comparison purposes. For a very long time, the
zebu, which is perfectly interfertile with the European ox,
has been considered a distinct species (Bos indicus). It is
only recently that it lost its species status. It is nevertheless
considered a full subspecies (Bos taurus indicus), although
many intermediary phenotypes exist between Bos taurus
taurus (the European ox) and B. taurus indicus. The polar
bear is classiﬁed as a species (Ursus maritimus), distinct
from the brown bear (Ursus arctos). However, the two
species produce fertile offspring, including now in nature
(“pizzly”; Vincent, 2010). This is assumed to be explain-
able by global warming, a consequence of which being that
the two species coexist in some areas. Polar and brown
bears are genetically closely related, according to both
nuclear and mitochondrial genes (Yu et al., 2004). In
mitochondrial-based phylogenies, polar bears appear as a
subdivision of brown bears. Alaska brown bears are
genetically closer to polar bears than to other geographical

644 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

populations of brown bears. This might suggest that the
polar bear is only a recently appeared subspecies of the
brown bear, whose phenotypic speciﬁcity may be due to
strong selective pressures undergone in extreme climates
(Avise, 2004).

These two examples and the other examples cited above
show that for rather comparable genetic data, various ani-
mal and human populations may be attributed different
taxonomical statuses. Taxonomy is a difﬁcult art with, quite
often, considerable subjectivity and no clear-cut answers:
“Nature laughs at our classiﬁcations.”

SEMANTIC CAUTION: A HEADACHE
If one decides that major continental human groups, and
possibly some lesser groups, ﬁt the concept of subspecies
or geographical races, should we opt for calling them
“races”? The response is absolutely not self-evident. For
historical reasons and continuing discrimination, the term
makes many people uncomfortable, even upset: “Inciden-
tally, I am inclined to dismiss the word ‘race’ because of its
connection with the odious episodes of racism with which
we are continuously confronted” (Cavalli-Sforza, 2007).
Jacquard (cited by Taguieff, 1988) recommended “elimi-
nating the term of race as a useless and dangerous tool.”

As I have mentioned, many researchers who cannot be
suspected of racism (Dobzhansky, 1962a, 1973, among
others) do not hesitate to use the term “race.” According to
Dobkzhansky (1962b), “to say that mankind has no races
plays into the hands of race bigots.” Many other authors
nevertheless prefer to use cautious euphemisms, even if the
concept they have in mind may be close to the subspecies
concept defended by Dobzhansky (1962a). “Beneath the
jargon, cautious phrases and academic courtesies, one thing
was clear:
the consensus about social constructs was
unraveling. Some even argued that, looked at the right way,
genetic data show that races clearly do exist. One of the
more painful spectacles of modern science is that of human
geneticists piously disavowing the existence of races even
as they investigate the genetic relationships between
“ethnic groups”. Given the problematic, even vicious, his-
tory of the word “race,” the use of euphemisms is under-
standable. But it hardly aids understanding, for the term
“ethnic group” conﬂates all the possible ways in which
people differ from each other” (Leroi, 2005). I think even
more than this author that the euphemism “ethnic group” is
a complete semantic disaster, since its initiator is the racist
author Vacher de Lapouge. Moreover, according to the
original meaning, the term refers to cultural attributes only,
with no biological meaning. It
is therefore a complete
misinterpretation
concept.
“Geographical/continental ancestry groups” was proposed
by Baer et al. (2013). Jordan (2008, Chapters 2 and 14), for
fear of racism but also because he considers that the term

biological

race

of

the

“race” is poorly deﬁned, recommended rejecting it and
instead using “ascendance” (ancestry). Similarly, Rose
(2009) advised using “biogeographic ancestry,” not only as
a euphemism but also because he disagreed with the val-
idity of the biological race concept. Rosenberg et al. (2005)
cautiously noted: “our evidence for clustering should not be
taken as evidence of our support of any particular concept
of ‘biological race.’” Relethford (2009) lucidly raised the
question, “In cases where broad geographic groups are
used, should we refer to these groups as ‘races’ or should
we use more politically correct [my emphasis] terms such
as ‘geographic regions’ or ‘geographic clusters’?” It re-
mains to be seen, however, if such semantic caution is not
counterproductive among students and the public. Caulﬁed
et al. (2009) noted that “narrowly deﬁned terms, such as
ancestry, are likely to have less public recognition than
race” and that “the relevance of race and of race categories
far exceeds the arena of scientiﬁc discourse and becomes
the concern of government regulation, media accounts and
language debate, science cannot independently dictate its
meaning or invent new terms to replace it.”

CENSORSHIP?
A concern of another kind may come from the possible
threat to the very possibility of freely debating the question
of race.

Although open to freedom of research, including for IQ
racial comparisons, Ceci and Williams (2009), proposed
that “perhaps such research should be forced to pass a
higher costebeneﬁt threshold before publication.” Simi-
larly, Altshuler (cited by Richardson, 2011) called for a
“higher standard of proof” for this kind of research. All this
is no less than a low-level form of censorship. The temp-
tation is strong for the referees to use a particularly high
“costebeneﬁt threshold” (an eminently subjective criterion)
or a “higher standard of proof” as alibis for simply barring
the road to a kind of research they dislike. The prerequisite
not
to build a speciﬁc population genetics for humans
should be kept ﬁrmly in mind here. Criteria to evaluate
articles should be the same whatever model is used, be it
Homo sapiens or Triturus cristatus. Rose (2009) consid-
ered that research on race and IQ should be discouraged
(“just ideology masquerading as science”). So did Jordan
(2008, Chapter 2). It is obvious that research on racial
differences in intelligence and cognition constitutes a spe-
cial
implications”
(Richardson, 2011). Surely circulating results about this
research in the media and the public calls for utmost
caution. However,
less
explicit censorship is not
limited to cognition and IQ
research and may be extended to the race debate as a whole.
According to Cooper et al. (2003), “To invoke the au-
thority of genomic science in the debate over the value of

case, with “potentially explosive

the tendency toward more or

The Race/Ethnic Debate: An Outsider’s View Chapter | 37 645

FIGURE 37.1 Illustrations of human diversity in the scientiﬁc literature as well as in lay productions (advertisements) still have a strong tendency to use
pictures of Africans, Asians, and Europeans, traditionally described as major “races”. Here, variation of facial expressions among different human
populations take as key example Europeans, Asians and Africans. After LoBue, V., Thrasher, C., 2015. The Child Affective Facial Expression (CAFE) set:
validity and reliability from untrained adults. Frontiers in Psychology 5, 1532. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01532.

judging

the merits

of

parameters when

race as a category of nature is to accept the social meaning
as well. The discovery that races exist is not an advance
of genomic science into uncharted territory; it is an exten-
sion of the atavistic belief that human populations are not
just organized, but ordered.” The message is clear: scien-
tists who rely on the biological race concept cannot ignore
the social message of it. Describing races could even
amount to ordering them. The Editorial of Nature Genetics
(2000) warned that: “From now on, Nature Genetics will
therefore require that authors explain why they make use of
particular ethnic groups or populations, and how classiﬁ-
cation was achieved. We will ask reviewers to consider
these
a
manuscriptdwe hope that this will raise awareness and
inspire more rigorous design of genetic and epidemiolog-
ical studies.” In their “guiding principles on using racial
categories in human genetics,” Lee et al. (2008) proposed
(statement 7) that “we discourage the use of race as a proxy
for biological similarity and support efforts to minimize the
use of the categories of race and ethnicity in clinical
medicine.” A sadly, censorship-smelling famous affair was
the boycott of
the Human Genome Diversity project
(HGDP), which aimed at surveying the genetic diversity of
“isolated indigenous people.” One of the leaders of the
project was Lucas Cavalli-Sforza who, in addition to being
an eminent scientist is an indisputable moral authority. This
did not prevent the World Council of Indigenous People
(WCIP) from attacking the HGDP as a “racist, colonialist,
vampire project.” Reardon (2005) proposed that the project
at its very start should have included social sciences, with
more in-depth reﬂection on race and power in science. As a
result of the crash at take-off of the HGDP, research on
human genetic diversity continued, but the initiators of
other projects avoided controversies of that kind as much as

possible, without taking into account the issues related to
social sciences raised by Reardon (2005).

It looks as though the recommendations of the Editorial
in Nature Genetics (2000) and the above-cited authors, as
well as the distressing HGDP episode, did not slow down
ancestry-based research. Many recently published articles
are based on compared geographical and ancestry samples
(see Chapters 6 and 10). A remarkable case is the HapMap
project, whose initial sampling comprised three pop-
ulations: (1) the Yorubans (YRI) from Nigeria; (2) Utah
residents with ancestry from northern and western Europe
(CEU); and (3) the Japanese Tokyo (JPT) population plus
Han Chinese in Beijing, China (CHB). In other words, this
sample was based on Africans, Europeans, and Asians,
three of the grand’races (Vallois, 1976), “the most extreme
human phenotypes” (Edgar, 2009), which in addition to
scientiﬁc publishing, remain omnipresent as a reference in
cinema, literature, advertising, etc., every time human di-
versity is evoked (Fig. 37.1).

TWO DIFFERENT STRATEGIES TO FIGHT
RACISM
To conclude this chapter, we will discuss efﬁcient strategies
that could be designed to ﬁght racism.

Science-Based Antiracism
A major strategy after World War II and the discovery of
Nazi crimes has been to base antiracism on scientiﬁc data.
This has been called the “absolute paradigm shift”
(Goodman, 2003). The goal was to demonstrate that race
was a mere social construction and a biological myth. To
eliminate the word or to deny its biological value was a

646 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

If

statements

the absolute paradigm shift

prerequisite for eliminating racism.
races did not
exist, racism would appear inept (Taguieff, 1988). This
absolute paradigm shift only partly convinced the public.
As noted by Edgar and Hunley (2009), “Although we
have now been teaching for generations that races do not
exist,
these naïve notions [typological views] persist
[among students] and they continue to have social and
scientiﬁc consequences.” Abrupt
such as
“science gives the irrefutable proof that human races do
not exist” could be counterproductive (Klarsfeld and
Vernier, 1998). As for the scientiﬁc community, as we
have already seen (see “The Taxonomical Problem: Are
There ‘Races’?”),
is not
shared by all biologists, or even by a majority of them. As
deplored by the Editorial of Nature Genetics (2000): “on
one hand, the public is told that there is no scientiﬁc basis
for race, and that
there is more variation within pop-
ulations than between populations. On the other, scientists
use racial terms when describing research results, such as
an increased risk for breast cancer in Jews or for prostate
cancer in Blacks, and frequently emphasize population-
speciﬁc markers, alleles and disease susceptibility.” As
we have seen throughout this chapter, deciding whether
“there are races” (Huston and Raymond, 2013) or “there
are no races” (Livingstone, 1962) is highly dependent
upon the deﬁnition used for the term and therefore cannot
be provided with a ﬁnal, crystal-clear response. So given
this lack of consensus, even among scientists, it is illusory
to hope that the absolute paradigm shift will be able to
eradicate racism. It should be remembered that the ﬁrst
UNESCO statement on race (1951) did not deny the ex-
istence of human races and called only for equal rights for
all members of humankind.

The great danger of this science-based antiracist strat-
egy is that if science supported the existence of races, or
even worse, race inequalities for cognitive ability, for
example, then racism could be considered as justiﬁed. As
reported by Klarsfeld and Vernier (1998), “I think a
geneticist has the duty of using the discoveries he has
made as a rampart against what he ideologically con-
demns.” This risky mixture of morals and science means
that the one who is right, either the racist or the antiracist,
is the one who has science on his side. The danger is that
science is changing. Data can be refuted, in one direction
or the other. The same data can be interpreted in different
ways according to the background and the psychological
proﬁle of who analyzes them. Clear-cut, ﬁnal answers do
not exist in science. There are no proofs, there are only
working hypotheses. So if we make this issue dependent
upon scientiﬁc data, antiracism would be constantly
threatened by new results (which are presently pouring in),
new hypotheses, new interpretations. The warning should

therefore be sounded that this strategy of founding anti-
racism on scientiﬁc data, whatever its good intentions may
be, is perilous. For example, research on brain or behavior
genes is still in its infancy (Richardson, 2011; Vitti et al.,
2012; Woodley et al., 2014). Its future results are today
entirely unpredictable.

Morals-Based Antiracism
The opposite strategy is to decide once and for all that
antiracism should be exclusively based on moral/societal
choices. Morals and science should be mutually sanc-
tuarized. Our moral choices should be independent of
scientiﬁc data. In turn, morals should not dictate scientiﬁc
conclusions, a tendency only too often observed. If a hy-
pothesis was considered wrong every time it appeared
scandalous, heliocentrism (Copernicus),
the theory of
evolution (Darwin), the high antiquity of man (Boucher de
Perthes), and infant sexuality (Freud) would have been
rejected.

We all know that there are differences (innate or ac-
quired by education, or both) in talent, strength, size, dis-
ease susceptibility, attractiveness, etc., among people.
These are crude data. Laws do not care. As a societal
choice, they consider that all men and women (should)
have equal rights. This is the same for populations of
different ancestries. Whatever the data yielded by science
now or in the future may be, people must have equal rights,
equal access to health care and education, and racism must
be against the law, full stop: “We emphasize that the ex-
istence of differences, however small, should not be a basis
for discrimination. Statements like ‘We hold these truths to
that all men are created equal.’ (US
be self-evident
Declaration of Independence, 1776) reﬂect morality, not
science” (Tishkoff and Kidd, 2004). As Jordan stated
(2008, Chapter 4), equality should not be based on biology.
It is a societal choice.

The UNESCO universal declaration on the human
genome (1997) should be more than enough for this
morals-based antiracism and is a convenient conclusion
for this chapter: “Recognizing that research on the human
genome and the resulting applications open up vast pros-
pects for progress in improving the health of individuals
and of humankind as a whole, but emphasizing that such
research should fully respect human dignity, freedom and
human rights, as well as the prohibition of all forms of
discrimination based on genetic
characteristics, no
research or research applications concerning the human
genome, in particular in the ﬁelds of biology, genetics and
medicine, should prevail over respect for the human rights,
fundamental freedoms and human dignity of individuals
or, where applicable, of groups of people.”

The Race/Ethnic Debate: An Outsider’s View Chapter | 37 647

REFERENCES

Amadon, D., 1949. The seventy-ﬁve per cent rule for subspecies. Condor

51, 250e258.

American Association of Anthropologists statement on race. American

Anthropologist 100, 1998, 712e713.

Arvey, R.D., Bouchard Jr., T.J., Kaufman, N.L., et al., 13 December 1994.

Mainstream science on intelligence. The Wall Street Journal.

Avise, J.C., Ball, R.M., 1990. Principles of genealogical concordance in
taxonomy. Oxford Surveys in

species concepts and biological
Evolutionary Biology 7, 45e67.

Avise, J.C., 2000. Phylogeography. Harvard University Press.
Avise, J.C., 2004. Molecular Markers, Natural History and Evolution,

second ed. Chapman & Hall, New York, London.

Ayala, F.J., Kiger, J.A., 1984. Modern Genetics, second ed. The Benjamin/

Cummings Publishing Company, Menlo Park, California.

Baer, R.D., Arteaga, E., Dyer, K., Eden, A., Gross, R., Helmy, H.,
Karnyski, M., Papadopoulos, A., Reeser, D., 2013. Concepts of race
and ethnicity among health researchers: patterns and implications.
Ethnicity & Health 18, 211e225.

Bamshad, M.J., Wooding, S., Watkins, W.S., et al., 2003. Human popu-
lation genetic structure and infererence of group membership. The
American Journal of Human Genetics 72, 578e580.

Belizário, J.E., 2013. The humankind genome: from genetic diversity to

the origin of human diseases. Genome 56, 705e716.

Betancourt, H., López, S.R., 1993. The study of culture, ethnicity, and race

in American Psychology. American Psychologist 48, 629e637.

Boas, F., 1912. Changes in the bodily form of descendants of immigrants.

American Anthropologist 14, 530e562.

Bocquet-Appel, J.P., 1996. Note sur l’origine de deux interviews: Henri
Victor Vallois et Gustave Malécot. Bulletins et Mémoires de la
Société d’Anthropologie de Paris 1e2, 115e124.

Burchard, E.G., Oh, S.S., Foreman, M.G., Celedón, J.C., 2015. Moving
toward true inclusion of racial/ethnic minorities in federally funded
studies. A key step for achieving respiratory health equality in the
United States. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care
Medicine 191, 514e521.

Bustamante, C.D., González Burchard, E., De La Vega, F.M., 2011. Ge-

nomics for the world. Nature 475, 163e165.

Caspari, R., 2009. 1918: Three perspectives on race and human variation.

American Journal of Physical Anthropology 139, 5e15.

Caulﬁeld, T., Fullerton, S.M., Ali-Khan, S.E., et al., 2009. Race and
ancestry in biomedical research: exploring the challenges. Genome
Medicine 1, 8.

Cavalli-Sforza, L.L., Feldman, M.W., 2003. The application of molecular
genetic approaches to the study of human evolution. Nature Genetics
33, 266e275.

Cavalli-Sforza, L.L., Minch, E., Mountain, J.L., 1992. Coevolution of
genes and languages revisited. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America 89, 5620e5624.

Cavalli-Sforza, L., 2007. Human evolution and its relevance for scientiﬁc
epidemiology. Annual Review of Genomics and Human Genetics 8,
1e15.

Ceci, S., Williams, W.M., 2009. Should scientists study race and IQ? YES:

the scientiﬁc truth must be pursued. Nature 457, 788e789.

Cochran, G., Harpending, H., 2009. The 10,000 Year Explosion e How
Civilization Accelerated Human Evolution. Basic Books. A Member
of the Perseus Books Group, New York.

Cooper, R.S., Jay, S., Kaufman, J.S., Ward, R., 2003. Race and genomics.

The New England Journal of Medicine 348, 1166e1170.

Cracraft,

J., 1983. Species concept and speciation analysis.

In:
Johnson, R.F. (Ed.), Current Ornithology. Plenum Press, New York,
pp. 159e187.

de Praconval, M., 29 July 2009. Théorie raciale ou raciste? L’homme

multidimensionnel. Le Nouvel Observateur.

Dobzhansky, T., Spassky, B., 1959. Drosophila pardistorum, a cluster of
species in statu nascendi. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 45 (3), 419e428.

Dobzhansky, T., 1962a. Mankind Evolving, 1962. Yale University Press.
Dobzhansky, T., 1962b. Comment on Frank B. Livingstone: “on the non-

existence of human races”. Current Anthropology 3, 279e281.

Dobzhansky, T., 1973. Genetic Diversity and Human Equality. Basic

Books, New York.

Eberhardt, J.L., 2005. Imaging race. American Psychologist 60, 181e190.
Edgar, H.J.H., Hunley, K.L., 2009. Race reconciled?: How biological
anthropologists view human variation. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology 139, 1e4.

Edgar, H.J.H., 2009. Biohistorical approaches to ‘‘Race’’ in the United
States: biological distances among African Americans, European
Americans, and their ancestors. American Journal of Physical An-
thropology 139, 58e67.

Editorial, 2000. Census, race and science. Nature Genetics 24, 97e98.
Edwards, A.W.F., 2003. Human genetic diversity: Lewontin’s fallacy.

BioEssays 25, 798e801.

Fischer, A., Pollack, J., Thalmann, O., Nickel, B., Pääbo, S., 2006. De-
mographic history and genetic differentiation in apes. Current Biology
16, 1133e1138.

Foster, M.W., 2004. Race: the reality of human differences. Journal of

Clinical Investigation 113, 1663.

Foucart, S., 3 June 2013. Les “races humaines” existent? Alors énumérez-

les! Le Monde.

Frances, A., 2013. Saving Normal: An Insider’s Revolt Against Out-of-
control Psychiatric Diagnosis, -5, Big Pharma, and the Medicalization
of Ordinary Life. William Morrow, New York.

Fujimura, J.H., Bolnick, D.A., Rajagopalan, R., et al., 2014. Clines
without classes: how to make sense of human variation. Sociological
Theory 32, 208e227.

Gannett, L., 2013. Theodosius Dobzhansky and the genetic race concept.
Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences 44, 250e261.

Gelman, A., 8 May 2014. The paradox of racism. Why the new book by
the New York times’ Nicholas Wade is both plausible and prepos-
terous. Science. The state of the universe.

Gobineau, A., 1853. Essai sur l’inégalité des Races humaines. Didot, Paris.
González Burchard, E., Ziv, E., Coyle, N., et al., 2003. The importance of
race and ethnic background in biomedical research and clinical
practice. The New England Journal of Medicine 348, 1170e1175.

Goodman, A.,

2003.

http://www.pbs.org/race/000_About/002_04-

background-01-07.htm.

Graves, J.L., 2014. Why This Book on Genetics and Race Is a Problem.

https://evolution-institute.org/article/book-review-great-are-wades-
errors-in-a-troublesome-inheritance-genes-race/.

Gravlee, C.C., 2009. How race becomes biology: embodiment of social
inequality. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 139, 47e57.
Harpending, H., 2002. Race. Population genetics perspective. In: Pagel, M.

(Ed.), Encyclopedia of Evolution, pp. 979e981.

648 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

Hartl, D.L., 1985. Our Uncertain Heritage: Genetics and Human Diversity,

second ed. Harper & Row, New York.

Hellenthal, G., Busby, G.B.J., Band, G., et al., 2014. A genetic atlas of

human admixture history. Science 343, 747e751.

Herrnstein, R.J., Murray, C., 1994. The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class

Structure in American Life. The Free Press.

Hey, J., 2001. The mind of the species problem. Trends in Ecology &

Evolution 16, 326e329.

Hooton, E.A., 1926. Methods of racial analysis. Science 63, 75e81.
HoSang, D.M., 2014. On racial speculation and racial science: a response

to Shiao et al. Sociological Theory 32 (228), 243.

Hunley, K.L., Healy, M.E., Long, J.C., 2009. The global pattern of gene
identity variation reveals a history of long-range migrations, bottle-
necks, and local mate exchange: implications for biological race.
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 139, 35e46.

Huston, N., Raymond, M., 17 May 2013. Oui, les races existent. Le

Monde.

Jacquard, A., 1982. Au péril de la science? Interrogations d’un généticien.

Seuil, Paris.

Jordan, B., 2008. L’humanité au pluriel. La génétique et la question des

races. Editions du Seuil, Paris.

Jorde, L.B., Wooding, S.P., 2004. Genetic variation, classiﬁcation and

“race”. Nature Genetics 36, S28eS32.

Keita, S.O.Y., Kittles, R.A., Royal, C.D.M., et al., 2004. Conceptualizing

human variation. Nature Genetics 36, S17eS20.

Long, J.C., Li, J., Healy, M.E., 2009. Human DNA sequences: more
variation and less race. American Journal of Physical Anthropology
139, 23e34.

Longobardi, G., Ghirotto, S., Guardiano, C., et al., 2015. Across language
families: genome diversity mirrors linguistic variation within Europe.
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 157, 630e640.

Malik, K., 2012. Why Both Sides Are Wrong in the Race Debate. Pan-
https://kenanmalik.wordpress.com/2012/03/04/why-

daemonium.
both-sides-are-wrong-in-the-race-debate/.

Marks, J., 2014. The Genes Made Us Do it. The New Pseudoscience of

Racial Difference. In These Times. http://www.inthesetimes.com.

Mayr, E., 2002. The biology of race and the concept of equality. Daedalus
131 (1), 89e94. On Inequality (Winter, 2002). http://www.gnxp.com/
MT2/archives/001951.html.

Mersha, T.B., Abebe, T., 2015. Self-reported race/ethnicity in the age of
genomic research: its potential impact on understanding health dis-
parities. Human Genomics. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s40246-014-
0023-x.

Miotto, O., Almagro-Garcia, J., Manske, M., et al., 2013. Multiple pop-
ulations of artemisinin-resistant Plasmodium falciparum in Cambodia.
Nature Genetics 45, 648e655.

Moreno-Estrada, A., Gignoux, C.R., Fernández-López, J.C., et al., 2014.
The genetics of Mexico recapitulates Native American substructure
and affects biomedical traits. Science 344, 1280e1285.

Morning, A., 2014. Does genomics challenge the social construction of

King, R.C., Stansﬁeld, W.D., 1990. A Dictionnary of Genetics, fourth ed.

race? Sociological Theory 32, 189e207.

Oxford University Press New York, Oxford.

Klarsfeld, A., Vernier, P., 1998. La biologie au service de l’antiracisme:

limites et dangers. Médecine/Sciences 11, 1292e1294.

Kollewe, J., 17 February 2012. DNA machine can sequence human ge-

nomes in hours. The Guardian.

Kubota, J.T., Banaji, M.R., Phelps, E.A., 2012. The neuroscience of race.

Nature Neuroscience 15, 940e948.

Le Petit Larousse Illustré, 2009. Larousse, Paris.
Lee, S.S., Mountain, J., Koenig, B., et al., 2008. The ethics of character-
izing difference: guiding principles on using racial categories in hu-
man genetics. Genome Biology 9, 404. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/gb-
2008-9-7-404.

Lent, H., Wygodzinsky, P., 1979. Revision of the Triatominae (Hemiptera,
Reduviidae), and their signiﬁcance as vectors of Chagas disease.
Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History 163, 127e516.
Leroi, A.M., 2005. A Family Tree in Every Gene. The New York Times.

March 14.

Leslie, S., Winney, B., Hellenthal, G., et al., 2015. The ﬁne-scale genetic

structure of the British population. Nature 519, 309e314.

Lewontin, R.C., 1972. The apportionment of human diversity. Evolu-

tionary Biology 6, 381e398.

Lherminier, P., Solignac, M., 2005. De L’espèce. Editions Syllepse, Paris.
Lieberman, L., Hampton, R.E., Littleﬁeld, A., Hallead, G., 1992. Race in
biology and anthropology: a study of college texts and professors.
Journal of Research in Science Teaching 29, 301e321.

Linnaeus, C., 1758. Systema naturae per regna tria naturae :secundum
classes, ordines, genera, species, cum characteribus, differentiis, syn-
onymis, locis (in Latin), tenth ed. Laurentius Salvius, Stockholm.

Livingstone, F., 1962. On the non-existence of human races. Current

Anthropology 3, 279e281.

Long, J.C., Kittles, R.A., 2003. Human genetic diversity and the nonex-

istence of biological races. Human Biology 75, 449e471.

Mountain, J.L., Risch, N., 2004. Assessing genetic contribution to
phenotypic differences among “racial” and “ethnic” groups. Nature
Genetics 36, S48eS53.

Need, A.C., Kasperaviciut_e, D., Cirulli, E.T., Goldstein, D.B., 2009.
A genome-wide genetic signature of Jewish ancestry perfectly
separates individuals with and without full Jewish ancestry in a
large random sample of European Americans. Genome Biology
10, R7.

Nei, M., 1978. The theory of genetic distance and evolution of human

races. Japanese Journal of Human Genetics 23, 341e369.

Ousley, S., Jantz, R., Freid, D., 2009. Understanding race and human
variation: why forensic anthropologists are good at identifying race.
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 139, 68e76.

Patrinos, A., 2004. Race and the human genome. Sponsor’s forward.

Nature Genetics 36, S1eS2.

PBS, 2003. Race: The Power of an Illusion. http://www.pbs.org/race/000_

General/000_00-Home.htm.

Pigliucci, M., 2013. What are we to make of the concept of race? Thoughts
of a philosopherescientist. Studies in History and Philosophy of
Biological and Biomedical Sciences 44, 272e277.

Reardon, J., 2005. Race to the Finish: Identity and Governance in an Age

of Genomics. Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, Oxford.

Relethford, J.H., 2009. Race and global patterns of phenotypic variation.

American Journal of Physical Anthropology 139, 16e22.

Richardson, S.S., 2011. Race and IQ in the postgenomic age: the micro-

cephaly case. BioSocieties 6, 420e446.

Risch, N., Burchard, E., Ziv, E., Tang, H., 2002. Categorization of humans
in biomedical research: genes, race and disease. Genome Biology 3 (7)
comment2007.1e2007.12.

Romualdi, C., Balding, D., Naside, I.S., et al., 2002. Patterns of human
diversity, within and among continents, inferred from biallelic DNA
polymorphisms. Genome Research 12, 602e612.

The Race/Ethnic Debate: An Outsider’s View Chapter | 37 649

Rose, S., 2009. Should scientists study race and IQ? NO: science and

The 1000 Genomes Project Consortium, 2012. An integrated map of ge-

society do not beneﬁt. Nature 457, 786e788.

Rosenberg, N.A., Pritchard, J.K., Weber, J.L., et al., 2002. Genetic

structure of human populations. Science 298, 2381e2385.

Rosenberg, N.A., Mahajan, S., Ramachandran, S., et al., 2005. Clines,
clusters, and the effect of study design on the inference of human
population structure. PLoS Genetics 1 (6), e70.

Rotimi, C.N., 2004. Are medical and nonmedical uses of large-scale
genomic markers conﬂating genetics and “race”? Nature Genetics
36, S43eS47.

Rushton, J.P., Jensen, A.R., 2006. The totality of available evidence shows

the race IQ gap still remains. Psychological Science 17, 921e922.

Sarich, V., Miele, F., 2004. Race: The Reality of Human Differences.

netic variation from 1,092 human genomes. Nature 491, 56e65.

Tibayrenc, M., Ayala, F.J., 2012. Reproductive clonality of pathogens: a
perspective on pathogenic viruses, bacteria, fungi, and parasitic pro-
tozoa. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 109 (48), E3305eE3313.

Tibayrenc, M., Ayala, F.J., 2013. How clonal are Trypanosoma and

Leishmania? Trends in Parasitology 29, 264e269.

Tibayrenc, M., 2006. The species concept in parasites and other pathogens:

a pragmatic approach? Trends in Parasitology 22, 66e70.

Tishkoff, S.A., Kidd, K.K., 2004. Implications of biogeography of human
populations for “race” and medicine. Nature Genetics 36, S21eS27.
Vallois, H.V., 1976. Les Races Humaines. Presses Universitaires de

Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado, USA.

France, Paris.

Schwartz, R.S., 2001. Racial proﬁling in medical research. The New En-

Vincent, C., 16 December 2010. La fonte de la banquise donne naissance

gland Journal of Medicine 344, 1392e1393.

au “pizzly”. Le Monde.

Shiao, J.L., Bode, T., Beyer, A., Selvig, D., 2012. The genomic challenge

to the social construction of race. Sociological Theory 30, 67e88.

Sneath, P.H.A., Sokal, R.R., 1973. In: Kennedy, D., Park, R.B. (Eds.),
Numerical Taxonomy. The Principle and Practice of Numerical
Classiﬁcation. Freeman, San Francisco, p. 537.

Sparks, C.S., Jantz, R.L., 2002. A reassessment of human cranial plas-
ticity: boas revisited. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences of the United States of America 99, 14636e14639.

Vitti, J.J., Cho, M.K., Sarah, A., Tishkoff, S.A., Sabeti, P.C., 2012. Human
evolutionary genomics: ethical and interpretive issues. Trends in Ge-
netics 28, 137e145.

vonHoldt, B.M., Pollinger, J.P., Lohmueller, K.E., et al., 2010. Genome-
wide SNP and haplotype analyses reveal a rich history underlying
dog domestication. Nature 464, 898e902.

Wade, N., 2015. A Troublesome Inheritance. Genes, Race and Human

History. Penguin books, New York.

Taguieff, P.A., 1988. La Force du Préjugé. Essai sur le Racisme et ses

Wolpoff, M.H., 2009. How Neandertals inform human variation. Amer-

Doubles. Armillaire la découverte Paris.

Tang, H., Quertermous, T., Rodriguez, B., et al., 2005. Genetic structure,
self-identiﬁed race/ethnicity, and confounding in case-control associ-
ation studies. The American Journal of Human Genetics 76, 268e275.
Tate, S.K., Goldstein, D.B., 2004. Will tomorrow’s medicine work for

everyone? Nature Genetics 36, S34eS42.

Templeton, A.R., 1999. Human races: a genetic and evolutionary

perspective. American Anthropologist 100, 632e650.

Templeton, A.R., 2012. Gene ﬂow, haplotype patterns and modern human
In: eLS. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester. http://

origins.
dx.doi.org/10.1002/9780470015902.a0020795.pub2.

Templeton, A.R., 2013. Biological races in humans. Studies in History and

Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences 44, 262e271.

ican Journal of Physical Anthropology 139, 91e102.

Woodley, M.A., Rindermann, H., Bell, E., et al., 2014. The relationship
between microcephalin, ASPM and intelligence: a reconsideration.
Intelligence 44, 51e63.

Woodley, M.A., 2010. Is Homo sapiens polytypic? Human taxonomic

diversity and its implications. Medical Hypotheses 74, 195e201.

Yu, L., Li, Q.W., Ryder, O.A., Zhanga, Y.P., 2004. Phylogeny of the bears
(Ursidae) based on nuclear and mitochondrial genes. Molecular
Phylogenetics and Evolution 32, 480e494.

Yudell, M., Roberts, D., DeSalle, R., Tishkoff, S., 2016. Taking race out of

human genetics. Science 351, 564e565.

Chapter 38

Social Darwinism

M. Ruse
Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL, United States

In 1877, in a highly technical discussion of landholding in
Ireland, Joseph Fisher wrote: “I can ﬁnd nothing in the
Brehon laws to warrant this theory of social Darwinism, and
believe further study will show that the Cain Saerrath and
the Cain Aigillue relate solely to what we now call chattels,
and did not in any way affect what we now call the freehold,
the possession of the land” (Fisher, 1877). Cain Saerrath
refers to laws to do with honor and personal relationships
and Cain Aigillue to laws to do with forfeits and ﬁnes, and
Fisher is arguing that the holding of large tracts of land by
individuals is not warranted by traditional law. Exactly why
he spoke of “social Darwinism” is not made clear, although
obviously he has Darwin’s theory in mind, especially the
thoughts about the struggle for existence. Even so, it is not
at all clear that he thinks of social Darwinism as a unit, as a
single identiﬁable concept, or rather as simply Darwinism in
a social situation. Clearly, he is using the language of social
Darwinism in a negative way, but as such there is no
justiﬁcation for the claim (nor is it being made) that social
Darwinism is always something negative (Leonard, 2009).
Social Darwinism, however you read it, was not a term
that took off rapidly. There are estimated to be no more than
about a dozen usages of the term before the First World War,
and this the time when historians usually argue that Social
Darwinism was at its most vigorous. In fact, it was not until
the Second World War that the term really became popular,
thanks to the American historian Richard Hofstadter’s use of
the term in his Social Darwinism in American Thought
(1944). It entered the discourse of scholars and remains
prominently so to this day. Given this somewhat, shall we
say, ambiguous history, it therefore behooves us to take care
about the term’s meaning and its proper application. Let us
start our inquiry with Darwin himself.

CHARLES DARWIN

Darwin’s theory of evolution through natural selection, as
given in the Origin of Species (1859) is straightforward.
First, there is the argument to the struggle for existence:

A struggle for existence inevitably follows from the high
rate at which all organic beings tend to increase. Every

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00038-7
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

being, which during its natural lifetime produces several
eggs or seeds, must suffer destruction during some period
of its life, and during some season or occasional year,
otherwise, on the principle of geometrical
its
numbers would quickly become so inordinately great that
no country could support the product. Hence, as more in-
dividuals are produced than can possibly survive, there
must in every case be a struggle for existence, either one
individual with another of the same species, or with the
individuals of distinct species, or with the physical condi-
tions of life.

increase,

Darwin (1859, pp. 63e64)

Then, drawing on the fact that whenever you have a
population of organisms, you ﬁnd that there are differences
between them and that every now and then something new
seems to pop up into being, there is the argument to natural
selection.

Let it be borne in mind how inﬁnitely complex and close-
ﬁtting are the mutual relations of all organic beings to
each other and to their physical conditions of life. Can
it, then, be thought improbable, seeing that variations useful
to man have undoubtedly occurred, that other variations
useful in some way to each being in the great and complex
battle of
life, should sometimes occur in the course of
thousands of generations? If such do occur, can we doubt
(remembering that many more individuals are born than
can possibly survive) that individuals having any advantage,
however slight, over others, would have the best chance of
surviving and of procreating their kind? On the other hand,
we may feel sure that any variation in the least degree
injurious would be rigidly destroyed. This preservation of
favourable variations and the rejection of injurious varia-
tions, I call Natural Selection.

Darwin (1859, pp. 80e81)

Do note that, for Darwin, change is not random. Certain
features lead to success. Others do not. This means that the
successful
features have virtues not possessed by the

651

652 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

unsuccessful; features like the hand and the eye are “as if ”
designed for their endsdthey are “adaptations.”

So much for the “Darwinism” part of the equation. Now
for the “social.” In the Origin of Species Darwin said very little
about our species. He had always believed fully that his theory
applied to humankind, but before the controversy started, he
had wanted ﬁrst to get the main ideas on the table. Twelve
years later, in the Descent of Man (1871), he grasped the nettle
and took up human evolution, both physical and sociocultural.
There was some social discussion in the Descentdin this
respect it was different from the Origindalthough much of it
was not about European societies and was instead more about
what Darwin and his fellows would have called “savages.”
(This was apart from the fact that much of the Descent was not
about human beings at all, but about sexual selection in the
animal world. Darwin was preparing the way to argue that
sexual selection had been crucial in human evolution, espe-
cially in making for racial differences.)

Darwin ﬁrst had to argue that natural selection could
lead to a social situation at all. It was not the case that, from
a biological perspective, the struggle just led to outright
hostility, competition, and warfare, and that anything social
must be imposed from without, almost by force. Darwin
had faced this problem in the Origin when dealing with the
social
insects. His solution there to the problem of
“altruism” (as it was called) was to suggest that it comes
about because of relatedness. Organisms show help to
others if they are related. Although Darwin did not have the
language of genetics, he would have agreed with today’s
thinkers who argue that inasmuch as relatives reproduce,
one is oneself reproducing by proxy because you share
units of heredity (genes) with relatives (Hamilton, 1964).
In the Descent, Darwin broadened this discussion out a
little. He agreed that sociality could come about through
nonrelatives via what
today is known as “reciprocal
altruism”die, you scratch my back and I will scratch yours
(Trivers, 1971): “In the ﬁrst place, as the reasoning powers
and foresight of the members became improved, each man
would soon learn that if he aided his fellow-men, he would
commonly receive aid in return. From this low motive he
might acquire the habit of aiding his fellows; and the habit of
performing benevolent actions certainly strengthens the
feeling of sympathy which gives the ﬁrst impulse to benev-
olent actions. Habits, moreover, followed during many gen-
erations probably tend to be inherited” (Darwin, 1871, pp. 1,
163e164). Then Darwin added: “But there is another and
much more powerful stimulus to the development of the
social virtues, namely, the praise and the blame of our fellow-
men. The love of approbation and the dread of infamy, as
well as the bestowal of praise of blame, are primarily due, as
we have seen in the third chapter, to the instinct of sympathy;
and this instinct no doubt was originally acquired, like all the
other social instincts, through natural selection” (pp. 1, 164).
He elaborated: “To do good unto othersdto do unto others as

ye would they should do unto youdis the foundation-stone
of morality. It is, therefore, hardly possible to exaggerate
the importance during rude times of the love of praise and the
dread of blame” (pp. 1, 165).

Darwin then went into detail: “It must not be forgotten
that although a high standard of morality gives but a slight
or no advantage to each individual man and his children
over the other men of the same tribe, yet that an advance-
ment in the standard of morality and an increase in the
number of well-endowed men will certainly give an
immense advantage to one tribe over another” (pp. 1, 166).
Darwin doesn’t mince words about what
this means:
“There can be no doubt that a tribe including many mem-
bers who, from possessing in a high degree the spirit of
patriotism, ﬁdelity, obedience, courage, and sympathy,
were always ready to give aid to each other and to sacriﬁce
themselves for the common good, would be victorious over
most other tribes; and this would be natural selection.” And
so we get the consequence. “At all times throughout the
world tribes have supplanted other tribes; and as morality is
one element in their success, the standard of morality and
the number of well-endowed men will thus everywhere
tend to rise and increase.” Darwin was not now breaking
from the thinking of the Origin. He made it clear that he
regarded tribes as interrelated families, and the family he
took to be one individual, a kind of superorganism. In other
words, with respect
just as with the ants,
humans are parts of a whole rather than individuals in their
own right (Richards and Ruse, 2016).

to morality,

SOCIAL VIEWS

Laid on top of this we get the views of an upper-middle-
class Englishman whose family money came from trade.
On the one hand, like almost everyone else on mainland
Britain, Darwin feared and despised the Irish, worrying
about their unrestrained family sizes:1

[T]he reckless, degraded, and often vicious members of
society, tend to increase at a quicker rate than the provident
and generally virtuous members. Or as Mr. Greg puts the
case: ‘The careless, squalid, unaspiring Irishman multiplies
like rabbits: the frugal, foreseeing, self-respecting, ambi-
tious Scot, stern in his morality, spiritual
in his faith,
sagacious and disciplined in his intelligence, passes his best
years in struggle and in celibacy, marries late, and leaves
few behind him. Given a land originally peopled by a
thousand Saxons and a thousand Celtsdand in a dozen

1. Comparatively, the Irish were a much bigger issue in the 19th century,
with about 5 million inhabitants compared to 10 million on mainland Great
Britain (England, Wales, and Scotland). Today there are about 5 million
people compared to over 60 million in Great Britain. Whoever was to blame,
the fact is that the Irish were poor and, when in Great Britain, rarely seen to
great advantage, crammed into the slums of big cities, such as Liverpool.

generations ﬁve-sixths of the population would be Celts, but
ﬁve-sixths of the property, of the power, of the intellect,
would belong to the one-sixth of Saxons that remained. In
the eternal ’struggle for existence,’ it would be the inferior
and less favoured race that had prevaileddand prevailed
by virtue not of its good qualities but of its faults.’

Darwin (1871, pp. 1, 174)

Fortunately there are some balancing factors, mainly
that the children of poor, unthinking people die off more
quickly than the children of wise and sensible people. It is
not a matter of who is ﬁrst out of the gate but of who
crosses the ﬁnishing line ﬁrst, and the Scots have it on the
Irish in this respect. Not as much as the English of course,
but then who does?!

One good thing about English society as far as Darwin
was concerned was the ﬁrm commitment to capitalism.
Interestingly, note here (for future reference) that it is not a
question of who fails in the struggle but more of who wins:

In all civilised countries man accumulates property and
bequeaths it to his children. So that the children in the same
country do not by any means start fair in the race for
success. But this is far from an unmixed evil; for without the
accumulation of capital the arts could not progress; and it
is chieﬂy through their power that the civilised races have
extended, and are now everywhere extending, their range,
so as to take the place of the lower races. Nor does the
moderate accumulation of wealth interfere with the process
of selection. When a poor man becomes rich, his children
enter trades or professions in which there is struggle
enough, so that the able in body and mind succeed best. The
presence of a body of well-instructed men, who have not to
labour for their daily bread, is important to a degree which
cannot be over-estimated; as all high intellectual work is
carried on by them, and on such work material progress of
all kinds mainly depends, not to mention other and higher
advantages. No doubt wealth when very great tends to
convert men into useless drones, but their number is never
large; and some degree of elimination here occurs, as we
daily see rich men, who happen to be fools or proﬂigate,
squandering away all their wealth.

Darwin (1871, vol. 1, pp. 169e170)

Darwin, the child of capitalismdactually the grandchild
of capitalism because it was his mother’s father Josiah
Wedgwood who made the family money with his pottery
worksdhad little time for primogeniture. This was the
practice of aristocrats passing on their land and possessions
to their oldest sons. As far as Darwin was concerned, all
children (certainly all boys) deserved an equal cut. As
expectedly, Darwin had little time for unions. Writing to a
German correspondent in 1872, Darwin said: “I much wish

Social Darwinism Chapter | 38 653

that you would sometimes take occasion to discuss an allied
point, if it holds good on the continent,dnamely the rule
insisted on by all our Trades-Unions, that all workmen,d
the good and bad, the strong and weak,dsh[oul]d all work
for the same number of hours and receive the same wages.”
Adding: “I fear that Cooperative Societies, which many
look at as the main hope for the future, likewise exclude
competition. This seems to me a great evil for the future
progress of mankind” (Darwin, 1985, pp. 20, 324).2

We can see, therefore, that historically we can make a
claim for Charles Darwin being a social Darwinian, what-
ever language one uses. One senses, however, that the so-
ciopolitical consequences he drew from his theory were less
to do with the mechanics of the theorydeven the struggle
for existencedand more with the inherited beliefs that he
held. Someone with different beliefs might go another way.
And indeed this was so. The co-discoverer of natural
selection, Alfred Russel Wallace, was a socialistdhe had
heard the Scottish industrialist and socialist Robert Owen
when he was an impressionable teenagerdand he always
thought that natural selection pointed that way (Wallace,
1905). Unlike Darwin who always thought that natural
selection favors the individualdand that hence altruism
and other social sentiments had to be explained in terms of
beneﬁt
that natural
selection can favor the group, up to and including the
species (Ruse, 1980). For him, it came naturally to argue
that within the human species we have sentiments pro-
moting group harmony, which he translated as socialism.
More extreme was Prince Peter Kropotkin, who argued
that there is an evolved sentiment of mutual aid and that

to the individualdWallace thought

2. A topic often linked to social Darwinism is that of eugenics, the idea of
selective breeding of humans to improve them. This was a theme started
and promoted by Darwin’s cousin Francis Galton. Generally, those most
into social Darwinism were more interested in society as it is or can be
changed through social means, rather than plans for biological change.
Darwin himself drew back somewhat from eugenics. He recognized the
problem (referencing Galton as his source of information):

With savages, the weak in body or mind are soon eliminated; and those
that survive commonly exhibit a vigorous state of health. We civilised
men, on the other hand, do our utmost to check the process of elimi-
nation; we build asylums for the imbecile, the maimed, and the sick; we
institute poor-laws; and our medical men exert their utmost skill to save
the life of every one to the last moment. There is reason to believe that
vaccination has preserved thousands, who from a weak constitution
would formerly have succumbed to small-pox. Thus the weak members
of civilised societies propagate their kind. No one who has attended to
the breeding of domestic animals will doubt that this must be highly
injurious to the race of man. It is surprising how soon a want of care, or
care wrongly directed, leads to the degeneration of a domestic race;
but excepting in the case of man himself, hardly any one is so ignorant
as to allow his worst animals to breed (Darwin, 1871, vol. 1, p. 168).
That said, Darwin pulled back from offering any solution. We feel
sympathy for life’s unfortunates, and so be it: “Nor could we check our
sympathy, if so urged by hard reason, without deterioration in the
noblest part of our nature.”

654 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

this leads to harmonious interactions of such intensity that
we should abolish the state entirely and adopt an anarchist
philosophy of life.

[W]henever mankind had to work out a new social organi-
zation, adapted to a new phase of development,
its
constructive genius always drew the elements and the inspi-
ration for the new departure from that same ever-living
tendency. New economical and social institutions, in so far
as they were a creation of the masses, new ethical systems,
and new religions, all have originated from the same source,
and the ethical progress of our race, viewed in its broad lines,
appears as a gradual extension of the mutual-aid principles
from the tribe to always larger and larger agglomerations,
so as to ﬁnally embrace one day the whole of mankind,
without respect to its divers creeds, languages, and races.

Kropotkin (1902)

HERBERT SPENCER

Pause for a moment and ask why Darwin would have
thought that capitalism was a good thing. No so much why
it happens, but why it is good that it happens. Clearly in
some sense because he believed in societal progress. He
thought that a capitalist society would function better than
other societies and that this would lead to improvement.
Similar sorts of thinking obviously lay behind his views on
the Irish. If they just outbreed the Scots, then we are facing
degeneration, and that is not a good thing. We do know in
fact that although Darwin denied that there was a built-in
principle of progress within his theory, he did believe
that his theory led to biological progress and that ultimately
human progress would be part and parcel of this. He
thought that there would be what modern-day biologists
call “arms races” between lines of evolving organisms, and
that this would lead to improvement. In the third edition of
the Origin (1861) he wrote as follows:

If we look at the differentiation and specialisation of the
several organs of each being when adult (and this will
include the advancement of the brain for intellectual pur-
poses) as the best standard of highness of organisation,
natural selection clearly leads towards highness; for all
physiologists admit that the specialisation of organs, inas-
much as they perform in this state their functions better, is
an advantage to each being; and hence the accumulation of
variations tending towards specialisation is within the
scope of natural selection.

Darwin (1861, p. 134)

Talk of such progress brings us around to the other key
ﬁgure in any discussion of Social Darwinism, Darwin’s
fellow English evolutionist Herbert Spencer. In fact, far
more than Darwin, it is Spencer’s name that comes ﬁrst to

mind in any discussion of social Darwinism, for he is
thought to be the epitome of any and all calls for society to
be built on the foundation of natural selection, brought on
by the struggle for existence. However, while there is
obvious truth in this, we do need to tread carefully. First,
there is no doubt that Spencer did articulate sentiments that
seem to be pure social Darwinism (as it is generally un-
derstood). He is well known for his tough stand on social
issues, and thesedcommonly known as laissez faired
seem to be a straight
from biology and the
Darwinian process of struggle and selection.

transfer

We must call those spurious philanthropists, who, to pre-
vent present misery, would entail greater misery upon
future generations. All defenders of a Poor Law must,
however, be classed among such. That rigorous necessity
which, when allowed to act on them, becomes so sharp a
spur to the lazy and so strong a bridle to the random, these
pauper’s friends would repeal, because of the wailing it
here and there produces. Blind to the fact that under the
natural order of things, society is constantly excreting its
unhealthy, imbecile, slow, vacillating, faithless members,
these unthinking, though well-meaning, men advocate an
interference which not only stops the purifying process but
even increases the vitiationdabsolutely encourages the
multiplication of the reckless and incompetent by offering
them an unfailing provision, and discourages the multipli-
cation of the competent and provident by heightening the
prospective difﬁculty of maintaining a family.

Spencer (1851, pp. 323e324)

This sounds like Margaret Thatcher at her most militant,
and the analogy is not misplaced. Both Spencer and
Thatcher came from the lower-middle classes, in the British
Midlands, raised in nonconformist (dissenters’) families.
This means they were outside the upper echelons of society
(unlike Darwin) and there was an element of resentmentda
feeling that the state beneﬁts those in power or those that are
totally unworthy and that the hard working and illustrious
(themselves) did not get the respect that they deserved.3

3. In this context, Spencer sounds a bit like Darwin with respect to the
degeneration of the race because of society’s unfortunates:

Besides an habitual neglect of the fact that the quality of a society is
physically lowered by the artiﬁcial preservation of
its feeblest
members, there is an habitual neglect of the fact that the quality of
a society is lowered morally and intellectually, by the artiﬁcial
those who are least able to take care of
preservation of
themselves. For if
the unworthy are helped to increase, by
shielding them from that mortality which their unworthiness would
naturally entail, the effect is to produce, generation after genera-
tion, a greater unworthiness.

Richards (1987, p. 303).

Second, above all others, it was Spencer who pushed
the notion of progress. Indeed, he saw organic evolution as
being but one facet of the overall upward progress that
characterizes the whole world process: from the undiffer-
entiated to the differentiated, or in his words from the ho-
mogeneous to the heterogeneous:

Now we propose in the ﬁrst place to show, that this law
of organic progress is the law of all progress. Whether it
be in the development of the Earth, in the development
of Life upon its surface, in the development of Society,
of Government, of Manufactures, of Commerce, of Lan-
guage, Literature, Science, Art,
this same evolution of
the simple into the complex, through successive differenti-
ations, hold throughout. From the earliest
traceable
cosmical changes down to the latest results of civilization,
we shall ﬁnd that the transformation of the homogeneous
into the heterogeneous, is that in which Progress essentially
consists.

Social Darwinism Chapter | 38 655

Or think of some of the ﬁction:

His teeth closed on Spitz’s left fore leg. There was a crunch
of breaking bone, and the white dog faced him on three
legs. Thrice he tried to knock him over, then repeated the
trick and broke the right fore leg. Despite the pain and
helplessness, Spitz struggled madly to keep up. He saw the
silent circle, with gleaming eyes,
lolling tongues, and
silvery breaths drifting upward, closing in upon him as he
had seen similar circles close in upon beaten antagonists in
the past. Only this time he was the one who was beaten.

There was no hope for him. Buck was inexorable. Mercy
was a thing reserved for gentler climes. (London, 1903,
p. 24)

This is from The Call of the Wild, by Spencer-enthusiast Jack
London.

Spencer (1857, pp. 2e3)

POINTS TO CONSIDER

Nothing escapes this law. Humans are more complex or
heterogeneous than other animals; Europeans are more
complex or heterogeneous than savages; and (hardly a
surprise) the English language is more complex or hetero-
geneous than the languages of other speakers. Spencer
combined all of this with his views on the basis of ethics,
arguing that morality emerges through the evolutionary
process and our duties are to ensure that this happens by
removing barriers and facilitating the process. “Ethics has
for its subject-matter, that form which universal conduct
assumes during the last stages of its evolution” (Spencer,
1879, p. 21). Continuing: “And there has followed the
corollary that conduct gains ethical sanction in proportion
as the activities, becoming less and less militant and more
and more industrial, are such as do not necessitate mutual
injury or hindrance, but consist with, and are furthered by,
co-operation and mutual aid.”

Third, a lot of people (especially in America) picked up
on this. Given the rough and tough society in which they
lived, they found that the Spencerian philosophy spoke to
them. Leading barons of industry like Andrew Carnegie,
the great steel magnate, and John D. Rockefeller, of Stan-
dard Oil fame, were enthusiastsd“The law of competition
may be sometimes hard for the individual, [but] it is best for
the race, because it insures the survival of the ﬁttest in
every department” (Andrew Carnegie, 1889)das were
some of the professors and others who wrote on these
things: “A drunkard in the gutter is just where he ought to
be.The law of survival of the ﬁttest was not made by man,
and it cannot be abrogated by man. We can only, by
interfering with it, produce the survival of the unﬁttest”
(Sumner, 1914).

And yet, the story is never quite this simple. Consider the
following ﬁve points that complexify the situation. First,
although Spencer did indeed discover natural selection
independently of Darwin and always endorsed it somewhat,
it was never his primary mechanism of change. He was
always ﬁrst and foremost a Lamarckian, thinking that real
change comes about through the inheritance of acquired
characteristics. The struggle for Spencer was a spur to ac-
tion that would make for new features that could then be
passed along directly. Although he certainly did think that
some lost, in a funny way Spencerian evolution would keep
going if there were no losers, so long as everyone kept
striving to succeed (Spencer, 1852).

Second, connected with this point at least in part was the
fact that Spencer was an organicist, thinking that society is
like an organism and thus integrated with parts functioning
together. Yes, there was struggle within the society, but the
struggle was not to break it apart but rather to improve it.

The parts of an animal form a concrete whole, but the parts
of society form a whole which is discrete. While the living
units composing the one are bound together in close con-
tact, the living unit composing the other are free, are not in
contact, and are more or less widely dispersed. Though
coherence among its parts is a prerequisite to that coop-
eration by which the life of an individual organism is car-
ried on, and though the members of a social organism, not
forming a concrete whole, cannot maintain cooperation by
means of physical inﬂuences directly propagated from part
to part, yet
they can and do maintain cooperation by
another agency. Not in contact, they nevertheless affect one
another through intervening spaces, both by emotional
language and by the language, oral and written of the

656 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

intellect. That is to say, the internuncial function, not
achievable by stimuli physically transferred, is nevertheless
achieved by language.

Spencer (1860)

instancedno doubt

in part

thinking that among other

Third, Spencer was far from militant or harsh about
everything. For
reﬂecting
Quaker elements in his familydhe was always against
militancy, thinking that (real) arms races were a waste of
time and money (Spencer, 1904). Especially deplorable
was the arms race at the end of the 19th century between
the British and German navies. He was also in favor of free
trade,
this would
encourage relationships between nations, if only from self-
interest. His followers also were more nuanced than sug-
gested. Like Darwin,
they were more interested in the
survival of the successful (which is what they tended to
belong to) than the nonsurvival of the nonsuccessful.
Consider for a moment the nature of Andrew Carnegie’s
great philanthropy. It was to found and support public li-
braries. These would be places where the poor but talented
could go and improve themselves. All very Spencerian.

things

(Prince Peter Kropotkin, the anarchist, was another who
pushed the idea of help, or what he called “mutual aid.” See
Kropotkin (1955), ﬁrst published in 1903.)

Fourth, Spencer’s long-time friend Thomas Henry
HuxleydDarwin’s great supporter and the grandfather of
the novelist Aldous Huxleydﬁnally got very irritated with
claims that the evolutionary process leads progressively to
better things and that therefore morality must be a function
of trying to aid the evolutionary process. Indeed, in Hux-
ley’s opinion, it is often the case that those attributes that
lead to success in the struggle are precisely those that we do
not think well. “Man, the animal, in fact, has worked his
way to the headship of the sentient world, and has become
the superb animal which he is, in virtue of his success in the
struggle for existence” (Huxley, 1893, p. 51). Continuing:

For his successful progress, throughout the savage state,
man has been largely indebted to those qualities which he
shares with the ape and the tiger; his exceptional physical
organization; his cunning, his sociability, his curiosity, and
his imitativeness; his ruthless and ferocious destructiveness
when his anger is roused by opposition.

But, in proportion as men have passed from anarchy to
social organization, and in proportion as civilization has
grown in worth, these deeply ingrained serviceable quali-
ties have become defects. After the manner of successful
persons, civilized man would gladly kick down the ladder
by which he has climbed. He would be only too pleased to
see “the ape and tiger die.”

(I discuss Huxley’s essay in some detail in my edition of

the essay, Ruse 2009.)

Fifth and ﬁnally, many people including those predis-
posed to Spencerian thinking saw the justice in Huxley’s
critique and modiﬁed their
thinking accordingly. Jack
London was one. On the one hand, he continued to see the
virtues of Spencer’s thinking and of how this would lead to
better and more harmonious functioning. “Only Spitz
quivered and bristled as he staggered back and forth,
snarling with horrible menace, as though to frighten off
impending death. Then Buck sprang in and out; but while
he was in, shoulder had at last squarely met shoulder. The
dark circle became a dot on the moon-ﬂooded snow as
Spitz disappeared from view. Buck stood and looked on,
the successful champion, the dominant primordial beast
who had made his kill and found it good” (London, 1903,
p. 24). But it is more than just this. Everyone now beneﬁts
from Buck’s success, dogs and men. “Highly as the dog-
driver had forevalued Buck, with his two devils, he
found, while the day was yet young, that he had under-
valued. At a bound Buck took up the duties of leadership;
and where judgment was required, and quick thinking and
quick acting, he showed himself the superior even of Spitz,
of whom Francois had never seen an equal” (p. 26).

On the other hand, London wrote tales that were far
more in line with Huxley than with Spencer. In The Scarlet
Plague (1912), a new disease wipes out almost all human
beings. One of the survivors, a professor of classics, ru-
minates on the appalling behavior of people under such
huge stresses, not to mention the often grotesque actions of
those that do survive. One of the most successful was “an
iniquitous, moral monster, a blot on the face of nature, a
cruel, relentless, bestial cheat as well.” The professor
concludes in a very non-Spencerian fashion that Progress is
never permanent and that the best we can do is ﬁght the
beast within us:

The gunpowder will come. Nothing can stop itdthe same
old story over and over. Man will increase, and men will
ﬁght. The gunpowder will enable men to kill millions of
men, and in this way only, by ﬁre and blood, will a new
civilization, in some remote day, be evolved. And of what
proﬁt will it be? Just as the old civilization passed, so will
the new. It may take ﬁfty thousand years to build, but it will
pass. All things pass.

ADOLF HITLER

Let’s move now fully into the 20th century. Whoever was
responsible, we do ﬁnd stark statements of a social
Darwinian nature. Some of the more notorious were made
by military men before and during the First World War.
General Friedrich von Bernhardi, pushed out of the German
army because he was signaling a little too bluntly the
General Staff’s intentions, left no place for the imagination
in his best-selling Germany and the Next War (1912): “War

is a biological necessity,” and hence, “Those forms survive
which are able to procure themselves the most favourable
conditions of life, and to assert themselves in the univer-
sal economy of nature. The weaker succumb.” Progress
depends on war: “Without war, inferior or decaying races
would easily choke the growth of healthy budding elements,
and a universal decadence would follow.” And, anticipating
horrible philosophies of the 20th century: “Might gives the
right to occupy or to conquer. Might is at once the supreme
right, and the dispute as to what is right is decided by the
arbitrament of war. War gives a biologically just decision,
since its decision rests on the very nature of things”
(Bernhardi, 1912, p. 10, quoted by Crook, 1994, p. 83).

There is continuing debate about the extent to which
Hitler can truly be labeled a social Darwinian. It is a popular
cry by those who would discredit evolutionary thinking
generally. “Darwin-led-to-Hitler-led-to-the-Holocaust” sort
of thinking. Whether such guilt by association is fully merited
is another matter. Lifted out of context, the story looks dire:

All great cultures of the past perished only because the
originally creative race died out from blood poisoning.

The ultimate cause of such a decline was their forgetting
that all culture depends on men and not conversely; hence
that to preserve a certain culture the man who creates it
must be preserved. This preservation is bound up with the
rigid law of necessity and the right to victory of the best and
stronger in this world.

Those who want to live, let them ﬁght, and those who do not
want to ﬁght in this world of eternal struggle do not deserve
to live.

Hitler (1925, p. 1, Chapter 11)

However, as always, things are a bit more complex than
that. If you look at the supposedly Darwinian passages in
context, you see that Hitler’s real obsession is with racial
purity, and this was certainly not Darwin’s concern. Having
said this, something had to lead to Hitler and obviously the
19th century bears much of the guilt. If you feel a slight sense
of unease, I would not say that you are without justiﬁcation,
remembering, of course, that Darwin himself was not the only
(some might say, not the chief) foundation for social Dar-
winism (Richards, 2008 discusses these issues in detail).

JULIAN HUXLEY

Social Darwinism Chapter | 38 657

in point. He argued that evolution justiﬁes an obsession
with technology, science, and major public works. While
Huxley was not uninterested in life at the personal level, it
was the general domain which really excited him.

All claims that the State has an intrinsically higher value
than the individual are false. They turn out, on closer
scrutiny, to be rationalizations or myths aimed at securing
greater power or privilege for a limited group which con-
trols the machinery of the State. On the other hand the
individual is meaningless in isolation, and the possibilities
of development and self-realization open to him are
conditioned and limited by the nature of the social orga-
nization. The individual thus has duties and responsibilities
as well as rights and privileges, or if you prefer it, ﬁnds
certain outlets and satisfactions (such as devotion to a
cause, or participation in a joint enterprise) only in relation
to the type of society in which he lives.

Huxley (1934, pp. 138e139)

The key moral principle seems to have been for the need
of planning in running the state and, above all, the appli-
cation of scientiﬁc principles and results in such planning
and its implementation. You simply cannot (or should not)
leave things to chance or intuitiondthe implication being
that this is precisely where your average politician does
leave thingsdbut should bring the trained scientiﬁc mind
to bear on life’s problems.

Again and again Huxley returned to this theme. For
instance, in a book which he wrote in the interwar years, If I
Were Dictator (1934), he stressed the need for science in
the running of an efﬁcient state and that such science would
need to be of the social variety as well as physicochemical
and biological. During the Second World War, he wrote a
highly laudatory essay on the Tennessee Valley Authority,
that marvel of the Rooseveltian New Deal, whereby the
federal government built and ran a massive system of river
damming and irrigation in what had hitherto been one of
the more desolate parts of the United States (Huxley, 1943).
Then, after the War it was Huxley who insisted on science
being added to UNESCO, and he wrote a vigorous polemic
arguing that the organization had to be run on evolutionary
linesdlines demanding lots of science. So vigorous was his
polemic indeed that he upset his masters and he was refused
a full four-year term as director general.4

Moving toward the present, although the term social Dar-
winism is rarely used because of the negative connotations
(although for some critics this is the very reason for using
it), we do ﬁnd that the kind of thinking that it represented
persisted and indeed persists to the present day. Julian
Huxley (the grandson of Thomas Henry Huxley and the
older brother of the novelist Aldous Huxley) is a good case

4. Huxley was interested in eugenics, but obviously for him as for most the
appalling things done by the National Socialists damped much enthusiasm.
It is probably fair to say that (again like most) Huxley moved from an
earlier hope that genetics might be used actually to produce better quality
humans to a more limited belief and hope that genetics might be used to
prevent horrendous pains and illnessesdgenetic counseling of the kind,
for instance, that is often offered to Ashkenazi Jews who fear they might
be the carriers of genes for Tay-Sachs disease.

658 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

What is interesting, and perhaps to be expected in the
light of our discussion, is that Huxley was a fanatic about
evolutionary progress,
justiﬁes moral
behavior. Our ethical duty is to work with and within this
process to see that it is realized as fully as possible.

thinking that

it

this

The teleologically-minded would say that
trend
[progress] embodies evolution’s purpose. I do not feel that
we should use the word purpose save where we know that a
conscious aim is involved; but we can say that this is the
most desirable direction of evolution, and accordingly that
our ethical standards must ﬁt into its dynamic framework.
In other words, it is ethically right to aim at whatever will
promote the increasingly full realization of increasingly
higher values.

Huxley (1943, p. 42)

Similar Sentiments Come out

in his Polemic for

UNESCO:

From the evolutionary point of view, the destiny of man may
be summed up very simply: it is to realize the maximum
progress in the minimum time. That is why the philosophy
of Unesco must have an evolutionary background, and why
the concept of progress cannot but occupy a central posi-
tion in that philosophy.

Huxley (1948, p. 11)

EDWARD O. WILSON

More recently it is the Harvard evolutionistdant specialist
and sociobiologistdEdward O. Wilson who has been
pushing moral action in the name of evolution. He sees all
of life as an interconnected whole. This is expressed
through his “biophilia” hypothesis: “To explore and afﬁl-
iate with life is a deep and complicated process in mental
development. To an extent still undervalued in philosophy
and religion, our existence depends on this propensity, our
spirit is woven from it, hope rises on its currents” (1984).
Individual organisms, individual species, are part of a larger
network and no one or group can take itself apart
in
isolation. Morally, therefore, our obligation is to preserve
(human) life. Explicitly, Wilson sees the signiﬁcance of
sustainability and of the cherishing of the environment and
the preservation of species in terms of human welfare. If we
destroy the rainforests of South America in pursuit of short-
term ends like cattle rearing, we stand in danger of
destroying many plants that could in the future prove to
have invaluable medicinal properties.

We must

therefore tackle the paradox of “the two
themes that form the fundamental basis of ethics,
the
expanding-circle theme that gives rights to all species,
versus the anthropocentric theme that measures all good in

the coin of human welfare.” This will be difﬁcult but it will
not be impossible. “The two are resolved in part by noting
that for human survival and mental health and fulﬁllment
we need the natural setting in which the human mind
almost certainly evolved and in which culture has devel-
oped over these millions of years of evolution. Perhaps
both of those arguments can be joined to create the pru-
dence concerning the environment and our own pop-
ulations that is so desperately needed.”

Behind all of this lie very Spencerian themes: “the
overall average across the history of life has moved from
the simple and few to the more complex and numerous.
During the past billion years, animals as a whole evolved
upward in body size, feeding and defensive techniques,
brain and behavioral complexity, social organization, and
precision of environmental controldin each case farther
from the nonliving state than their simpler antecedents
did” (Wilson, 1992, p. 187). Wilson concludes: “Progress,
then, is a property of the evolution of life as a whole by
almost any conceivable intuitive standard, including the
acquisition of goals and intentions in the behavior of
animals.”

CONCLUSION

it

is clear that evolutionists,

We can bring our discussion to an end. For all that there are
legitimate questions about the use of the term social Dar-
winism,
including Charles
Darwin, have been interested in the social implications of
evolutionary thinking. There have been differences about
the basic biological theory, especially between the two with
greatest call to be called the founders: Charles Darwin and
Alfred Russel Wallace. Analogously, Charles Darwin and
Herbert Spencer had profoundly different visions of the
evolutionary process. There have also been differences
about how the biology plays out in societydthe differ-
ences, for instance, between Darwin and Wallace. There
have been enthusiasts for social DarwinismdSpencer
obviouslydand there have been criticsdThomas Henry
Huxley as obviously.

Social Darwinism, especially since the popularization of
the term by Hofstadter, has generally been thought to be a
problematic, if not outright wrong, philosophy of society.
We have seen evidence that in the hands of some this is
clearly true. I doubt there are many today who would stand
up for the thinking of General von Bernhardi. On the other
hand, it is by no means obvious that historically it has
always been a philosophy that all decent people would
reject. In many respects, Andrew Carnegie was not a
particularly nice man. He could be brutal with his workers.
The Homestead Strike in Pittsburgh is an example that will
neverdand should neverddie. But he genuinely did
believe what he said when he claimed that no man should
die rich, and his founding of public libraries enriched the

lives of manydincluding this author, who grew up in a
town in England with a Carnegie Library.

It

far bigger

is far from obvious that social Darwinism was
responsible for all of the ills of which it stands accused.
Something had to cause Hitler and the National Socialists,
but even if evolutionary ideas played some role it was
factorsdthe
limited and there were other
German Volkish movement from the 19th century and re-
sidual anti-Semitism to mention two factors. (And if a third
is needed, the dislike of Hitter and the Nazi leaders for
evolutionary ideas generally, which linked Arians with
Jews.) Finally, forms of social Darwinism persist to this
day, even though the term is rarely, if ever, used. At the
social level, Julian Huxley and Edward O. Wilson have
been among the most important evolutionists of the 20th
century (and in Wilson’s case, the 21st century). Let us
leave it at that. If nothing else, we should have persuaded
the reader that social Darwinism is something that still
merits vigorous historical examination.

REFERENCES

Social Darwinism Chapter | 38 659

Huxley, J.S., 1934. If I Were Dictator. Harper and Brothers, New York and

London.

Huxley, J.S., 1943. TVA: Adventure in Planning. Scientiﬁc Book Club,

London.

Huxley, J.S., 1948. UNESCO: Its Purpose and Its Philosophy. Public

Affairs Press, Washington, D.C.

Huxley, T.H., 2009. In: Ruse, M. (Ed.), Evolution and Ethics with a New

Introduction. Princeton University Press, Princeton.

Kropotkin, P., 1902. Mutual Aid: A Factor in Evolution. Extending Ho-

rizons Books, Boston.

Kropotkin, P., 1955. Mutual Aid. Extending Horizons Books, Boston.
Leonard, T.C., 2009. Origins of the myth of social Darwinism: the ambig-
uous legacy of richard Hofstadter’s social Darwinism in American
thought. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 71, 37e51.

London, J., 1903. The Call of the Wild. Macmillan, New York.
London, J., 1912. The Scarlet Plague. London Magazine. Macmillan, New

York.

Richards, R.J., 1987. Darwin and the Emergence of Evolutionary Theories

of Mind and Behavior. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Richards, R.J., 2008. The Tragic Sense of Life: Ernst Haeckel and the
Struggle over Evolutionary Thought. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.

Richards, R.J., Ruse, M., 2016. Debating Darwin. University of Chicago

Press, Chicago.

Bernhardi, F.V., 1912. Germany and the Next War. Cotta, Stuttgart and

Ruse, M., 1980. Charles Darwin and group selection. Annals of Science

Berlin.

37, 615e630.

Carnegie, A., 1889, 1962. The gospel of wealth. In: Kirkland, E.C. (Ed.),
The Gospel of Wealth and Other Timely Essays. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, Mass, pp. 14e49.

Spencer, H., 1851. Social Statics; or the Conditions Essential to Human
Happiness Speciﬁed and the First of Them Developed. J. Chapman,
London.

Crook, P., 1994. Darwinism: War and History. University of Cambridge

Spencer, H., 1852. A theory of population, deduced from the general law

Press, Cambridge.

Darwin, C., 1859. On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection,
or the Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life. John
Murray, London.

Darwin, C., 1861. Origin of Species, third ed. John Murray, London.
Darwin, C., 1871. The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex.

John Murray, London.

Darwin, C., 1985. The Correspondence of Charles Darwin. Cambridge

of animal fertility. Westminster Review 1, 468e501.

Spencer, H., 1857. Progress: its law and cause. Westminster Review

LXVII, 244e267.

Spencer, H., 1860. The social organism. Westminster Review 73,

90e121.

Spencer, H., 1879. The Data of Ethics. Williams and Norgate, London.
Spencer, H., 1904. Autobiography. Williams and Norgate, London.
Sumner, W.G., 1914. The Challenge of Facts and Other Essays. Yale

University Press, Cambridge.

University Press, New Haven.

Fisher, J., 1877. A history of landholding in Ireland. Transactions of the

Trivers, R.L., 1971. The evolution of reciprocal altruism. Quarterly Review

Royal Historical Society 5, 228e326, 424.

of Biology 46, 35e57.

Hamilton, W.D., 1964. The genetical evolution of social behaviour.

Wallace, A.R., 1905. My Life: A Record of Events and Opinions. Chapman

Journal of Theoretical Biology 7, 1e52.

and Hall, London.

Hitler, A., 1925. Mein Kampf. Secker and Warburg, London.
Hofstadter, R., 1944. Social Darwinism in American Thought. Beacon

Wilson, E.O., 1984. Biophilia. Harvard University Press, Cambridge,

Mass.

Press, Boston.

Wilson, E.O., 1992. The Diversity of Life. Harvard University Press,

Huxley, T.H., 1893. Collected Essays: Darwiniana. Macmillan, London.

Cambridge, Mass.

Chapter 39

History and Diversity of Religion

T. Borchert
University of Vermont, Burlington, VT, United States

RELIGIOUS VERSUS NONRELIGIOUS

In March 2014, I was in a cab in Bangkok, traveling to
meet a monk at Wat Bowonniwet, a royal temple and the
home of the late sangha-raja, the head of the monastic
community. For the previous 6 months, Bangkok had been
wracked by protests about
the political system, which
would eventually lead to a military takeover in late May. In
the midst of this, I was interviewing monks about what
they thought about these protests, and whether monks had
a right or a responsibility as Buddhist monks to participate
in them. In other words, I was asking them about the
proper place of a religiondBuddhismdin the life of the
nation.

Thailand is a predominately Buddhist country, and most
Buddhists there follow Theravada Buddhism. This form of
Buddhism is commonly associated with mainland South-
east Asia and Sri Lanka, as opposed to Mahayana
Buddhism which is associated with East Asia and Central
Asia (though the Buddhism of Central Asia is sometimes
referred to as Vajrayana Buddhism). Many people view
Theravada Buddhism as the form that is closest to the
“original Buddhism” taught by Siddhartha Gotama some
2500 years ago. This is partly a scholarly construction, a
product of 19th century European concerns with the origins
of religions, though it is also the result of the limits of
historical (textual and archaeological) evidence from South
Asia 2500 years ago. Part of the claims about Buddhism,
especially in its Theravada forms, that are embedded in the
widespread understanding of the religion is that it is, or is
supposed to be, outside of politics. Despite this, Theravada
monks (who represent only a fraction of the number of
Buddhists) regularly engage in both direct and indirect
political activities throughout
the Theravada worlds of
Southeast Asia and Sri Lanka. These actions open them up
to accusations
they are not engaged in “real”
Buddhism.

that

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00039-9
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

On this particular day in this particular cab, however, I
was not talking about politics, but about the images that the
cab driver had on his dashboard. In most Bangkok taxis,
there would be a combination of amulets, small statues of
monks, Buddha images, and occasionally images of gods
such as the Chinese Bodhisattva/goddess of compassion,
Guanyin, or the elephant headed Hindu god, Ganesh, seen
by Thai Buddhists as well as Indian Hindus as the “solver
of problems.”1 These amulets and images are usually
understood by Thais, taxi drivers and otherwise, as having
protective qualities. Drivers will also sponsor monks to
draw yantras, magical spells, on the roof of the car above
where the driver sits to maximize protection. At the same
time, however,
in conversations with drivers it became
clear that Thais hold a variety of attitudes towards these
images and amulets. Some see them as directly efﬁcacious;
some have an emotional attachment
to the images or
amulets, and enjoyed the story of how they came into their
possession; others did not really pay much attention to
them, because they “belonged” to a driver that they shared
the taxi with, or because they did not put much stock in
their protective qualities. In other words, even in a country
where identity is closely tied up with the Buddhist religion,
something that we often call a “world religion,” people
often vary signiﬁcantly in how they regard the important
aspects of the religion.

1. In the bombing of the Erawan Shrine in August 2015, the shrine was
often referred to as “Hindu.” While the shrine has a god at its center that is
commonly associated with Hinduism, Brahma, it should be seen as a
shrine for Thai Buddhists. While Thai Buddhism was inﬂuenced by
Brahmanical and “Hindu” forms from its earliest days, the reference to
these as “Hindu” is an example how European and American observers
have difﬁculties conceptualizing the ways Buddhism incorporates cults
that are not seen as “Buddhist.” See McDaniel (2011) for some discussion
of these issues.

661

662 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

The driver of my cab on this day was the “renter” of the
amulets and images,2 and while he delighted in letting me
know the monks that had produced the amulets, and the
famous temples (wat) that he had gone to, we also began to
talk about
the relationship of Islam and Buddhism in
Thailand and religion as well. In the last decade, relations
between Muslims and Buddhists in Thailand have some-
times been fraught primarily because of a conﬂict in the
southern four provinces of Thailand between the state
and local Malays. This conﬂict is alternately described in
political, ethnic, or religious terms. The state of relations
between Buddhists and Muslims in Thailand has become
more tense since 2013 because of events in neighboring
Myanmar, where radical Buddhists have attacked Muslims
as being illegal aliens within the nation-space (despite the
fact
the Rohingyas, have been in
Myanmar for generations). Yet when I asked him whether
there was a conﬂict between Buddhism and Islam, he told
me, “No, not really, there are problems but they are not
really about religion.” He continued by making claims
about the nature of religion and nonreligion. “All religions
are the same; Christianity, Islam, Buddhism, Hinduism:
they all teach the same thing, about being good. Actually,
I am more concerned about someone with no religion than
I am with someone with a different religion.”3

these Muslims,

that

implicit

importantly,

There are a number of assumptions that were embedded
to highlight. First and
in this conversation that I want
perhaps most
in the taxi driver’s
statements was the idea that religions are coherent phe-
nomena that can be compared to one another. Buddhism
and Islam in this case are the same kind of thing. They are
within the context equivalent, but also distinct from one
another. Second, there were implicit taxonomies within the
conversation about ways of being in this world: one can be
religious, and one can be not religious. This is understood
to be a choice. Third, although the driver mentioned
Hinduism, most Thais when talking about “religion,”
speciﬁcally in the way that the driver did, are referring to
one of three religions: Buddhism, the “religion” of roughly
90% of the population, Christianity, and Islam. Thais
recognize the existence of other religions, but when they
talk about religion as being a “pillar” of the country, along
with the “nation” and the king,
they mean these three
religions. What it does not mean from the viewpoint of
most Thais are things like animism or spirit worship
practiced by the Hill Tribes of the North and Northeast.
They will often recognize these as religions, but they are
not the religions of the Thai nation, per se. (At the same
time, there are practices embedded within Thai Buddhism,

2. In Thailand, amulets and images are seen as being sacred, and therefore
are objects that are not “bought,” but rather “rented” by the person who has
possession of them.
3. Personal communication, Bangkok, March 21, 2014.

such as the exchange of amulets made by famous monks
that overlap with some of the lesser forms of religiond
whether these are really religious or corruptions of religion
is something of a contested issue within Thailand.4) Very
little of this was spelled out in our conversation; it was
understood and assumed. What makes this interesting is
that it was not out of the ordinary. While people’s opinions
varieddsome felt like Buddhism and Islam were in the
midst of conﬂict, for exampledthis was a conversation that
was repeated regularly over the course of 6 months. These
were the assumptions that most Thais in 2014 have when
they talk about religion (sasana).

It is in many ways the view that most people have about
religion in the early 21st century: one can be religious or
not religious, and this is usually though not always a matter
of choice; religions are equivalent phenomena that are
comparable; and there are legitimate and illegitimate forms,
though where a given phenomenon ﬁts on the scale of
legitimacy is often implicit rather than explicit. Most of us
assume we understand what religion is, but we have only
very rarely interrogated those assumptions. Indeed,
this
assumption might be seen as following the well-known
adage about pornography, that we can’t say what it is,
but we know it when we see it (Sullivan, 2005).

Indeed,

This implicit notion of religion has been a problem for
the academic study of religion since it began with the
beginning of the social sciences in the latter half of the 19th
century. Scholars were, of course, concerned with religion
before the end of the 19th century, but much of this interest
was either theological or antitheological in nature. The
disciplined study of religion external to religious commu-
nities principally began as a central part of the formation of
the modern university.
some scholars have
observed that “virtually all the novel disciplines that came
to ﬂourish [in the development of the modern university in
the 19th century] cut their teeth on critical interrogation of
religion and things religious” (Lincoln, 2012, p. 131; see
also Lincoln, 2003, pp. 57e58). That is to say, sociology,
anthropology, political
and psychology all
established their independence in part by making religion
their object of study, rather than a part of their methodo-
logical assumptions. This has some important implications
for our understanding of the history of religion. When we
use the term “religion,” we are referring to it in distinctly
modern ways. By modern I am referring to the events of the
last two centuries, speciﬁcally the emergence of nation-
states within the context of European colonialism, and the
modern knowledge systems (of which “religion” is a part)
that emerged as a part of this process. The problem with
using religion as a descriptor
the
phenomena that we describe using the term “religion” were

is that not all of

science,

4. For discussions of the role of amulets in Thai society, see McDaniel
(2011) and Pattana (2012).

conceived by the people who lived them as we describe and
understand “religion.” For example, is it appropriate for us
to use the term “religion” to describe the cults of Rome or
the different types of ofﬁcial and unofﬁcial religious forms
that were present in China before 1911 when the empire
fell? We describe these as “religious” in part because they
entail rites, rituals, and sacriﬁces in relation to invisible/
spiritual/sacred beings. Yet there are two problems with
this. First, there is an implicit differentiation within our
notions of religiondreligion is a distinct spheredthat was
either not present or differently conceived of within the
worldview of these actors. Second, deﬁnitions of religion
often entail either tautologies or deferrals to other equally
vague concepts. For example, if we take the Durkheimian
deﬁnition of religion, that it is a “uniﬁed system of rites and
beliefs relative to sacred things” (Durkheim, 2001), we
must still answer what a “sacred thing” might be.5

This chapter is meant

to address the diversity and
history of religion, and while I will do this to a certain
extent, it is perhaps better to think about this as interro-
gating the assumptions that underlie the possibility of even
asking questions about the diversity of religion. That is to
say, before we can understand the diversity of human
practices with regard to religion, it is necessary to under-
stand what
religion is, and how religions have been
categorized. While it is beyond the scope of this chapter to
fully explore either of these issues, it will be my aim here to
provide contours of the important issues at play in both
deﬁnitions and taxonomies of religion.

Let me ﬁrst set forward several assumptions that I write
this chapter with. The ﬁrst is an assumption about diversity.
Regardless of what religion is, I presume that humans have
done everything one can imagine in the context of what
we now call
religious. They have worshiped and
believed in anthropomorphic beings, nonanthropomorphic
beings, animals, nature gods, ancestors, devils and demons,
other humans (who may or may not be seen as super
human). They have sung, danced, eaten, buried, written,
carved, thought about, sown, reaped, burned, built, eaten,
not-eaten, manipulated their bodies in all sorts of ways,
valorized humans, crushed humans, built hierarchies in
society, demolished hierarchies (though far less often), and
many other things that I do not name here. All of these acts
have been done at one time or another in the name of
something that we might call religion.6

History and Diversity of Religion Chapter | 39 663

The second assumption is that while religion may be old
and impossibly diverse, the term “religion” is not. As will
be discussed below, the term “religion” is one that is part of
the formation of the modern world in which we live. While
we can have arguments about what the modern is and when
it began, there was an important transformation in the ways
that the English speaking world began to talk about how
human societies situated themselves in the world,
in
relation to the notions of metaphysical reality (that is the
“divine” or “sacred”). As a part of this transformation,
which was also a part of the development of the knowledge
projects of the modern European world over the course of
the 19th century, the notions of the secular and religion
emerged together, as did both the modern notion of science
and the things that we understand to be the sciences.
In other words, although humans interacting in some way
with the universe is probably as old as human societies, this
way of talking about it is roughly two centuries old.

Third, religions are things that are understood by people
and governments (though not always scholars) to be a
universal aspect of the human. That is to say, all human
societies are understood as having religious communities or
institutions that are fundamental to what they are.7 There is
a certain irony to this, given the assumption above about
the relative newness of the category of religion. Although
one might say, following J. Z. Smith (2004, p. 179), that
throughout most of the non-European world, “religion is
not a native category,” it is a category that has been taken
up by communities throughout
the world. How this
happened has varied: it was imposed on some communities;
taken up willingly by some, taken up as a necessity of
modernization, or taken up as a strategic matter. In other
words, even though it was not a native category, it has
become a universal one.8 The universality of the category,
or perhaps better the seeming universality of the category
obscures local differences in how religion is understood as
well as
the transformation described in the second
assumption.

Fourth, and perhaps most importantly, the category of
religion is inextricable from questions of power and the
political, even when it is understood as apolitical. Deﬁning
religion is a part of a larger discourse on religion. This is
the idea that the thing we call “religion” is a distinct and

5. Durkheim (2001, p. 46). Durkheim does deﬁne sacred things as “set
apart and forbidden.” He also continues to talk about “beliefs and practices
which unite into one single moral community called a Church, all those
who adhere to them.”
6. Note too that human communities have done most of these acts outside
of “religion” as well.

7. Chidester (1996) discusses how Europeans understood that some of the
indigenous peoples of Southern Africa did not have any beliefs or practices
that the Europeans recognized as religious. While this was empirically
false and the product of assumptions of “savagery,” this was also held up
as the exception that made the rule that all communities have religions.
8. As Gottschalk (2013, p. 32) puts it: “Although the concepts of religion
may have not had precedent in many cultures and Western imperialists had
a disproportionate role in its global naturalization,
indigenous people
played their role in local adoptions and adaptations of the notion.”

664 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

deﬁnable aspect of human societies (the thing that makes
people trustworthy, according to my Bangkok taxi driver).
Not all societies and nation-states have valued religion, but
in general religion has been seen as a legitimate form of
human activity, at least some forms of it. In calling some
activities “religious” and others not (calling them, for
example, “superstitious” or “a cult”) means that one is
engaged in a process of determining what is proper and
improper. This is inherently political, resulting in practices
that are valorized and those that are denigrated and
oppressed within societies.

In what follows, I want to explore the issues behind
these assumptions, pointing not so much to the diversity of
religious practices through time, but rather to how and why
certain groups of actors have deﬁned religion as well as
categorized different
types of religious practices. I am
concerned here with the knowledge projects and practices
that make these deﬁnitions and taxonomies possible in the
ﬁrst place. In the ﬁrst parts of the chapter, I will discuss the
dynamics and practices of deﬁnition and classiﬁcation. In
the latter part of the chapter, I will turn to speciﬁc case
studies from Asia, examining how “religion” came to be
incorporated into East Asia as a category, as well as the
role it has played in the governing projects of post-Mao
China.

THE PROBLEM OF DEFINING

it

Deﬁning religion is a surprisingly complicated enterprise.
There are several reasons for this. First,
is a meta-
category, a term that describes a type of activity that is
embedded in cultures and societies, and it is an “anthro-
pological” rather than natural term. It is a term that people,
scholars for example, use to describe types of phenomena,
not the phenomena itself. People generally do not believe
in/practice religion, but rather they believe in/practice
speciﬁc religions, such as Christianity, Islam, and so forth.
This means that the term is an umbrella, a “second-order
generic concept” (Smith, 2004, p. 194) used to describe
a group of things that must all share some essential nature.
Second, determining what
this essential nature is has
proved to be extremely difﬁcult. “Religion” as a term seeks
to describe a vast range of activities and practices, in a
diverse set of times and places which are not obviously
related to one another. To state the obvious, deciding
which of
is
the essential one has been highly contested. Should we
assume, for example, that beliefs in gods, for example, are
the essential core of religion, or should it rather be worship
of these gods? Even if they are uniﬁed by god in my
question,
to this particular
question.

these practices, activities, or

thoughts

there is no single answer

We can see this by comparing several recent textbooks
which are introductions either to the study of religion or to

the study of world religions. These ﬁve textbooks,9 pub-
lished between 1995 and 2015, are all directed at un-
dergraduates and normally, but not always, “world
religions” classes.10 There are two points that I want to
make about these books, one a matter of deﬁnition, and the
other a matter of taxonomy. First, all of these introductory
textbooks feel it necessary to talk about what religion is
before they talk about the speciﬁc religions. Signiﬁcantly,
none of them use the same deﬁnition, though there are
commonalities between the different deﬁnitions, and shared
inﬂuences. For example, Young (2005, p. 4) deﬁnes reli-
gion as “a human transformation in response to perceived
ultimacy.” Similarly, Deming (2015, p. 4) sees religion as
an “orientation to those things which are of ultimate value
in a person’s life,” and speciﬁes that they are “systems of
traditions of orientations” such as Christianity and Islam.
These texts (and also Ellwood and McGraw who deﬁne
religion in terms of “the sacred” and “things set apart”)
share roots in both the work of the Historian of Religion,
Mircea Eliade, which emphasized religion as a distinct
aspect of human life unlike any other,11 and the theologian
Paul Tillich (1958) who saw the nature of religion as being
deﬁned by an attention to what he called “ultimate
concerns.” Brodd et al. (2013) on the other hand, come out
of a more critical anthropological tradition, citing Asad’s
(1993) argument against
the possibility of universal
deﬁnitions of religion. However, recognizing the need to
provide at least a working deﬁnition, they stipulate that
“Religion is a cultural
system integrating teachings,
practices, modes of experience, institutions, and artistic
expressions that relate people to what they perceive to be
this deﬁnition also bears the
transcendent.” Ironically,
traces of Clifford Geertz’s
(1973) highly inﬂuential
anthropological deﬁnition of
religion, “Religion as a
Cultural System” which is precisely what Asad was
critiquing. Aside from the general interest of how to think
about what religion is, what is important to recognize here
is that there are a number of different intellectual traditions
of deﬁning what religion might be, as well as disciplinary
traditions (anthropological, phenomenological, theological,
and sociological to name the major ones). Some of these

9. The books are Young (2005), Ellwood and McGraw (2005), Oxtoby
et al. (2010), Brodd et al. (2013), and Deming (2015). These do not
exhaust the market, but are representative of it. Several of these have had
more than one edition, with the ﬁrst edition going back several decades. In
the interest of full disclosure, I wrote the Buddhism chapter in Deming.
10. On the development of “world religions” as the category of choice to
describe the major religious systems of the world, see Masuzawa (2005).
Throughout this chapter, it should be understood that terms like religion,
world religions, the sacred, and so forth are always categories the meaning
of which is under negotiation (and thus the use of quotation marks).
11. Eliade (1959). In this, Eliade’s understanding of religion should be
understood as a phenomenological transformation of Durkheimian soci-
ology, borrowing the terminology of the sacred and profane, and empha-
sizing the set apart nature.

textbooks are focused on concrete forms, such as notions of
the divine, while others seek to locate the unities within
religion in terms of meaning and the uniqueness of religion.
Despite the lack of unity in deﬁning religion, these
introductory textbooks display signiﬁcant consistency
about the religions that they focus on: all of them have
Hinduism, Buddhism, Daoism, Confucianism and Shinto
(though some in stand-alone chapters, and some combined
into the religions of East Asia, or the religions of China and
Japan separately), Christianity, Islam, and Judaism.12 Three
of the four have Sikhism and Jainism chapters (and a fourth
deals with these religions in the “India” chapter), and they
all
in
stand-alone chapters (four out of the ﬁve), or in chapters
dealing with Japanese religions, for example). The consis-
tency breaks down after this, and the different books
address the complexities raised by noneworld religions in
different ways. Some talk about “tribal religions” (Ellwood
and McGraw, 2005) while some use the category of the
“indigenous” (Young, 2005; Brodd et al., 2013; Oxtoby
et al., 2010).

“new religious movements”

address

either

reasons for

In some ways, the patterns visible in these books reﬂect
a consensus which is brought
into being as much by
institutional and capitalistic concerns as it is by intellectual
concerns (Masuzawa, 2005, p. 9).13 They also, however,
reﬂect real confusion over how to address those religions
that have not been considered to be “systems.”14 One might
consider several
this, some of which are
innocent
intellectual problems, others of which are
reﬂective of dynamics of power and racism that have been
endemic to the assumptions and concerns of European/
American intellectual projects. On the innocent side, the
religions of indigenous communities have often been part
of disparate communities, rather than uniﬁed in empires,
and so the consistencies and patterns within them have not
always been obvious. Many of them have also not always
had a written corpus, but rather oral literature, and while
early scholars, missionaries, and colonial ofﬁcials may have
collected what came to be called folk tales, the complexity
and profundity of these narratives has not always been
obvious, certainly not to the early scholars, missionaries,

12. Oxtoby et al. (2010), it should be noted has the religions of the world
split into two different volumes. It uses the same introductory material
introducing what religion is in both volumes. The volume on “Western
Traditions” has Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, as well as Indigenous
Religions.
13. In preparing the “Buddhism” chapter in Deming (2015), I was told that
textbook companies have an informal “80e20” rule in thinking about
textbooks. There could only be about 20% of the book that was considered
to be new or different, because otherwise instructors would not be willing
to adapt it, because it would change their classes too much.
14. Masuzawa (2005, p. 15), cites a suggestion by Immanuel Wallerstein,
that anthropology developed to address “tribal” societies, small in scale,
while Orientalism developed to study “large-scale” kingdoms (civilizations
or systems) with vast written traditions.

History and Diversity of Religion Chapter | 39 665

attitudes

colonial ofﬁcials, and sometimes modernizing nationalists,
who collected them. Their failures to recognize these
patterns is reﬂective of the negative. The Europeans and
Americans who ﬁrst encountered these communities
normally assumed that their traditions and communities
were pagans, heathens, or savages. Some of these were
theological categories; some reﬂective of straightforwardly
racist
and European
Americans.15 While there were exceptions
such as
Bartolome de las Casas (1992), most of those Europeans
who encountered non-Europeans approached them with a
strong sense of racial and civilizational superiority. This
much is well known, of course, but it
is important to
highlight that scholarly ways of conceptualizing the social
formations that we call religions bear the genealogical
traces of the past. Smith put this concisely when he noted
that:

by Europeans

held

A world religion is a religion like ours; but it is, above all, a
tradition which has achieved sufﬁcient power and numbers
to enter our history, either to form it, interact with it, or
thwart it. All other religions are invisible. We recognize
both the unity within and the diversity between the “great”
World Religions because they correspond to important geo-
political entities with which we must deal. All “primitives”
by way of contrast, may be simply lumped together as may
be so-called “minor religions” because they do not
confront our history in any direct fashion. They are invis-
ible. (Smith 2004, p. 169)

While the authors of these textbooks often try to think
through and around these problems when talking about
what religion is and choosing what to put into their text-
books, these racial and civilizational ideologies and hier-
archies remain embedded in how we think about what we
study in Religious Studies.16

that needs

There is an additional point

to be
highlighted when talking about the problem of deﬁnition:
the “essential nature” of religion. Earlier I noted that one of
the difﬁculties of developing a complete deﬁnition of
the diversity of phenomenadpractices,
religion is that
beliefs, social structuresdrenders it difﬁcult to determine
what is the core aspect of religion. By core here, I mean that
aspect of religion that we could talk about as a universal

15. Notions of civilizational superiority tied up with notions of religion and
civilization are not unique to the Europeans and Americans, but were
common within East Asia, particularly in the context of modernization and
nation-state formation. See Tanaka (1993) and Dikötter (1992) for Japan
and China, respectively.
16. While there have been many efforts to move beyond these ideologies,
it can be very difﬁcult to do so, even when scholars are well-meaning. In
my ﬁrst year of graduate school at the University of Chicago, the History
of Religion program (the history of which provides the backbone of my
narrative in this chapter) ﬁnally removed “Primitive Religions” from the
title of one of the possible qualifying exams to be taken. This was in 1995.

666 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

essence, one that would allow us to understand clearly
that the animal sacriﬁces performed by the emperor of
China (or by his attendants) in premodern China,
the
beliefs/writings of
John Calvin or his Presbyterian
followers, and the possession practices of candomblé in
Brazil can all be linked into the same concept: religion.
While this has produced a large number of different
attempts at deﬁning “religion”dthe Historian of Religions,
J. Z. Smith (2004, p. 193), cites a textbook from 1912,
which by that point had listed over 50 different attempts to
deﬁne religiondscholars have dealt with this differently.
Some, not liking the deﬁnitions they found, have come up
with their own deﬁnitions, emphasizing different parts of
the common deﬁnitions (see, eg, Tweed, 2006; Deming,
2005 for recent attempts). Others, such as W. C. Smith
50 years ago (1978), have called the term unworkable. For
W. C. Smith (among others), the point is not just the di-
versity, but rather the simple but profound point
that
“religion” is a European concept that has been introduced,
sometimes by force and sometimes by choice to promote
modernization, and not really a useful concept for under-
standing how non-Western societies conceptualize the
world.

Among the more powerful critiques regarding the
nature of religion was Asad’s (1993) critique of Clifford
Geertz’s Anthropological deﬁnition of religion (referred to
earlier). Geertz’s (1973, p. 90) deﬁnition, inﬂuential within
the study of religion both inside and outside of Religious
Studies for almost
two decades, deﬁned religion as “a
system of symbols which acts to establish powerful,
pervasive, and long-lasting moods and motivations in men
by formulating conceptions of a general order of existence
and clothing these conceptions with such an aura of
factuality that the moods and motivations seem uniquely
realistic.” Geertz’s deﬁnition was about the production of
meaning in societies17 and was attacked by Asad (1993) on
primarily two grounds. The ﬁrst was an essentially
Foucauldian argument that Geertz had failed to account
for the role that power played in the constitution of the
formulations that Geertz said the system of symbols
represented. The second was that Geertz’s emphasis was
one that privileged interior aspects of social life (beliefs,
moods, and motivations), and that this was inﬂuenced by
the widespread Protestant emphasis on belief as the
foundation of religion. Asad argued that while Geertz’s
deﬁnition implicitly at
least made claims to being a
it could not be because it
universal deﬁnition,

that

17. While Geertz’s deﬁnition gained prominence with its republication in
Geertz (1973), it was ﬁrst written in 1963, and so follows the phenome-
nological work of Eliade’s (1959) and Berger’s (1967) sociological dis-
cussions of religion. While they differ in important ways, all of these bear
the imprint of posteWorld WarII/Cold War concerns reﬂecting existential
anxiety and attention to meaning-making.

itself

place

(ie, mid-20th

the product of

privileged concerns that were the product of a certain time
century North American
and
academy,
the late 19th century
development of the modern university). Asad took this a
step further to suggest that there could be no universal
deﬁnition of religion, precisely because all attempts to
deﬁne religion are the product of speciﬁc times and places.
Asad’s critique seems to me to be right, up to a point.
The category emerged in a particular time and place, and that
has shaped the implicit notions that are embedded in the
category. There is not likely to be a single deﬁnition of
religion which can fully account for all
things that all
societies might want to call religion. However, it is also not
enough to simply abandon the category, despite its
problems. It is a term that has been naturalized around the
world, and is a category embedded within legal structures.18
Thomas Tweed has suggested that the inability to create a
science based on a universal deﬁnition should not produce
despair, any more than anthropologists should stop talking
about “culture” or art historians should stop talking about
“art.” Religion is a “constitutive category” of the ﬁeld, and it
is the responsibility of the ﬁeld to continue to struggle with
how to think about the term, and to understand the ways in
which nonspecialists think about
it, both implicitly and
explicitly (Tweed, 2006, pp. 30e33). Indeed, as the Histo-
rian of Religions Bruce Lincoln (2003, p. 2) puts it, the
historically situated nature of “religion” as a category should
not render “futile all efforts at deﬁnition, however, particu-
larly when one understands these as provisional attempts to
clarify one’s thoughts, not to capture the essence of things.”
A disciplined concern and attention to what “religion” is can
never be ﬁnal, but rather shifts according to particular times
and places. So let us turn to these attempts a bit more
explicitly.

DEFINING RELIGION

In thinking through how best to deﬁne religion, scholars
have sought
to categorize different kinds of religions.
These categorizations have to do with the content of the
deﬁnition, the work of the deﬁnition and the form that
the deﬁnition has taken. While the word religion predates
the 16th century, according to Smith (2004, p. 180) it is
only at
there begins to be something
resembling a modern usage of the term. In large part, this is
because it is at this point that Europeans encounter on a
large scale communities and societies that are so clearly
distinct
Islam, or
Judaism. For the most part, early efforts to deﬁne religion
were focused around notions of gods, or more appropriately

follow Christianity,

from those that

this point

that

18. On the way that deﬁning religion in general or speciﬁc religions pro-
duces unintended consequences within legal systems, see Sullivan (2005)
and Sen (2010).

God. Jason Ananda Josephson has argued that
these
were “theocentric,” “implicitly theological and rooted in the
assumption that a monotheistic divinity has revealed
religion to different cultures.” This theocentric notion of
religion (which he links to the mid-18th century Encyclo-
pedie) was replaced over time by what he refers to as a
“hierocentric” notion of
religion, based instead on
established notions of beliefs deﬁning the relationship
between “man and the sacred” (Josephson, 2012, p. 9,
citing Larousse Dictionairre). This shift happened as a
result of a desire to de-Christianize the concept of religion,
a task that was only partially successful. At least through
the 19th century scholars and government ofﬁcials in places
like China and Japan understood Protestant
forms of
Christianity to be the principal model of what religion
the deﬁnitions of
meant. Yet, as the discussion of
religion in the textbooks discussed above showed,
the
“hierocentric” notion continues to be inﬂuential in the way
many deﬁne the concept. One of the ironies that Josephson
points to is that even as the essence of religion shifted from
a focus on God to one on the sacred (an admittedly vague
concept
since
Durkheim used it in his deﬁnition of religion in the early
20th century), is that the collections of religions that were
determined through the “theocentric” model, what we tend
to call “world religions” at this point, were simply inherited
within “hierocentric” models of
religion: “While the
hierocentric deﬁnition seems to represent a rejection of
divine revelation in favor of the anthropological concept of
the sacred, it inherited a cluster of ‘religions’ based on the
very principle that
it ultimately rejected. Even once it
discarded the old principle, the new deﬁnition was stuck
with the pre-established list of religions, which was then
used to generate a variety of vague commonalities
necessary to formulate a new deﬁnition” (Josephson, 2012,
p. 11). In other words, efforts to develop deﬁnitions or
religion following scientiﬁc principles
taxonomies of
have generally been hindered by implicit
theological
assumptions left over from the point when “religion” was a
primarily theological category.

that has presented its own problems

While the shift from the theocentric to hierocentric
deﬁnitions allowed for the possibility of a de-Christianized
notion of religion,
it also opened up the possibility of
other types of deﬁnitions. Martin Riesebrodt has suggested
that
the primary distinction in determining a model of
religion is to decide the difference between “content-based”
deﬁnitions, like the theocentric ones to which Josephson
refers, and functionalist models of religion,19 which explain
the role that
religion plays in society. Content-based
deﬁnitions of religion have sometimes been accused of

History and Diversity of Religion Chapter | 39 667

being too speciﬁc (and therefore cannot explain enough of
the diversity of religion), or too theological. Riesebrodt
argues conversely that functionalist explanations of religion
are good for explaining how society works, but they are not
particularly good at explaining what religion is or does.
They cannot differentiate clearly between religious and
nonreligious phenomena, and as a result, everything gets
mashed together (Riesebrodt, 2010, pp. 72e73).20

“averting misfortune, overcoming crises,

Riesebrodt’s distinction between content and functional
models is described in a different way in Thomas Tweed’s
effort to develop a theory of religion. Tweed articulates a
distinction between “empirical” and “stipulative” deﬁni-
tions of religion. The former seeks to be a “true statement
about the way things are”; that is, it is a statement that is
either true or false about some object. They purport to
provide tools for describing how some object works, or
exists. These statements are derived inductively by looking
at conditions “on the ground” and using these conditions to
develop statements that can be applied to determine
whether a phenomena is the same. Riesebrodt’s (2010,
p. 91) notion of religion, for example, that religions are
about
and
providing salvations” is derived from examining liturgies.
He argues that
liturgies provide access to actions that
people engage(d) in and they also hold clues to the meaning
that people gave to their actions. Stipulative deﬁnitions, on
the other hand, are not the outcome of study, but rather are
propositions that begin the study. According to Tweed,
they are less about determining the degree of truth or
falsehood, but rather their importance is about “usefulness”
for understanding the phenomena at hand. In a sense,
stipulative deﬁnitions (such as Geertz’s discussed in the
previous section) direct our attention in particular ways to
begin the process of analyzing phenomena, whether at the
level of the individual or of society. To a certain extent,
the difference between these two types of deﬁnitions is
situational more than qualitative.
the
question is not whether one type is better than the other, but
rather what kinds of questions one is asking. In other
words,
the scholar wants to
understand what religion is or what religion does.

In other words,

the question is whether

I will not provide my own deﬁnition here. There are a
number of accounts that I ﬁnd compelling that I use in the
course of teaching or researching different problems, and
the point of this chapter is not to provide a ﬁnal, universal
account of what religion is or does, but rather to explain the
contours of how it has worked. There is one other point I
want to make about deﬁnitions, however. While scholars
within the modern university have consistently studied
religion over the last 200 years, whether theologically or
not, the issue of what “religion” is and does has only been

19. I recognize a slippage in my writing between deﬁnitions and models.
As Tweed (2006, p. 42) notes, deﬁnitions imply theories, so a deﬁnition of
religion is really a theory of religion.

20. Functionalist deﬁnitions often have a hard time explaining the ways
that nationalism is or is not a religion, for example.

668 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

important at certain moments. For example, in the late 19th
century, during the period of high colonialism and faced
with the diversity of human practices and the problem of
governing them, religion and its essential nature was of
central concern.21 Another key moment was the late 1960s
and early 1970s when postwar
existentialism and
modernization theory encouraged scholars to think about
how religion functioned as a fundamental factor of meaning
making in human communities.22 A third moment has been
the posteCold War, during which we have seen the
reemergence of religion as a vital force in politics, whether
in the break up of Yugoslavia with its ethno-religious wars,
the religious right in US politics, or the anxiety over reli-
giously inspired “terror.”23 The problems scholars were
concerned with during these moments have been different,
but they have been inspired to deﬁne and think about the
nature of religion at moments when the nature of society is
in question, suggesting that religion (or “religion”) is at the
heart of society.

CLASSIFYING RELIGION AS A PROJECT
OF SECULAR MODERNITY

religions: Christianity,

While we might suggest
that deﬁning “religion” is a
modern project, classifying religion is something that
people have done for a very long time, if not throughout
history. Often this classiﬁcation has been little more than a
distinction between your religion and my religion, though
this has often had a moral valence. J. Z. Smith writes about
pre-Columbian Christian taxonomies of religion in this
vein. There were four
Islam,
Judaism and Other. These were internal accounts of be-
lievers, and as a result, this taxonomy could be glossed as
one good, true religion, two traditions that were differently
defective, and everything else that did not ﬁt in the ﬁrst
three (Smith, 2004, p. 187). Similarly, from at least the
Ming dynasty in the 14th century, the imperial Chinese
government differentiated between “ofﬁcial” and “popular”
religion. Ofﬁcial forms were those that were prescribed in
legal documents and included the many ofﬁcial rites that
the emperor was supposed to conduct (such as sacriﬁces to
Heaven and Earth or the imperial Ancestors). Popular

21. This can be seen in early anthropologists such as such as E. B. Tylor,
who believed in evolutionary models of human cultures and argued that a
minimal deﬁnition of religion was a “belief in spiritual beings,” as well as
Orientalists such as Friedrich Max Müller who sought to use philological
methods to develop a “science of religions.” For discussion of the devel-
opment of Anthropology and Orientalism and their concern with religion,
see Masuzawa (2005, pp. 15e17).
22. See footnote 18 above.
23. It is during this period that we see Asad’s (1993) critique of Geertz
discussed earlier, as well as a number of scholars critiquing Huntington’s
(1996) argument about the “clash of civilizations.” See also Casanova
(1994), Juergensmeyer (2003), and Lincoln (2003).

essentially

heterogeneous with

religion included a diverse array of cults to individual gods
and goddesses, as well as the Buddhists and Taoists that
were not regulated by the state (Taylor, 1990, p. 128). This
taxonomy was
two
categories: orthodox state forms and everything else. At the
same time, “everything else” was divided into tolerable and
intolerable forms (the latter was referred to “heterodox” or
xiejiao).24 There was another important taxonomy within
late imperial China that was referred to as the san jiao, the
“three teachings.” The san jiao, which referred to
Buddhism, Taoism, and Confucianism, was an idea that
saw these three religions as uniﬁed at their core. This is
similar to, but not quite the same as contemporary views of
religion. Where in much contemporary understanding,
religions are seen (often unreﬂexively) as being essentially
the same type of social phenomena, the san jiao were seen
as authoritative teachings which differed on the surface, but
fundamentally partook of the same essence.25

There is an important shift that happens over the course
of the 18th and 19th century that affects the way that the
classiﬁcation of religion takes place. This is the develop-
ment of the idea of the secular, of which religion is a central
component. In general terms, the narrative of secularization
is a familiar one (perhaps too familiar). After the Wars of
Religion and the Peace of Westphalia that followed in the
mid-17th century, religion was increasingly relegated to the
private sphere. The development, which involved a
disembedding of
religious ideologies from the public
sphere, was a long process that took several hundred years,
and indeed has never been a completely realized project
(Keddie, 2003, pp. 17, 20). However,
in the common
narrative as areas of knowledge emerged from the control
of church authority, “liberated from the sphere of
religion. [n]ew sciences bec[a]me viable and effective as
ways of understanding European society” (Masuzawa,
2005, p. 16). As this was taking place, while speciﬁc
religions remained part of society, the idea of religion as a
distinct aspect of society (or indeed human nature) was also
emerging (again, Durkheim plays an important part in this).
What religion was, as I have already discussed, was not and
is not always clear, but there was a clear idea that religion
was a distinct phenomenon that itself becomes an object of
study. In other words, the very concept of religion, the
development of the “isms” we call the world religions, and
the idea that these share a common nature, these ideas

24. Brook (2009) suggests that there is signiﬁcant continuity between Qing
dynasty (1644e1911) regulation of “religion” and what was implemented
within the modern Chinese state. On the reimportation of xiejiao as a
category of governance by the early 21st century Communist government
of China, see Palmer (2008).
25. In this, the idea of the san jiao was more like the idea articulated by
Max Müller (1870, p. 14) that all religions were reﬂective of the sacred or
divine (this was in the hierocentric mode to use Josephson’s terms), and
that religion is the human “faculty of apprehending the Inﬁnite.”

emerge as a fundamental part of the idea of the secular
world (Masuzawa, 2005; Gottschalk, 2013, p. 6).26

The classiﬁcation of religions by European scholars
began in earnest in the 18th century, part of the “great urge
to classiﬁcation” that delineated both the religions of the
world and classiﬁed them according to shared characteris-
tics (Gottschalk, 2013, p. 22). According to Smith (2004, p.
186), this was part of an explosion of data which entered
European spheres as a result of colonialism, and classifying
religions was a part of an effort to determine if religion
should be spoken of in the singular or pluraldthat is,
religion or religions. Scholars developed a number of
different models for classifying religions during this period,
dividing religions sometimes theocentrically, sometimes
according to other criterion.27 A. M. Fairbairn, for example,
divided religions into “Spontaneous or Natural Religions”
and “Instituted Religions.” Among the former were
“Primitive Naturalisms” such as early Greeks, Hindus, or
Slavs, and “Transformed Naturalisms” which included
Romans, Egyptians, and Ancient Chinese. Another model,
developed by Cornelius Petrus Tiele in Outline of
the
History of Religion to the Spread of Universal Religions
(1876), organized religions according to the levels that they
had attained, dividing religions into “natural religion” and
“ethical religions.” Natural religions had three branches in
Tiele’s model: “magical religions under the control of
animism”; “puriﬁed or organized magical religions”; and
“anthropomorphic polytheism.” Among the ﬁrst were
“savages and uncivilized peoples”; the second included the
Kami of Japan and the Finns; and the last included the
Vedic religions. The “ethical religions” in Tiele’s account
were divided into “race” or “national” religions such as
Taoism and Confucianism or Brahmanism and “universal-
istic religious communities,” which included just Islam,
Buddhism, and Christianity. In Smith’s account, the shift
from theocentric to hierocentric models of religion (ie, the
shift
to the sacred or ultimate concerns
described earlier) came less from a desire to de-Christianize
religion than to grapple with the complexity of the religions
that scholars encountered. These 19th century classiﬁca-
tions were morphological but not evolutionary;
they
depended on hierarchical notions and assumptions that
religions had attained higher or lower states, but
they
tended not to be focused on historical change that evolution
demonstrates. In many of these models, Christianity (and in
particular Protestant Christianity) was either implicitly or
explicitly the highest form.

from god(s)

History and Diversity of Religion Chapter | 39 669

There was another way of classifying religion that
became prevalent in the 20th century, which was to think
about religion in relation to related but somewhat different
terms, such as magic, superstition, spirituality, and science.
Like deﬁning religion, there were ways in which this was
done prior to the development of secular modernity (such
as when the Chinese imperial government declared a
movement to be unorthodox), but the relationship between
these different categories takes on a particularly important
turn with the emergence of secular forms of knowledge
(and the self-conscious view that these forms of knowledge
are secular and “scientiﬁc,” and not religious). The rela-
tionship between magic and religion, for example, was one
that scholars explored in a variety of ways in the late 19th
and early 20th centuries. While this can be seen as an issue
within the models classifying religions above, it took a
more speciﬁc direction in works like The Golden Bough
(ﬁrst written in 1890), James George Frazer’s (1959)
multivolume study into the nature of magic and religion
that human societies naturally progressed from magic to
religion to science. Several decades later, the anthropologist
Bronislaw Malinowski
removed the evolutionary (or
perhaps better developmental) framework that Frazer used
and talked about magic and religion as serving different
functions within “primitive” societies.
Instead of pro-
gressing from one to the other, magic served as a type of
primitive science, while religion provided a community
with its meaningful aspects, reintegrating the community
after a death, for example (Malinowski, 1992).

is

knowledge

There is a pejorative aspect to this, of course, that is
related to the unspoken discourse of the secular which is
“scientistic,” in that scientiﬁc ideas are hegemonic, and the
language within which
articulated
(Gottschalk, 2013, p. 29; Asad, 1993). Within the context
of the secular modern, belief has been privileged over
ritual, and science over religion. This took form in the
English speaking world as a privileging of the Protestant
focus on beliefs over Catholic ritualism.28 This has not just
affected how Protestant forms are described; it has also had
a signiﬁcant impact on how scholars have studied religions
like Buddhism as well. There has been a tendency within
the study of Buddhism to privilege what are seen as the
words of the Buddha over the lives of Buddhists because
living Buddhists in Southeast Asia, for example, were often
seen as being overly embedded in magical frameworks
(Hallisey, 1995). These
“protestant presuppositions”
(Schopen, 1997) led scholars to presume that the Pali canon
of Theravada Buddhism could be read uncritically as

26. Most forms of modernization theory, with the idea that religion will
disappear as societies modernize, mistakenly hold that secularization is an
inevitable historical process.
27. Information from this section comes from Smith (2004, pp. 186e191,
esp. 189e191).

28. Anti-Catholic sentiments in England and the United States are
complicated, and are as much about sovereignty and ethnicity as they are
about attitudes towards ritual and magic. However, anxiety over ritualistic
forms and the magic that is situated within the veneration of saints, for
example, should be seen as complementary.

670 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

reﬂecting the world in which the Buddha taught, rather than
as an ideological account of how certain followers of the
Buddha imagined it.29 Moreover, early scholars of Bud-
dhism were as likely to see Buddhism as a “philosophy” as
a religion, because of its rationalist forms. This meant that
phenomena such as the amulets and images in my
Bangkok taxi cab were seen as “corruptions” of the rational
philosophy of the Buddha. In recent decades, however, in
line with the turn to the “quotidian” (Tweed, 2015),
scholars have argued rightly that practices that are nega-
tively referred to as “magical” are central
to Buddhist
worlds (see, eg, McDaniel, 2011).

The concept of religion should thus be seen not as
a single concept, but rather one that
is in relationship
with other concepts. Peter van der Veer has suggested
that we see “religion-magic-secularity-spirituality” as a
“syntagmatic chain,” a series of terms that are “connected,
belong to each other, but cannot replace each other. They
do not possess stable meanings independently from one
another and thus cannot be simply deﬁned separately. They
emerge historically together,
imply one another, and
function as nodes within a shifting ﬁeld of power” (van der
Veer, 2014, p. 9). These concepts, to which we should also
add science and superstition,30 are often also hierarchically
oriented and sometimes have a moral valence as well. Thus
“religion” is superior to “magic” or “superstition” but
inferior to “science” and sometimes “spirituality.”31

THE DEVELOPMENT AND USE OF
“RELIGION” IN EAST ASIA IN THE 19TH
AND 20TH CENTURIES

In this last section, I want to turn to several different aspects
of how religion has developed in Asian communities over
the past 150 years. This has not been a straightforward
process and has entailed both the appropriation and impo-
sition of the categories of religion, superstition, science, etc.
onto the religious worlds of communities throughout Asia.
Often a top-down process, it has deeply impacted how
people conceptualize and live their
religions. While
religions have been present within Asia for many centuries,
the conceptual framework of religion was not. Indeed,
religion was a word that was not present in the modern

29. This should not be taken as a pejorative statement about the Buddhist
texts. Rather it is a statement that they are interested and foster a particular
position about the nature of reality. While they can provide clues to
conditions in early Buddhist communities, they should not be read as
historical accounts (according to historical disciplines) any more than the
gospels of the Christian Bible should be read as reﬂecting historical
experience.
30. In China, in the 1920s, for example, modernizers and nationalists often
saw religion/tradition as an impediment to the development of Modern
China, precisely because it was seen in opposition to science.
31. On spirituality, see Huss (2014).

sense of the word in Asia prior to colonialism (for the
majority of Southern Asia, colonialism begins in the latter
part of the 18th century; for East Asia, it is from the
mid-19th century). While it is now a concept that has been
fully indigenized, this was a process that took decades. It
began with the need to invent a word; in some places this
was done by modifying an existing concept. For example in
Hindi, “religion” is the word dharma. Prior to the modern
era, dharma had many meanings, such as “truth,” “law,”
and “duty.” Many of these meanings have resonances with
the ways that religion can be deﬁned (and indeed some
of these meanings for dharma can still be attested to).
Similarly, some Southeast Asians such as Thais and Khmer
who followed Theravada forms of Buddhism appropriated
the word sasana, which classically has meant “the teach-
ings of the Buddha,” to designate “religion.” In East Asia,
scholars and ofﬁcials took a different direction, using a
fairly obscure Chinese Buddhist term and repurposing it to
mean “religion.” This was done in Japan ﬁrst, in an effort to
translate treaties into Japanese, using the term shukyo
(Josephson, 2012). Somewhat later in the midst of their
own modernization and efforts to oppose colonialism,
Chinese scholar/ofﬁcials reappropriated this term, using a
Chinese reading (zongjiao).

shukyo,

zongjiao,

in at

least

“Religion,” whether

sasana, or
dharma, has now been fully indigenized throughout Asia,
and it now has a fairly stable meaning, even though the
connotations may vary across the region. However, this
was not the case in the latter decades of the 19th century
and early 20th century. Not only was this a new word and
concept that was imported into the region, but it was also
unclear exactly what was the phenomena to which it
referred. This uncertainty was relevant
two
different ways. First, while Christianity was the primary
model for the term, for the ﬁrst half of the 20th century, and
particularly in the 1920s, Chinese scholars debated what the
term meant and which aspects of Chinese culture it
governed. According to the scholar/ofﬁcial
in question,
zongjiao might mean Christianity, a positive ideology at the
heart of the nation, or superstition (in the sense of a false
ideology or science).
the
Communist victory in 1949 that the last sense of religion
became stable in the use of the word. Second, to the degree
that there were several different religions in Asia, it was not
clear which of these could be accurately described using the
term zongjiao. The clearest example of this in China was
whether or not Confucianism was to be understood as a
religion. In the European and American academies of the
late 19th century, Confucianism was widely understood to
be an example of a religion, but this was not as clear to
Chinese people, and certainly not to the Qing government.
During the Parliament of World Religions in Chicago in
1892, a representative of the Qing government came to
speak about Confucianism. Peng Guangyu,
the First

it was only after

Indeed,

that

Secretary of the Legation of the Qing government
in
Washington, DC, argued that Confucianism was not a
zongjiao (religion), but rather an authoritative teaching
(jiao) about the proper human relations between ruler and
subject (van der Veer, 2014, p. 86). Moreover, he denied
the legitimacy of the concept of the san jiao which linked
Buddhism, Taoism, and Confucianism, rejecting not the
metaphysical aspects of Confucianism, but
these
should be understood as a “religion” or equivalent to other
such teachings. Several years later, however, one of the
most important ofﬁcials of the Qing government, Kang
Youwei, sought to recast Confucianism as a religion along
the lines of Protestant Christianity,
in part because he
believed that powerful nations had religions at their roots
and that the way for the Qing to resist Western imperialism
was to reform the national ideology (Sun, 2013, pp. 21e22;
see also Pﬁster, 2015). That
these reforms failed is
incidental
the nature of
Confucianism was and indeed is a matter of debate among
the
people in the Chinese sphere (including not
just
People’s Republic, but Taiwan, Hong Kong,
and
Singapore, as well as the Chinese diaspora in Europe and
North America).

that how to label

to the fact

The indigenization of “religion” in Japan during the
same period is comparable in broad terms, but it entailed a
different outcome. When Japan was forced to accept
relations with European and American powers in the 1850s,
this precipitated the fall of
the Tokugawa Shogunate
(1600e1868). The Tokugawa had used things we call
religion effectively for more than two centuries to control
the population and reinforce its authority. Their tools were
primarily Confucian ideologies focused on social hierarchy
and state authority, and also compulsory afﬁliation with
Buddhist temples. The fall of the Tokugawa Shogunate and
the rise of a nationalist
imperial government with the
Meiji emperor as the head of state led in turn to a dises-
tablishment of Buddhism from the national government.
Shukyo initially emerged as a concept because Western
powers sought to establish freedom of religion, so that
Christian missionaries could engage in mission activities
(Josephson, 2012). However,
the category was actively
taken up by Japanese nationalists (along with other terms
like “technology” and “science”) who believed they needed
these concepts
to modernize the nation and resist
colonialism. Later in the century, the Meiji government
sought
to use religious ideologies to foster national
construction, in particular Shinto (for the same reason that
Kang Youwei sought to make Confucianism a state religion
in China a few years later). Yet in a bit of legerdemain, the
Meiji government determined in 1882 that Shinto had two
parts, “shrine Shinto” and “sect Shinto.” The shrines of
shrine Shinto were state institutions and declared to be
about the nation, not religious (Earhart, 2004, p. 167).
The upshot of this was that the Meiji government used a

History and Diversity of Religion Chapter | 39 671

“political religion” (Gentile, 2006) as its mobilizing force,
but because it was not a “religion” in ways that resembled
Christianity,
it
supported “freedom of religion.”32

the government could still declare that

registered times.34 This does not exhaust

The way in which “religion” is handled within the
Reform-era People’s Republic of China (PRC; 1979e
present) is perhaps more telling of the complexities that
I have been discussing. While the Chinese Communist
Party (CCP) is formally opposed to religion, since the end
of the Mao era, they have generally recognized that it is
better to try and regulate religion than it is to extirpate it,
the primary policy goal during the Cultural Revolution
(1966e1976).33 In the past 45 years,
there have been
swings back and forth, but in general, the Party-State has
tolerated what it calls “normal religion.” Normal religions
in China include Buddhism, Taoism, Christianity, Islam,
and Catholicism, and people are allowed to practice these
religions openly as long as this is done in registered places
at
religious
practice in China however. There is a vast ocean of popular
religious practice that does not easily fall under
the
designation of “normal religion”; this is sometimes, though
not always referred to as “feudal superstition” (fengjian
mixin). Part of the CCP’s regulatory efforts have been
based on manipulating the deﬁnition of religion to its own
ends.
the CCP declared, “All worship of
supernatural forces can be called superstition. Religions are
superstition, but
it cannot be said that all superstitions
are religions. For example, no kinds of feudal superstitions
are religions” (Lancashire, 1981, p. 277). The CCP has over
the years used this deﬁnition as a mechanism of control.
Essentially what counts as “religion” and what counts as
“superstition” (or worse as an “evil cult”) varies according
to how the CCP perceives its needs. Interestingly, though,
for
occasionally these deﬁnitions can provide cover
religious practitioners. For example, popular
religious
groups, which fall into a grey zone of regulation, have
sometimes sought to have themselves redeﬁned as “Taoist”
or as “Buddhist” so that they are given a legal standing.
This entails some tradeoffs, though, because once they are
registered as such, they are no longer vulnerable to political
movements against “superstition,” but they are subject to
greater regulatory scrutiny (Chau, 2009).

In 1978,

32. It is perhaps worth noting that this distinction that shrine Shinto was
not religious was largely disbelieved by non-Japanese, and is speciﬁcally
rejected in the “peacetime” Constitution imposed by the United States after
World War II.
33. For a clear articulation of the CCP’s post-Mao policy, see “Document
19: The Basic Viewpoint and Policy on the Religious Question during Our
Country’s Socialist Period” (MacInnis, 1989, pp. 8e25).
34. The policy has relaxed over time, but it is not clear that it is a fully
liberalizing one. As Pitman Potter (2003) put it, there is still a signiﬁcant
“belief in control.”

672 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

CONCLUDING THOUGHTS

Why does this matter
in relation to my taxi driver
in Bangkok? He was articulating a position that is not
uncommon, and that would seem to be exactly what we
would expect. Religion is about ethics, about being good,
and there are two types of people: religious and not
religious. This does not really seem to say anything about
the history and diversity of religion. To the contrary,
however, what this man was articulating to me in the spring
of 2014 was precisely the product of the last century and a
half, of the formation of the secular, and the idea that
“religion” is a natural category that articulates certain kinds
of actions and attitudes. My point is not that this is an
unreasonable thing to think (or rather not to think, because
it was not something that he had to think about). Rather, it
is that this is a relatively new attitude, and that coming to
think this way is an effect of processes of governance,
education, and the wider development of the world in
which we live. Rather than seeing things as true or not true,
we have come to see religions as a series of similar
phenomena that we have a choice about.

taxi

driver)

or

(like my

Not everyone thinks about “religion.” Indeed, most
people do not; rather they pay attention to the ways that
their own speciﬁc religion develops, and perhaps is
perceived. For the vast majority of insiders, the salient
categories are not different types of religions, but rather
religion/not-religion
the
moral variation within the syntagmatic chain of religion-
magic-superstition-science. Those that do think about
“religion” have been primarily scholars and state actors, the
former presumably to understand society and the latter to
govern and/or control it. While these are different kinds of
projects, it should be clear from what has been said that
these projects sometimes overlap. Scholars in the human
sciences were deeply involved in colonial projects up
through the end of European colonialism.
in
important ways, scholarship about religion is the very
product of the colonial enterprise (Gottschalk, 2013), just
as anthropology developed in the need to understand (and
control) the peoples that were colonized (Masuzawa, 2005).
This overlap of state and scholarly projects has persisted
through the Cold War (Wax, 2008; Ford, 2012), and indeed
into the posteCold War era, including the “Human Terrain
System,” the US Department of Defense’s efforts to use
Anthropologists in the “war on terror.” Scholars have of
course been critical of these efforts, just as they have taken
part in them.

Indeed,

The point is that the concept of religion is inevitably
framed by politics. This chapter has sought to argue that
before discussion of diversity of religious practices and
institutions begins, the way in which religion is understood
has to be interrogated. Religious practices and communities
are not always political in nature; indeed sometimes they

are apolitical or even antipolitical. However, the nature of
religion, the assumptions around the category, the concepts
that are part of its web of relations, what counts as
religion, and how those deﬁnitions and classiﬁcations are
implemented through scholarly and/or popular discourse or
governing practices are inevitably shaped by the politics of
the day.

REFERENCES

Asad, T., 1993. Genealogies of Religion. Princeton University Press,

Princeton, NJ.

Berger, P., 1967. The Sacred Canopy: Elements of a Sociological Theory

of Religion. Doubleday, Garden City, NY.

Brodd, J., Nystrom, L.L.B., Platzner, R., Shek, R., Stiles, E., 2013.

Invitation to World Religions. Oxford University Press, New York.

Brook, T., 2009. The politics of religion: late-imperial origins of the
regulatory state. In: Ashiwa, Y., Wank, D. (Eds.), Making Religion,
Making the State. Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA.

Casanova, J., 1994. Public Religions in the Modern World. University of

Chicago Press, Chicago.

Casas, B., 1992 [1552]. In: Stafford Poole, C.M. (Ed.), Defense of the

Indians. Northern Illinois University Press, DeKalb, IL.

Chau, A., 2009. Expanding the space of popular religion: local temple
activism and the politics of legitimation in contemporary Rural China.
In: Ashiwa, Y., Wank, D.L. (Eds.), Making Religion, Making the
State: The Politics of Religion in Modern China. Stanford University
Press, Stanford, CA.

Chidester, D., 1996. Savage Systems: Colonialism and Comparative
Religion in Southern Africa. University of Virginia Press, Charlot-
tesville, VA.

Deming, W., 2005. Rethinking Religion: A Concise Introduction. Oxford

University Press, New York.

Deming, W. (Ed.), 2015. Understanding the Religions of the World: An

Introduction. Wiley Blackwell, West Sussex, UK.

Dikötter, F., 1992. The Discourse of Race in Modern China. Stanford

University Press, Stanford, CA.

Durkheim, E., 2001. Elementary Forms of the Religious Life. Oxford

University Press, Oxford.

Earhart, B., 2004. Japanese Religion: Unity and Diversity, fourth ed.

Wadsworth, Belmont, CA.

Eliade, M., 1959. The Sacred and the Profane: The Nature of Religion.

Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, San Diego, CA.

Ellwood, R.S., McGraw, B.A., 2005. Many Peoples, Many Faiths: Women
and Men in the World Religions, eighth ed. Pearson/Prentice Hall,
Upper Saddle River, NJ.

Ford, E., 2012. Cold War Monks: An International History of Buddhism,
Politics and Regionalism in Thailand and Southeast Asia 1941e1976
(Ph.D. dissertation). Yale University.

Frazer, J.G., 1959. In: Gaster, T.H. (Ed.), The New Golden Bough.

Criterion Books, New York.

Geertz, C., 1973. The Interpretation of Cultures: Selected Essays. Basic

Books, New York.

Gentile, E., 2006. Politics as Religion. Princeton University Press,

Princeton, NJ.

Gottschalk, P., 2013. Religion, Science and Empire: Classifying Hinduism

and Islam in British India. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

History and Diversity of Religion Chapter | 39 673

Hallisey, C., 1995. Roads taken and not taken in the study of Theravada
Buddhism. In: Lopez, D. (Ed.), Curators of the Buddha: The Study
of Buddhism Under Colonialism. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, IL.

Huntington, S.P., 1996. The Clash of Civilization and the Remaking of the

World Order. Simon & Shuster, New York.

Huss, B., 2014. Spirituality: the emergence of a new cultural category and
its challenge to the religious and the secular. Journal of Contemporary
Religion 29 (1), 47e60.

Josephson, J.A., 2012. The Invention of Religion in Japan. University of

Chicago Press, Chicago.

Juergensmeyer, M., 2003. Terror in the Mind of God: The Global Rise of

Religious Violence. University of California Press, Berkeley.

Keddie, N., 2003. Secularism and its discontents. Daedulus 132 (3),

14e30.

European sinology. In: Jansen, T., Klein, T., Meyer, C. (Eds.),
Globalization and the Making of Religious Modernity in China:
Transnational Religions, Local Agents and the Study of Religion,
1800-Present. Brill, Leiden.

Potter, P., 2003. Belief in control: regulation of religion in China. In:
Overmyer, D. (Ed.), Religion in China Today. Cambridge University
Press, New York.

Riesebrodt, M., 2010. The Promise of Salvation: A Theory of Religion.

University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Indian Buddhism.

Schopen, G., 1997. Archeology and protestant presuppositions in the study
of
In: Bones, Stones and Buddhist Monks:
Collected Papers on the Archeology, Epigraphy, and Texts of
Monastic Buddhism in India. University of Hawai’i Press, Honolulu.
Sen, R., 2010. Articles of Faith: Religion, Secularism and the Indian

Supreme Court. Oxford University Press, Delhi.

Lancashire, D., 1981. Chinese Essays on Religion and Faith. Chinese

Smith, W.C., 1978. The Meaning and End of Religion. Harper and Row,

Materials Center, San Francisco.

San Francisco.

Lincoln, B., 2003. Holy Terrors. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Lincoln, B., 2012. The (Un)discipline of religious studies. In: Gods and
Demons, Priests and Scholars: Critical Explorations in the History of
Religions. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Smith, J.Z., 2004. Religion, religions, religious. In: Relating Religion:
Essays in the Study of Religion. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.

Sullivan, W.F., 2005. The Impossibility of Religious Freedom. Princeton

MacInnis, D.E., 1989. Religion in China Today: Policy and Practice. Orbis

University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Books, Maryknoll, NY.

Sun, A., 2013. Confucianism as a World Religion: Contested Histories and

Malinowski, B., 1992 [1948]. Magic, Science and Religion and Other

Contemporary Realities. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Essays. Waveland Press, Prospect Heights, IL.

Tanaka, S., 1993. Japan’s Orient: Rendering Pats into History. University

Masuzawa, T., 2005. The Invention of World Religions, or, How Euro-
pean Universalism Was Preserved in the Language of Religion.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

McDaniel, J.T., 2011. The Lovelorn Ghost and the Magical Monk:
Practicing Buddhism in Modern Thailand. Columbia University Press,
New York.

Müller, F.M., 1870. Lectures on the Science of Religion.
Oxtoby, W.G., Amore, R.C. (Eds.), 2010. World Religions: Eastern

Traditions, third ed. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Palmer, D., 2008. Heretical doctrines, reactionary secret societies, evil
cults: labeling heterodoxy in twentieth-century China. In: Yang, M.
(Ed.), Chinese Religiosities: Afﬂictions of Modernity and State
Formation. University of California Press, Berkeley.

Pattana, K., 2012. Mediums, Monks and Amulets: Thai Popular Buddhism

Today. Silkworm Books, Chiang Mai, Thailand.

of California Press, Berkeley.

Taylor, R., 1990. Ofﬁcial and popular religion and the political organi-
zation of Chinese society in the ming. In: Liu, K.C. (Ed.), Orthodoxy
in Late Imperial China. University of California Press, Berkeley.

Tillich, P., 1958. Dynamics of Faith. Harper, New York.
Tweed, T., 2006. Crossing and Dwelling. Harvard University Press,

Cambridge, MA.

Tweed, T., 2015. After the quotidian turn: interpretive categories and
scholarly trajectories in the study of religion since the 1960s. The
Journal of Religion 95 (3), 361e385.

Veer, P.v.d., 2014. The Modern Spirit of Asia: The Spiritual and the
Secular in China and India. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Wax, D. (Ed.), 2008. Anthropology at the Dawn of the Cold War: The
Inﬂuence of Foundations, McCarthyism and the CIA. Pluto Press,
London.

Pﬁster, L., 2015. A modern ruist religious vision of a global unity: Kang
Youwei’s Utopian vision and its humanistic religious refraction in

Young, W.A., 2005 [1995]. The World’s Religions: Worldviews and
Contemporary Issues. Pearson Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.

Chapter 40

Religion Viewed From Different Sciences

G.M. Verschuuren
Genesis P.C., LLC, Atkinson, NH, United States

WHAT IS SCIENCE AND WHAT IS
RELIGION?

When speaking of science, people often have very
different connotations and denotations in mind. Most
agree that physics and chemistry are sciences. But what
about psychoanalysis,
to just mention one case of
disagreement? Even certain parts of the life sciences are
questioned by some as deserving to be called science.
Then there are some so-called sciences that are hardly
experimentaldwith astronomy on one side and paleon-
tology at the other end. Apparently, there is a great deal of
disagreement as to what science entails. Some say it is a
systematic enterprise that builds and organizes knowledge
in the form of
testable explanations and predictions.
Others have a broader conception which embraces all
knowledge of the type that can be rationally explained and
reliably applied.

So, which are the ﬁelds then that should qualify to be
called “science”? I am not going to be the judge in this
case. Who can anyway? In this article, I will limit myself to
the so-called “hard” sciences or “natural” sciences such as
physics, chemistry, and biologydbecause they are often
seen as hostile or even lethal to religion. (But something
similar could also be said about psychology, to name just
another ﬁeld.) I will not give in to the temptation of crafting
a comprehensive deﬁnition of science.

It should not be surprising that

there is even more
controversy when it comes to religion. A very broad deﬁ-
nition considers religion as an organized collection of be-
liefs, cultural systems, and world views that relate humanity
to an order of existence. It is a deﬁnition that is typically
used in religious study courses; it is basically a sociological
deﬁnition (Geertz, 1993). Then there are psychological
deﬁnitions in terms of spirituality and self-transcendence
(eg, Cloninger, 2004).

My problem with these kinds of deﬁnitions is that reli-
gion is reduced to some form of cultural or social system. It
is like studying science as a (merely) sociological or psy-
chological phenomenonda set of convictions, rules, and
problem-solving techniques. Names that come to mind are
Robert K. Merton, Thomas S. Kuhn, and Stephen E. Toul-
min. What these approaches have in common is that they
ignore, or even deny, that science is (also) about a reality
beyond the system of science. In a similar way, religion too
refers to something beyond the belief system of religion.
What almost all religions have in common is that they refer
to (the existence of) a Transcendent Being, usually called
God.
this entails a factual
statementdeither God is or God is not, either God exists or
God does not exist. If God does not exist, our facts are
wrong. Therefore, my choice deﬁnition is as follows: Reli-
gion is about transcendence and about the transcendent one,
Goddmore in speciﬁc about a relationship between Creator
and creature. I will come back to this deﬁnition later.

is hard to deny that

It

The question we have to deal with now is whether
science leaves any room for religion in the sense just
described.

THERE WOULD BE NO ROOM FOR
RELIGION, IF SCIENCE COVERS ALL
THERE IS

Is there room for religion if religion refers to a transcen-
dent Being? Obviously not, if we take the position that
science covers all there is. If transcendence refers to the
aspect of God’s nature and power that is totally indepen-
dent of the material universe, beyond all physical laws,
then transcendencedor more precisely the object of
transcendencedis per deﬁnition beyond the reach of
empirical
therefore

experimental

or

science,

and

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00040-5
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

675

676 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

illegitimate, since science is supposed to cover all there is.
I am not talking here about a belief in transcendence, for
beliefs can be studied by sociologists, psychologists, his-
torians, and the like. So, if science does cover all there is,
then transcendencedand therefore religion, in the deﬁni-
tion mentioned earlierdis out of the question. But this
conclusion hinges on a questionable presuppositiond
namely, that science in fact covers all there is.

The view that science is all-comprehensive in covering all
there is has become rather prevalent nowadays and is usually
called scientism. It has been deﬁned as “the view that the
characteristic inductive methods of the natural sciences
are the only source of genuine factual knowledge and, in
particular, that they alone can yield true knowledge about
man and society” (Bullock and Trombley, 1999). Scientism is
widespread in scientiﬁc circles. It is one of the main reasons
why some scientists reject the validity and truth claims of
religion. Therefore, scientism deserves closer scrutiny.

Supporters of scientism claim that science provides the
only valid way of ﬁnding truth. They pretend that all our
questions have a scientiﬁc answer phrased in terms of
particles, quantities, and equations. Their claim is that there
is no other point of view than the “scientiﬁc” world-view.
They believe there is no corner of
the universe, no
dimension of reality, no feature of human existence beyond
its reach. In other words, they have a dogmatic, unshakable
belief in the omnicompetence of science.

A ﬁrst reason for questioning the viewpoint of scientism
is a very simple objection: those who defend scientism
seem to be unaware of the fact that scientism itself does not
follow its own rule. How could science ever prove all by
itself that science is the only way of ﬁnding truth? There is
no experiment that could do the trick. Science cannot pull
itself up by its own bootstraps any more than an electric
generator is able to run on its own power. So, the truth of
the statement “no statements are true unless they can be
proven scientiﬁcally” cannot itself be proven scientiﬁcally.
It is not a scientiﬁc discovery but at best a philosophical or
metaphysical stance. It declares everything outside science
as a despicable form of metaphysics, in deﬁance of the fact
that all those who reject metaphysics are in fact committing
their own version of metaphysics.

A second reason is that a method as successful as the one
science provides does not disqualify any other methods.
Scientism poses an exclusive claim that can only be made
from outside the scientiﬁc realm, thus grossly overstepping
the boundaries of science. If it is true, it becomes false. It
steps outside science to claim that there is nothing outside
science and that there is no other point of viewdwhich does
not seem to be a very scientiﬁc move. The late University of
California at Berkeley philosopher of science Paul Feyer-
abend (1975) comes to the opposite conclusion when he says
that “science should be taught as one view among many and
not as the one and only road to truth and reality.”

for

instance,

A third reason for rejecting scientism is the following.
Scientiﬁc knowledge does not even qualify as a superior
form of knowledge; it may be more easily testable than
other kinds, but it is also very restricted and therefore re-
quires additional
forms of knowledge. Mathematical
knowledge,
is the most secure form of
knowledge but it is basically about nothing. Consider the
analogy used by Edward Feser (2014): A metal detector is a
perfect tool to locate metals, but that does not mean there is
nothing more to this world than metals. Those who protest
that the analogy is no good, on the grounds that metal
detectors detect only part of reality while physics detects
the whole of it are simply begging the question again, for
whether physics really does describe the whole of reality is
precisely what is at issue. An instrument can only detect
what it is designed to detect. That is exactly where scien-
tism goes wrong: instead of letting reality determine which
reality,
techniques are appropriate for which parts of
scientism lets
is
considered “real” in lifedin denial of the fact that science
has purchased success at the cost of limiting its ambition.
To best characterize this restricted attitude, an image
used by the late psychologist Abraham Maslow (1966)
might be helpful: If you only have a hammer, every
problem begins to look like a nail. So, instead of idolizing
our “scientiﬁc hammer,” we should acknowledge that not
everything is a “nail.” Even if we were to agree that the
scientiﬁc method gives us better testable results than other
sources of knowledge, this would not entitle us to claim
that only the scientiﬁc method gives us genuine knowledge
of reality. Admittedly, it is true that if science does not go
to its limits, it is a failure, but it is equally true that, as soon
it becomes arrogantda
as science oversteps its limits,
know-it-all.

favorite technique dictate what

its

A fourth argument against scientism is that the pioneers
of science were very much aware of the fact that there is
more to life than science. When the Royal Society of
London was founded in 1660,
its members explicitly
demarcated their area of investigation and realized very
clearly that they were going to leave many other ﬁelds
untouched. In its charter, King Charles II assigned to the
fellows of the Society the privilege of enjoying intelligence
and knowledge, but with the following important stipula-
tion “provided in matters of things philosophical, mathe-
matical, and mechanical.”1 That’s how the “division of the
estate” was executed; it was this “partition” that led to a

1. The Royal Society originated on November 28, 1660, when 12 men met
to set up “a Colledge for
the promoting of Physico-Mathematicall
Experimentall Learning.” Robert Hooke’s draft of its statutes reads liter-
ally: “The Business and Design of the Royal Society is: To improve the
knowledge of natural things, and all useful Arts, Manufactures, Mechanik
practices, Engyries and Inventions by Experiments e (not meddling with
Divinity, Metaphysics, Moralls, Politicks, Grammar, Rhetorik, or Logic).”

Religion Viewed From Different Sciences Chapter | 40 677

division of labor between the natural sciences and other
ﬁelds of human interest. By accepting this separation, sci-
ence bought its own territory, but certainly at the expense of
inclusiveness;
the rest of the “estate” was reserved for
others to manage. On the one hand, it gave to scientists all
that could “methodically” be solved by counting and
measuring. On the other hand, these scientists agreed to
keep their hands off of all other domainsdreligion, edu-
cation, legislation, justice, ethics, and what have you.

If the previous objections against scientism are valid,
we must come to the conclusion that religion can still stand
tall next to science, unless.

THERE WOULD BE NO ROOM FOR
RELIGION IF THERE IS ONLY “MATTER”
IN THIS UNIVERSE

This centuries-old view has commonly been dubbed
materialism. It holds the view that all things are composed
(“matter”), and all phenomenadincluding
of material
consciousness and love, to name just a fewdare consid-
ered to be the result of material interactions. Not only does
materialism assert that matter is everywhere, but also that
matter is all there is. In other words, matter is supposedly
the only entity in this universe; and thus physical matter
has been declared the only fundamental reality in this
universe. Put in a nutshell, all things are composed of
matter and dust, or are the mere result of material
interactions.

Materialism is often associated with reductionism, ac-
cording to which the objects or phenomena individuated at
one level of description must be explicable in terms of the
objects or phenomena at a lower level of description. This
kind of reductionism frequently leads to popular statements
like these: an organism is really nothing but a bag of genes;
a human being is nothing but a string of DNA; human
beings are nothing but specks of dust; human beings are
nothing but machines made of meat; human values are
nothing but
thinking
is nothing but a series of ﬁrings along neurons; a human
being is only a bundle of instincts; love is nothing but a
chemical reaction; religion is nothing but a set of emotions
or even illusions. In general, all the previous statements
have one thing in common: the whole is nothing but the
sum of its material parts. C. S. Lewis (1980) famously
dubbed this as “nothing-butery.”

the outcome of natural selection;

What might be wrong with materialism, and its cousin,
reductionism? First of all, reductionism has an undisputed
preference for lower levels. But one could question why
explaining phenomena at “higher” levels, by referring to
entities at “lower” levels, could not be turned around by
explaining “lower” levels in terms of “higher” levels. The
late biologist Barry Commoner (1964) rightly noted that the

statement “the secret of DNA is life”dwith all
its
complexity of
as
least
compelling as the more popular slogan “the secret of life
is DNA.”

cellular organizationdis

at

Secondly, we are dealing here with a metaphysical
stance again. For some enigmatic and ironic reason,
materialism has quite a spiritual appeal to it. It is one thing
to use a sound methodology of searching for material
explanations, but it is something else to change such a
technique into a doctrine claiming there are no other
explanations than material explanations. Materialism is at
best a presupposition of scientists, but cannot possibly be a
conclusion based on empirical research.

A third problem arises from the following question:
what is it that gives matter such a powerful metaphysical
position? Materialism does not explain why our universe is
the way it is, or why it even exists at all. The cosmologist
Stephen Hawking (2002) once worded this as follows:
“You still have the question: why does the universe bother
to exist.” As a matter of fact, our universe need not be the
way it is, and it need not even exist (it is only in the dia-
lectical materialism of Marxism that matter is considered to
be the absolute). Choosing the option that there just is no
explanation is basically an irrational response that leaves
us stuck in a purely material, actually absurd universe. Take
the law of gravitydit may help us explain things, but it
cannot explain itself. Those who embrace materialism
cannot avoid the question as to how matter can ever explain
itself, its own existence. Matter cannot just pop up out of
nothing; nothing comes from nothing, as the saying goes.
Since I do not see how matter could ever explain itself, a
solely material universe is essentially an absurd, irrational,
and unexplainable universe, which is a stance that deﬁes
rationality.

Another reason for rejecting materialism is that it leads
to contradictions. The very idea that “nothing exists
except matter” is self-refuting because, if it were true,
neither it nor any other mental idea or claim would or
could exist; so it would deny its own existence. Those who
deny the existence of anything nonmaterial also deny the
existence of their very own denial since denials are
certainly immaterial as well. Claims like these just defeat
and destroy themselves, for they cut off the very branch
that the person who makes such claims isdor actually
wasdsitting on.

One of the consequences of this objection is the need
for making a distinction between mental activities and
neural activities. We cannot just deny the mental, because
denying the existence of mental activities is in itself a
mental activity, and thus would lead to contradiction. If
the mental were the same as the neural, thoughts could
never be true or false, as neural events simply happen, and
that is that! This is the paradox that the late British biol-
ogist J. B. S. Haldane (1928) worded as follows: “If my

678 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

mental processes are determined wholly by the motions
of atoms in my brain, I have no reason to suppose that
my beliefs are true. and hence I have no reason for
supposing my brain to be composed of atoms.” The
famous philosopher Thomas Nagel (2012) asserted that a
materialist conception of nature is almost certainly false,
except for those who deny that the mental is an irreducible
aspect of reality.

This leads yet to another objection against the world
view of materialism: Almost everyonedincluding most
scientistsdacknowledge that, separate from the material
world, there is also an immaterial world. Almost every
scientist accepts entities such as scientiﬁc laws and sci-
entiﬁc statements, hypotheses and theories,
truths and
falsehoods, all of which are nonmaterial entities. Curi-
ously enough, all scientiﬁc explanations based on laws of
nature are actually strange entitiesdthey explain material
things and events by using nonmaterial laws of nature
such as the law of gravity. Unlike all material things
surrounding us, laws of nature do not have any of the
features that apply to the material world. A law is not
located somewhere in space, not even in our minds, for the
mind just has a mental picture of the lawdyet a law holds
everywhere in this universe. It is also beyond time, a
timeless entity that cannot emerge nor perish in the history
of the universe. Neither are laws of nature subject
to
change, for they will always remain true, even before they
were discovered. Suddenly, we ﬁnd ourselves in a
nonmaterial world where things are not large or small,
light or heavy, hard or soft, but instead true or false, and
right or wrong. Scientiﬁc statements can be true or false,
but the things they are aboutdquarks, atoms, molecules,
cells, hormonesdare physical or material, but never true
or rational. How could there be truth to what science
claims if everything were merely material? If this question
is answered in the afﬁrmative, then there must be more
than what science is about.

It has become increasingly hard to deny that laws are
not something material, a mere brain wave or so, but rather
immaterialdcall them mental, spiritual, or whatever. I am
reluctant to call them mental as that adjective might sug-
gest they only exist in our minds (à la David Hume). On
the contrary, they are very “real” and exist outside the
mind. We may know them but we cannot create them; they
are there even before we know them. That is the reason
why a bridge designed according to the right laws does
stand ﬁrm, whereas another bridge collapses because its
engineers erred in their calculations or used the wrong
laws. That is also the reason why laws of nature have to be
discovered, not invented. Without such “given” laws, our
minds would not be able to tell true from false and right
from wrong.

If you agree with these objections, religion can still

stand tall next to science, unless.

THERE WOULD BE NO ROOM FOR
RELIGION IF SCIENCE CAN EXPLAIN
RELIGION AWAY

There have been many scientiﬁcdor arguably semi-
scientiﬁc or quasiscientiﬁcdattempts to explain religion
away. Probably the best-known example is declaring reli-
gion an “illusion”das Sigmund Freud would call itdor a
“delusion”das Richard Dawkins (2008) describes it. Did
these people effectively refute religion?

First of all, if Freud claims that basic beliefs are the
rationalization of our deepest wishes, would this not also
entail that his own atheistic beliefs could be the ration-
alization of his own desires as well? Second, even if belief
in God were wishful thinking, one could never prove that it
is nothing more than wishful thinking, for the simple reason
that absence of evidence is not evidence of absence. Third,
these declarations are more based on metaphysical con-
victions than empirical evidence. Ironically,
those who
currently consider religion a delusion often also deem
Freud’s psychoanalysis a pseudo-science. Fourth, the claim
that the brain created God could easily be countered with
the reversed claim that it was God who created the brain. If
this reversed claim is correct, we do not project a human
image onto heaven, but heaven shows us what human
beings can and should be like.

However, a more serious case was made by the human
geneticist Dean Hamer (2005). He theorized that if our
sense of spirituality has a genetic basis, then those who
rank higher in spirituality should share some genetic link
that those who rank lower do not. He measured spirituality
by using a “self-transcendence” scale developed by the
psychologist Robert Cloninger, in order to quantify how
“spiritual” someone is, based on the assumption that spir-
ituality can be quantiﬁed by psychometric measurements.
Hamer analyzed DNA and personality score data from over
1000 individuals, but limited his search for a “spiritual
gene” to nine genes known to produce monoamines and
then identiﬁed one particular gene, VMAT2, as showing a
signiﬁcant correlation with afﬁnity for spirituality. When he
analyzed this gene further, he discovered that those with the
nucleic acid cytosine in one particular spot on the gene
ranked high in spirituality, whereas those with the nucleic
acid adenine in the same spot ranked lower. So, the ques-
tion is: do we really have a discovery here?

First of all, gene VMAT2 is basically a “pump”
responsible for packaging a neurotransmitter for export
during brain activity. In that speciﬁc sense, it is arguably an
important gene, and its product may even be active when
someone has “religious experiences,” but that does not
make this gene a “god gene.” It is obvious that concepts of
God do reside in our brainsdthey certainly do not reside in
our toesdbut that does not tell us where they ultimately
come from. As an aside, one could even argue they do not

come from the brain but from the mind. This may not be
mainstream thinking, but some very sophisticated scientiﬁc
and philosophical thinkersdsuch as the Nobel laureate and
neurobiologist Sir John Eccles, the philosopher of science
and religion Richard Swinburne, and the philosopher of
science Sir Karl Popperdare mindebody dualists who take
the reality of the mental most seriously. Whether this does
entail dualism is another issue.

Second, when it comes to religion, the cultural envi-
ronment is particularly important, because religion is also a
trait of our culture and personality. However, it has been
proven to be hard to link individual genes to personalities,
so it is very doubtful if we can possibly link them to
religion. There are too many intervening steps involvedd
such as other genes, epigenetics, environmental effects on
gene expression, cultural factors, and personal factors
(see other chapters in this book)dto make such a
simplistic link. Some traits can be hereditary without
being genetic.

Third, Hamer (1994) has proved himself to be an expert
in inventing genesdonce it was a “gay gene,” now a “god
gene.” Unfortunately for him, the ﬁeld of behavioral ge-
netics is littered with failed links between particular genes
and behavioral traits. We have been bombarded with new
genes: a gene for alcohol addiction, a gene for homosex-
uality, a gene for schizophrenia, a gene for altruism, and
now even a gene for religiondthe list could go on and on.
Many of these were inventions that have never made it so
far to becoming discoveries. It
is also noteworthy to
mention that Hamer rushed into print with his book without
any peer review and without publishing his results in a
credible and reputable scientiﬁc journal.

Fourth, even if it were true that we are genetically hard-
wired for religion, what could this possibly mean? Clearly,
we are not hard-wired for a particular religion; there are
more than 7000 identiﬁed varieties. “Born a Catholic” does
not mean always a Catholic. Plenty are the cases of people
who, in the course of their lives, decided to become atheists
or decided the opposite by leaving atheism behind. Even if
some part of spirituality is wired in the brain, the forms and
practices of religion are still cultural and can be passed
from one person to another by learning or imitation and can
be changed by further experiences.

Fifth, it is very doubtful whether all this genetic talk has
actually anything to do with a Transcendent Being, God.
Perhaps genetics can tell us something about mystical ex-
periences, but the idea that people believe in God because
of mystical experiences is foolish. One need not feel any-
thing, let alone have a mystical experience, to believe in the
existence of God. Arguably, most individuals who believe
in God have never experienced God in a mystical way.
Quite a few believe in God, or reject God, for purely in-
tellectual reasons. Others simply have an intuitive aware-
ness of God’s existence. So, the label “god gene” is very

Religion Viewed From Different Sciences Chapter | 40 679

deceiving, to say the leastdwhich Hamer did acknowledge
himself, though.

Sixth, a “feeling of transcendence” is not necessarily a
religious experience, and if Hamer is right, it is in fact
merely a biological one. The monoamines involved in the
feeling of self-transcendence are the same monoamines that
are jumbled by ecstasy, LSD, and other mind-altering
drugs.
transcendence is a biological
experience rather than a religious experience, then studies
performed on that experience only tell us something about
biology, not religiondreligion being an experience in
terms of transcendence and the transcendent one, God.

If the feeling of

Seventh, all of this prompts the question as to why
Hamer wants to reduce religion and faith in God to
something else, to something like spiritual experiences. The
answer can perhaps be found in some underlying meta-
physical presuppositiondthat biology can fully explain
everything in life, including religious faith, beliefs, and
experiences. This presupposition is based on the view that
all reality can be reduced to a scientiﬁc explanationda
view we discussed earlier. True, if there is only material
stuff in this universe, there is no longer room for spiritual
realitydperhaps
and
sensationsdbut not for a reality behind and beyond those
experiences. Hence, the “spiritual allele” of the “god gene”
is not spiritual at all and can certainly not cause a religious
experience.
It may cause a natural sensation of self-
transcendence that some have unwittingly interpreted as
an encounter with the divine.

experiences

for

spiritual

If you agree with these objections, religion can still

stand tall next to science, unless.

THERE WOULD BE NO ROOM FOR
RELIGION IF WE GO BY THE “HARD”
FACTS

Many scientists believe that only science deals with what
they call the “hard” facts, whereas religion does not and
cannot. They come close to those who believe that, by
giving a mighty kick to a stone, they have proved the reality
of a “hard fact.” When scientists proclaim “the facts tell
us,” they often think the discussion is closed, but “in fact”
the discussion has just begun. Francis Crick (1990) was
right on target when he said, “A theory that ﬁts all the facts
is bound to be wrong, as some of the facts will be wrong.”
Facts are not the “rock-solid” or “hard core” realities most
people, including many scientists, think they are. So, let us
ﬁnd out what facts really are.

What is “out there” is not an assortment of rock-solid
facts, but rather a collection of things, situations, and
events; facts are merely our interpretations of the things
and events we encounter around usdthey are our way of
making them intelligible for us. Things and events may be
the “physical” parts of our world, perhaps even rock-solid,

680 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

but facts are “mental” creationsdthe interpretations of
things and events in our minds. To use a distinction we
discussed earlier, things and events are material entities, but
facts are nonmaterial entities. Apparently, we need a clear-
headed analysis ﬁrst before we can go any further.

Let us start with what we usually agree upon when it
comes to facts. Facts are supposed to be detached from time
and space; they are true regardless of who you are and
when and where you live; they appear as objective, abso-
lute, and universal. On the other hand, once we start
thinking and talking about them, facts seem to come back
into space and time, because thinking requires thoughts,
and talking requires statements. And that’s what makes the
situation so complicated, for now we end up with at least
four rather disparate elements: events, thoughts, statements,
and facts (White, 1970). How are they related, then?

Some people think that facts are the same as events,
which the latter they regard as the “objective,” “hard core”
elements of this universe. The main reason for thinking this
is that events seem the best candidates to offer us a rock-
solid foundation for our facts. True, events do happen or
do not happen; you can neglect them but not deny them. So
by replacing facts with events, we might think we have
found the strong objective foundation that we strive for.
However, facts and events are concepts very different from
each other. Unlike facts, events are dated, tied to space and
time, whereas facts are detached from space and time, as we
found out earlier. It is even considered a fact that certain
events did not occur; it is a fact, for instance, that Darwin
did not have a copy of Mendel’s 1866 article in his
collection. Apparently, a fact is not the same as an event;
the best we can say is that a fact is a description of an event,
but not the event itself.

This outcome has made some others claim that facts
must be merely thoughts, then, existing only in our minds
as something purely subjective. However, thoughts cannot
be equated to facts. Thoughts can have some peculiar
characteristics such as being imaginary, illogical, confused,
time-consuming, and so ondwhereas facts cannot. Facts,
on the other hand, deal with what the events actually are,
and not with what they might be. Facts are true, even if
some people have never thought about them. Facts are al-
ways about something outside our thoughts and refer to
something independent of our thinking. Therefore, a fact is
not just a thought, but it may be the object of a thought.

A third solution might be that facts are identical to what
people say about themdthat is, the same as (true) state-
ments. However, if that were the case, there would be as
many facts as there are statements (for instance, facts would
be different in English and Dutch). Obviously, facts have to
be clearly distinguished from statements. Statements can be
hypothetical,
long-winding, and
difﬁcult to understand, and so on. Facts, on the other hand,
cannot be any of these; a fact may be hard to accept, but

inaccurate, exaggerated,

never hard to understand; it is never hypothetical or half-
true. There are even facts which everyone has forgotten
or which were never expressed yet. Conclusion: a fact is
not a statement, but it may be the content of a statement.
From this analysis follows that we are facing here an
intricate situation: If facts are not events or thoughts or
statements, what then are they? Facts actually feature as a
focus point at the intersection of those three other elements:
A fact is not an event but the description of an event, not a
thought but the object of a thought, and not a statement but
the content of a statementdand these can apply all at the
same time. A more comprehensive deﬁnition of a fact could
be like this: A fact is the description of an event, the object
of a thought, and the content of a statement, all at once
(Verschuuren, 1986). Facts are closely connected to these
three other elements through the process of interpretation:
facts are interpretations of events by means of thoughts and
statements. It is through interpretation that thoughts and
statements transform events into facts. Facts need events so
they can be tested; they need thoughts so they can be un-
derstood; and they need statements so they can be dis-
cussed. Unlike things, events, and situations, facts are
nonmaterial entities.

What this abstract discussion makes clear is that facts
are always based on interpretations. If this is true, then there
is no factual information without interpretationdand as a
consequence, “no interpretation” would mean “no infor-
mation.” The more interpretation we inject, the more in-
formation we may provide, but also the more we need to
prove. When I describe a certain event taking place in the
sky as “Those are moving spots,” I do express a fact, but it
contains “empty” information, even though it is “safe” in-
formation. When I say, however, “Those are ﬂying birds,”
informationdand
my statement does convey additional
therefore I may need to come up with more evidence to
support my claim. And when I say, “Those are migrating
geese,” I inﬂate my information even more, thus making
my factual statement still more vulnerable.

Since facts are not objects like stones, we cannot bump
into them. Therefore,
there are no “hard core” facts,
because facts cannot be touched, heard, or seen; events and
things can, but facts cannot, as they are immaterial entities.
Facts are about something “rock-solid,” about something
beyond our control, but they are not rock-solid themselves,
since they have a man-made part, dependent on human
interpretation. Facts are mental entities, so there is nothing
physically solid about themdand yet, they are not purely
mental creations either, because they are about something
outside themselves, which is the ﬁnal touchstone of that
which a “fact” describes (otherwise they are not facts but
imaginary thoughts or so).

Unlike animals, which only live in a world of things and
events, human beings also live in a world of facts. By
stating facts, they always claim much more than what they

Religion Viewed From Different Sciences Chapter | 40 681

“observe.” In observation, one is both a passive “spectator”
and an active “creator” at the same time. “Facts” transform
“things” of the world into “objects” of knowledge; they
change experiences
thus enabling
humans to see with their “mental eyes” what no physical
eyes could ever see before. There would be no science
without them.

into observations,

HOW DO WE GET TO THE FACTS?

Getting to the facts is not as easy as opening your eyes.
That is the reason why there is so much discussion about
“the facts” in science. So, it should not really surprise us
that the high-standard scientiﬁc journal Nature published a
disturbing commentary claiming that in the area of pre-
clinical researchdwhich involves experiments done on
rodents or cells in petri dishes, with the goal of identifying
possible targets for new treatments in peopledindependent
researchers doing the same experiment could not get the
same results as reported in the scientiﬁc literature (Begley
and Ellis, 2012). Over 10 years, Amgen researchers could
reproduce the results from only 6 out of 53 landmark pa-
pers. And researchers at Bayer Healthcare reported that
only in 20e25% of 67 projects analyzed the relevant
published data were completely in line with their in-house
ﬁndings.

Since we look at

things as spectators, and then
change them into facts as creators, we do not “have”
observationsdlike we do have sensorial experiencesdbut
we “make” observations. Philosophical giants such as
Aristotle and Thomas Aquinas would put it this way: All
we know about the world comes through our senses but this
is then processed by the intellect that extracts from sensory
experiences that which is intelligible. It is through facts that
events become intelligible to us. Although we know the
world through sensations or sense impressions, they are just
the media that give us access to reality. The philosopher
John Haldane (2011) put it well when he said, “One only
knows about cats and dogs through sensations, but they are
not themselves sensations, any more than the players in a
televised football game are color patterns on a ﬂat screen.”
Knowledge does rest on sensation and experiment, but this
does not mean it is conﬁned to it.

Yet, “reality” remains the ultimate foundation of all we
know; so it should always be the ultimate touchstone of all
our interpretations. But there is a problem here. Since we
only know reality through (interpreted) facts, there is no
direct way of comparing facts with reality. How could we
ever compare “interpreted” facts with “hard core” reality if
we have no access to reality other than through interpre-
tation? How could we ever compare what we know with
what we do not know (yet)? How could we ever step
outside our knowledge and compare what we know with
what we do not know yet? Think of this analogy: How

would nearsighted individuals ever know that reality is not
as blurred as they see it? Certainly not by comparing their
own images with the “real” images, but perhaps by
comparing their own images with the images received
through different tools such as proper glasses.

The problem we have here is probably best expressed
by Plato: “How would you search for what is unknown to
you?” (Meno, 80d). Plato noticed a paradox here: We are in
search of something “unknown”dotherwise we would not
need to search anymoredand yet it must be “known” at the
same timedotherwise we wouldn’t know what to search
for, or would not even know if we had found what we were
searching for. That is the reason why we need hypothetical
statements based on concepts, which work like “search-
lights” that may help us illuminate what was in “darkness”
before. That’s how facts come about, in an interaction be-
tween thoughts, statements, and events. I borrowed the term
“searchlight” from the physicist and philosopher Karl
Popper (1979). As early as 1865,
the biologist Claude
Bernard (1957) had called a theory a “light” instead of an
absolute authority.

Some have objected that the facts we know are part of
our knowledge and therefore cannot be external to our
knowledge; consequently, speaking in terms of anything
“outside” our knowledge would be out of the question. In
such a view, however, knowledge is conceived as though it
were a box, allowing things only to be either inside or
outside the box. On the contrary, knowledge is certainly not
like a box. It may be best compared to a source of light, as
Edmund Husserl (1970) sees it; if a light beam hits a certain
thing that is in darkness, this thing will be in the light, and
yet it would not be inside the source of light.

Concepts are the “searchlights” we need in order to
search for new facts. Even such a simple process as
generalizing from “some” to “many” cases, and ultimately
to “all” similar casesdas is done in inductiondis based on,
well. similarity! However, similarity is not visible until
we know already what these cases have in common. We
need to identify ﬁrst what is relevant to our problem, for
similarity cannot be established until it has been identiﬁed
in a word ﬁrst, or actually in a concept. Before we can
“notice” a carnivore, we need the “notion” of a carnivore to
begin with. In other words, there is no recognition without
cognition. Because concepts are the building blocks of
thoughts and statements, scientists, for instance, are always
in need of imaginative, bold ideas, outlined in what is
called a hypothesis; it is this very hypothesis that makes
them “see” the similarity that they were not able to see
before. In science, all observations must be for or against
some hypothesis or theory if they are to be of any service in
science. As Charles Darwin put it in a letter to Henry
Fawcett, “How odd it is that anyone should not see that all
observation must be for or against some view if it is to be of
any service!” (Darwin, 1861).

682 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

No wonder then that a camera, for example, cannot
capture factsdall it can capture are things, situations, and
events. Take a surveillance camera; it “observes” every-
thing because it does not “know” what to observe. That is
why cameras and other observational tools cannot replace
scientistsdthey may be helpful to them but cannot replace
them. The problem with pictures in general is that they do
not show us facts until we give some interpretation to what
is seen on the picture. The same with books: They provide
lots of information for “bookworms,” but to real worms
they have only paper to offer. Facts carry a heavy man-
made component.

Alas, hypotheses and theories just do not spontaneously
emerge from observation. Biologists, for instance, were not
able to see the similarity in building blocks between ani-
mals and plants until the concept of a “cell” had been
established; neither could they see the similarity between
leprosy and tuberculosis until the concept of “bacteria” had
become available. Take this simple analogy: America did
exist before it was “invented,” but while still called the
West Indies, it had not yet been “discovered.”

IS THERE A WAY FOR SCIENCE AND
RELIGION TO LIVE TOGETHER?

So far we have discussed one side of the coin: since facts
carry a man-made component, they need to be tested and
may have to be revised. But there is another side to the
coin. Because of their man-made component, there can be
various ways of looking at the same thing or event, which
makes for various kinds of facts. Facts are always inter-
preted from a speciﬁc perspective and, since there are many
more perspectives than what science tries to capture with its
barometers, thermometers, and spectrometers, science does
not give us the only window on the world; there are many
other windows, views, vistas, aspects, perspectives, or
whatever you wish to call
I discussed
scientism as to its claim that science provides “the only
source of genuine factual knowledge,” but now we have
even more reason to question what “genuine factual
knowledge” really stands for.

them. Earlier,

Reality is like a jewel with many facets that can be
looked at from various angles, from different viewpoints.
Just like the “physical eye” sees colors in nature, so the
“artistic eye” sees beauty in nature, the “rational eye” sees
truths and untruths, the “moral eye” sees rights and wrongs,
and the “religious eye” sees everything in relationship to
God. All these “eyes” claim to be in search of reality, but
each one “sees” a different aspect of itdand therefore sees
different “facts.” Let me use a more speciﬁc example. The
“physical or biological eye” sees every beginning of new
life as a fertilization processda product of procreation. The
“religious eye,” on the other hand, sees it as a gift from

Beyondda product of creation. These two perspectives
may be different, but certainly not contradictory, as they
can both be true and qualify as “facts.” A fertilized egg cell
is the beginning of a human life, but it is not its origin. For
the religious believer, the origin of every human life is God,
for it is in God that we live, move, and have our being. To
put it differently: In the beginning of one’s life is God, but
at the beginning of one’s life is a fertilized egg cell. All of
us may have very well come to this world from God,
although we have come here through our parents. Some-
thing similar holds for the relationship between the Big
Bang and Creation:
the
beginning of the universedthat is, about what happened
“at the beginning”dwhereas Creation is about the origin of
the universe, about what is “in the beginning.” Creation is
something “in the beginning,” which made it possible for
something to happen “at the beginning.”

the Big Bang may be about

The fact that God is the origin of all human life may
qualify as much as “fact” as the fact that human life comes
from fertilized egg cells. Since all facts carry a man-made
component, they can be seen from a speciﬁc perspective,
yet supported by more or less evidence. Some factsd
especially some scientiﬁc onesdcome with an enormous
baggage of background information and supporting obser-
vation techniques (without those, there would be no dis-
covery of Higgs boson, for instance). And so do some
religious facts according to religious believers. Undoubt-
edly, “bare” facts just do not exist. Religious facts are as
“bare” as any other facts. The philosopher Ludwig Witt-
genstein once worded it this way: “To believe in a God
means to see that the facts of the world are not the end of
the matter” (Wittgenstein, 1961). And Albert Einstein
(1941) once said, “Science without religion is lame, reli-
gion without science is blind.”

Instead of a “one-sided” outlook on events, the analysis
I used in this chapter
rather supports an “all-round”
outlook. In Hamlet’s words, there is so much more than
dreamt of in your philosophy. As a matter of fact, reality
may have different aspects and appearances to show, all of
which can be equally real, valid, and objective. Without the
appropriate conceptual and interpretational
framework,
many facts would escape notice. In order to obtain an idea
of the many aspects of an event, we need to inspect it from
different anglesdthat is, within different interpretational
frameworksdotherwise we could miss out on some
essential views. Thanks to human interpretation, reality has
become a multifaceted phenomenon.

On the other hand, accepting that there are various
interpretational frameworks does not mean that they can all
be tested the same waydthat is, the way things are tested in
the empirical and experimental sciences, let alone in the
natural sciences. Yet the question remains: is a religious
outlook a valid outlook? I see no reason why not. Facts are

not material entities, so we found out, therefore they can
never be “hard,” “tangible,” “audible,” or the likednot
even in science. We tend to overestimate the power of facts
when it comes to science, whereas in religion, we tend to
underestimate the power of facts. Put differently, as far as
science is concerned, there is much more believing in what
we know than many want to believe. And, vice-versa, in
religion there may be much more knowing in what we
believe than many seem to know.

have

actually

come

up with

But one could argue that all of this only makes for rather
“negative” evidence in support of a religious outlook. Is
there also “positive” evidence? Many philosophers and
theologians
positive
evidencedwhich has sometimes been rejected by those
with a preconceived idea of materialism or scientism. I
would not go into those details but I will just raise a few
rhetorical questions: could there be order in this world if
there were no orderly Creator? Could there be scientiﬁc
laws if there were no rational Lawgiver? Could nature be
intelligible if it were not created by an intelligent Creator?
Could there be moral
there were no moral
Lawgiver? Could there be design in nature, if there were no
intelligent Designer (let me stress that this is not equivalent
to the so-called “intelligent design theory”)?

laws if

The best and most rational answer to all these questions
is a rather deﬁnite “No, there could not.”dunless one just
wants to give up on rationality ahead of time. To put it
positively, such answers work like powerful “pointers” to a
Transcendent Being or Creator God as the best possibled
and arguably onlydrational explanation for the fact that this
Universe does exist and is the way it is. The British phys-
icist John Polkinghorne (1989) calls them “pointers to the
divine as the only totally adequate ground of intelligibility.”
Rationality calls for an explanationdunless one decides to
abandon rationality, but that is a position hard to defend on
rational grounds. The answer that things just are the way
they are is not a very satisfying response; our universe need
not be the way it is, and it need not even exist. As the
physicist Paul Davies (2000) said at one point, “There must
be an unchanging rational ground in which the logical,
orderly nature of the universe is rooted.”

In other words, our rationality is based on the power of
reason and reasoning. The mere fact that reason existsd
including its order, its content, its principles, its rules, and
its powerdcalls for an explanation. Reason tells us that
only reasoned proofs and scientiﬁc evidence make our
claims understandable,
justiﬁed, and true.
Science itself arises from and rests upon these pillarsdthe
certainty and strength of reason and its many principles and
demands. If these were only based on individual, subjec-
tive, and personal sensations, we would lose the universal
rational order that guides and evaluates all our thinking and
all our scientiﬁc endeavors. We would end up with mere

intelligible,

Religion Viewed From Different Sciences Chapter | 40 683

illusions or hallucinations. Thus the question remains what
causes reason’s order to exist. Leaving God out of the
cosmos would reduce reason to a mere neural experience
that leaves us only with the sensation of reason, without
any further reality. We could even go as far as claiming
that, without a Creator God, scientists would fundamentally
lose their reason for trusting their own scientiﬁc reasoning.
If God does exist, there is at least an explanation and
foundation for the existence of reason and its orderdwhich
is so vital to science.

No doubt,

the validity of any kind of

religious
perspective has been questioned repeatedly. Skeptics can be
found anywhere. Not only do they attack the religious
perspective, but also the scientiﬁc perspective. Skepticism
makes for a very restrained view on the worlddactually so
restrained that absolute skeptics cannot even know whether
they have a mind to doubt with. Skeptics turn things the
wrong way. Granted, we often do need to eliminate errors
to get to the truth, yet our ultimate goal is not to avoid
errors, but to gain truthdto know rather than to know what
we do not know. Skeptics, on the other hand, make it their
ﬁnal goal to avoid errors, in denial of the fact that elimi-
nating errors is only a means to gaining truth about reality.
Skeptics such as the philosopher David Hume question
even the connection between cause and effect and consider
it only a habit of our thinking as we become accustomed to
see one thing constantly conjoined to another. It is hard to
maintain, though, that scientiﬁc discoveriesdwhether it is
pathways of metabolism, networks of neurons, the cellular
process of protein synthesis, the cascade of coagulation, or
the control mechanism of homeostasisdare merely based
on our thinking habits.

Needless to say that a radical form of skepticism would
not only undermine the very foundation of science, but also
the adequacy and validity of any kind of religious outlook.
As to whether this is an acceptable outcome is a decision I
must leave up to you.

REFERENCES

Begley, C.G., Ellis, L.M., 29 March 2012. Drug development: raise

standards for preclinical cancer research. Nature 483, 531e533.

Bernard, C., 1957. An Introduction to the Study of Experimental Medi-

cine. Dover Publication, New York, p. 40.

Bullock, A., Trombley, S. (Eds.), 1999. The New Fontana Dictionary of

Modern Thought. Harper Collins, London, p. 775.

Cloninger, C.R., 2004. Feeling Good: The Science of Well-being. Oxford

University Press, New York.

Commoner, B., 1964. Roles of deoxyribonucleic acid in inheritance.

Nature 202, 960e968.

Crick, F., 1990. What Mad Pursuit: A Personal View of Scientiﬁc

Discovery. Basics Books, New York.

Davies, P., 2000. What happened before the big bang. In: Stannard, R.

(Ed.), God for the 21st Century. Templeton Press, pp. 10e12.

684 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

Dawkins, R., 2008. The God Delusion, reprint ed. Mariner Books.
Einstein, A., 1941. In: Science, Philosophy and Religion, a Symposium
(New York: The Conference on Science, Philosophy and Religion in
Their Relation to the Democratic Way of Life).

Letter to Henry Fawcett (18 Sep 1861). In Charles Darwin, Francis Dar-
win, Albert Charles Seward, More Letters of Charles Darwin (1903),
vol. 1, 195.

Lewis, C.S., 1980. The Weight of Glory and Other Addresses, revised ed.

Feser, E., 2014. Scholastic Metaphysics: A Contemporary Introduction.

Macmillan, New York, pp. 71e72.

Editions Scholasticae.

Feyerabend, P., 1975. Against Method: Outline of an Anarchistic Theory

of Knowledge. Verso Books, New York, p. viii.

Geertz, C., 1993. Religion as a cultural system. In: The Interpretation of

Cultures. Fontana Press, pp. 87e125.

Maslow, A.H., 1966. The Psychology of Science. HarperCollins, p. 15.
Nagel, T., 2012. Mind and Cosmos: Why the Materialist Neo-darwinian
Conception of Nature Is Almost Certainly False. Oxford University
Press.

Polkinghorne, J., 1989. Science and Creation. The Search for Understanding.

Haldane, J.B.S., 1928. Possible Worlds and Other Essays. Harper and

Shambala, Boston, MA.

Brothers, p. 209.

Haldane, J., 2011. Hume’s destructive genius. First Things 218, 23e25.
Hamer, D., 1994. The Science of Desire: The Search for the Gay Gene and

the Biology of Behavior. Simon and Schuster, New York.

Hamer, D., 2005. The God Gene: How Faith Is Hardwired into Our Genes.

Anchor Books.

Popper, K.R., 1979. Objective Knowledge, revised ed. Clarendon Press,
Oxford. Appendix 1: “The Bucket and the Searchlight e Two
Theories of Knowledge.

Verschuuren, G.M.N., 1986. Investigating the Life Sciences. In: Foundations
& Philosophy of Science and Technology Series. Pergamon Press,
Oxford (Chapters 4 and 5).

Hawking, S., 2002. In Interviews with Gregory Benford, “Leaping the
Abyss: Stephen Hawking on Black Holes, Uniﬁed Field Theory and
Marilyn Monroe. Reason, 4.02 (April): 29.

White, A.R., 1970. Truth. Doubleday, Garden City, NY (Chapter 6).
Wittgenstein, 1961. Notebooks 1914e1916 translated by Gertrude Eliz-
abeth Margaret Anscombe, ﬁrst ed. Journal entry (8 July 1916), p. 74e

Husserl, E., 1970. The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental
Phenomenology (C. David, Trans.). Northwestern University Press,
Evanston, p. 6.

Chapter 41

Universal Humanity, Religious
Particularity, and Scientiﬁc Reductionism

T. Peters
GTU/CTNS, Berkeley, CA, United States

One of the rapidly moving frontiers in university under-
graduate education is Big History (Brown, 2007; Christian
et al., 2014). The ﬁeld of Big History now incorporates
what was previously known as World History into a larger
scheme: the evolutionary history of the universe. Like a
series of Russian boxes, the rise of human civilization is
ﬁtted into a larger evolutionary boxdbiological adapta-
tion for survivaldand this in turn is placed within the still
larger physical story of our cosmos. Within this tele-
scoping framework the rise of human religious practices
is thought to be the product of evolutionary adaptation,
that is, religion has been naturally selected because it
contributes to reproductive ﬁtness.

However, I note that an explanatory gap has opened up, a
gap between human reports of a transcendent divine reality
and the attempt to provide an evolutionary explanation. A
signiﬁcant historically retrievable phenomenon has not been
sufﬁciently accounted for by the big historians, namely, the
Axial Breakthrough (Bellah, 2011, 2012; Jaspers, 1953;
Voegelin, 1956e1987). By Axial Breakthrough, I refer to
events shocking the human psyche that occurred in different
parts of the world during the ﬁrst millennium before the
common era. After the rise of city-states and during the early
stages of empire, a transcendental insight dawned on certain
individuals in China, India, and the Middle East. This
transcendental insight shed new light on the human condi-
tion in the recorded ruminations of Confucius, Lao Tzu, the
Upanishadic Brahmans, the Buddha, Zoroaster, the Hebrew
prophets, and Plato. Whether theists or nontheists, these
thinkers cultivated belief in a transcendent moral order and
transcendent ground for human reasoning that is trans-tribal
and universal in scope. In some instances this breakthrough
became the basis upon which whole cultures were con-
structed with local ethnic identities placed within a growing
sense that there exists a single universal humanity. This

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00041-7
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

ancient history gradually morphed over
two-and-a-half
millennia into contemporary beliefs in universal human
dignity complemented with respect for ethnic and religious
diversity.

The axial insight was partially mystical. As mystical, it
was extra-linguistic while impacting linguistically formu-
lated descriptions of it. These formulations were context-
dependent, to be sure; yet each original context-dependent
formulation contributed independently to the growth of
diverse religious traditions. Thus, paradoxically, the mystical
insight attests to a single ultimate reality while the diversity
of religious traditions augurs our inescapable need for
culture-speciﬁc symbol systems for apprehending the ulti-
mate. We moderns live with both respect for cultural
diversity and respect for a single universal humanity.

But we must ask: does reality match the appearance?
Might axial insights and religious diversity be reducible to
one and only one principle, namely, natural selection?
Even though it appears that human seers have gained
insight from a transcendental source such as God, is this a
delusion fopped off on human consciousness by repro-
ductive ﬁtness? Even though the human mind wanders
from thought to thought and poses questions about ulti-
mate reality and ultimate meaning, can the mind be
reduced to the brain’s neuronal ﬁrings? Is human con-
sciousness and transcendental awareness nothing but an
epiphenomenon: ephemeral, delusional, and misleading?
ﬁeldsd
sociobiology, neurophilosophy, and Big Historydare look-
ing for the underlying unity of human experience not in the
transcendental claims of axial thinkers, but rather in the hu-
man brain that both axial and nonaxial persons share. “Cur-
rent neuroscientiﬁc and psychological evidence [suggests a
bioevolutionary explanation for nonlinguistic experience
which accounts for] cross-cultural similarities. Rather than

Contemporary

three

reductionists

in

685

i
n
d
i
c
a
t
i
n
g
a
c
o
m
m
o
n
m
y
s
t
i
c
o
b
j
e
c
t
,
s
u
c
h
s
i
m
i
l
a
r
i
t
i
e
s
m
a
y
i
n
s
t
e
a
d
m
e
r
e
l
y
b
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
t
s
o
f
t
h
e
s
h
a
r
e
d
s
t
r
u
c
t
u
r
e
o
f
t
h
e
h
u
-
m
a
n
b
r
a
i
n
,
(cid:148)
c
o
n
t
e
n
d
s
J
a
s
o
n
B
l
u
m
(
B
l
u
m
,
2
0
1
4
,
p
.
1
6
8
)
.
S
u
c
h
a
r
e
d
u
c
t
i
o
n
i
s
t
p
o
s
i
t
i
o
n
(cid:1)
n
d
s
t
h
e
u
n
i
f
y
i
n
g
f
a
c
t
o
r
n
o
t
i
n
t
h
e
m
y
s
t
i
c
a
l
c
l
a
i
m
b
u
t
r
a
t
h
e
r
i
n
t
h
e
b
r
a
i
n
t
h
a
t
m
a
k
e
s
t
h
e
c
l
a
i
m
.
S
o
m
e
n
o
n
r
e
d
u
c
t
i
o
n
i
s
t
s
a
r
e
(cid:1)
g
h
t
i
n
g
b
a
c
k
.
P
h
i
l
o
s
o
p
h
e
r
o
f
s
c
i
e
n
c
e
T
h
o
m
a
s
N
a
g
e
l
c
o
n
t
e
n
d
s
t
h
a
t
r
e
d
u
c
i
n
g
e
v
o
l
u
t
i
o
n
a
r
y
t
h
e
o
r
y
t
o
s
t
r
i
c
t
l
y
p
h
y
s
i
c
a
l
a
n
d
c
h
e
m
i
c
a
l
c
a
u
s
a
t
i
o
n
p
r
e
v
e
n
t
s
a
c
k
n
o
w
l
e
d
g
i
n
g
w
h
a
t
i
s
e
m
p
i
r
i
c
a
l
l
y
r
e
a
l
,
n
a
m
e
l
y
,
l
i
v
i
n
g
c
r
e
a
-
t
u
r
e
s
w
i
t
h
c
o
n
s
c
i
o
u
s
s
e
l
f
-
u
n
d
e
r
s
t
a
n
d
i
n
g
:
(cid:147)
P
h
y
s
i
c
o
-
c
h
e
m
i
c
a
l
r
e
d
u
c
t
i
o
n
i
s
m
i
n
b
i
o
l
o
g
y
i
s
t
h
e
o
r
t
h
o
d
o
x
v
i
e
w
,
a
n
d
a
n
y
r
e
s
i
s
-
t
a
n
c
e
t
o
i
t
i
s
r
e
g
a
r
d
e
d
a
s
n
o
t
o
n
l
y
s
c
i
e
n
t
i
(cid:1)
c
a
l
l
y
b
u
t
p
o
l
i
t
i
c
a
l
l
y
i
n
c
o
r
r
e
c
t
(cid:148)
(
N
a
g
e
l
,
2
0
1
2
,
p
.
5
)
.
R
e
d
u
c
i
n
g
l
i
f
e
t
o
i
t
s
p
h
y
s
i
c
o
-
c
h
e
m
i
c
a
l
e
l
e
m
e
n
t
s
f
a
i
l
s
t
o
e
x
p
l
a
i
n
i
t
:
(cid:147)
I
t
i
s
p
r
i
m
a
f
a
c
i
e
h
i
g
h
-
l
y
i
m
p
l
a
u
s
i
b
l
e
t
h
a
t
l
i
f
e
a
s
w
e
k
n
o
w
i
t
i
s
t
h
e
r
e
s
u
l
t
o
f
a
s
e
q
u
e
n
c
e
o
f
p
h
y
s
i
c
a
l
a
c
c
i
d
e
n
t
s
t
o
g
e
t
h
e
r
w
i
t
h
t
h
e
m
e
c
h
a
n
i
s
m
o
f
n
a
t
u
r
a
l
s
e
l
e
c
t
i
o
n
(cid:148)
(
N
a
g
e
l
,
2
0
1
2
,
p
.
6
)
.
S
o
,
i
n
t
e
r
n
a
l
t
o
s
c
i
e
n
t
i
(cid:1)
c
m
e
t
h
o
d
,
N
a
g
e
l
u
r
g
e
s
a
b
r
o
a
d
e
n
i
n
g
t
o
i
n
c
l
u
d
e
d
i
s
t
i
n
c
t
i
v
e
l
y
h
u
m
a
n
p
h
e
n
o
m
e
n
a
s
u
c
h
a
s
m
i
n
d
,
c
o
n
s
c
i
o
u
s
n
e
s
s
,
a
n
d
s
e
l
f
-
h
o
o
d
:
(cid:147)
T
h
e
g
r
e
a
t
a
d
v
a
n
c
e
s
i
n
t
h
e
p
h
y
s
i
c
a
l
a
n
d
b
i
o
l
o
g
i
c
a
l
s
c
i
e
n
c
e
s
w
e
r
e
m
a
d
e
p
o
s
s
i
b
l
e
b
y
e
x
c
l
u
d
i
n
g
t
h
e
m
i
n
d
f
r
o
m
t
h
e
p
h
y
s
i
c
a
l
w
o
r
l
d
.
T
h
i
s
h
a
s
p
e
r
m
i
t
t
e
d
a
q
u
a
n
t
i
t
a
t
i
v
e
u
n
d
e
r
-
s
t
a
n
d
i
n
g
o
f
t
h
a
t
w
o
r
l
d
,
e
x
p
r
e
s
s
e
d
i
n
t
i
m
e
l
e
s
s
,
m
a
t
h
e
m
a
t
i
c
a
l
l
y
f
o
r
m
u
l
a
t
e
d
p
h
y
s
i
c
a
l
l
a
w
s
.
B
u
t
a
t
s
o
m
e
p
o
i
n
t
i
t
w
i
l
l
b
e
n
e
c
e
s
-
s
a
r
y
t
o
m
a
k
e
a
n
e
w
s
t
a
r
t
o
n
a
m
o
r
e
c
o
m
p
r
e
h
e
n
s
i
v
e
u
n
d
e
r
-
s
t
a
n
d
i
n
g
t
h
a
t
i
n
c
l
u
d
e
s
t
h
e
m
i
n
d
(cid:148)
(
N
a
g
e
l
,
2
0
1
2
,
p
.
8
)
.
T
h
i
s
i
s
a
s
t
e
p
i
n
t
h
e
r
i
g
h
t
d
i
r
e
c
t
i
o
n
,
i
n
m
y
j
u
d
g
m
e
n
t
.
I
n
a
d
d
i
t
i
o
n
t
o
a
c
k
n
o
w
l
e
d
g
i
n
g
t
h
e
m
e
r
e
e
x
i
s
t
e
n
c
e
o
f
c
o
n
s
c
i
o
u
s
-
n
e
s
s
,
w
e
n
e
e
d
t
o
t
a
k
e
a
f
u
r
t
h
e
r
s
t
e
p
a
n
d
m
a
k
e
r
o
o
m
f
o
r
t
h
e
c
l
a
i
m
s
o
f
c
o
n
s
c
i
o
u
s
n
e
s
s
.
I
n
c
l
u
d
e
d
i
n
t
h
e
c
l
a
i
m
s
o
f
h
u
m
a
n
c
o
n
s
c
i
o
u
s
n
e
s
s
f
o
r
t
h
r
e
e
m
i
l
l
e
n
n
i
a
n
o
w
a
r
e
c
l
a
i
m
s
o
f
a
t
r
a
n
-
s
c
e
n
d
e
n
t
g
r
o
u
n
d
t
o
r
e
a
l
i
t
y
a
n
d
o
f
m
e
a
n
i
n
g
t
o
h
i
s
t
o
r
y
.
S
u
c
h
c
l
a
i
m
s
s
h
o
u
l
d
b
e
t
e
s
t
e
d
f
o
r
t
h
e
i
r
t
r
u
t
h
o
r
f
a
l
s
i
t
y
,
n
o
t
r
e
j
e
c
t
e
d
a
p
r
i
o
r
i
a
s
e
p
i
p
h
e
n
o
m
e
n
a
l
b
y
p
r
o
d
u
c
t
s
o
f
p
h
y
s
i
c
s
a
n
d
c
h
e
m
i
s
t
r
y
.
I
n
w
h
a
t
f
o
l
l
o
w
s
,
I
w
i
l
l
p
o
i
n
t
o
u
t
t
h
e
e
x
p
l
a
n
a
t
o
r
y
g
a
p
i
n
t
h
r
e
e
(cid:1)
e
l
d
s
:
n
e
u
r
o
s
c
i
e
n
c
e
,
s
o
c
i
o
b
i
o
l
o
g
y
,
a
n
d
B
i
g
H
i
s
t
o
r
y
.
A
t
s
t
a
k
e
i
s
,
(cid:1)
r
s
t
,
t
h
e
o
n
t
o
l
o
g
i
c
a
l
s
t
a
t
u
s
o
f
h
u
m
a
n
c
o
n
-
s
c
i
o
u
s
n
e
s
s
a
n
d
,
s
e
c
o
n
d
,
t
h
e
i
n
t
e
g
r
i
t
y
o
f
r
e
l
i
g
i
o
u
s
c
l
a
i
m
s
m
a
d
e
i
n
v
a
r
i
o
u
s
c
h
a
p
t
e
r
s
o
f
t
h
e
h
u
m
a
n
s
t
o
r
y
.
A
x
i
a
l
c
l
a
i
m
s
i
n
t
e
r
e
s
t
u
s
i
n
p
a
r
t
i
c
u
l
a
r
,
b
e
c
a
u
s
e
t
h
e
y
p
r
o
v
i
d
e
a
t
h
e
o
l
o
g
i
c
a
l
g
r
o
u
n
d
i
n
g
f
o
r
t
h
e
c
o
n
c
e
p
t
o
f
a
u
n
i
v
e
r
s
a
l
h
u
m
a
n
i
t
y
t
h
a
t
m
a
n
i
f
e
s
t
s
i
t
s
e
l
f
i
n
m
u
l
t
i
p
l
e
c
u
l
t
u
r
a
l
l
y
s
p
e
c
i
(cid:1)
c
f
o
r
m
s
.
M
o
r
e
i
m
p
o
r
t
a
n
t
l
y
,
i
t
i
s
b
e
l
i
e
f
i
n
a
d
i
v
i
n
i
t
y
w
h
o
t
r
a
n
s
c
e
n
d
s
t
h
e
p
h
y
s
i
c
a
l
o
r
d
e
r
w
h
i
c
h
m
a
k
e
s
p
o
s
s
i
b
l
e
t
h
e
m
e
a
n
i
n
g
f
u
l
n
e
s
s
o
f
b
o
t
h
n
a
t
u
r
a
l
a
n
d
h
u
m
a
n
h
i
s
t
o
r
y
.
T
H
E
F
I
R
S
T
G
A
P
:
C
O
N
S
C
I
O
U
S
N
E
S
S
I
N
T
H
E
C
O
N
T
E
X
T
O
F
N
E
U
R
O
S
C
I
E
N
C
E
A
N
D
N
E
U
R
O
P
H
I
L
O
S
O
P
H
Y
O
n
e
o
f
t
h
e
m
a
n
t
r
a
s
r
e
p
e
a
t
e
d
l
y
c
h
a
n
t
e
d
b
y
t
h
o
s
e
w
h
o
m
e
d
i
t
a
t
e
o
n
t
h
e
a
d
v
a
n
c
e
s
i
n
n
e
u
r
o
s
c
i
e
n
t
i
(cid:1)
c
r
e
s
e
a
r
c
h
i
s
t
h
i
s
:
t
h
e
b
r
a
i
n
-
a
s
-
a
u
t
o
m
a
t
i
c
-
p
i
l
o
t
h
a
s
t
a
k
e
n
c
a
r
e
o
f
m
a
t
t
e
r
s
e
v
e
n
b
e
f
o
r
e
w
e
b
e
c
o
m
e
a
w
a
r
e
o
f
i
t
.
O
r
,
t
o
s
a
y
i
t
a
n
o
t
h
e
r
w
a
y
:
t
h
e
b
r
a
i
n
i
s
t
h
e
h
a
r
d
w
a
r
e
a
n
d
t
h
e
m
i
n
d
i
s
t
h
e
s
o
f
t
w
a
r
e
.
O
r
,
t
o
s
a
y
i
t
s
t
i
l
l
a
n
o
t
h
e
r
w
a
y
,
t
h
e
m
i
n
d
i
s
i
n
d
i
s
t
i
n
g
u
i
s
h
a
b
l
e
f
r
o
m
t
h
e
b
r
a
i
n
.
(cid:147)
T
h
e
m
i
n
d
.
i
s
t
h
e
b
r
a
i
n
,
(cid:148)
w
r
i
t
e
s
p
h
i
l
o
s
o
p
h
e
r
D
a
n
i
e
l
D
e
n
n
e
t
t
(
2
0
0
6
,
p
.
1
0
7
)
.
W
h
a
t
t
h
i
s
p
h
i
l
o
s
o
p
h
e
r
h
a
s
d
o
n
e
p
r
e
m
a
t
u
r
e
l
y
i
s
t
o
(cid:1)
l
l
i
n
a
g
a
p
,
a
n
e
x
p
l
a
n
a
t
o
r
y
g
a
p
n
o
t
y
e
t
b
r
i
d
g
e
d
b
y
a
c
t
u
a
l
l
a
b
o
r
a
t
o
r
y
r
e
s
e
a
r
c
h
e
r
s
.
W
h
a
t
a
p
p
e
a
r
s
t
o
b
e
n
o
n
m
a
t
e
r
i
a
l
,
o
u
r
m
i
n
d
,
i
s
a
c
t
u
a
l
l
y
m
a
t
e
r
i
a
l
a
f
t
e
r
a
l
l
.
T
h
u
s
s
a
y
s
t
h
e
m
a
t
e
r
i
a
l
i
s
t
r
e
d
u
c
t
i
o
n
i
s
t
.
B
a
c
k
i
n
t
h
e
l
a
b
o
r
a
t
o
r
y
,
b
r
a
i
n
r
e
s
e
a
r
c
h
e
r
s
c
o
n
f
r
o
n
t
a
n
e
x
p
l
a
n
a
t
o
r
y
g
a
p
b
e
t
w
e
e
n
w
h
a
t
w
e
e
x
p
e
r
i
e
n
c
e
s
u
b
j
e
c
t
i
v
e
l
y
i
n
c
o
n
s
c
i
o
u
s
n
e
s
s
a
n
d
m
a
t
e
r
i
a
l
i
s
t
a
t
t
e
m
p
t
s
t
o
e
x
p
l
a
i
n
t
h
i
s
e
x
p
e
r
i
e
n
c
e
.
(cid:147)
F
o
r
n
o
m
a
t
t
e
r
h
o
w
d
e
e
p
l
y
w
e
p
r
o
b
e
i
n
t
o
t
h
e
p
h
y
s
i
c
a
l
s
t
r
u
c
t
u
r
e
o
f
n
e
u
r
o
n
s
a
n
d
t
h
e
c
h
e
m
i
c
a
l
t
r
a
n
s
-
a
c
t
i
o
n
s
w
h
i
c
h
o
c
c
u
r
w
h
e
n
t
h
e
y
(cid:1)
r
e
,
n
o
m
a
t
t
e
r
h
o
w
m
u
c
h
o
b
j
e
c
t
i
v
e
i
n
f
o
r
m
a
t
i
o
n
w
e
c
o
m
e
t
o
a
c
q
u
i
r
e
,
w
e
s
t
i
l
l
s
e
e
m
t
o
b
e
l
e
f
t
w
i
t
h
s
o
m
e
t
h
i
n
g
t
h
a
t
w
e
c
a
n
n
o
t
e
x
p
l
a
i
n
,
n
a
m
e
l
y
,
w
h
y
a
n
d
h
o
w
s
u
c
h
-
a
n
d
-
s
u
c
h
o
b
j
e
c
t
i
v
e
,
p
h
y
s
i
c
a
l
c
h
a
n
g
e
s
,
w
h
a
t
e
v
e
r
t
h
e
y
m
i
g
h
t
b
e
,
g
e
n
e
r
a
t
e
s
o
-
a
n
d
-
s
o
s
u
b
j
e
c
t
i
v
e
f
e
e
l
i
n
g
,
o
r
a
n
y
s
u
b
j
e
c
t
i
v
e
f
e
e
l
i
n
g
a
t
a
l
l
,
(cid:148)
w
r
i
t
e
s
M
i
c
h
a
e
l
T
y
e
f
o
r
t
h
e
S
t
a
n
f
o
r
d
E
n
c
y
c
l
o
p
e
d
i
a
o
f
P
h
i
l
o
s
o
p
h
y
(
T
y
e
,
2
0
1
3
)
.
T
h
i
r
d
-
p
e
r
s
o
n
e
x
p
l
a
n
a
t
i
o
n
s
s
i
m
p
l
y
c
a
n
n
o
t
a
c
c
o
u
n
t
f
o
r
(cid:1)
r
s
t
-
p
e
r
s
o
n
e
x
p
e
r
i
e
n
c
e
s
.
D
e
s
p
i
t
e
t
h
e
g
a
p
,
s
o
m
e
n
e
u
r
o
s
c
i
e
n
t
i
s
t
s
a
n
d
m
a
n
y
n
e
u
r
o
-
p
h
i
l
o
s
o
p
h
e
r
s
r
u
s
h
i
n
t
o
(cid:1)
l
l
i
t
w
i
t
h
m
a
t
e
r
i
a
l
i
s
t
a
s
s
u
m
p
t
i
o
n
s
.
T
h
e
y
c
o
n
t
e
n
d
t
h
a
t
o
b
j
e
c
t
i
v
e
e
x
p
l
a
n
a
t
i
o
n
s
w
i
l
l
e
v
e
n
t
u
a
l
l
y
r
e
d
u
c
e
s
u
b
j
e
c
t
i
v
e
e
x
p
e
r
i
e
n
c
e
t
o
t
h
a
t
o
f
a
d
e
l
u
s
i
o
n
.
D
a
n
J
o
n
e
s
w
r
i
t
e
s
a
v
i
r
t
u
a
l
o
b
i
t
u
a
r
y
f
o
r
t
h
e
h
u
m
a
n
m
i
n
d
i
n
t
h
e
N
e
w
S
c
i
e
n
t
i
s
t
:
(cid:147)
N
e
u
r
o
s
c
i
e
n
t
i
s
t
s
i
n
c
r
e
a
s
i
n
g
l
y
d
e
s
c
r
i
b
e
o
u
r
b
e
h
a
v
-
i
o
u
r
a
s
t
h
e
r
e
s
u
l
t
o
f
a
c
h
a
i
n
o
f
c
a
u
s
e
a
n
d
e
f
f
e
c
t
,
i
n
w
h
i
c
h
o
n
e
p
h
y
s
i
c
a
l
b
r
a
i
n
s
t
a
t
e
o
r
p
a
t
t
e
r
n
o
f
n
e
u
r
a
l
a
c
t
i
v
i
t
y
i
n
e
x
o
r
a
b
l
y
l
e
a
d
s
t
o
t
h
e
n
e
x
t
,
c
u
l
m
i
n
a
t
i
n
g
i
n
a
p
a
r
t
i
c
u
l
a
r
a
c
t
i
o
n
o
r
d
e
-
c
i
s
i
o
n
.
W
i
t
h
l
i
t
t
l
e
s
p
a
c
e
f
o
r
f
r
e
e
c
h
o
i
c
e
i
n
t
h
i
s
c
h
a
i
n
o
f
c
a
u
s
a
t
i
o
n
,
t
h
e
c
o
n
s
c
i
o
u
s
,
d
e
l
i
b
e
r
a
t
i
n
g
s
e
l
f
s
e
e
m
s
t
o
b
e
a
(cid:1)
c
t
i
o
n
(cid:148)
(
J
o
n
e
s
,
2
0
1
1
,
p
.
3
2
)
.
P
h
y
s
i
c
i
s
t
S
t
e
p
h
e
n
H
a
w
k
i
n
g
s
l
a
m
s
t
h
e
l
i
d
s
h
u
t
o
n
t
h
e
c
o
n
s
c
i
o
u
s
n
e
s
s
c
a
s
k
e
t
:
(cid:147)
r
e
c
e
n
t
e
x
-
p
e
r
i
m
e
n
t
s
i
n
n
e
u
r
o
s
c
i
e
n
c
e
s
u
p
p
o
r
t
t
h
e
v
i
e
w
t
h
a
t
i
t
i
s
o
u
r
p
h
y
s
i
c
a
l
b
r
a
i
n
,
f
o
l
l
o
w
i
n
g
t
h
e
k
n
o
w
n
l
a
w
s
o
f
s
c
i
e
n
c
e
,
t
h
a
t
d
e
t
e
r
m
i
n
e
s
o
u
r
a
c
t
i
o
n
s
,
a
n
d
n
o
t
s
o
m
e
a
g
e
n
c
y
t
h
a
t
e
x
i
s
t
s
o
u
t
s
i
d
e
t
h
o
s
e
l
a
w
s
.
I
t
i
s
h
a
r
d
t
o
i
m
a
g
i
n
e
h
o
w
f
r
e
e
w
i
l
l
c
a
n
o
p
e
r
a
t
e
i
f
o
u
r
b
e
h
a
v
i
o
r
i
s
d
e
t
e
r
m
i
n
e
d
b
y
p
h
y
s
i
c
a
l
l
a
w
,
s
o
i
t
s
e
e
m
s
t
h
a
t
w
e
a
r
e
n
o
m
o
r
e
t
h
a
n
b
i
o
l
o
g
i
c
a
l
m
a
c
h
i
n
e
s
a
n
d
t
h
a
t
f
r
e
e
w
i
l
l
i
s
j
u
s
t
a
n
i
l
l
u
s
i
o
n
(cid:148)
(
H
a
w
k
i
n
g
,
2
0
1
0
,
p
.
3
2
)
.
O
n
t
h
e
o
n
e
h
a
n
d
,
l
a
b
o
r
a
t
o
r
y
b
r
a
i
n
r
e
s
e
a
r
c
h
e
r
s
a
r
e
m
o
r
e
m
o
d
e
s
t
t
h
a
n
t
h
e
p
h
i
l
o
s
o
p
h
e
r
s
a
b
o
u
t
t
h
e
i
r
c
l
a
i
m
s
.
S
t
e
v
e
n
R
o
s
e
,
D
i
r
e
c
t
o
r
o
f
t
h
e
B
r
a
i
n
a
n
d
B
e
h
a
v
i
o
r
R
e
s
e
a
r
c
h
G
r
o
u
p
a
t
t
h
e
O
p
e
n
U
n
i
v
e
r
s
i
t
y
i
n
t
h
e
U
n
i
t
e
d
K
i
n
g
d
o
m
,
r
e
f
r
a
i
n
s
f
r
o
m
m
a
k
i
n
g
c
l
a
i
m
s
a
b
o
u
t
c
o
n
s
c
i
o
u
s
n
e
s
s
:
(cid:147)
A
s
n
e
u
r
o
s
c
i
e
n
-
t
i
s
t
s
w
e
d
o
n
(cid:146)
t
h
a
v
e
a
n
y
t
h
i
n
g
v
e
r
y
m
u
c
h
u
s
e
f
u
l
t
o
s
a
y
a
b
o
u
t
t
h
a
t
p
a
r
t
i
c
u
l
a
r
B
i
g
C
[
C
o
n
s
c
i
o
u
s
n
e
s
s
]
.
w
e
w
o
u
l
d
d
o
b
e
t
t
e
r
t
o
k
e
e
p
s
i
l
e
n
c
e
(cid:148)
(
R
o
s
e
,
2
0
0
5
,
p
.
4
)
.
O
n
t
h
e
o
t
h
e
r
h
a
n
d
,
s
o
m
e
s
u
c
h
a
s
F
r
e
n
c
h
c
o
g
n
i
t
i
v
e
s
c
i
e
n
c
e
r
e
s
e
a
r
c
h
e
r
S
t
a
n
i
s
l
a
s
D
e
h
a
e
n
e
a
r
e
a
t
t
e
m
p
t
i
n
g
t
o
t
u
r
n
(cid:147)
a
p
h
i
l
o
s
o
p
h
i
c
a
l
m
y
s
t
e
r
y
i
n
t
o
a
l
a
b
o
r
a
t
o
r
y
p
h
e
n
o
m
e
n
o
n
(cid:148)
(
D
e
h
a
e
n
e
,
2
0
1
4
,
p
.
8
)
.
6
8
6
P
A
R
T
|
I
I
I
E
t
h
i
c
s
,
P
o
l
i
t
i
c
s
a
n
d
R
e
l
i
g
i
o
u
s
C
o
n
s
i
d
e
r
a
t
i
o
n
s
Universal Humanity, Religious Particularity, and Scientiﬁc Reductionism Chapter | 41 687

the self

Dehaene believes he can turn our ﬁrst-person conscious
experience of
into a third-person quantitative
analysis. “Even these higher-order meanings of conscious-
ness are no longer inaccessible to experimentation. In our
laboratories, we have learned to quantify what the ‘I’ feels
and reports, both about the external environment and about
itself ” (Dehaene, 2014, p. 9). Does the translation of ﬁrst-
person accounts into third-person analysis eliminate the
ontological
status of ﬁrst-person subjectivity? Will
this come to mean that our ﬁrst-person experience is but
a delusion and that third-person analysis will take out a
patent on reality?

Afﬁrming

this

position,

self-as-delusion

neuro-
philosopher Thomas Metzinger pits the brain against
subjectivity: “Subjective experience is a biological data
format, a highly speciﬁc mode of presenting information
about the world by letting it appear as if it were an Ego’s
knowledge. But, no such things as selves exist in this
world” (Metzinger, 2009, p. 8). The self along with the
mind can be reduced to biochemical activity in the brain;
thereby, making our conscious sense of self-groundedness
delusional. Almost like the Buddhist teaching of anatta,
the teaching of today’s neurophilosopher tells us to give
up childish fairy tales such as consciousness, mind, and
the subjective self.

Nonreductionists respond with cautious demure. While
not denying the inﬂuence of the brain on the mind, objectors
contend that the mind is not reducible to the brain. “Expe-
rience may arise from the physical, but it is not entailed by
the physical. The moral of all this is that you can’t explain
conscious experience on the cheap,” argues David Chalmers
(Chalmers, 1997, p. 18, Chalmers’ italics). In short, con-
sciousness is reducible to neuronal ﬁrings according to the
reductionists; but it is not reducible according to those who
wish to protect the existence of consciousness, mind, and
selfhood.

This leads philosopher Otfried Höffe to observe, “The
actual insights of brain research offer in any event no
dogmatic neuro-biologism according to which mind and
consciousness merely emerge as natural events and ac-
cording to which the social nature of humanity occurs
exclusively on the basis of biological nature” (Höffe, 2010,
p. 249).

Despite these, materialists press forward in public with
their reductionist agenda. This elicits anxiety. Each of us
feels at home in our subjectivity, in our consciousness.
Subjectivity establishes who we are and where we are; it
establishes who is the person experiencing the self and the
world. Subjectivity instantiates us in being. So, for the
neurophilosopherdostensibly relying on the science of
the braindto explain our subjective ﬁrst-person self-
understanding in terms of something else elicits the fear
that our personhood will be explained away. The third-
person scientiﬁc perspective appears as a threat to our

interior ﬁrst-person self-understanding. This is an exis-
tential threat posed by an abstract discipline. We dare not
underestimate the power of this existential threat to elicit
anxiety.

Despite the rising anxiety, neurophilosophers continue to
advance their
reductionist agenda. Thomas Clark un-
derstands the existential anxiety his agenda elicits: “Involved
here are fairly deep and emotional issues of human auton-
omy and specialness, especially the fear that if consciousness
is nothing over and above physically instantiated function,
then we lose our privileged status as rational agents riding
above the ﬂux of brute causality.If it
that
subjectivity and the sense of self is merely function, then it
becomes terrifying (for some) that no principled distinction
may exist between us and a very clever robot” (Clark, 1997,
p. 50).

turns out

But Clark has no intention of respecting this fear. He
takes no prisoners. He presses forward with his task of
ﬁnding a reductive explanation: “But of course we must not
let such fears prejudice our initial conception of conscious-
ness or restrict our investigation.As a scientiﬁc strategy for
unifying knowledge, the reductionist impulse is hardly to be
eschewed but rather to be encouraged.To reduce mental
phenomena to functional processes via some plausibly evi-
denced identiﬁcation is, after all, not to eliminate them, but
simply to redescribe them from a third person perspective”
(Clark, 1997, pp. 50e51). Clark supports the “functional
identity hypothesis, which makes a strong claim.that
subjectivity is constituted by those central representational
processes which transform and enhance sensory information
to the point where it normally dominates in the control of
behaviour” (Clark, 1997, p. 52). In sum, Clark will not
eliminate our ﬁrst-person perspective; he will simply rede-
scribe our ﬁrst-person perspective in third-person terms. That
is what science does, according to this philosopher.

Reductionists attempt

to bridge the explanatory gap
with promises drawn from their materialist presuppositions.
Chalmers attempts to build a different kind of bridge. His
bridge is made out of information. Because information is
ubiquitously present in all physical reality, human con-
sciousness based upon this physical substrate will continue
to bear
this information: “Information is truly funda-
mental.information is everywhere” (Chalmers, 1997,
p. 27). The gap has now been closed, thinks Chalmers. A
nonreductive yet physicalist explanation of conscious
experience is just around the corner, he promises.

The reductionists want to defend their bridge from
assault, so they ﬁre back at Chalmers with heavy artillery.
Because Chalmers sees a “gap,” he is attacked by his
reductionist critics on the grounds that he harbors a
disguised Cartesian dualism: “The resulting naturalistic
dualism Chalmers defends is Cartesian at its core, and
despite his claim that such a position is entirely compat-
ible with the scientiﬁc view of the world, dualisms have

688 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

fared badly as science proceeds to unify our conception of
human kind in nature” (Clark, 1997, p. 48). Dennett de-
scribes the Chalmers position as “an imaginary dazzle in
the eye of a Cartesian homunculus” (Dennett, 2006, p. 34).
Materialist philosophers are at war with Cartesian sub-
stance dualism, and they are drafting neuroscience into
their arsenal.

In sum, an explanatory gap exists between what brain
researchers observe and the attempt to explain what they
observe by appeal to material causation. To date, in the
laboratory, human consciousness has deﬁed reduction to
physical or biochemical explanations. The explanatory gap
remains. However,
to neuroscientists who
actually pursue the research, neurophilosophers try to ﬁll in
this gap with a priori assumptions derived from a materi-
alist philosophy. This elicits anxiety; and anxiety keeps the
discussion exciting. When pursuing empirical science along
with sober reﬂection on that science, however, reductionist
materialism gets in the way.
that
neuroscience needs to study human consciousness toward
the end of explaining it, not explaining it away.

is my judgment

in contrast

It

This is the point made by Nagel: a scientiﬁc method
which will allow only physical and chemical explanations
just may preclude itself from understanding what lies right
before our eyes, namely, consciousness, mind, and self: “If
the mental is not itself merely physical, it cannot be fully
explained by physical science” (Nagel, 2012, p. 14). Perhaps
scientiﬁc methodology should consider self-broadening.
Without such broadening, we will lose the ontological status
of consciousness, mind, and selfhood. Along with this loss,
we will also lose the claims made by conscious persons,
including claims about transcendent reality.

We have just deﬁned the gap between ﬁrst-person
experience and third-person explanation, between neuro-
science and neurophilosophy. The ﬁeld of sociobiology
opens up a second gap, a gap between genetic determinism
and religious consciousness. Here we will see the same play
performed on a different stage. In sociobiology what gets
reduced is religious consciousness and, thereby, religious
claims.

THE SECOND GAP: RELIGION IN THE
CONTEXT OF SOCIOBIOLOGY’S
ACCOUNT OF EVOLUTION

institution to serve the
Religion evolved as a cultural
reproductive ﬁtness of Homo sapiens. Because religious
societies make more babies that grow to reproductive age,
religion was selected for, and became a trait of, the human
race. How do we know this? It is a deduction from a
premise, namely, that all of culture has evolved to serve
reproductive ﬁtness. So goes the argument in ﬁelds, such
as sociobiology and evolutionary psychology whichd
regardless of
scientiﬁc research

their credibility as

programsdare sponsored by well-respected members of
the international scientiﬁc community. Therefore, we
should accept at
the level of assumption that
religion, like all cultural forms, is a product of biological
evolution; and religion can best be explained by appeal to
evolution for its explanation.

least at

The key that unlocks the explanatory power of evolu-
tion, according to sociobiologists,
is DNA replication.
Oxford’s Richard Dawkins exclaims, “we are.robot-
vehicles blindly programmed to preserve the selﬁsh mole-
cules known as genes.” The genes are in the driver’s seat;
and human organisms like all organisms get taken for an
evolutionary ride. We are “manipulated to ensure the sur-
vival of [our] genes” (Dawkins, 2006, p. x). Similarly, the
American founder of the ﬁeld of sociobiology, Edward O.
Wilson, makes the same point this way: “the individual
organism is only the vehicle [of genes], part of an elaborate
device to preserve and spread them.The organism is only
DNA’s way of making more DNA” (Wilson, 1975, p. 3).
Now, back to our focus: the religious claims of human
consciousness. Wilson asks, what is the origin of religion?
“At some point in Late Paleolithic times, people began to
reﬂect on their own mortality,” wondering what happened
to their relatives after death. “The departed still lived, and
regularly rejoined the livingdin dreams” (Wilson, 2012, p.
264). Dreams and visions and hallucinations were mistak-
enly thought to be revelatory; so religious authority and
doctrines grew. Creation myths developed, assuring “the
believers that they are paramount in the sight of God.
Religious faith offers the psychological security that
uniquely comes from belonging to a group” (Wilson, 2012,
p. 266). “Perhaps it [shared belief in God] is no more than a
tribe united by a creation myth. If the latter, religious faith
is better interpreted as an unseen trap unavoidable during
the biological history of our species.Humankind deserves
better” (Wilson, 2012, p. 267). Evidently, Wilson believes
religion was an evolutionary mistake. We deserve better.
What might be better? Science, of course.

Before looking for what is better than religion, let us
remind ourselves of just how this purported origin de-
termines the essence of religion: “Humanity lives in a
largely mythic, spirit-haunted world. We owe that to our
early history.To explain the mysteries of their existence,
they [humans at an earlier stage of evolution] believed in
the superior beings otherwise like themselves, the divine
ones who built not just stone tools and shelters but the
whole universe.The only way our forebears could manage
to explain existence itself was a creation myth. And every
creation myth, without exception, afﬁrmed the superiority
of the tribe that invented it over all other tribes. That much
assumed, every religious believer saw himself as a chosen
person. [This view was] conceived in ignorance of most of
the real world” (Wilson, 2012, p. 291). Our religious an-
cestors were ignorant and produced creation myths out of

Universal Humanity, Religious Particularity, and Scientiﬁc Reductionism Chapter | 41 689

their ignorance; but today Wilson will produce creation
stories based upon knowledgedscientiﬁc knowledged
which will dispel this ignorance.

At work here is the assumption that yesterday’s origin
determines today’s essence: “True to their biological origins,
they [religions] passionately encourage altruism within their
membership, and systematically extend it to outsiders, albeit
usually, with an additional aim of proselytization. Commit-
ment to a particular faith is by deﬁnition religious bigotry”
(Wilson, 2012, p. 292). To be religious is to be bigoted.

When it comes to the claims enunciated by axial mystics
regarding a transcendent order of justice, a universal hu-
manity, and a life beyond this one, Wilson will hear none of
it. It is with considerable passion that Wilson trumpets that
we should “repudiate, respectfully, the claims of those in
power who say they speak for God, are a special repre-
sentative of God, or have exclusive knowledge of God’s
divine will. Included among these purveyors of theological
narcissism are would-be prophets, the founders of religious
cults, impassioned evangelical ministers, ayatollahs, imams
of the grand mosques, chief rabbis, Rosh yeshivas, the Dalai
Lama, and the pope” (Wilson, 2012, p. 293). In place of
these spokespersons for God, Wilson will place himself as
the spokesperson for evolution and a naturalistic ethic of
universal altruism. Wilson’s tribe of scientists must defeat
these religious tribes in order to establish a supratribal
worldview based on science. The scientiﬁc worldview will
save humanity, save us most of all from the degrading forces
of religious bigotry.

In sum, organized religion is an expression of tribalism
organized eusocially around creation myths that maintain
tribal identity. By retelling ancient creation myths in terms
of biological evolution, Wilson is in effect trying to orga-
nize a new tribe of those in-the-know to engage in battle
against anachronistic religious tribes who still
live in
ignorance. Intertribal war goes on. The new war will be
between the tribe of scientists, on the one side, and their
enemies, a federation of bigoted religious believers, on the
other side. I take this to be the self-understanding of the
sociobiologist.

Let’s look again. In the case of sociobiology, there is
more than mere scientiﬁc observation going on. Providing a
scientiﬁc deﬁnition of
religion with an accompanying
evolutionary explanation is not all that is at stake. Despite
the alleged fact that religion has been selected by natural
selection, E.O. Wilson plans to deselect religion by his
theory of evolution. Even if evolutionary biology in the
past selected religion; Wilson plans to take the action in the
future that will deselect it in favor of something better,
namely, science. The future of our evolution will now be
guided by the conscious scientist to select for science and
deselect for religion.

The framework within which E.O. Wilson approaches
the relationship between science and religion is what Ian

Barbour identiﬁes as the conﬂict model (Barbour, 1990, pp.
3e30). Another way to describe the position Wilson takes
is to see it as scientiﬁc imperialism (Peters, 2003, p. 17).
According to this model, science and religion are at war
with one another, each trying to defeat the other and win by
establishing a dominant worldview. The victory in Wil-
son’s case need not be total. Wilson’s military objective is
to subjugate religion by providing an explanation for reli-
gion within bioevolutionary terms. What characterizes
scientiﬁc imperialism is its goal of conquering the territory
formally possessed by theology and claiming it as its own.
For Wilson, biologists can better explain religion than
theologians can. Therefore, theologians are out of a job,
replaced by biologians.

The methodological point here ought not to be missed.
By providing an evolutionary explanation for the phe-
nomenon of religion, the sociobiologist need not attend to
the truth or falsity of religious claims. Whatever claims
about transcendent reality have been voiced by religious
spokespersons can be reduced to physical and biological
factors operative in evolution. This reduction applies to
every human phenomenon except one: Wilson’s own sci-
ence. Natural selection should select Wilson’s science for
our evolutionary future; and in order to make this happen
Wilson’s science will have to win over religion in the
struggle for existence. What looks like a mere scientiﬁc
theory has become a formidable species ﬁghting for the
extinction of human religion.

The image evoked by Wilson is the biblical Battle of
Armageddon, in which the forces of light defeat the forces of
darkness: “The Armageddon in the conﬂict between science
and religion.began in earnest during the late twentieth
century. It is the attempt by scientists to explain religion to
its foundations.At its source, the struggle is not between
people but between worldviews” (Wilson, 2012, p. 255).
Wilson’s worldview represents the light; whereas a religious
worldview represents the darkness to be conquered.

Religion deserves to lose, because it spreads darkness
and ignorance “Why.is it wise openly to question the
myths and gods of organized religions? because they are
stultifying and divisive.Because they encourage igno-
rance, distract people from recognizing problems of the real
world” (Wilson, 2012, p. 292).

In order to overcome the divisive darkness and igno-
rance plaguing our society due to organized religion,
rational and scientiﬁc individuals should press forward to-
ward a secularized worldview. One of the most potent
weapons “is the increasingly detailed scientiﬁc recon-
struction of religious belief as an evolutionary biological
product. When placed in opposition to creation myths and
their theological excesses, the reconstruction is increasingly
persuasive to any even slightly open mind” (Wilson, 2012,
p. 293). Note how evolutionary theory has become some-
thing much more than a mere scientiﬁc explanation for

690 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

observable phenomena; it has become a weapon in Wil-
son’s war against religion.

Should the war end in favor of the army of scientiﬁc
imperialists, then an elite of benevolent secular dictators
would teach their ignorant religious subjects the truth about
the real world. Defeated religious warriors should celebrate
their surrender and welcome this enlightenment: “Scien-
ce.is the wellspring of all the knowledge we have of the
real world that can be tested and ﬁtted to preexisting
knowledge. It is not just another way of knowing as often
claimed, making it coequal with religious faith. The conﬂict
between scientiﬁc knowledge and the teachings of orga-
nized religions is irreconcilable” (Wilson, 2012, p. 295).

At this point we need to distinguish between science
and scientism. “Scientism,” according to David Ray Grifﬁn,
is “the belief that the scientiﬁc method.is the only way to
discover truth” (Grifﬁn, 2000, p. 10). Francisco J. Ayala
represents science as science apart from scientism when he
afﬁrms that “science is a way of knowing, but it is not the
only way” (Ayala, 2007, p. 177). But for Wilson,
in
contrast to Ayala, science is the only way. “Science.is the
wellspring of all the knowledge,” pens Wilson, assuming
that his own ranting counts as scientiﬁc knowledge. What is
happening is that
the good name of science is being
invoked to bless a secular ideology, a virtual secular
counterpart
science becomes
scientism, science not only ceases to be science and
changes into religion, but becomes an intolerant danger for
liberal societies,” Markus Mühling warns us (Mühling,
2014, p. 27). What we have in Wilson’s sociobiology is not
laboratory research tendering a theory to explain human
history. Rather,
justifying
scientiﬁc imperialism. No one need fear authentic science.
But Wilson’s scientism looks like the very religion against
which he is going to war.

is an ideology aimed at

to religion. “Whenever

it

THE THIRD GAP: BIG HISTORY AS THE
COMPREHENSIVE CONTEXT

Let’s add a third gap: the gap opened up by Big History
between natural meaninglessness and historical meaning-
fulness. Big Historians view both natural and human his-
tory through reductionist lenses, blinding them to historical
moments where transcendent meaning engages history.

The Big History movement

in higher education in-
corporates the history of human civilizations into a larger
story of nature where evolution in both its biological and
cosmic form is the protagonist. According to the Interna-
tional Big History Association, Big History “seeks to un-
derstand the integrated history of the Cosmos, Earth, Life,
and Humanity, using the best available empirical evidence
and scholarly methods” (IBHA, 2014). Or, Big History is
“the attempt to construct a united account of the past at all
scales from those of human history to those of cosmology;

the modern scientiﬁc equivalent of traditional origin stor-
ies” (Christian et al., 2014, p. 307). Or, according to the late
Robert Bellah, history and prehistory can be described
together: “History goes all the way back and any distinction
between history and prehistory is arbitrary. That means that
biological historydthat is, evolutiondis part of the human
story all
ix). The
concept of evolution unites what were previously separate:
natural history and human history.

the way through” (Bellah, 2011, p.

Building on a Darwinian foundation, big historians are
constructing a metanarrative to explain everything from the
Big Bang to our own era on Earth. “Fifty years ago, the
suggestion that Darwinism might make some contribution
to philosophical understanding would have been greeted
somewhat like a bad smell at a vicarage tea party,” writes
Michael Ruse. But today evolution’s explanatory province
has expanded to include “both the theory of knowledge
(epistemology) and the theory of morality (ethics)” (Ruse,
2013, p. 28). For today’s big historians, evolutionary phi-
losophy now explains the entire history of the cosmos in-
clusive of human history, knowledge, and ethics. The
concept of evolution is no longer limited to explaining
speciation as it was for its founder, Charles Darwin. Now, it
allegedly explains everything.

Like the neuroscientists, big historians must confront
an explanatory gap. Up until this point, we have lived with
two histories: natural history and human history. Classi-
cally, we know that natural history is without telos, pur-
pose, or direction,
thereby making it meaningless or
valueless. In contrast, because human history includes the
story of human subjectivity, the meaning of history be-
comes central to every endeavor to reconstruct the past. In
short, we confront a gap between prehuman meaning-
lessness and human meaningfulness. The big historian’s
self-assignment is to put the two together. Just what will
bridge the two? The big historian’s answer: evolution. The
natural history of the evolution of species on planet Earth
will become the bridge over the gap between physical
history prior to the arrival of human consciousness and
human history, which records the adventures of human
consciousness.

Will the conﬂation of natural history with human his-
tory have meaning? With the question of history’s
meaning in mind, we must pose a postmodern question:
who’s history is Big History? A paradoxical metanarrative
among the deconstructionist postmodernists is that there is
no metanarrative. There is no value-neutral or meaning-
neutral stance, say these postmodernists (Lyotard, 1992,
p. 19). Therefore, every metanarrative is perspectival
whether its projectors recognize their perspective or not.
Every metanarrative comes from some place and reﬂects
somebody’s social location, tradition, and vested interests.
Every metanarrative is the product of somebody’s sub-
jective consciousness.

Universal Humanity, Religious Particularity, and Scientiﬁc Reductionism Chapter | 41 691

Big History is a metanarrative. It must be if it is to be
big. It must be if it is to be history. Now, I approve of such
a metanarrative. I do not belong to the skeptical school of
deconstructionist postmodernism. Yet,
the question re-
mains: who’s subjective perspective determines the mean-
ing of Big History? What is the vested interest of the big
historian? What might be the ideology through which the
big historian will interpret the cosmic and human past?

Our culture, like every coherent and enduring culture,
requires a metanarrative if it is to enjoy meaning and if it is
to understand itself. Yet, if big historians adopt a strictly
scientiﬁc perspective without incorporating the subjective
dimensions of our distinctively human reality, it will be
difﬁcult to acknowledge the perspective of the big historian
and even more difﬁcult to appreciate the history of human
subjectivity which makes historical meaning possible. If
big historians incorporate the materialism and reductionism
we see in neurophilosophy and sociobiology into their
method, then certain voices will be silenced: the voices of
consciousness, mind, self, and God.

Allegedly, everything belonging to the human phe-
nomenon, according to the big historian, can be reduced to
one principle: the force of evolutionary development. “The
scope of the concept of evolution” is expanding “to include
cosmic and cultural history,” according to big historian Ken
Gilbert (Gilbert, 2014, p. 135). Our human civilization
today is the product of “an evolutionary force in nature
analogous to the force of gravity” (Gilbert, 2014, p. 142).
This is curious. Physicists know four
forces: gravity,
electromagnetism, the strong nuclear force, and the weak
nuclear force. Biology adds no forces to these four. Evo-
lution obeys the same four forces that nonliving physical
entities obey. But Gilbert invents a new forcedan evolu-
tionary forcedfound in biology; and then he retroactively
moves it back from biological evolution so that now it
applies to cosmic evolution. And he moves it forward to
apply to human cultural evolution. All things prehuman and
human now ﬁnd one convenient explanation: evolution.
Gilbert’s enthusiasm for evolution might be tolerable; but
his rewriting the science textbooks in order to ground all
that happens in Big History in an imaginary evolutionary
force is nothing but ideology. Because it is dressed in
scientiﬁc apparel, the otherwise nude ideology is covered
over.

When the scientiﬁc gaze turns science into scientismd
that is, when science becomes a worldview or ideologyd
then, the door opens to nihilism. Wilson ﬁnds in his scien-
tism a thrilling ideology; but most laboratory scientists rebel
at the thought that their work might become co-opted by an
implicitly nihilistic ideology. “By scientism I mean the
absurdly reductionist belief that all truth can be learned and
all reality described through science (never deﬁned) and only
through science,” writes geochemist Rustum Roy (Roy,
2005, p. 836). The nihilism built into scientism ﬁnds a

dramatic voice in biologist Jacques Monod: “The ancient
covenant is in pieces: man at last knows that he is alone in
the unfeeling immensity of the universe, out of which he has
emerged only by chance. Neither his destiny nor his duty
have been written down” (Monod, 1972, p. 167). My
if Big History becomes the meta-
concern here is that
narrative of scientism,
the reductionist perspective may
obliterate a decisive chapter in the cultural story, namely, the
axial breakthrough to transcendence and the meaningfulness
of history.

Nihilism is inescapable when one eliminates ﬁrst-person
human consciousness from what counts as a scientiﬁc
explanation. This is because all meaningdincluding the
meaning of naturedis the product of human consciousness.
Once human consciousness has been reduced to neuronal
ﬁrings or reproductive ﬁtness, all meaning disappears from
the objective domain. To have meaning, one must afford
ontological respect to the consciousness of human selves.
What we have done so far is put together the ﬁelds of
neurophilosophy, sociobiology, and Big History. In these
three cases, we ﬁnd an attempt to explaindactually, explain
awaydthe phenomenon of religious consciousness in terms
of the larger bioevolutionary development of life on Earth.
The emergence of human awareness of transcendent reality
should,
in principle, be reducible to the physical and
chemical processes which constitute human brain function.
So the reductionist argument goes. Should this argument
remain without challenge?

Referencing the axial age with open eyes itself consti-
tutes a challenge of sorts. The axial age precipitated a deep
enhancement in human subjectivity, the very subjectivity
which eventually made the writing of meaningful history
possible. Therefore, any historical account which does not
include the history of subjectivity as its object would not be
genuine history; it would amount to a mere agglomeration
of natural facts strung together. In addition, any history
which does not acknowledge the meaning structure pre-
sumed by the historian telling the historical story would
disguise his or her subjective perspective; and this would
imply, de facto, a form of nihilism. In short, I recommend
that big historians pause to assess the impact and import of
the axial age on the very subjectivity that makes possible
their reconstruction of natural and human history. But to do
so, they may have to forsake their scientism, materialism,
and reductionism.

FROM BEYOND NATURE AND HISTORY:
THE AXIAL BREAKTHROUGH

“Religion is the vision of something which stands beyond,
behind, and within, the passing ﬂux of immediate things;
something which is real, and yet waiting to be realised;
something which is a remote possibility, and yet the greatest
of present facts; something that gives meaning to all that

692 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

passes, and yet eludes apprehension; something whose
possession is the ﬁnal good, and yet is beyond all reach;
something which is the ultimate ideal, and the hopeless
quest” (Whitehead, 1925, p. 238). This is what religion is,
according to Alfred North Whitehead. What he is describing
could not have come into human consciousness if the axial
breakthrough were not an earlier chapter in our human story.
Among contemporary philosophers of religion repre-
senting a variety of religious traditions, the axial insight
persists. “All the great world faiths afﬁrm, in their different
ways, the indescribable nature of the ultimate,” trumpets
John Hick (Hick, 2010, p. 164). Hindus especially feel a
mission to maintain and recast this axial insight: “Truth
may be one, but we will need many paths to itdwith di-
versity, tolerance, and dialoguedif we seek to grasp its
entirety.This is the real idolatrydtaking one’s immediate
perspectival knowledge for the whole” (Kasturi et al., 2014,
p. 37).

The label for this view is pluralism: “Polycentric
pluralism would hold that the religions are completely
distinct and unrelated, each worshipping or otherwise
responding to its own Ultimate, and with its own path to its
own expected end” (Hick, 2010, p. 156). Pluralists claim
that culturally speciﬁc religious language points to an
ineffable transcendent reality which is eternal and uni-
versal; and this ground of all being conditions human
existence even while it itself remains unconditioned. This
is one of the many claims lifted up by contemporary hu-
man consciousness, a claim a priori dismissed by a method
that seeks to reduce the very consciousness that raises this
claim to physical and chemical processes.

Even though I speak frequently of the axial insight as if it
marked a eureka moment, that insight might be a response to
an external stimulus. Instead of a human discovery of the
transcendent, it might have been the transcendent which
initiated the encounter. It appears that human consciousness
was shocked during the axial period, shocked by a reality
beyond daily understanding or comprehension.

The originator of the term, axial age, was German
philosopher of history, Karl Jaspers. “What is new about
this age, in all three areas of the world [China, India, Eur-
asia], is that man becomes conscious of Being as a whole, of
himself and his limitations. He experiences the terror of the
world and his own powerlessness. He asks radical ques-
tions. Face to face with the void he strives for liberation and
redemption. By conscious recognizing his limits he sets
himself the highest goals. He experiences absoluteness in
the depths of selfhood and in the lucidity of transcendence”
(Jaspers, 1953, p. 2). Human consciousness now asks: is
this world all there is? Is there more? Is there an ultimate
reality which transcends this one? (Eliade, 1957, p. 64).

Might these questions have been a response to a stim-
ulus, the entrance of the transcend into the mundane? Or, to
ask it another way: might the axial insight be the human

response to a revelation of the ineffable God? Certainly a
Muslim 1000 years after the axial age would answer in the
afﬁrmative” “God! There is no God but Him, Living, Self-
sufﬁcient. Slumber cannot seize Him, nor sleep. To Him
belongs all in the heavens and on the earth.His Throne
extends over the heavens and earth, which He preserves
untiringly” (Qur’an, 2:255).

With the axial insight, critical philosophy is born right
along with its twin, belief in a transcendent moral order
“Man becomes conscious of Being as a whole, of himself
and his powerlessness. He asks radical questions. Face to
face with the void he strives for liberation and redemption.
By consciously recognizing his limits he sets himself the
highest goals. He experiences absoluteness in the depths of
selfhood and in the lucidity of transcendence. In this age
were born the fundamental categories within which we still
think today” (Jaspers, 1953, p. 2). It takes a philosophical
apprehension of a transcendent reality in order, eventually,
to ground what we moderns deem to be universal: justice,
equality, dignity, rights, and planetary responsibility. Only
when grasped by what is real can we let go of our vested
interests or myopic tribalism to embrace universal values
which transcend what is local, parochial, or private. We are
in a position to see the relationship of the part to the whole:
“In speculative thought he [the axial seer] lifts himself up
towards Being itself, which is apprehended without duality
in the disappearance of subject and object, in the coinci-
dence of opposites. That which is experienced in the loftiest
ﬂights of the spirit is a coming-to-oneself within Being,
or as unio mystica as becoming one with the Godhead”
(Jaspers, 1953, p. 3).

For ancient Israel, God was responsible for this tran-
scendent moral order, which took the form of the Torah or
divine Law. Our moral obligations became identiﬁed with
ultimate reality, with God, according to biblical scholar
Walter Brueggemann: “God is an agent of judgment and
restoration.ultimate accountability and such emergence
of relational (covenantal) good in biblical tradition are
credited to an active, willful agency who is known by
name, whose name attests to the personal,
relational
dimension of ultimate reality” (Brueggemann, 2014, p. 49).
Now, to be clear, I am not suggesting that human mo-
rality was given birth for the ﬁrst time by an axial mother.
More prosaic evolutionary explanations of a much earlier
rise of moral awareness sufﬁce. It seems obvious that as
human intelligence increased, so did the intellectual power to
discriminate between better and worse future scenarios. It is
easy to surmise how standards such as better versus worse or
right versus wrong would arise early in the H. sapiens story.
And such moral standards were no doubt adaptive. Darwin
himself predicted this: “Any animal whatever, endowed with
well-marked social instincts.would inevitably acquire a
moral sense or conscience” (Darwin, 1874, p. 98). Richard
Joyce dubs this native moralism, the position that “morally

Universal Humanity, Religious Particularity, and Scientiﬁc Reductionism Chapter | 41 693

assessing aspects of one’s environment
(and oneself)
enhanced the reproductive ﬁtness of our ancestors” (Joyce,
2013, p. 464).

The leap in being taking place during the axial period
builds on this more primitive moral notion. Because of the
transcendental
leap, objective and universal principles
could emerge. Over against the oneness of divinity the
entire world could now be seen as a unity, as an ecumenic
or comprehensive unity. This new insight revealed an ideal,
namely, the universal human race. Even though no one
could empirically demonstrate that a single universal hu-
man race exists, this idea presented itself to human con-
sciousness as a transcendent ideal and as an ethical standard
for moral deliberation.

I must stress how important in the human story was the
birth of the concept of a Universal Humanum: “The un-
derstanding of a universal humanity originates in the
experience of transcendence; and the ineffable kinship of
under God revealed in the experience can immanently be
expressed only through a myth of descent from a common
mother or father” (Voegelin, 3:107). It took a mystical
experience with a heavenly reality for us on Earth to realize
our extratribal unity, our Universal Humanum. We do not
experience the Universal Humanum on a daily basis, yet it
has become the moral order of the universe as we moderns
view it. For this we can thank the axial insight.

On the one hand, axial seers were grasped by the
transcendent, sometimes thought of in divine terms. On the
other hand, by measuring the empirical world of daily life
over against
the envisioned ideal, our ancestors could
construct ethical norms that
reﬂected a universal and
timeless moral order: “The theoretical breakthrough in each
axial case led to the possibility of universal ethics, the
reassertion of fundamental human equality, and the ne-
cessity of respect for all humans, indeed for all sentient
beings. And yet in each case these assertions came out of
living communities whose religious practices deﬁned who
they were and whose stories were essential to their identi-
ties” (Bellah, 2011, p. 606).

The axial age made the modern age possible. It would
be curious if today’s scientists would look back and elim-
inate the axial insight from our remembered and precedent-
setting history. This would be like a tree branch severing its
relationship to its trunk and roots.

It is curious that in his haste to explain the phenomenon
terms that Wilson limits his
of religion in biological
description to tribalism and bigotry. That is all religion is:
tribalism and bigotry. Wilson feels he can renounce trib-
alism and bigotry because he himself takes a universalistic
and unprejudiced perspective. But, he fails to footnote axial
religion. Like a scientiﬁc paper, which neglects to give
credit to previous research, Wilson neglects to give credit to
the very religious insight that makes possible his criticism
of tribalism and bigotry.

In part, today’s axial thinking is constructive, perhaps
reconstructive. The material out of which we construct our
picture of the axial era is the surviving symbols, liturgies,
and belief systems of the living religious traditions. Some
of our religious traditions bear into the modern world the
axial insight; and they continue to inspire segments of our
emerging global society with high ideals and hope for the
future. The emerging planetary society will be constructed
out of a plurality of religious symbol systems, each of
which individually points to a universal transcendent reality
and the accompanying hint that we must think ethically in
terms of a single universal human race.

CONCLUSION

Because today’s Christian theologians draw primarily from
Scripture and secondarily from ancient Athenian philoso-
phy, they cannot help but say “thank you” to the ancient
axial prophets. By synthesizing an axial notion of a tran-
scendent creator God with a big history interpreted in part
through evolutionary lenses, today’s theistic evolutionists
can ﬁnd meaning in both natural and human history. The
Jesuit Titan of 20th-century theology, Karl Rahner, saw it
this way: “Is a continuous development of the cosmos from
its simplest and most original components right up to its
present differentiation and complexity, the realm of living
being included, acceptable to Christian faith in such a way
that it can leave this whole evolution to natural science as a
thesis or hypothesis, and then, at most, afterwards include
this evolution in a Christian conception of the world? Our
answer is yes” (Rahner, 1988, XXI: 38). The 21st-century
systematic theologian Elizabeth Johnson, sees it the same
way: “The mystery of the living God, utterly transcendent,
is also the creative power who dwells at the heart of the
world sustaining every moment of its evolution” (Johnson,
2007, p.188).

Evolutionary theory need not a priori eliminate from its
purview the axial chapter in the human story. Nor does
evolutionary theory need to eliminate at
the level of
assumption the existence of God or the human experience
with transcendent
reality. Evolutionary theory can be
compatible with theism as well as other forms of religious
belief. The key is this: evolutionary theory should stick to
its original purpose, namely,
to explain speciation in
biology. Charles Darwin titled his principal book of 1859,
The Origin of Species, because he had discovered how
variation in inheritance and natural selection could explain
speciation. This theory did not purport to explain other
things such as the origin of life, the origin of the universe,
or the origin of reductionist materialism. Claims made by
axial prophets to have experienced a shock in their con-
sciousness due to the presence of the divine are simply not
the subject matter of Darwinian evolution. For the big
historian to subordinate everything happening in big

694 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

history to a ﬁctional “evolutionary force” is to promulgate
an ideology of scientism. Evolutionary theory without
scientism can still function as a fertile research program
without interfering with other truths in the human psyche.
“The message has always been twofold,” writes
Francisco J. Ayala, “(1) evolution is good science and
(2) there need not be contradiction between evolution and
religious beliefs” (Ayala, 2007, p. 5). Ayala offers our
conclusion: “Yes, one can believe in both evolution and
God.evolution is not the enemy of religion but, rather, its
friend” (Ayala, 2010, pp. 82e83).

REFERENCES

Ayala, F.J., 2007. Darwin’s Gift to Science and Religion. Joseph Henry

Press, Washington.

Ayala, F.J., 2010. Am I a Monkey? Six Big Questions about Evolution.

Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.

Barbour, I.G., 1990. Religion in an Age of Science. Harper, San Francisco.
Bellah, R.N., 2011. Religion in Human Evolution: From the Paleolithic to

the Axial Age. Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA.

Bellah, R.N. (Ed.), 2012. The Axial Age and its Consequences. Harvard

University Press, Cambridge MA.

Blum, J.N., March 2014. The science of consciousness and mystical
the

radical empiricism. Journal of

experience: an argument
American Academy of Religion 82 (1), 150e173.

for

Brown, C.S., 2007. Big History from the Big Bang to the Present. The

New Press, New York.

Brueggemann, W., 2014. Embracing and/or refusing god-talk. Tikkun 29

(3), 49e50 (Summer).

Chalmers, D.J., 1997. The hard problem: facing up to the problem of
consciousness. In: Shear, J. (Ed.), Explaining Consciousnessethe
Hard Problem. MIT Press, Cambridge MA, pp. 9e30.

Christian, D., Brown, C.S., Benjamin, C., 2014. Big History between

Nothing and Everything. McGraw-Hill, New York.

Clark, T.W., 1997. Function and phenomenology: closing the explanatory
gap. In: Shear, J. (Ed.), Explaining Consciousnessethe Hard Problem.
MIT Press, Cambridge MA, pp. 45e60.

Dawkins, R., 2006. The Selﬁsh Gene. Oxford University Press, 30th

Anniversary Edition, Oxford and New York.

Dehaene, S., 2014. Consciousness and the Brain: Deciphering How the

Brain Codes Our Thought. Viking, New York.

Darwin, C., 1874. The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex,

second ed. John Murray, London.

Dennett, D., 2006. Breaking the Spell. Viking, New York.
Eliade, M., 1957. The Sacred and the Profane: The Signiﬁcance of Reli-
gious Myth, Symbolism, and Ritual within Life and Culture. Harcourt,
Brace, and World, New York.

Gilbert, K., 2014. The universal breakthroughs of big history: devel-
oping a uniﬁed theory. In: Grinin, L., Baker, D., Quaedackers, E.
(Eds.), Teaching and Researching Big History: Exploring a New
Scholarly Field. Uchitel Publishing House, Volgograd, Russia,
pp. 112e146.

Grifﬁn, D.R., 2000. Religion and Scientiﬁc Naturalism: Overcoming the

Conﬂicts. SUNY, Albany NY.

Hawking, S., Mlodinow, L., 2010. The Grand Design. Bantam Books,

New York.

Hick, J., 2010. The New Frontier of Religion and Science: Religious
Experience, Neuroscience and the Transcendent. Macmillan, Palgrave,
New York.

Höffe, O., 2010. Can Virtue Make Us Happy? In: Douglas, R., McGauhey,

Aaron Bunch (Eds.) Northwestern University Press, Evanston IL.

International Big History Association (IBHA), 2014. http://www.

ibhanet.org/.

Jaspers, K., 1953. The Origin and Goal of History. Routledge, New York.
Johnson, E.A., 2007. Quest for the Living God: Mapping Frontiers in the

Theology of God. Continuum, New York.

Jones, D., April 16, 2011. The free will delusion. New Science 210 (2808),

32e35.

Joyce, R., 2013. Ethics after Darwin. In: Ruse, M. (Ed.), The Cambridge
Encyclopedia of Darwin and Evolutionary Thought. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge UK, pp. 461e467.

Kasturi,

J.A., Viswanath, S., Kiulawan, A., Narine, R., 2014.
A progressive Hindu approach to god. Tikkun 29 (3) (Summer)
36e37 and 67e68.

Lyotard, J., 1992. In: Pefanis, J., Thomas, M. (Eds.), The Postmodern

Explained. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.

Metzinger, T., 2009. The Ego Tunnel: The Science of the Mind and the

Myth of the Self. Basic Books, New York.

Monod, J., 1972. Chance and Necessity. In: Wainhouse, A. (Ed.). Collins,

London.

Mühling, M., 2014. Resonances: Neurobiology, Evolution and Theology.

Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, Göttingen.

Nagel, T., 2012. Mind and Cosmos: Why the Materialist Neo-darwinian
Conception of Nature Is Almost Certainly Wrong. Oxford Univer-
sity, Oxford UK.

Peters, T., 2003. Science, Theology, and Ethics. Ashgate, Aldershot UK.
Rahner, K., 1988. Natural science and reasonable faith. In: Theological
Investigation, vol. 21, pp. 16e55. New York: Crossroad, 1961e1988;
XXI.

Rose, S., 2005. The 21st Century Brain. Jonathan Cape, London.
Roy, R., December 2005. Scientism and technology as religions. Zygon 40

(4), 835e844.

Ruse, M., 2013. Introduction. In: Ruse, M. (Ed.), The Cambridge Ency-
clopedia of Darwin and Evolutionary Thought. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge UK, pp. 1e31.

Tye, M. Qualia. In: Zalta, E.N. (Ed.), 2013. The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy (Fall 2013). http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2013/
entries/qualia/.

Voegelin, E., 1956e1987. Order and History. 5 Volumes. Louisiana State

University Press, Baton Rouge LA.

Whitehead, A.N., 1925/1953. Science and the Modern World. Cambridge

University Press, Cambridge UK.

Wilson, E.O., 1975. Sociobiology: The New Synthesis. Harvard Univer-

sity Press, Cambridge MA.

Wilson, E.O., 2012. The Social Conquest of Earth. W.W. Norton, New

York.

Chapter 42

Evolution and the Future of Medicine

M.R. Rose1, G.A. Rutledge1, L.G. Cabral1, L.F. Greer1, A.L. Canﬁeld2 and B.G. Cervantes1
1University of California, Irvine, CA, United States; 2University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States

treat patients, and how patients

INTRODUCTION
There have been three major upheavals in the history
of Western medicine. Each has changed how medical
professionals
regard
healthfulness. Is another change coming? We think there is.
We believe that a fourth reformation of the practice of
medicine is imminent, that it will be based on evolutionary
genomics, and that it will happen before the end of the 21st
century. This reformation is not just historically likely, but
also desirable and necessary for the continued improvement
of patient outcomes. With it will also arrive the possibility
of reducing the aggregate costs of the practice of medicine.
We can’t understand the signiﬁcance of where medicine
is headed without the context of past upheavals in the
foundations of medicine, so we will begin by brieﬂy of-
fering our views on the overall arc of Western medicine to
this point in time. Although the roots go back further to
Egypt and Babylon, auspicious advances in medical un-
derstanding occurred during the classical Greek and Roman
periods. An acknowledged early founder of the scientiﬁc
method as well as anatomy and physiology, Herophilus of
Chalcedon (335e280 BCE) did the ﬁrst-known human
anatomical dissections and with his student Erasistratus
(304eca.250 BCE) established the connection between
mental functions and the brain; mapped sensory and motor
neurons; studied metabolism; and gave names to many of
the bones and muscles (Russo, 2004; see Nutton, 2013).
In the autumn of Hellenistic science and of the Roman
Empire, Galen of Pergamon (129eca.217 CE) discovered
the physiological functions of many of the organ systems,
such as the renal system and the connection between speech
and the brain (Siegel, 1968, 1970; 1973). Much of this
knowledge was lost after the fall of the Roman Empire in
the 5th century CE and through the medieval period, and
recovery was slow and halting through the Renaissance
(Russo, 2004). Only with the 16th century did major
forward progress begin again.

last

The ﬁrst of the three major historical reformations
of Western medicine occurred 1500e1850. Around the
time of
the Reformation in Latin Christendom, when
European surgeons, physicians, and naturalists were no
longer constrained by medieval religious rules prohibiting
dissection, they began to accumulate anatomical and crude
physiological knowledge. Western medical scientists could
at
learn by observation rather than by conjecture
and extrapolation. Pulmonary respiration was described
by Protestant dissident scholar and physician Miguel
Servetus (unpublished, ca.1542), and later published within
Christianismi Restitutio (1553). Soon afterward, he was
burned at the stake near Calvinist Geneva after ﬂeeing
from both Protestant and Catholic authorities. Only three
copies of the book escaped destruction (Hillar and Claire,
2002).

the ﬁrst

literally burned at

Later physicians and biologists still met with contro-
the stake.
versy, but most were not
William Harvey (1578e1657) was not
in his
ﬁeld, but his dissections and descriptions of cardiovascular
circulation in De Motu Cordis (1628) were the most
detailed and deﬁnitive of his formative era. On the basis of
such crude but essential physiological discoveries, Western
medicine resumed progress. By the 19th century, physi-
cians were able to use their new information and skills to
save lives in at least some circumstances, if only by such
elementary means as the use of efﬁcient tourniquets to
prevent bleeding out.

The second reformation of medicine is more famous.
In the late 19th century, medical microbiology provided the
intellectual framework and conceptual insights required to
mitigate the spread of contagious disease. Early in the 19th
century, the notion still lingered on that epidemic diseases
such as bubonic plague, cholera, and malaria (literally,
“sick air”) were caused by miasma of the air, or by
polluting fumes from ﬁlth and putrid decaying matter (Last,
2007; Karlen, 1995; Kokayeff, 2013). There had been

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00042-9
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

695

696 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

this might not be the case:

in 1546,
earlier hints that
Girolamo Fracastoro proposed that
seed-like disease
contagions could be spread among people. In 1676, Anton
van Leeuwenhoek empirically observed microorganisms
through the microscope (Egerton, 2006), and earlier, in
1665, Robert Hooke had microscopically observed mold
fruiting bodies (Gest, 2005). It is possible that a Jesuit
priest, Athanasius Kirchner, was the ﬁrst to see microor-
ganisms, decades before the publication of Robert Hooke’s
Micrographica (Wainwright, 2003).

By 1700, physician Nicolas Landry had proposed that
microscopic “worms” caused diseases such as smallpox
(Crookshank, 1888). Botanist Richard Bradley, in 1720,
suggested that microscopic “poisonous insects” caused
plague and “all pestilential distempers” (Santer, 2009).
By the late 19th century, botanist Ferdinand Cohn had
classiﬁed bacteria by shape (Drews, 1999), and scientists of
the day had a starting point for discussing their character-
istics and role in the transmission of diseases.

Intellectual progress with the problem of contagious
disease accelerated during the 19th century. The ﬁrst to
empirically link disease causally to a microorganism was
Agostino Bassi, who showed in experiments from 1808 to
1813 that a “vegetable parasite” caused silkworms to
contract
the disease muscardine (Barbo, 1836), now
understood to be fungal. Bassi went on to propose that
many diseases of plants, animals, and humans are the result
of infectious microscopic organisms. In 1847, the obstetric
physician Ignaz Semmelweis linked the high puerperal
fever infection rates in pregnant women to “cadaverous
particles” (cited in István, 1983) on the unwashed hands of
medical doctors returning from autopsies, in strong contrast
with the much lower rates associated with those cared
for by midwives (Hanninen et al., 1983). Dr. John Snow
(1855) proposed that cholera was caused by drinking a
contagion found in water. In 1854, Filippo Pacini discov-
ered the microorganism responsible for cholera, Vibrio
cholera, which was later rediscovered by Robert Koch
(Howard-Jones, 1984; Bentivoglio and Pacini, 1995).

result

Starting in the 1850s, Pasteur experimentally estab-
lished that microbial fermentation and growth in nutrient
media do not
from spontaneous generation; he
studied the etiology of puerperal fever; he discovered that
microorganisms were responsible for spoilage in various
types of drinks; and he introduced his namesake heat
treatment, pasteurization, as a preventive measure (Pasteur,
1880; Ullmann, 2007). He linked two silkworm parasitic
diseases, pébrine and ﬂacherie, to egg-infecting parasites
(Ullmann, 2007), and, building on others’ work, Pasteur
helped develop rabies and anthrax vaccines. Other notable
advances of this era have also stood the test of time:
German physician and microbialist Robert Koch linked
microbial pathogens with speciﬁc diseases, and helped
develop criteria, called Koch’s Postulates or Koch-Henle

transmembrane

Postulates, that have been adapted and remain informa-
tive in the study and treatment of infectious bacteriological
disease (Brock, 1999). This microbial revolution in the
understanding and treatment of infectious disease allowed
physicians to save millions of lives during the 20th century.
The third reformation of medicine has chieﬂy taken
place since 1950. The development of molecular biology
has recast cell physiology within a molecular framework,
eliminating many of the pre-1950 ideas about the founda-
tions of chronic disease. In particular, the molecular genetic
foundations of the “errors of metabolism” identiﬁed by
Archibold Garrod in his 1923 book Inborn Errors of
Metabolism have been discovered. The speciﬁc DNA
sequence changes, as well as the downstream metabolic
deﬁciencies, of numerous genetic diseases have been well
characterized and can now be precisely diagnosed using
molecular genetic assays. For example, cystic ﬁbrosis is
now known to be a result of disabling mutations in the
cystic ﬁbrosis
regulator
(CFTR) gene (Rommens et al., 1989; Gadsby et al., 2006).
This gene encodes a transmembrane ion transporter protein
that, when so mutated, misfolds so as to interrupt many
epithelial secretionary processes, with debilitating and
life-threatening congestive results (Riordan et al., 1989;
Childers et al., 2007). The cause of Huntington’s Disease
has been shown to be an excess of repeats of a glutamine-
encoding cytosine-adenine-guanine codon near the 5
end
of the huntingtin (HD or HTT) gene (Huntington’s Disease
Collaborative Research Group, 1993; Choi et al., 2014;
Harjes and Wanker, 2003; Goehler et al., 2004). We have
made signiﬁcant headway in characterizing other genetic
diseases as well. The very rare HutchinsoneGilford pro-
geria syndrome (HGPS) mimics accelerated aging and
causes early death, often by coronary arterial disease or
stroke (McClintock et al., 2007). About 90% of progeria
cases have a synonymous G608G (GGC > GGT) mutation
in exon 11 of the lamin A/C (LMNA) gene, which activates
a splice donor site, leading to the production of the path-
ological protein progerin (McClintock et al., 2007).

conductance

0

Characterizing diseases

such as Huntington’s and
progeria at the molecular level is an important step toward
treating and even preventing them. There have been cases
in which uncovering the underlying biochemistry and
molecular biology of particular genetic diseases has led
directly to effective treatment. One example is the treatment
of phenylketonuria by modifying diet to reduce phenylal-
anine
exposure, notably after neonatal biochemical
diagnosis.

signiﬁcant

This brief overview of prior landmark episodes in
medical history shows
reformation during
distinctive episodes of scientiﬁc discovery and practical
advocacy. It is far from the case that medicine has placidly
progressed from its foundations in the classical era of
Hippocrates.

We are not novel in proposing the need for a fourth
reformation of medicine, one focusing on incorporating
ﬁndings and directives from evolutionary biology. To give
one such previous proposal,
the idea of incorporating
evolutionary biology in medicine was put forward with
particular prominence, force, and eloquence by Nesse and
Williams in their 1994 book, Why We Get Sick: The New
Science of Darwinian Medicine. Our thoughts have devel-
oped in the light cast by that work.

Here we provide, ﬁrst, a general discussion of the idea
of evolutionary medicine; second, a discussion of the
relevance of evolutionary genomic research to biomedical
research and medical practice; third, an introduction to the
relevance of “Hamiltonian” research to the prevention
and treatment of chronic diseases of aging; and fourth,
thoughts on the possibilities of using evolutionary genomic
strategies for the development of pharmaceuticals.

THE IDEA OF EVOLUTIONARY MEDICINE
The basic idea of incorporating ﬁndings from evolutionary
biology in medicine seems, at ﬁrst, eminently reasonable.
After all,
the ecology and evolutionary genetics of a
pathogen will often be key to the effective treatment of its
infections in humans, as discussed in other chapters.
Similarly, investigating the population genetics underlying
the transmission and frequency of genetic diseases is a
longstanding part of medical genetics. However, it is when
we turn to chronic noninfectious diseases that now affect
the majority of adults that things become trickier.

A Two Cultures Problem
There is a major problem inhibiting the introduction
of evolutionary biology into the practice of medicine.
Evolutionary biology is the most general, and the most
theoretical, of all ﬁelds of life science. It focuses on large
swaths of time, difﬁcult mathematical theories, and now
genome-wide patterns of genetic polymorphism. Among all
academic ﬁelds within the life sciences, evolutionary
biology is most comparable to physics in its aspirations
toward strong inference tests of powerful yet general
mathematical
theories. In terms of Ernest Rutherford’s
aphorism that “all science is either physics or stamp-
collecting,” modern-day evolutionary biology falls on the
physics side of that divide.

Medicine falls on the other side of the divide. The
practice of medicine revolves around the correct inference
of particular details of pathophysiology, singular diseases
or syndromes, and speciﬁc infectious pathogens, together
with the most effective choices of medication or procedure
for treatment. Where evolutionary biology takes on the
whole diversity of life, the concrete and narrowly focused
subject of medicine is humans, their disorders, and their

Evolution and the Future of Medicine Chapter | 42 697

pathogens. This creates a “two cultures” problem, in which
the fundamental approach and breadth of one ﬁeld could
not be more different from those of the other ﬁeld. How
can we construct a functional bridge across which the
intellectual scope and powerful concepts of evolutionary
biology can be transported into the realm of medicine?

Two Strategies for Bridging Biological
Cultures
The idea of evolutionary medicine is hardly a secret, and
there are symposia where evolutionary biologists and
biomedical academics propose new therapeutic approaches
to speciﬁc pathogens and chronic disorders based on
relatively narrow hypotheses derived from evolutionary
research or speculations (Stearns and Koella, 2007).
However, many of these attempts to bridge the evolutionary
and medical cultures are in effect Darwinian supplemen-
tation, rather than fundamental reform, of medical research
and practice. Although the reductionist theorists of modern
medicine may disparage such efforts, practicing physicians
who have experienced the limitations and failures of
reductionist dogmas ﬁrsthand may be more open-minded.
Applying Darwinian evolution to medicine is still a
tenuous and not yet systemic endeavor, although the
potential for success is increasing as awareness of the
beneﬁts of cross-cultural scientiﬁc collaboration increases.
Interest in ﬁnding ways to apply evolution to medicine has
been around since the late 19th century (Zampieri, 2009),
and there is a growing effort
toward systematically
reorganizing medicine in an evolutionary framework
(Shanks and Pyles, 2007; Román-Franco, 2009).

One area in which there has been some useful
integration of evolutionary biology into medicine has been
in the study of adaptive immunity. Immunologist Niels
Jerne (1955) proposed that there are a large variety of
globulin antibody molecules continuously synthesized,
some fraction of which possess chemical afﬁnity toward
any antigen entering the blood or lymph. Physician David
Talmage (1957) further argued that successful antibodye
antigen conjugates formed on the surface of speciﬁc cells
producing the antibody caused the proliferation of such
cells. Building on Jerne and Talmage, Macfarlane Burnet
(1959) developed the “clonal selection” theory of how
“antigentic determinants” trigger antibody-producing cell
proliferation, including long-term immunological memory,
through differential afﬁnities to the antigen in question.
This hypothesis also began to crack the door toward
understanding autoimmune disease.

Today, in the age of genomics, we are beginning to
recognize what was far beyond the imagination of Jerne,
Talmage, Burnet, and other early students of adaptive
immunity: Darwinian evolution has had a direct hand in
immune adaptation. For instance, we now see that the great

698 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

diversity of antibody production in the lymphocytic V(J)D
system is tied to recombination-activating genes (RAG1 and
RAG2), the ﬁrst of which is homologous to a recombinase
found in transposons
(Kapitonov and Jurka, 2005),
genomic hitchhikers from evolutionarily ancient infections.
Phylogenomic analysis is now probing the evolutionary
histories of the genes that encode the antigen presentation
and processing system (Forni et al., 2014). Further
advances of evolutionary theory in immunology with direct
medical applications are likely to follow in unforeseen
ways.

We certainly do not wish to impede even piecemeal
accretions of evolutionary research within a medical
context, but
there is an alternative to incremental and
haphazard progress. Thinking about the three major refor-
mations of medical practice during the past 500 years, we
note that they hinged on eliminating well-established but
materially erroneous dogmas. For example, Pasteur and his
followers fought avidly against
the inclination of most
physicians of the day to ignore the importance of microbial
contamination. That
revolutions
in biology were eventually followed by substantive
revolutions in medical education and practice, despite the
characteristic resistance the medical establishment has
shown toward such innovation and extirpation. Here we
propose that a fourth large-scale reformation of medicine
should follow from the introduction of evolutionary
thinking into medical education and practice.

intellectual

is to say,

AN EVOLUTIONARY PERSPECTIVE ON
GENOMIC MEDICINE

The Failed Promise of Reductionist
Genomics
When James Watson and others were avidly selling the idea
of the Human Genome Project to their skeptical colleagues
and to Congress, they broadly suggested that learning the
genomic master programs of life, particularly that of the
human species, would make understanding and treating
disease vastly easier. In effect, they promised, once we
know the entirety of the DNA sequence of the human
genome, reading off the key sites controlling medical
disorders will become straightforward, with powerful new
treatments to follow shortly thereafter.

Nothing like

that has happened. Straightforward
solutions to medical problems did not come from the ﬁrst
two human genomes fully sequenced in 2003. Nor have
they since come from the thousands of human genomes
analyzed in Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS) of
chronic diseases. It has all turned out to be much more
difﬁcult than Watson and the other molecular biologists
anticipated, with much more causal complexity and

subtlety. While the sequencing of thousands or indeed
hundreds of thousands of human genomes will add enor-
mously to our understanding of human evolution, medical
diagnosis and practice have not been obviously illuminated
by this avalanche of detailed information about
the
human genome. The advent of genome-wide sequencing
and analysis has been arguably the most radical trans-
formation of the empirical foundations of biology in its
entire history, but the immediate medical revolution that
was so conﬁdently prophesied has not materialized.

An Evolutionary Alternative to Reductionist
Genomics
Evolutionary geneticists are now in the business of parsing
the complexity of genomes with respect to both (1) the
evolution of such genomes and (2) how genomes produce
phenotypes. We already know that there is a vast amount of
genetic polymorphism in the genomes of humans and other
outbred animals, such as natural populations of the fruit ﬂy
Drosophila melanogaster. GWAS are beginning to show
that a stunningly large amount of human genetic poly-
morphism is functionally signiﬁcant (eg, Welcome Trust
Case Control Consortium, 2007; the ENCODE project).
Unfortunately, the analysis of standing genetic variation
using genome-wide technologies has proven much less
penetrating than was hoped (Rose et al., 2011; Burke et al.,
2014). It has not revealed the master controls that underlie
either organismal function or medical pathology, except in
cases involving the mutations underlying certain severe
genetic diseases such as Huntington’s Disease, progeria,
and cystic ﬁbrosis.

Evolutionary biologists also perform GWAS analyses
and add to it experimental evolution to amplify genetic
differentiation. Experimental evolutionary genomics has
proven an exceptionally useful tool for parsing the genomic
foundations of both function and dysfunction in model
species, from Escherichia coli to Drosophila melanogaster.
This approach is illustrated well by a study of the genomic
foundations of adaptation to elevated temperature in
E. coli., in which Tenaillon et al. (2012) propagated more
than 100 replicate populations of E. coli for 2000 genera-
tions at high temperatures. Then they sequenced one
genome from each of these replicate populations at the
end of selection. All replicate populations achieved high
levels of adaptation to high temperature conditions, but the
pattern of gene sequence evolution was much more com-
plex. In total, 1331 DNA sequence changes were found
across the ensemble of populations, with more than 600
different sites undergoing evolutionary change identiﬁed.
While adaptation to high temperatures repeatedly employed
common pathways, the genetic details of what just 2000
bacterial generations had accomplished were far more

complex than expected in conventional scenarios for the
genetic foundations of adaptation in bacteria. Bacterial
genomes are orders of magnitude simpler than those of
multicellular animals like humans. The complexity of the
genomics of bacterial adaptation to elevated temperature
sets a minimum level for what we can expect for the ge-
nomics of human function and disorders.

The combination of experimental evolutionary geno-
mics with phylogenetic tools allows evolutionary geneti-
cists to parse the human genome. Many of the genomic
sites with functionally important genetic variation for
experimental evolution in animals like Drosophila are
embedded in sequences that have close homologues in
human populations. This lets us combine experimental
evolutionary genomics in model animal species with in-
formation about the human genome in order to approach
human medical problems with far greater scientiﬁc pene-
tration than ever before. In effect, experimental evolution
can serve as a key to unlock the functional mysteries of
model animal species genomes and then, of most medical
interest, the genomes of patients. At present, the use of this
strategy is just getting started. Highly provisional results
linking Drosophila experimental evolutionary genomic
ﬁndings to human GWAS have been sketched out in the
context of the chronic diseases of aging (Rose et al., 2010).

A HAMILTONIAN APPROACH TO THE
CHRONIC DISEASES OF AGING

Aging: A Reductionist Failure
In no area has the inadequacy of reductionist biomedical
research been more obvious than in the study of aging.
Although it has proven possible for molecular geneticists to
construct mutant yeast and nematodes with greatly
extended longevities,
these organisms characteristically
have reduced reproduction, mobility, competitive ability,
and/or cognition (Van Voorhies et al., 2006; Bansal et al.,
2015). In effect, lifespan is increased, but what we will call
healthspan is diminished. This singular defect of this large-
effect mutation strategy dissuades most, though not all,
gerontologists from recommending comparable molecular
interventions for chronic human disorders.

The Evolutionary Solution to the Scientiﬁc
Problem of Aging
Building on the verbal sketches of R. A. Fisher, P. B.
Medawar, and G. C. Williams, in 1966 W. D. Hamilton
formulated the beginnings of a mathematical theory for the
evolution of aging based on declining forces of natural
selection with adult age. From 1970 to 1980, Brian Char-
lesworth developed this body of theory to a satisfactory

Evolution and the Future of Medicine Chapter | 42 699

level (eg, Charlesworth, 1980), making the mathematical
theory for the explanation of aging among the strongest
examples of biological theory in general. There have been
many elaborations of this core theory, particularly with
respect to the evolution of very late life history (eg, Mueller
et al., 2011), but the core mathematical theory developed
by Hamilton and Charlesworth is still central
to most
theoretical analyses of aging within evolutionary biology.
The Hamiltonian theory of aging has been the chief
foundation of evolutionary research on aging, or senes-
cence, since about 1980. Experimental work has clearly
corroborated the Hamiltonian explanation for aging, not
least by the simplicity of producing animals with longer
healthspans by manipulating Hamilton’s forces of natural
selection, by shifting reproductive windows in evolving
populations (Rose, 1991; Rose et al., 2004). As a body of
research in evolutionary biology, Hamiltonian studies
of aging provide one of the more important and likely
candidates for insertion into the corpus of medical research
and practice.

Applying Hamiltonian Research to Human
Chronic Disease
Age-related diseases such as cardiovascular disease and
type 2 diabetes are proliferating globally. For this reason,
the strategy of applying the well-founded discoveries of
evolutionary research on aging seems not merely reason-
able but imperative. However, such application quickly
runs into problems arising from the ad hoc or supplemen-
tary invocation of evolution in discussions of health and
disease.

claims.

Loren Cordain and others (O’Keefe and Cordain, 2004;
Jönsson et al., 2009; Lindeberg, 2010; De Vany and Taleb,
2011) have invoked evolutionary thinking in their claims
that adopting a hunter-gatherer diet will alleviate chronic
disorders, and there have been medical case histories
seemingly supporting these
Indeed, medical
anthropologists have shown repeatedly that
individuals
with hunter-gatherer ancestry might alleviate their chronic
midlife medical disorders by switching back to their
ancestral diets (for example, Lindeberg, 2010). However,
evolutionary experiments using model organisms such as
D. melanogaster have shown extensive adaptation to novel
diets within a small number of generations (Matos et al.,
1999; Simoees et al., 2008). Research with urea supple-
mentation in Drosophila provides a clear example of
adaptation to noxious novel foods proceeding quickly.
Borash et al. (2000) studied the developmental viability of
D. melanogaster populations selected for urea tolerance.
When reared as larvae on urea-supplemented media,
females and males from the urea-selected populations
developed much more successfully.

700 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

This seemingly implies that human populations that
have long practiced agriculture should be well adapted to
the agricultural diet and lifestyle, as Zuk (2013) has pro-
posed. She contends that human populations that have
practiced agriculture for 200e400 generations have had
sufﬁcient evolutionary time to adapt to an agricultural diet.
Zuk draws particular attention to the evidence for adapta-
tion to milk consumption among European adults, such as
the continued activity of the lactase enzyme at later ages in
European populations.

If human populations that have long practiced agricul-
ture are well adapted to the agricultural diet and lifestyle, as
Zuk argues, how is it
that adopting a hunter-gatherer
diet alleviates chronic disorders, as clinical studies have
shown (Lindeberg, 2010)? Hamiltonian evolutionary theory
can resolve this apparent contradiction. Strong forces of
natural selection at early ages have provided young humans
with long agricultural ancestry reasonable health under
agricultural
the decline of
Hamilton’s forces at later ages can lead to a mismatch with
the agricultural diet at later ages.

conditions. Nonetheless,

rice, or corn would not

To illustrate this principle in a simple example:
approximately 10,000 years ago, a child introduced to
wheat,
likely have had the
metabolic equipment necessary to process and utilize these
agricultural foods. As a result, that child would have been
more likely to become malnourished and more likely to
succumb to infection than a child who did happen to have
the metabolic enzymes to thrive on this novel diet.
The healthy and strong child would have been more
likely to live on to reproduce and pass on the genes for
these metabolic enzymes, allowing direct descendants to
not only tolerate this diet, but to thrive at early ages, and
even into young adulthood. This effect would have become
stronger over subsequent generations with progressively
greater dependence on agricultural foods, and more and
more individuals would have been able to tolerate and
thrive on an agricultural diet during childhood and early
adulthood.

from thriving on agricultural

The process of selection that sieves out those alleles
that prevent us
foods
becomes weaker as we get older, and then grinds to a halt
after the average age at which populations stop reproduc-
ing. In much the same way that many individuals lose
their tolerance to lactose at later ages of life, many begin to
lose their tolerance to agricultural foods in and around their
30s or 40s. Thus, a more complete evolutionary analysis
suggests that patients with chronic aging-related diseases
such as arthritis, diabetes, hypertension, and hypercholes-
terolemia, should adopt a more Paleolithic diet and lifestyle
speciﬁcally at
they have a long
agricultural ancestry (Mueller et al., 2011, Chapter 11). In
addition to these disorders, perhaps even insomnia

later ages, even if

and depression might be addressed by a change to an
ancestral diet.

STRATEGIES FOR PHARMACEUTICAL
DEVELOPMENT

The Impasse Facing Reductionist
Pharmaceutical Research and Development
for Chronic Disorders
Genomic analysis of functional characters, from height in
humans (eg, Yang et al., 2010) to developmental speed in
fruit ﬂies (Burke et al., 2010), has revealed the functional
involvement of many genomic sites, from hundreds to
thousands. Given the number of sites involved and the
rarity of major effect loci identiﬁed in these studies, it is
likely that most chronic diseases are affected by genetic
variation of small effect at many genomic loci.

The traditional reductionist pharmaceutical research and
development (R&D) strategy focuses on a small number of
pathways for disease etiology; often, on just one pathway.
Type 1 diabetes, as an exemplar, is a disorder involving
complete, or almost complete, failure of insulin production.
The intravenous supply of insulin is the medical interven-
tion of choice, in order to approximate functional regulation
of serum glucose. A single protein biosynthetic failure is
countered by providing that protein. In this case, there is a
single defective pathway that is treated by the provision of
a single substance. But of all the cases of chronic diabetes,
type 1 diabetes affects just a small minority of patients,
from as much as 6 per 10,000 in European children to about
one-hundredth that rate among children in India (Gale,
2012), although failures of diagnosis may contribute to this
disparity.

By contrast, according to the World Health Organiza-
tion, “347 million people worldwide have diabetes, 90% of
whom have type 2 diabetes” (World Health Organization,
2014). Type 2 diabetes is a disorder characterized by
insensitivity to insulin. That is, insulin is produced but does
not effectively regulate serum glucose levels. The resulting
chronic elevation of serum glucose levels in turn leads to
progressive damage to multiple tissues. From a Hamilto-
nian perspective,
type 2 diabetes is a chronic disorder
among adults that is strongly affected by lifestyle factors,
improving in incidence or progression with higher activity
levels, lower body weight, and/or a diet low in carbohy-
drates. That is, modiﬁcation of the 20th century sedentary
lifestyle reliant on processed foods reduces the likelihood
of type 2 diabetes, even among those diagnosed with pre-
diabetic elevation of serum glucose levels. In contrast to the
effectiveness of
the pharmaceutical
treatment of type 2 diabetes is only moderately successful.
Medications such as metformin (Glumetza, Fortamet,

lifestyle changes,

Riomet, Glucophage) slow its progression, but do not
entirely eliminate the pathophysiology of the disorder.
Characteristically, such medications lose effectiveness over
time. In conventional medical thought, medications pre-
scribed for a speciﬁc ailment are simple solutions to a
singular disorder. Any other effects are considered “side
effects,” and are of a lesser and secondary impact on
nonessential systems. But in practice, that is not always the
case; for example, antipsychotics used extensively to treat
schizophrenia, various affect disorders, anxiety, and
insomnia can accelerate the progression of type 2 diabetes.
This occurs as a result of metabolic syndrome, a known
effect of some antipsychotics, which consists of obesity,
high cholesterol, and diabetes. In particular, antipsychotics
such as olanzapine, quetiapine, and clozapine, can lead to
the development of type 2 diabetes.

is

that

the disorder

A number of biochemical pathways are known to affect
type 2 diabetes, such as PPAR-ɤ, which serve as targets for
the development of medication (Bermúdez et al., 2010).
But the genomic analysis of type 2 diabetes suggests that
there are many genomic sites that affect its incidence (eg,
Huang et al., 2014; Kong et al., 2014; Padmalayam, 2014;
Grover et al., 2014). A problem facing the treatment of type
2 diabetes
involves numerous
biochemical mechanisms, each of which is likely to have
only a small effect on the incidence and progression of the
disorder. How can pharmaceuticals be developed that can
simultaneously target the many components of the complex
underlying machinery of this, or other similarly complex,
disorder? There is no certainty that a candidate medication
that targets just one of these pathways can be effectively
combined with medications that target other pathways that
underlie type 2 diabetes. The complexity of the drug trials
that would be required to best calibrate this polypharmacy
is daunting.

The Impasse Facing Evolutionary-Genomic
Pharmaceutical Research and Development
for Aging
An emerging cliché of health advocacy is the idea of
“treating aging,” as chronic disorders such as type 2 dia-
betes, hypertension, high cholesterol, and chronic back and
joint pain all show a striking pattern of age association.
That is, numerous chronic disorders have incidence patterns
that correlate with biological age, particularly after age 30.
Cardiovascular diseases such as atherosclerosis, which is
not due to mechanical trauma, and cancers other than those
such as retinoblastoma, which is due to a rare genotype,
have patterns of incidence that increase exponentially with
adult age. Thus, it is now commonly argued by gerontol-
ogists that these aging-associated diseases are caused by a
common underlying physiological progression that deﬁnes
aging itself.

Evolution and the Future of Medicine Chapter | 42 701

In contrast to the conclusions of present-day gerontol-
ogists, evolutionary biologists argue that aging is not a
physiological process any more than adaptation itself is
(eg, Mueller et al., 2011; Rose et al., 2012). Rather,
evolutionary biologists consider aging to be a pattern of
age-dependent detuning of adaption. In this view, there is
no underlying physiological process of aging whatsoever,
turning the notion of “treating aging” on its ear, and making
the proposal to treat that conjectural process, rather than
the
engenders,
impracticable.

secondary chronic disorders

that

it

This does not mean that evolutionary biologists have
less interest in mitigating the effects of aging; rather, we
have very different strategies for retuning age-dependent
adaptation so as to postpone if not effectively eliminate
aging and its attendant chronic disorders (eg, Rose et al.,
2014). After all, evolutionists have been deliberately post-
poning and slowing aging using experimental evolution for
decades (eg, Rose et al., 2004). Rose et al. (2010) pre-
sented, in reasonable detail, one such strategy for mitigating
human aging, using genetic homologies between the
experimental evolutionary genomics of aging in fruit ﬂies
and the genomics of human chronic age-associated diseases
such as type 2 diabetes.

just

it would be very difﬁcult

Problems with evolutionary genomic proposals should
be noted carefully. First, such proposals face the problem of
trying out many combinations of multiple candidate sub-
stances that might affect underlying pathways identiﬁed by
genomic analysis,
like reductionist pharmaceutical
R&D strategies. Second, in the absence of a comprehensive
and detailed understanding of the physiological genomics
that underlie the tuning of human age-dependent adapta-
tion,
to choose candidate
substances to test in any such massive drug trials. This
suggests that there are decades of additional research ahead
before the advent of the systems biology models of human
age-dependent adaptation required to refashion human ag-
ing (Rose et al., 2014). The direct approach to the study of
human aging that evolutionary research on aging suggests
is possible might not be a practicable strategy for some time
to come. Eventually it should yield to the advancing tools
of network analysis of big data, but that is not an immediate
prospect.

A Promising Middle Way?
A less-noticed feature of
research using experimental
evolution is that it can be somewhat narrowly focused. The
classic studies on the evolution of age-dependent or
environment-dependent
adaptation focused on ﬁtness
itself
life-historical
components (eg, Rose, 1984). But experimental evolution
can be applied to any characteristic that can be used as a
focus of selection, from resistance to acute lethal stressors

(eg, Lenski et al., 1991) or

its

702 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

(eg, Rose et al., 1992) to running behavior (eg, Swallow
et al., 2009).

that

underpin

increased

The physiological mechanics of slowed aging in
fruit ﬂies have been studied using selection experiments
focused on bits of that physiological machinery separately
(Rose et al., 2004). For example, a characteristic feature of
slowed aging in experimentally evolved fruit ﬂies is
increased desiccation resistance (Service et al., 1985).
Selecting for
increased desiccation resistance in turn
increases lifespan (Rose et al., 1992). The physiological
characteristics
desiccation
resistance are increased water content and reduced rates of
water loss (Chippindale et al., 1998). These two charac-
teristics in turn evolve independently from each other
(Archer et al., 2007). Therefore, if we were interested in
pharmaceutically increasing desiccation resistance in fruit
ﬂies, we could focus on increasing their water content and
reducing their rate of water loss. This is a more tractable
problem than ﬁnding medications that affect the ﬂy aging
pattern as a whole (Matsagas et al., 2009; Rose et al.,
2010). The choice of such pharmaceutical candidates could
in turn be guided by genomic analysis of
fruit ﬂy
populations that have evolved high levels of desiccation
resistance.

We are not particularly interested in augmenting
desiccation resistance in fruit ﬂies as an end point.
However, fruit ﬂies also show progressive heart disease as a
function of age (Nishimura et al., 2011; Ocorr et al.,
2007a,b), and fruit ﬂies
that have evolved greater
lifespans have more robust hearts (Shahrestani et al., in
preparation). Furthermore, conventional genetic analysis of
loci like opa1 has already revealed similarities between the
genetic foundations of heart disease in humans and in fruit
ﬂies (eg, Shahrestani et al., 2009). This suggests that we
could use a more focal evolutionary genomic strategy to
develop medications for speciﬁc chronic disorders such as
heart disease,
taking advantage of genetic similarities
between fruit ﬂies and humans whenever they are found.
Such a strategy could proceed by selecting for enhance-
ments of characteristics such as heart
robustness in
Drosophila. These fruit ﬂies could then be genomically
analyzed using sequencing of DNA or analyses of gene
expression. As proposed by Rose et al. (2010), the loci
identiﬁed by experimental evolution could then be tested
for both genetic and functional parallels
in patient
populations, as is now done for candidate loci of major
effect
in studies of mutant model organisms. The loci
identiﬁed using experimental evolutionary genomics could
then be used as sources of
information for choosing
candidate pharmaceuticals. Initial rounds of testing could
proceed in the model organism, rather than on patient
populations, reducing expense and accelerating the R&D
process.

Medications developed using this strategy are unlikely
to provide the complete and general cessation of aging
sought by some advocates of radical life extension (eg, de
Grey and Rae, 2007). As has previously been argued (eg,
Rose et al., 2014), the elimination of aging is probably
decades away. But focal medications for chronic disorders
could substantially extend survival and function, and in
turn quality of life, beyond the beneﬁts achievable using
Hamiltonian lifestyle and diet modiﬁcation.

their

ideas

insertion of

CONCLUSION: A FOURTH RE-VISIONING
OF MEDICINE
The piecemeal
from evolutionary
biology into medicine will continue. These ideas are in
vogue and provide decent sound bites, so they are able to
garner public attention regardless of
legitimacy.
However, merely transferring sporadic insights
from
evolutionary biology to medicine, while intermittently
useful, can also generate confusion among both physicians
and patients. We propose that a more useful strategy would
be the wholesale re-visioning of medicine within an
evolutionary context. Reductionist assumptions underlying
medical practice and pharmaceutical development will
continue to be challenged by the complexity of the geno-
mics of human pathophysiology. These challenges will be
increased by the fact that medical research into aging has
made some fundamental errors in characterizing its actual
causes and nature. To achieve the best patient outcomes,
the evolutionary reformulation of
the foundations of
medicine should be thoroughgoing, careful, and systematic.
We do not claim to have achieved anything like that here.
But we hope that we have identiﬁed the need for such
reformation, as well as some of its promise.

REFERENCES

Archer, M.A., Bradley, T.J., Mueller, L.D., Rose, M.R., 2007. Using
experimental evolution to study the physiological mechanisms of
desiccation resistance in Drosophila melanogaster. Physiological and
Biochemical Zoology 80 (4), 386e398. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/
518354.

Bansal, A., Zhu, L.J., Yen, K., Tissenbaum, H.A., 2015. Uncoupling
lifespan and healthspan in Caenorhabditis elegans longevity mutants.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 112 (3), E277eE286.

Barbo, J., 1836. De la muscardine (maladie des vers à soie). Bonbée, Paris,

France.

Bentivoglio, M., Pacini, P., 1995. Filippo Pacini: a determined observer.
Brain Research Bulletin 38 (2), 161e165. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
0361-9230(95)00083-Q.

Bermúdez, V., Finol, F., Parra, N., Parra, M., Pérez, A., Peñaranda, L.,
Vílchez, D., Rojas, J., Arráiz, N., Velasco, M., 2010. PPAR-gamma
agonists and their role in type 2 diabetes mellitus management.

American Journal of Therapeutics 17 (3), 274e283. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1097/MJT.0b013e3181c08081.

Borash, D.J., Pierce, V.A., Gibbs, A.G., Mueller, L.D., 2000. Evolution of
ammonia and urea tolerance in Drosophila melanogaster: resistance
and cross-tolerance. Journal of Insect Physiology 46 (5), 763e769.

Brock, T.D., 1999. Robert Koch: A Life in Medicine and Bacteriology.

American Society of Microbiology Press, Washington, DC.

Burke, M.K., Dunham, J.P., Shahrestani, P., Thornton, K.R., Rose, M.R.,
Long, A.D., 2010. Genome-wide analysis of a long-term evolution
experiment with Drosophila. Nature 467 (7315), 587e590.

Burke, M.K., King, E.G., Shahrestani, P., Rose, M.R., Long, A.D., 2014.
Genome-wide association study of extreme longevity in Drosophila
melanogaster. GBE 6 (1), 1e11. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/gbe/evt180.
Burnet, F.M., 1959. The Clonal Selection Theory of Acquired Immunity.

Vanderbilt University Press, Nashville, TN.

Charlesworth, B., 1980. Evolution in Age-structured Populations. Cam-

bridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Childers, M., Eckel, G., Himmel, A., Caldwell, J., 2007. A new model of
cystic ﬁbrosis pathology: lack of transport of glutathione and its
thiocyanate conjugates. Medical Hypotheses 68 (1), 101e112.

Chippindale, A.K., Gibbs, A.G., Sheik, M., Yee, K.J., Djawdan, M.,
Bradley, T.J., Rose, M.R., 1998. Resource acquisition and the evo-
lution of stress resistance in Drosophila melanogaster. Evolution 52
(5), 1342e1352. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2411304.

Choi, Y.B., Kadakkuzha, B.M., Liu, X.A., Akhmedov, K., Kandel, E.R.,
Puthanveettil, S.V., 2014. Huntingtin is critical both pre- and post-
synaptically for
long-term learning-related synaptic plasticity in
Aplysia. PLoS One. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0103004.
Crookshank, E., 1888. The history of the germ theory. BMJ 1 (1415), 312.
de Grey, A., Rae, M., 2007. Ending Aging: The Rejuvenation Break-
throughs That Could Reverse Human Aging in Our Lifetime. St.
Martin’s Press, New York, NY.

De Vany, A., Taleb, N.N., 2011. The New Evolution Diet: What Our
Paleolithic Ancestors Can Teach Us About Weight Loss, Fitness, and
Aging. Rodale Press (incorporated).

Drews, G., 1999. Ferdinand Cohn, among the founders of microbiology.

ASM News 65 (8), 547.

Egerton, F.N., 2006. A history of the ecological sciences, Part 19:
Leeuwenhoek’s microscopic natural history. Bulletin of
the
Ecological Society of America 87, 47. http://dx.doi.org/10.1890/0012-
9623(2006)87[47:AHOTES]2.0.CO;2.

Forni, D., Cagliani, R., Tresoldi, C., Pozzoli, U., De Gioia, L., Filippi, G.,
Riva, S., Menozzi, G., Colleoni, M., Biasin, M., Lo Caputo, S.,
Mazzotta, F., Giacomo, P., Comi, G.P., Bresolin, N., Clerici, M.,
Sironi, M., 2014. An evolutionary analysis of antigen processing and
presentation across different timescales reveals pervasive selection.
PLoS Genetics
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/
10
journal.pgen.1004189.

e1004189.

(3),

Evolution and the Future of Medicine Chapter | 42 703

Gest, H., 2005. The remarkable vision of Robert Hooke (1635e1703): ﬁrst
observer of the microbial world. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine
48 (2), 266e272. http://dx.doi.org/10.1353/pbm.2005.0053.

Goehler, H., Lalowski, M., Stelzl, U., Waelter, S., Stroedicke, M.,
Worm, U., Droege, A., Lindenberg, K.S., Knoblich, M., Haenig, C.,
Herbst, M., Suopanki, J., Scherzinger, E., Abraham, C., Bauer, B.,
Hasenbank, R., Fritzsche, A., Ludewig, A.H., Büssow, K.,
Coleman, S.H., Gutekunst, C.A., Landwehrmeyer, B.G., Lehrach, H.,
Wanker, E.E., 2004. A protein interaction network links GIT1, an
enhancer of huntingtin aggregation, to Huntington’s disease. Molec-
ular Cell 15 (6), 853e865.

Grover, M.P., Ballouz, S., Mohanasundaram, K.A., George, R.A.H.,
Sherman, C.D., Crowley, T.M., Wouters, M.A., 2014. Identiﬁcation
of novel therapeutics for complex diseases from genome-wide asso-
ciation data. BMC Medical Genomics 7 (Suppl. 1), S8. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1186/1755-8794-7-S1-S8. Epub 2014 May 8.

Hamilton, W.D., 1966. The moulding of senescence by natural selection.
Journal of Theoretical Biology 12 (1), 12e45. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/0022-5193(66)90184-6.

Hanninen, O., Farago, M., Monos, E., 1983. Ignaz Philipp Semmelweis,

the prophet of bacteriology. Infection Control 4 (5), 367e370.

Harjes, P., Wanker, E.E., 2003. The hunt for huntingtin function:
interaction partners tell many different stories. TIBS 28 (8),
425e433.

Hillar, M.A., Claire, S., 2002. Michael Servetus: Intellectual Giant, Hu-
manist, and Martyr. University Press of America, Lanham, MD, p. 95.
Howard-Jones, N., 1984. Robert Koch and the cholera Vibrio: a centenary.

BMJ 288, 379e381.

Huang, T., Sun, J., Chen, Y., Xie, H., Xu, D., Li, D., 2014. Asso-
ciations of common variants in methionine metabolism pathway
genes with plasma homocysteine and the risk of type 2 diabetes
in Han Chinese. Journal of Nutrigenetics and Nutrigenomics 7 (2),
63e74.

István, B., 1983. Ignaz Phillip Semmelweis 1818e1865. Druckerei Kner,

Gyomaen drTd. Corvina Kiadó, Hungary.

Jerne, N.K., 1955. The natural-selection theory of antibody formation.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 41 (11), 849e857.

Jönsson, T., Granfeldt, Y., Ahrén, B., Branell, U., Pålsson, G.,
Hansson, A., Söderström, M., Lindeberg, S., 2009. Beneﬁcial effects
of a Paleolithic diet on cardiovascular risk factors in type 2 diabetes: a
randomized cross-over pilot study. CVD 8, 35.

Kapitonov, V.V., Jurka, J., 2005. RAG1 core and V(D)J recombination
signal sequences were derived from Transib transposons. PLoS
Biology 3 (6), e181. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.0030181.
Karlen, A., 1995. Man and Microbes: Disease and Plagues in History and
Modern Times. Touchstone Book, Simon & Schuster, NewYork, NY.
Kokayeff, N., 2013. Dying to be discovered: miasma vs. germ theory.

Fracastoro, G., 1546. De contagione et contagiosis morbis (Wilmer Cave

ESSAI 10. Article 24.

Wright (1930), Trans.). G. P. Putnam, New York, NY.

Gadsby, D.C., Vergani, P., Csanády, L., 2006. The ABC protein turned
chloride channel whose failure causes cystic ﬁbrosis. Nature 440
(7083), 477e483.

Gale, E.A.M., 2012. Epidemiology of Type 1 Diabetes. Diapedia,
2104085168 rev. no. 39: http://www.diapedia.org/type-1-diabetes-
mellitus/epidemiology-of-type-1-diabetes (cited 09.08.14.).

Garrod, A.E., 1923. Inborn Errors of Metabolism. H. Frowde and Hodder

& Stoughton, London, UK.

Kong, X., Zhang, X., Zhao, Q., He, J., Chen, L., Zhao, Z., Li, Q., Ge, J.,
Chen, G., Guo, X., Lu, J., Weng, J., Jia, W., Ji, L., Xiao, J., Shan, Z.,
Liu, J., Tian, H., Ji, Q., Zhu, D., Zhou, Z., Shan, G., Yang, W., 2014.
Obesity-related genomic loci are associated with type 2 diabetes in a
Han Chinese population. PLoS One 9 (8), e104486. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0104486.

Last,

J.M.

(Ed.), 2007. A Dictionary of Public Health. Oxford
University Press. http://www.oxfordreference.com/view/10.1093/acref/
9780195160901.001.0001/acref-9780195160901.

704 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

Lenski, R.E., Rose, M.R., Simpson, S.C., Tadler, S.C., 1991. Long-term
experimental Evolution in Escherichia coli. I. Adaptation and diver-
gence during 2,000 generations. American Naturalist 138 (6),
1315e1341. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2462549.

Lindeberg, S., 2010. Food and Western Disease. Health and Nutrition

From an Evolutionary Perspective. Wiley-Blackwell.

Matos, M., Rose, M.R., Pité, M.T.R., Rego, C., Avelar, T., 1999. Adap-
tation to the laboratory environment
in Drosophila subobscura.
Journal of Evolutionary Biology 13 (1), 9e19. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1046/j.1420-9101.2000.00116.x.

Matsagas, K., Lim, D.B., Horwitz, M., Rizza, C.L., Mueller, L.D.,
Villeponteau, B., Rose, M.R., 2009. Long-term functional side-effects
of stimulants and sedatives in Drosophila melanogaster. PLoS One 4
(8), e6578. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0006578.

McClintock, D., Ratner, D., Lokuge, M., Owens, D.M., Gordon, L.B.,
Collins, F.S., Djabali, K., 2007. The mutant form of lamin A that
causes Hutchinson-Gilford progeria is a biomarker of cellular aging in
human skin. PLoS One 2 (12), e1269. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0001269.

Mueller, L.D., Rauser, C.L., Rose, M.R., 2011. Does Aging Stop? Oxford

University Press, New York, NY.

Rose, M.R., Vu, L.N., Park, S.U., Graves Jr., J.L., 1992. Selection on
stress resistance increases longevity in Drosophila melanogaster.
Experimental Gerontology 27 (2), 241e250. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/0531-5565(92)90048-5.

Rose, M.R., Passananti, H.B., Matos, M., 2004. Methuselah Flies: A Case
Study in the Evolution of Aging. World Scientiﬁc Publishing,
Singapore.

Rose, M.R., Long, A., Mueller, L., Rizza, C., Matsagas, K., Greer, L.,
Villeponteau, B., 2010. Evolutionary nutrigenomics. In: Fahy, G.,
West, M., Coles, L.S., Harris, S. (Eds.), The Future of Aging: Path-
ways to Human Life Extensions. Springer, London, pp. 357e366.

Rose, M.R., Mueller, L.D., Burke, M.K., 2011. New experiments for an
undivided genetics. Genetics 188 (1), 1e10. http://dx.doi.org/10.1534/
genetics.111.128900.

Rose, M.R., Flatt, T., Graves, J.L., Greer, L.F., Martinez, D.E., Matos, M.,
Shahrestani, P., 2012. What is aging? Frontiers in Genetics 3, 134.
http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2012.00134.

Rose, M.R., Rutledge, G.A., Phung, K.H., Phillips, M.A., Greer, L.F.,
Mueller, L.D., 2014. An evolutionary and genomic approach to
challenges and opportunities for eliminating aging. Current Aging
Science 7 (1), 54e59.

Nesse, R.M., Williams, G.C., 1994. Why We Get Sick: The New Science
of Darwinian Medicine. Times Books, a division of Random House,
New York, NY.

Rose, M.R., 1984. Laboratory evolution of postponed senescence in
Drosophila melanogaster. Evolution 38 (5), 1004e1010. http://
dx.doi.org/10.2307/2408434.

Nishimura, M., Ocorr, K., Bodmer, R., Cartry, J., 2011. Drosophila as a
to study cardiac aging. Experimental Gerontology 46,

model
326e33010, 1016/j.exger.2010.11.035.

Nutton, V., 2013. Ancient Medicine (Sciences of Antiquity Series,

second ed. Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group, London, UK.

O’Keefe, J.H., Cordain, L., 2004. Cardiovascular disease resulting from a
diet and lifestyle at odds with our paleolithic genome: how to become
a 21st-century hunter-gatherer. Mayo Clinic Proceedings 79,
101e108.

Rose, M.R., 1991. Evolutionary Biology of Aging. Oxford University

Press, New York, NY, USA.

Russo, L., 2004. The Forgotten Revolution: How Science Was Born in 300
BC and Why It Had to Be Reborn (Silvio Levy, Trans.), second ed.
Springer-Verlag, New York, NY.

Santer, M., 2009. Richard Bradley: a uniﬁed, living agent theory of the
cause of infectious diseases of plants, animals, and humans in the ﬁrst
decades of the 18th century. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine 52
(4), 566e578.

Ocorr, K., Akasaka, T., Bodmer, R., 2007a. Age-related cardiac disease
model of Drosophila. Mechanisms of Ageing and Development 128,
112e116. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.mad.2006.11.023.

Service, P.M., Hutchinson, E.W., MacKinley, M.D., Rose, M.R., 1985.
Resistance to environmental stress in Drosophila melanogaster selected
for postponed senescence. Physiological Zoology 58, 380e389.

Ocorr, K., Perrin, L., Lim, H.Y., Qian, L., Wu, X., Bodmer, R., 2007b.
Genetic control of heart function and aging in Drosophila. Trends in
Cardiovascular Medicine 17 (5), 177e182.

Padmalayam, I., 2014. The heat shock response: its role in pathogenesis of
type 2 diabetes and its complications, and implications for therapeutic
intervention. Discovery Medicine 18 (97), 29e39.

Pasteur, L., 1880. On the extension of the germ theory to the etiology of
certain common diseases (trans.). In: Comptes Rendus, de l’Académie
des Sciences, vol. xc. The University of Adelaide, pp. 103e144
(H.C. Ernst, M.D., Trans.). https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/p/pasteur/
louis/exgerm/complete.html.

Riordan, J.R., Rommens, J.M., Kerem, B., Alon, N., Rozmahel, R.,
Grzelczak, Z., Zielenski, J., Lok, S., Plavsic, N., Chou, J.L., 1989.
Identiﬁcation of the cystic ﬁbrosis gene: cloning and characterization
of complementary DNA. Science 245 (4922), 1066e1073.
Román-Franco, A.A., 2009. Medicine in the 21st century:

towards a
Darwinian medical epistemology. Puerto Rico Health Sciences
Journal 28 (4), 345e351.

Rommens, J.M., Iannuzzi, M.C., Kerem, B., Drumm, M.L., Melmer, G.,
Dean, M., Rozmahel, R., Cole, J.L., Kennedy, D., Hidaka, N., 1989.
Identiﬁcation of the cystic ﬁbrosis gene: chromosome walking and
jumping. Science 245 (4922), 1059e1065.

Shahrestani, P., Leung, H.-T., Le, P.K., Pak, W.L., Tse, S., Ocorr, K.,
Huang, T., 2009. Heterozygous mutation of Drosophila Opa1 causes
the development of multiple organ abnormalities in an age-dependent
and organ-speciﬁc manner. PLoS One 4 (8), e6867. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0006867.

Shanks, N., Pyles, R.A., 2007. Evolution and medicine: the long reach of
“Dr. Darwin”. Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine 2, 4.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1747-5341-2-4.

Siegel, R., 1968. Galen’s System of Physiology and Medicine: An
and Observations on Bloodﬂow,
Analysis of His Doctrines
Respiration, Tumors and Internal Diseases. Karger Publishers,
New York, NY.

Siegel, R., 1970. Galen’s System of Physiology and Medicine: Observa-
tions and Experiments on Vision, Hearing, Smell, Taste, Touch and
Pain, and Their Historical Sources. Karger Publishers, New York, NY.
Siegel, R., 1973. Galen on Psychology, Psychopathology, and Function
and Diseases of the Nervous System: An Analysis of His Doctrines,
Observations, and Experiments. Karger Publishers, New York, NY.
Simoees, P., Santos, J., Fragata, I., Mueller, L.D., Rose, M.R., Matos, M.,
2008. How repeatable is adaptive evolution? The role of geographical
origin and founder effects in laboratory adaptation. Evolution 62 (8),
1817e1829. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1558-5646.2008.00423.x.

Evolution and the Future of Medicine Chapter | 42 705

Wainwright, M., 2003. An alternative view of the early history of
microbiology. Advances in Applied Microbiology 52, 333e355.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0065-2164(03)01013-X.

Welcome Trust Case Control Consortium, 2007. Genome-wide association
study of 14,000 cases of seven common diseases and 3,000 shared
controls. Nature 447 (7145), 661e678.

World Health Organization, 2014. Mobile Phones Help People With Dia-
betes to Manage Fasting and Feasting During Ramadan. WHO. http://
www.who.int/features/2014/mobile-phones-diabetes-ramadan/en/#.

Yang, J., Benyamin, B., McEvoy, B.P., Gordon, S., Henders, A.K.,
Nyholt, D.R., Madden, P.A., Heath, A.C., Martin, N.G.,
Montgomery, G.W., Goddard, M.E., Visscher, P.M., 2010. Common
SNPs explain a large proportion of the heritability for human height.
Nature Genetics 42, 565e569. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ng.608.

Zampieri, F., 2009. Medicine, evolution, and natural selection: an histor-

ical overview. The Quarterly Review of Biology 84 (4), 333e355.

Zuk, M., 2013. Paleofantasy: What Evolution Really Tells Us About Sex,

Diet, and How We Live. W.W. Norton, New York, NY.

Snow, J., 1855. On the Mode of Communication of Cholera. John Church,

New Burlington Street, London, UK.

Stearns, S.C., Koella, J.C., 2007. Evolution in Health and Disease. Oxford

University Press, Oxford, UK.

Swallow, J.G., Hayes, J.P., Koteja, P., Garland Jr., T., 2009. Selection
experiments and experimental evolution of performance and physi-
ology. In: Garland Jr., T., Rose, M.R. (Eds.), Experimental Evolution:
Concepts, Methods, and Applications of Selection Experiments.
University of California Press, Oakland, CA, pp. 301e351.

Talmage, D.W., 1957. Diversity of antibodies. Journal of Cellular Physi-

ology. Supplement 50 (Suppl. 1), 229e246.

Tenaillon, O., Rodríguez-Verdugo, A., Gaut, R.L., McDonald, P.,
Bennett, A.F., Long, A.D., Gaut, B.S., 2012. The molecular diversity
of adaptive convergence. Science 335 (6067), 457e461. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1212986.

The Huntington’s Disease Collaborative Research Group, 1993. A novel
gene containing a tri- nucleotide repeat that is expanded and unstable
on Huntington’s disease chromosomes. Cell 72 (6), 971e983.

Ullmann, A., 2007. Pasteur-Koch: distinctive ways of thinking about

infectious diseases. Microbe 2 (8), 383e387.

Van Voorhies, W.A., Curtsinger, J.W., Rose, M.R., 2006. Do longevity
mutants always show trade-offs? Experimental Gerontology 41 (10),
1055e1058. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.exger.2006.05.006.

Chapter 43

The Impact of Modern Medicine
on Human Evolution

F. Zampieri
University of Padua, Padua, Italy

INTRODUCTION

it

The Meaning of “Modern Medicine”
To discuss this topic,
to deﬁne
is necessary, ﬁrst,
“modern medicine.” The term “modern,” in this case,
means “current” or “contemporary,” that is, from 1946 up
to present, and it is not to be confused with the meaning
given by scholars in history, according to which the modern
era started with the Renaissance. “Modern medicine” is
characterized by a continuous technological development.
Technology is the driving force of medical advancements
in diagnosis, clinical, and surgical therapy, as shown by
immunohistochemistry, medical imaging techniques, gene
therapy (Friedmann and Roblin, 1972), stem cell therapy
(Bubela et al., 2012), natural and artiﬁcial organs, and tis-
sue transplants. It may be difﬁcult, by consequence, to give
a deﬁnition to a science that moves so fast. Modern med-
icine could completely change, tomorrow, by the discovery
of a new revolutionary technology.

However, the epistemological structure of medicine is
remaining stable from the second half of 19th century up to
now. Since then, medicine has become a positive science
based on the method of anatomo-clinical correlations.
Giovanni Battista Morgagni (1682e1771), professor of
anatomy at the University of Padua Medical School, Italy
(1715e1771), was the ﬁrst to demonstrate that clinical
symptoms were correlated with anatomical substrates,
founding organ pathology, which revolutionized also
clinical diagnosis (Zampieri et al., 2014). Morgagni’s rev-
olution reached its climax during the following centuries,
when pathology passed from organ to tissues (histopa-
thology) and cells (cell pathology), now reaching the ﬁnest
molecular architecture of the human body (molecular pa-
thology). This pathology changed medical practice,

promoting the development of clinical tools for detecting
the internal states of the body during a patient’s life and
disease, as well as treatments focused on the material seats
and causes of diseases. The ﬁrst
instrument was the
stethoscope,
introduced by the French physicians René
Laennec (1781e1826), thanks to which he was able to
establish that clinical symptoms of
tuberculosis were
caused by cavities (“tubercles”) in the lungs. Some decades
later,
the German bacteriologist Robert Koch
(1843e1910) discovered the material cause of these cav-
ities, that is, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, also known as
Koch’s bacillus.

in 1882,

The focus on organs,

tissues, cells, and molecules
favored the development of drugs, instruments, and pro-
cedures to give physicians access to internal parts of the
body during the life of patients. Antisepsis and anesthesia
gave surgery the means to extirpate pathological substrates
of diseases. Stem cells are the new frontier by which
medicine would like to replace a whole population of
diseased cells with a healthy one in patient’s bodies.
Medicine is also trying to cure diseases caused by genetic
mutations by directly or indirectly manipulating DNA it-
self. Moreover, the focus on material causes of diseases
favored the discovery that many of them were caused by
external factors, such as bacteria, viruses, and chemicals.
Their knowledge gave an extraordinary impulse not only to
therapeutic, but also to preventive medicine, hygiene, and
prophylaxis.

This model has been so successful to remain unaltered
up to now. Since after Morgagni’s revolution, to understand
a disease, physicians have to ﬁnd its material cause, from
outside or inside, where it is seated in the body, how it
affects normal processes in organs, tissues, cells, or mole-
cules, and how these processes clinically manifest.

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00043-0
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

707

708 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

It is easy to see that modern medicine focuses on factors
also affecting human evolution, that is, material changes in
physiology and morphology of organs, tissues, cells, and
molecules. Medicine tries to restore only pathological
changes, irrespectively from their heritability, while evo-
lution comprehends any inherited change, but many path-
ological changes are inherited and could play a role in our
evolution, both in shaping adaptations and in decreasing
adaptations for given functions. Moreover, by curing any
kind of disease and spreading the culture of health, medi-
cine contributes to create the human niche that affects our
biological evolution. Modern medicine has changed soci-
eties, increasing welfare and human life span: these effects
also, by deﬁnition, have an impact on how humans evolve
now, in the proximate and remote future. Even the external
causes of diseases, ie, virus, bacteria, and chemicals are, at
the same time, factors affecting our evolution. The rela-
tionship between humans, virus, and bacteria have been
producing important coevolutionary changes since the
beginning of human history. Humans continuously develop
adaptive changes to chemical factors, such as food, water,
air, and pollutants.

How Human Behavior Can Affect Human
Evolution
Medicine is a speciﬁc human activity because its principal
feature is curing sick individuals. From the antiquity,
medicine was considered an “art,” rather than a science,
even when based on scientiﬁc method and data collected by
other sciences. Thus, the conceptualization of the impact of
modern medicine on human evolution is possible only with
a theory explaining how human behaviors can affect bio-
logical evolution.

This is a signiﬁcant

issue for evolutionary biology,
because during late 19th and early 20th centuries, many
scientists were convinced that only Lamarckian mechanisms
explained human evolution, which was considered a special
domain where changes of behaviors and social uses, pro-
moted by our intelligence, were the most powerful
in
shaping adaptive hereditary changes. The British psychol-
ogist William McDougall (1871e1938) was convinced, for
instance, that a new adaptive behavior, cognitively acquired,
could be transmitted through heredity, and designed some
experiment
to demonstrate this hypothesis (McDougall,
1927, 1930, 1933; Rhine and McDougall, 1930). He
thought that if modiﬁcations of function and structure ac-
quired by the individual organism in consequence of its
efforts to adapt itself to its environment could be to some
degree transmitted to its descendant, then it was possible to
assign to the human mind an intelligible and leading role in
the “drama” of evolution (McDougall, 1927). Nowadays,
many scientists take the position against sociobiological
theories when applied to humankind, even if they use other

kinds of arguments. As it is well known, sociobiology tries
to understand animals’ behavior in terms of natural selec-
tion, on the hypothesis that behaviors are inherited traits
(Wilson, 1975). The general criticism against sociobiology
is that the models used to explain behaviors of social insects,
births, or mammals, could be only partially applied to
humankind, because men have a much more complex ner-
vous system, and as such genes and hereditary mechanisms
are less crucial in determining their behaviors (Cronin, 1993).
The ﬁrst models, describing in Darwinian terms how a
change of behavior could indirectly promote new inheri-
ted adaptations, was probably the so-called “Baldwin ef-
fect.” The American psychologist James Mark Baldwin
(1861e1934) formulated the theory according to which a
spontaneous behavioral change in a subpopulation, which
proves to be adaptive, creates a selective pressure by
which any spontaneous mutation coding for part of this
change will be immediately acquired by the genetic pool
of the population. Accumulating mutations along the same
line, a new stable adaptive trait could be shaped (Baldwin,
1896). This principle can be applied to humans, and its
reception by evolutionary biologists was probably because
it gave a particular importance to adaptive changes pro-
moted by human cognitive behavior. Baldwin advanced
that humans’ social instinct might have originated by a
change of behavior, which ultimately became, thanks to
the ﬁxation of mutations coding for this trait, part of our
genetic pool (Baldwin, 1896). Baldwin stressed also the
importance, in our species as well as in other mammals, of
the instinct of imitation. For children, it is enough to
imitate what they experience in context, to be able to
acquire language and whatever they need to adapt to their
environment. The development of more complex cultures
has created a selective pressure that favored the ﬁxation of
a genetic attitude for imitation. The instinct of imitation
overcomes the difﬁculties in acquiring languages, cultural,
and social rules too complex for becoming inherited
(Baldwin, 1896).

The evolution of lactase persistence in humans can be
interpreted with this model, since it is a mutation which
became ﬁxed by the selective pressure given by animal
domestication (Gerbault et al., 2011), and also antimicro-
bial resistance, as an effect of healthcare. The resistance of
a microorganism to an antimicrobial drug that was origi-
nally effective for treatment of infections is generically
caused by the use and misuse of antimicrobial drugs
because it accelerates the emergence of drug-resistant
strains. This, in turn, could have the effect of stimulating
the ﬁxation of new mutations in humans, resulting in the
overcoming of these new resistance strains, in a continuous
hosteparasite arms race (Nesse and Williams, 1994; see
later).

Another interesting example combining Baldwin ef-
fect and developmental evolutionary biology (EvoDevo;

The Impact of Modern Medicine on Human Evolution Chapter | 43 709

for EvoDevo, see later in this chapter), regards a study
published in the 1930s on the relationship between
installing air conditioning in the hospital and patients’
health. Close air-conditioned space is a new environment
created by man, which may produce a mismatch between
evolved human constitution and the new environmental
factor. Constantin Yaglou (1897e1960), professor of In-
dustrial Hygiene at Harvard’s School of Public Health
between the 1930 and 1950s, studied the effects of Har-
vard’s new air-conditioned nursery, from 1926 to 1929,
compared with a previous period, from 1923 to 1925,
when this innovation had yet to be made. He found, for
instance, that premature infants were less able to stabilize
their body temperatures than infants born at
term, a
characteristic exacerbated in the air-conditioned climate.
Among premature infants, the ability to regulate temper-
ature changed depending on birth weight. These and other
signiﬁcant ﬁndings were used for the development of
incubators, now fully entered in daily clinical practice
(Blackfan et al., 1933; Yaglou, 1938).

EvoDevo is actually focusing on phenotypic and
developmental plasticity, of which the interaction between
behavior and environment is a key component. Biologists
have observed that little mutations in genes controlling the
development of embryo and other phases of life could have
wide evolutionary effects, such as the emergence of new
adaptive characteristics. It is no more necessary to have
new genes to code a new trait, but it is enough to differently
regulate genes already existing (Beldade and Brakeﬁeld,
2002). The model states that developing mammals made a
prediction of their future environment from cues received
from the maternal environment. This prediction is effected
by epigenetic alterations that change the expression of
genes which then inﬂuence how the individual responds to
later predicted challenges (Gluckman et al., 2008). This
model explained better than a purely genetic one the dif-
ferences in individual disease risks in spite of similar life-
styles and the same environment. The epigenetic effects, as
new research indicates, may be transmitted across genera-
tions (Jablonka and Raz, 2009). Even if the cases studied
by EvoDevo regard mainly changes in utero, there are also
studies addressed to occurrences later in life. For instance,
there are some indications that, across several generations,
the mother’s age of menarche can inﬂuence her daughter’s
menarche (Mishra et al., 2007). There are studies also about
the period of childhood, in particular regarding the diet
which can affect later health, these effects being heredi-
tarily transmissible. EvoDevo, by consequence, gives
another scientiﬁc explanation on how a change in human
behavior can affect human evolution.

Finally,

the “niche construction” model

is another
fundamental instrument to understand how an animal and
human behavior can affect biological evolution (Odling-
Smee, 2003). Being this is an all-embracing model for

any geneeculture interaction, it might be supported that
all the examples we shall present in this paper are as-
cribable to this conceptual framework. Organisms regu-
larly modify local resource distributions, inﬂuencing both
their ecosystems and the evolution of traits whose ﬁtness
depends on such alterable sources of natural selection in
environments. The changes that organisms bring about in
their own selective environments can be an important
source of modiﬁed natural-selection pressures and can
generate some unusual evolutionary outcomes. For
example, niche construction can cause evolutionary
inertia and momentum,
it can lead to the ﬁxation of
otherwise deleterious alleles, it can support stable poly-
morphisms where none are expected, and it can eliminate
what would otherwise be stable polymorphisms (Laland
et al., 1999). “Ecosystem engineering” deeply character-
izes current humans’ ecology and this engineering regards
not only material changes by human technology, but also
and even more speciﬁcally cultural features that shape our
environment.
In humans, much niche construction is
inﬂuenced by socially transmitted behavior. Human cul-
tural variation, depending largely on differential social
transmission of information through social learning, may
result in cultural niche-constructing practices that modify
the natural selection of some human genes. Offspring
inherit not only genes, but also an ecological inheritance,
in the form of modiﬁed local selective environments
relative to genetic ﬁtness. Inherited physical resources
could refer to aspects of material culture, for example,
nutritional resources or tools, created through hunter-
gathering activity or
farming. Many inherited niches
obviously consist of both informatic and physical re-
sources: for instance, farmed livestock and crops are not
just nutritional resources, but also a source of public in-
formation concerning subsistence practices (Laland et al.,
1999). An example for medicine is given by drug treat-
ments to prevent diseases, which may relax genetic se-
lection for disease resistance or susceptibility. At the same
time, antibiotic use, favoring selection of resistant bacte-
rial strains, can result in cultural selection for the avoid-
ance of antibiotic use. This example is also notable as a
case of interspeciﬁc niche construction, as the cultural and
genetic evolution of antibiotic use and bacterial strains,
respectively, modify the selective environments of one
another (Kendal et al., 2011).

EUGENICS

Contemporary Eugenics
The impact of modern medicine on human evolution has
been discussed, in the recent past up to now, under eu-
genics theories. Even if prejudices of natives against
foreign populations, as well as controls of birth for

710 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

improving the quality of inhabitants, existed since the an-
tiquity in many countries, eugenics stricto sensu was born
with Francis Galton (1822e1911), who coined the term in
1883 (Galton, 1883), and remained popular up to World
War II. The terrible outcomes of racial policies in Germany
caused the abandonment of eugenics policies in Western
countries after the war. However, eugenics concerns exist
also among contemporary scientists. One of the most bril-
liant evolutionary biologists of the recent past, William
Hamilton (1936e2000), raised eugenics questions several
times during his career. He was convinced that almost all of
the worries of the early eugenicists were well-founded in
spite of the relative paucity of their evidence at the time,
referring to the pioneers, such as Francis Galton and Karl
Pearson (1857e1936), not the political demagogues who,
during Galton’s epoch, undertook actions without much
consideration and controlling the data. Still a junior lecturer
at the Imperial College of London, Hamilton suggested that
evolutionary biology might have something to say about
intergroup conﬂict, particularly on how different rates of
population growth exacerbate tensions between groups. In
1998, invited at the Pontiﬁcal Academy of Sciences in
Vatican, Hamilton spoke about how modern medicine was
causing long-term deleterious changes in the genome and
how these changes made desirable a program of eugenics
and selective abortion. Of course, his lecture was not well
received on that occasion (Haig, 2003).

Hamilton worries that modern medicine eliminates
natural selection and our genome will accumulate more and
more deleterious mutations, because without natural se-
lection, or with a relaxed one, the accumulation of harmful
mutation accelerates. He fears that our scientiﬁc and tech-
nological abilities to diagnose and repair these mutations is
insufﬁcient and he does not believe that future technologies
will improve to such an extent that we will be able to
correct all deleterious mutations and keep our genome
healthy. One of the examples he returns to very frequently
is the cesarean section. This medical practice, according to
him, relaxes the action of natural selection on the width of
the female pelvis favoring narrower hips, because a female
with narrow hips may give birth to a female with a similar
trait. In other words, by surviving,
thanks to cesarean
section, the affected female can continue to reproduce, thus
spreading the narrow hips trait. Hamilton proposes that
government should offer a state reward for a pledge by this
kind of woman not to bear more children (Hamilton, 2001).
Hamilton, however, thinks that the evolutionary process by
which females are developing narrow hips is based on mate
choice, when probably it
is due by an evolutionary
mothereoffspring conﬂict. Babies determine when to be
born, and the tightness of the birth passage possibly reﬂects
the evolutionary brinkmanship of fetuses remaining in the
safety of the womb until almost the last moment at which it
is safe to emerge (Haig, 2003). Moreover, Hamilton’s

worry has a disquieting historical precedent: Agnes Bluhm
(1862e1943), German female physician and eugenicist,
feared that medical assistance at birth allowed women to
survive and reproduce who would otherwise have been
unable to give birth, contributing to an increased incidence
of birth complications due to narrower birth passages
(Proctor, 1988). German Jews were accused of promoting
hospital birth and cesarean section, so the Nazi regime
shifted assistance at birth from physicians to midwives
(Proctor, 1988).

The Evolution of Sex, the second volume of Hamilton’s
collected papers, was almost ready to be published when
the author died in March 2000 (Hamilton, 2001). One of
the major goals of this 800-page work, consisting in
republished papers and chapters, was to initiate a debate on
subjects that he considered to have been treated as taboo,
particularly eugenics (Haig, 2003). The main problem,
according to Hamilton, is that modern medicine is actual-
izing a “dystopia” in which individuals carrying lethal
genes, who will require medication all of the time, will be
even more common in future populations. Hamilton
expressed similar ideas when he reviewed Dysgenic: Ge-
netic Deterioration in Modern Population, a book by
Richard Lynn, Professor Emeritus of Psychology at the
University of Ulster, UK (Lynn, 1996). A number of well-
characterized genetic diseases are under at least a weak
dysgenesis in the sense that we are medically curing them
and thus allowing their recessives (and sometimes hetero-
zygous conditions, too) a cessation of the counterselection
through death or disability that formerly kept the genes at
very low frequency (Hamilton, 2000). This is only a part of
the dystopia. In fact, medicine not only keeps alive those
who carry mutation for diseases already known, but it can
keep alive those who carry deleterious alleles generated by
new mutations. These mutations will quickly accumulate if
not purged by selection (Hamilton, 2001; Haig, 2003),
eventually becoming destabilizing for civilization itself
(Hamilton, 1988, 1991, 2001). Hamilton was convinced
that in two generations the damage being done by ante- and
postnatal lifesaving efforts of modern medicine will be
obvious to all and be a big talking point of science and
politics (Hamilton, 2001). By consequence, he proposes not
only to reinforce prenatal selection, but also to execute
infanticide, where it would be necessary, a proposal found
disturbing by many of his readers (Haig, 2003). For
instance, he wrote, “If early signs of a coming severe
handicap can be detected during that early postnatal period,
I hold that the kindest thing for the family in which the
defective child is to be dependent, and for the child itself,
may well be to kill it” (Hamilton, 2001).

Other contemporary scholars share some of the Ham-
ilton’s worries about the increase in harmful mutations in
our genome. However, Hamilton is more pessimistic than
scientists, such as, for instance, Steve Jones and John

The Impact of Modern Medicine on Human Evolution Chapter | 43 711

Maynard Smith, who think we can repair the known dele-
terious mutations by engineering the germ line or soma.
Their opinions, at any case, prove they also believe that
modern medicine causes an increase of harmful alleles’
frequency rate.

Weaknesses of Eugenics Theories
The idea that medicine is causing a degeneration of human
constitution is based on the assumption that medicine is
keeping alive those who would otherwise have perished.
However,
this is a misconception, which results from
thinking of natural selection as eliminating through mor-
tality, rather than changing through differential reproduc-
tive success. That an individual survives or not in given
circumstances is not determinant, because evolution is
based on reproduction, not on survival. Very often, medi-
cine keeps alive diseased individuals, such as babies
affected by cardiovascular malformations, not long enough
to give them the possibility to have children.

Another

fundamental argument of eugenics is that
humans do not shape any more adaptive changes, because
in modern times both ﬁt and unﬁt individuals survive. In
this way, medicine causes a relaxation of natural selection
and selective pressure, by which mutant nonfunctional or
harmful alleles increase in frequency. Now, it could be said
that Western medicine, which is the only approach having
important results in letting survive genetically diseased
individuals, is still practiced only in a small portion of the
world. We shall eventually advance that selective mortality
in the developing world is keeping the human gene pool
healthy, while the Western world enjoys the beneﬁts from
its advanced medicine, but it is a disturbing way to treat the
argument. Another perspective can be to focus only on the
developing world, trying to understand how the introduc-
tion of Western medicine is relaxing natural selection,
obtaining a “measure” of how much natural selection is
affected by this practice. To have a real effect, medical care
of patients with a genetic disease has to maintain the ﬁtness
of the cured patient equal to that of a healthy one. If the
selective differential of ﬁtness remains, at least in part, and
the mutation rate stays low, the genetic disease will prob-
ably increase a little in frequency, but without affecting a
major proportion of the population (Haig, 2003). Moreover,
much depends on the effect of
this mutation in the
phenotype. Some mutation has little health cost, while
others are so severe that even the most advanced medicine
cannot do much. As David Haig points out: “Only muta-
tions for which medical care causes a substantial increase in
reproductive ﬁtness are relevant to this question” (Haig,
2003). We think that
these cases are still quite rare.
Therefore, contrary to Hamilton, we think that the problem
of deterioration of human genome, if it exists, is not urgent
and eventually will never become serious.

Eugenics arguments, in particular the early ones, prob-
ably were based on a misunderstanding of the role of medical
practice in the “epidemiological transition” which revolu-
tionized Western societies in the 19th century (Omran,
1971). The shift from acute infectious diseases to death via
chronic, noninfectious, degenerative diseases was a result of
a higher standard of living and the introduction of medical
and public health practices in high-income nations under-
going industrialization, such as England, France, and Ger-
many. Antibiotics, vaccination, antisepsis surgery, and a
better hygiene favored by medical campaigns were the main
factors in this spectacular transition. Eugenics scientists
thought that the spreading of unﬁt individuals, saved by
medical care, caused degenerative chronic diseases. These
individuals could live enough to procreate children who, in
turn, diffused their inherited unﬁt genome, impoverishing the
population genetic pool. In reality,
these new diseases
emerged because of an increase of lifespan. As more and
more of the population reached advanced age, thanks to the
reduced infection threat, a rise in chronic diseases that typi-
cally began later in life became evident. Nevertheless, dis-
eases of later age affected individuals irrespective of their
genetic constitution, not because their genome was degen-
erated as an indirect consequence of medical practice.
Moreover, old individuals are no more relevant to natural
selection, because they usually do not reproduce.

Concerning the question about the evolutionary rate of
current human species, there is plenty of evidence that
humans are still evolving (Zimmer, 2009) and even that the
rate of evolutionary adaptive change is becoming faster
(Flintoft, 2006). For recent times, we mean both the evolu-
tionary scale, that is, millions of years, and human scale, that
is, centuries. A study examining differences in gene expres-
sion in the liver among more than 1000 human genes and their
orthologues from the chimpanzee, orangutan, and rhesus
macaque, found 19 genes that are expressed at the same level
in the three nonhumans primates, but at higher or lower levels
in humans compared with these other species (Gilad et al.,
2006). The genes examined, being under stabilizing selection,
remained constant across the entire phylogeny (about
70 million years), probably because changes in gene regula-
tion may be deleterious and hence inﬂuence disease suscep-
tibility. In fact, genes associated with human cancer are
slightly enriched and the expression levels of ﬁve genes of this
study have been shown to be altered speciﬁcally in liver car-
cinoma (Gilad et al., 2006). This research shows that the
function and regulation of transcription factors have been sub-
stantially modiﬁed in the human lineage by a rapid evolution.
One study, working with large sets of genetic data,
found that the rate of evolution by natural selection in
humans actually accelerated over the time, perhaps because
of the global population growth and because, by colonizing
the world and creating complex cultures, we have subjected
ourselves to a wide variety of new selection pressures.

712 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

Using a 3.9 million haplotype map (HapMap) single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) dataset, the research found
that selection accelerated greatly during the last millennia,
creating new adaptations in our species (Hawks et al.,
2007). This research was based on the data of the Inter-
national HapMap Consortium, which,
studying the
HapMap of the human genome, found around 1800 gene
variations
common in the past
(The International HapMap Consortium,
50,000 years
2005).

that have become

Another paper, searching for genes under natural se-
lection in Africans, Europeans, and East Asians, found in
each population some 200 genes showing signals of recent
selection (from 10,000 to 6000 years ago), but without
much overlap, suggesting that
the populations on each
continent were adapting to local challenges. It was done on
800,000 SNP in 309 unrelated individuals, mainly auto-
some, searching for loci where strong selection has driven
new alleles up to intermediate frequency. The 200 variants
identiﬁed have not yet reached ﬁxation, this meaning that
they have been very recently selected, and, having sub-
stantially different ﬁtness, they must indicate loci that are
the source of signiﬁcant phenotypic variations, probably of
medical relevance (Voight et al., 2006).
Lactase persistence in human adult

is another clear
recent adaptive evolution. This ability is
example of
genetically transmitted as a dominant
trait and lactase
persistence in a population correlates with that population’s
history of cattle domestication (Bersaglieri et al., 2004;
Gluckman et al., 2009). As is well known, humans started
to domesticate animals about 10,000 years ago, a period
that in the evolutionary perspective is short.

Another characteristic showing a “neotenic” process is
the age of the ﬁrst menarche, which has been continuously
decreasing from the beginning of
the 20th century
(McDowell et al., 2007). It is neotenic because girls became
sexually mature while retaining juvenile physical charac-
teristics. This process is commonly explained by socio-
cultural factors. Because girls have to develop a certain
amount of body fat in order to menstruate, access to food
affects age at menarche. The age of menarche has a he-
reditary basis and, by consequence, an important relation-
ship with ﬁtness. It
is generally accepted that natural
selection, on one hand, favors an early age of ﬁrst menarche
because this improves the probability to have more chil-
dren, and from the other hand, this pressure is counter-
balanced by the necessity for the mother to be mature
enough to take care of her offspring. Natural selection, by
consequence, will favor a plasticity in the age of ﬁrst
menarche according to the environment. For instance,
prenatal adverse factors can accelerate sexual maturation,
because the embryo, predicting the same circumstances in
the future, tries to reproduce as soon as possible. On the
contrary, adverse situations during childhood seem to

induce the infant to postpone sexual maturity, looking for
better conditions in the future (Gluckman et al., 2009).

A French-Canadian insular preindustrial population has
been recently studied in relation to the age at ﬁrst repro-
duction among women.
In this population, under a
non-Malthusian regime and in absence of birth control,
evolutionary model predicts a change toward earlier ﬁrst
reproduction, given that the trait is correlated, in such a
situation, with an increase of ﬁtness. The study found that
women giving birth to their ﬁrst child in the 1930s were
about 4 years younger than those who began to reproduce
around 1800 (Milot et al., 2011).

Another

study, which focused on current human
evolutionary changes, has been carried on with the data
provided by the Framingham Heart Study, an epidemio-
logical study which has tracked the health of thousands of
people in Framingham, Massachusetts, since 1948. 2238
women were analyzed, looking for traits correlated with
having a higher number of children. Researchers found that
women with low cholesterol, greater body weight, shorter
height, lower blood pressure, older age at menopause, and
earlier age at ﬁrst child, had more children on average than
women without these characteristics and that these traits, by
consequence, are under positive selection (Byars et al.,
2009).

The model “genes-culture coevolution” gives important
examples of human evolution in the most recent period of
our evolutionary history, because industrial and post-
industrial societies are ecosystems in which cultural activ-
ity, in its widest sense, plays the main role. We are entering
a new epidemiological transition. It is characterized by the
continued prominence of chronic, noninfectious disease
now augmented by the reemergence of infectious diseases.
Many of these infections were once thought to be under
control but are now antibiotic resistant because of massive
use of antibiotics in hospitals and elsewhere, while a
number of “new” diseases are rapidly emerging. It
is
characterized by another cultural factor, namely the trans-
portation system,
in our globalized era results in
rapid and extensive pathogen transmission (Harper and
Armelagos, 2010).

that

Another eugenics idea is that medicine, keeping alive
sick individuals, gave to them the chance to reproduce and
spread the genetic constitution at the base of their pathol-
ogies. This idea, in turn, is based on the assumption that
diseases having a genetic basis are traits detrimental for
evolution. However, diseases are not necessarily negative
characteristics in evolutionary terms. A new discipline,
namely evolutionary medicine, shows on the contrary that
natural selection is often responsible for the maintenance of
traits vulnerable to diseases, because of a balance between
costs and beneﬁts, or because a disease symptom can be a
defense, rather than a defect, such as fever, cough or
diarrhea (Nesse and Williams, 1994; Zampieri, 2009).

The Impact of Modern Medicine on Human Evolution Chapter | 43 713

Evolution and, in particular, natural selection, does not
shape “perfect” adaptations as it was generically under-
stood before (Nesse, 2005). Since the early 1960s, George
Williams (1926e2010) argued that natural selection acts to
maximize the mean reproductive performance regardless of
the effect on long-term population heath, wellness, or sur-
vival (Williams, 1966). This idea is at the basis of evolu-
tionary medicine, which considers humans, as well as all
other organisms, “bundle of compromises” shaped by nat-
ural selection and other evolutionary processes, in which
any trait, even the best one in terms of ﬁtness, can hide
structural or functional vulnerabilities for the individual
who carries it (Nesse and Williams, 1994). This is because
revolve around selection for
“Evolutionary processes
maintaining the reproductive ﬁtness, not
the health or
lifespan” (Gluckman et al., 2009). The evolution of upright
posture, for instance, has been an adaptive process, but it
shaped, at the same time, anatomical and physiological
changes that now leave humans vulnerable to lower back
pain, slipped disks, hemorrhoids, obstetric difﬁculties and
other health problems (Nesse and Williams, 1994). Even
the human eye, which has been long since considered a
perfect human “machine,” is fundamentally composed of a
defective architecture. Nerves and vessels penetrate the
eyeball in a bundle and spread out along the interior sur-
face, instead of penetrating from the outside as in the better-
designed cephalopod eye. Full ﬁeld of vertebrate vision
need a tiny nystagmus, which minimizes the shadows cast
by vessels and nerves on the retina, and brain processing
mechanisms, which extract
the visual signal from the
nystagmus noise. Octopi need neither of these processes,
nor to worry about retinal detachment (Nesse, 2005).

Any adaptation is the outcome of a compromise be-
tween costs and beneﬁts of the trait. Biological adaptive
structures and functions are vulnerable in some aspect or
under given circumstances. With this model, eugenics
became not only ethically but also scientiﬁcally unjustiﬁ-
able, because there are no more “absolute positive” traits to
be preserved and no more “absolute negative” ones to be
eliminated. Even a group of genes causing a disease can be
related with current (or past, or future) adaptive traits. In the
case of a disease caused by a trait whose genes were
adaptive in the faraway past of our species, deleting these
genes could deprive our species of an instrument which
could return to be useful in the future, eventually coopted
for another use. This process frequently occurred in our
evolutionary history, and it is studied under the issue of
“exaptation” (Gould and Vrba, 1982). This issue answers to
the ambiguity of the concept of adaptation, because it de-
ﬁnes both the process and the product of the process.
Adaptation does not take into consideration, in fact, that a
trait currently adapted for a given function could have been
shaped, during the past, for another function, or even
without any particular function related to ﬁtness. To avoid

the failure to recognize these characteristics, Stephen Jay
Gould (1941e2002) and Elisabeth Vrba proposed the
concept of “exaptation” for traits evolved for their usages,
or for no function at all, and later “coopted” for their cur-
rent role (Gould and Vrba, 1982). Exaptation can be of two
types: (1) functional shift, with the reuse by natural selec-
tion with previously different purposes;
(2) functional
cooptation from nonadaptation, when natural selection
leads to a useful structure of a trait previously nonadaptive,
like a side effect, a developmental constraint, a structural
effect, or a random insertion. Skull sutures, for instance,
originated as developmental constraints and then reused in
mammals as an adaptation to delivery (Pievani and Serrelli,
2011). A further case of type 2 is a structure or function
which is, at the same time, an adaptation at one level of
evolution (genes, organisms, groups, populations, species)
producing an exaptation at another (Gould and Vrba,
1982). The concept of exaptation represents the best solu-
tion to the criticism on Darwinian gradualism, which af-
ﬁrms that incipient stages of useful structures could not
function as the perfected forms do, so they cannot be
selected. On the contrary, according to the exaptation
model, the incipient stage performs a different function,
then it can be coopted for another function and, once this
new function has taken place, it improves its utility by
natural selection. Feathers, for instance, were shaped for
thermoregulation and then coopted for ﬂight. Once this new
effect was added to the function of thermoregulation as an
important source of ﬁtness, feathers underwent a suite of
secondary adaptations to enhance their utility in ﬂight. Any
coopted structure will probably not arise perfected for its
new effect. It will therefore develop secondary adaptations
for the new role (Gould and Vrba, 1982).

Organic structures and functions, being adaptations or
exaptations, are far from perfect. They are continuously
improving by cycles of adaptation and cooptation in rela-
tion to a changing environment. Eugenics, by consequence,
is even more illogical, because it does not take into account
that “imperfection” is the constitutive condition and state of
organic life.

Another important advancement concerns the role of
genes as the main “protagonists” of evolution. This topic is
important because eugenics theories are almost
totally
based on a “genocentric” view of biological evolution.
Current evolutionary biology and evolutionary medicine,
on the contrary, are well aware that genetic information is
only part of the story of evolution, because multiple inter-
vening variables
inﬂuence
phenotypic expression, and these inﬂuences may be more
or less important than genetic information (McGuire and
Troisi, 1998). Epigenetic mechanisms, moreover, are
becoming a central aspect for the understanding of gene-
expression dynamic, showing that our phenotype is the
result of an interaction between genes and environment

contingencies

and social

714 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

(cultural and physical) in which the two factors are equally
important (Gluckman et al., 2009). A kind of nongenomic
heritable modiﬁcations has been discovered, in particular
related to disease risk, contributing to a full understanding
of the mechanisms by which evolution shapes our traits and
vulnerabilities. In particular, a ﬁeld devoted to the devel-
opmental origins of health and disease (DOHaD) has
emerged, which is focused on speciﬁc aspects of the
broader biological mechanism of plasticity by which or-
ganisms, in response to cues such as nutrition or hormones,
adapt
their phenotype to environment. These responses
may be divided into those in which fetus or child change its
phenotype for immediate beneﬁt and those aimed at pre-
diction of a future environment: disease occurs in the
mismatch between predicted and realized future. The likely
mechanisms that enable plasticity involve epigenetic pro-
cesses, affecting the expression of genes associated with
regulatory pathways. There is evidence that epigenetic
marks may be inherited and so might contribute to non-
genomic heritable disease risk (Gluckman et al., 2010).

None of this means to leave the Darwinian foundation
of current evolutionary biology, because natural selection
among genes continues to play a fundamental role. Without
DNA, also nongenomic modiﬁcations should not
take
place, because they change DNA expression along some
generation. Similarly, without DNA, modiﬁcations in the
human physico-cultural niche could not have an evolu-
tionary impact.

THE IMPACT OF MODERN MEDICINE
ON HUMAN EVOLUTION
Even if eugenic assumptions are mistaken, this does not
mean that modern medicine does not have an impact on
human evolution. On the contrary, medicine affects human
evolution in many ways. It contributes to the human “niche
construction,” since it is a scientiﬁc practice that has an
impact on both individuals and societies. It
inﬂuences
mortality rate, population’s health and growth, and pop-
ulation’s coevolution with biotic and abiotic environment
(see later). Contrary to early and current eugenicists, we
believe that these effects could not be categorized as always
detrimental for the evolution of our species. Being under-
stood that predicting long-term changes is very difﬁcult,
empirical evidences and theoretical models support
the
view that medicine affects human evolution sometimes
favoring new adaptations and sometimes increasing harm-
ful alleles’ frequency rate.

Diagnostic Procedures
Genetic diagnosis can be applied on prenatal screening,
eventually becoming a way to prevent the birth of child
with genetic untreatable diseases. The ﬁrst genetic disease

to be diagnosed by this procedure was Huntington’s disease
in 1983 (McKusick, 2001). In this way, medicine should be
seen as acting in favor, rather than against, natural selec-
tion, because it gives the opportunity to stop pregnancy and
diffuse deleterious mutations. However, genetic screening
is different from genetic testing or diagnosis, because the
ﬁrst assesses only the degree of risk that the fetus may
potentially have certain common birth defects, but cannot
tell with certainty if the baby actually has the problem.
There is also the preconception genetic screening, when the
test is done before pregnancy to determine whether the
mother or father carry a gene for genetic disorders that
might run in families, such as cystic ﬁbrosis and sickle cell
anemia, and could be passed on when the couple conceives.
It is not a common practice, but it can surely prevent some
couples to give birth to a child with high probability to have
an untreatable disease.

While genetic screening is advancing, ethical concerns
have grown about its use and consequences. The state of
Pennsylvania in the United States promulgated the Down
Syndrome Prenatal Education Act in 2014, also known as
Chloe’s Law, from Chloe Kondrich, an 11-year-old child
who has Down syndrome. Chloe’s dad was horriﬁed to
learn that the vast majority of mothers choose abortion if
they learn their fetus is at risk for Down syndrome. He
pushed the Pennsylvania state legislature to enact a law for
better informing and supporting the future parents about
Down syndrome, giving a positive view of the condition
rather than a negative one (Caplan, 2015). This law over-
turns the long-standing foundational ethical norm of ge-
netic testing and counseling,
is, neutrality in the
provision of information. Genetic screening is developing
faster and soon will be a standard procedure for every
pregnant woman, not only for detecting Down syndrome,
but also for many other diseases. By consequence, ethical
concerns will become a fundamental issue, because parents
will be eventually inﬂuenced by a disability-friendly
normative message. It is difﬁcult, at any case, that the
change in genetic screening will affect human evolution. It
will favor an increase of individuals affected by Down
syndrome in the population, because more women will
decide to continue the pregnancy, but without affecting the
frequency rate of the chromosomal defect, because the
disabled only very rarely could have a child.

that

Genetic diagnostic procedures can be applied also to
diagnose diseases early, which before were detected too
late for treatment. There is no cure for phenylketonuria
(PKU), for instance, but newborns who are diagnosed early
and maintain a diet low in phenylalanine (Phe) can have a
normal life span with normal mental development. Women
with PKU can have normal pregnancies when they main-
tain the low-Phe diet. With these new technologies, some
PKU men have become fathers. In those cases, the mutation
is transmitted to the next generation. Because of this

The Impact of Modern Medicine on Human Evolution Chapter | 43 715

success, PKU has become increasingly common, but being
a rare disease (1/10,000e15,000), the global effect would
be negligible. Another interpretation is possible, given by
the possibility that the heterozygous state could have a
positive effect in carriers. A dated but interesting study
found that heterozygosity for the PKU allele is advanta-
geous in parents by rendering their unaffected offspring
more viable at birth, thereby improving the chance of sur-
vival of the allele. Unaffected offspring of parents hetero-
zygous for the PKU approaches the optimal birthweight,
compared to Norwegian neonates, which confers the min-
imum overall mortality in pre-, peri-, and postnatal periods.
This near-optimal birthweight, together with the possibly
higher effective fertility observed in PKU heterozygous
couples (at least in those who married in Norway before
1940), has apparently more than outweighed the disad-
vantages of the allele in PKU homozygous offspring as
shown, for example, in an excessive number of pre- and
perinatal deaths among the total offspring of PKU hetero-
zygotes, to say nothing of the PKU survivors who, often,
used to die young (Saugstad, 1977). In this case, if medi-
cine keeps alive also homozygous children, it indirectly
promotes a mutation being more frequently favorable than
unfavorable.

The possibility to “diagnose” genetic defects speciﬁc
for different ethnicity has been recently advanced by a so-
called “racial medicine,” particularly in the United States.
While traditional clinical trials were once conducted mainly
on white males, now in the United States most clinical
trials, as well as large observational studies, take into ac-
count characteristics such as age, gender, and race/
ethnicity. The 1993 National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Revitalization Act required for all NIH-funded research
involving human subjects to have as diverse a participant
cohort as possible, unless there were strongly justiﬁable
reasons to do otherwise (Norris, 2014). This approach
revitalized the concept of race and pushed researchers to
ﬁnd different genetic disease susceptibilities according to
ethnicity, even if this concept, unlike gender and age, has
no consensus criteria for deﬁnition. Clearly, there are ge-
netic predispositions with different rates in different pop-
ulations, but this is not statistically enough to recover the
notion of “race.” As is well known, there is more genetic
variation within these racial groups than across them. For
instance, genetic diversity among the major continental
populations is only 10e15% versus 85e90% within each
continent. However, while race itself is not a biological
variable, a group self-identifying as a given race may share
biologic characteristics originated because of
shared
ancestry (Norris, 2014). Some African Americans, for
instance, share with their ancestors two independent
sequence variants in the APOL1 gene on chromosome 22,
which predispose them to higher rates of kidney disease
than European Americans, who don’t have these variants

(Genovese et al., 2010). Based on this and similar studies,
American health agencies are making race an important
part of their policies, but from this assumption some sci-
entists are trying once more to propose race as a biological
entity (Leroi, 2005). To enter into that discussion is beyond
the scope of this chapter; what we can advance is that
medicine, considering these ethnic genetic differences
among populations, seems to be (or should be) going not in
the direction of a racial medicine, but in the direction of an
even more “personalized medicine.” A medicine which
takes into account not just the ethnicity of a given patient,
but his speciﬁc and unrepeatable past and recent history
inside also his ethnicaldand evolutionarydorigin. This is
also the aim of evolutionary medicine, which tries to take
into consideration, thanks to evolutionary models, genetic
and epigenetic individuality of single patients. Interindi-
vidual variations, at any case, is so high that medical care
will never be able to permanently change frequency rates of
alleles, affecting this diversity. For example, even if med-
icine manages to keep alive all American Africans who
carry the variants in the APOL1 gene on chromosome 22,
these alleles will hardly diffuse to the global African pop-
ulations,
extreme genetic
variability.

exactly because of

their

Irrespective of ethnicity, genetic diagnosis is becoming
a clinical daily practice for many diseases and it is partic-
ularly effective for monogenetic ones and for those with
few genes involved. For instance, a group of mutations
involved in the arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardio-
myopathy (ARVC), an inherited heart disease causing
abnormal heart rhythm and eventually sudden death, has
been identiﬁed (Thiene et al., 1988). The gold standard test
is genetic diagnosis, and in case of a positive test, relatives
are investigated to treat the disease and prevent sudden
death (Thiene, 2015). However, ARVC is rare;
in the
United States its prevalence is approximately 1/10,000,
even if studies found a prevalence of 1/200 of mutations
predisposing to the disease (Lahiten et al., 2011). Because
of its rarity, as in many other cases, medical care can
eventually cause a little increase in frequency of these
mutations, but without affecting the human genome as a
whole.

Therapeutic Procedures

Acute Versus Chronic

The efﬁciency of medical treatments continually improves
with new drugs, and clinical and surgical procedures, al-
lows for more cures for diseases. In many cases, diseases
that were previously acute or mortal are now chronic, such
as HIV, cancer, diabetes, and multiple sclerosis, enlarging
the lifespan of patients who would have died in previous
centuries. One could advance that mortal or acute diseases

716 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

should act as selective pressures that favor evolutionary
adaptive changes, improving the defenses against them, or
by eliminating the weakest individuals. If they became
chronic, selective pressure should fall down. When these
diseases have a genetic basis, to change them in chronic
could lead to an increase of the frequency of the harmful
alleles among the population, because diseased individuals
have more chances to reproduce. However, most of these
diseases either do not have a genetic basis, such as infec-
tious ones, or affect individual health after the reproductive
period. Cancer, diabetes, and multiple sclerosis normally
affect mature individuals. The little percentage of young
affected either do not survive, or, if they do, they are a
minority who cannot have an impact on the evolution of
global population.

We could eventually advance that medicine, extending
the lifespan of patients in the postreproductive period,
might promote the ﬁtness of their families, because some of
these individuals will be grandparents contributing to the
ﬁtness of their grandchild, taking care of them together with
their parents. One of the corollaries of “kin selection”
theory, in fact, is that all the members of a family, taking
care reciprocally, contribute to the ﬁtness of shared genes
(Hamilton, 1968). Now, if the genes predisposing to dia-
betes, for instance, runs in a family, medicine, curing some
of its members, will contribute to their diffusion. This
eventuality, however, is rare, because even inside a family
there is great genetic variability from mother and father
lineages. Moreover, the genetic variability generated by the
marriages of children with individuals from other families
may probably delete or dilute this tendency.

As in the case of infectious diseases (see later), also for
the chronic ones there could be the phenomenon of resis-
tance. If resistance, in the case of infection, is a trait ac-
quired by germs, which became resistant to antibiotics, in
chronic diseases the resistance is a physiological process
affecting patients who became gradually tolerant to the
drugs used for curing their diseases, such as cancer
(Chisholm et al., 2015). It is a process of evolutionary in-
terest because drug tolerance is an adaptive trait which,
being genetically based, should have been shaped by natural
selection. The usefulness of drugs tolerance seems obvious,
even if these kinds of easy explanations can be often wrong
in evolutionary biology. The gradual
the
ingestion of new substances could have represented, in the
past, a fundamental ability to acquire sources of nourish-
ment, in particular in period of starvation, or to sustain other
needs, such as physical activity. About 40,000 years ago,
for
instance, Australian aborigines were already using
nicotine from two different indigenous sources: Duboisia
hopwoodii and Nicotiana gossel. North and South Ameri-
cans also used nicotine from their indigenous plants Nico-
tiana tabacum and Nicotiana rustica (Saah, 2005). The
tolerance to that substance has been selected probably

tolerance of

because nicotine served as a stimulant useful for the life-
style of these populations. Primitive populations may have
exploited substances that now are considered psychoactive
drugs as substitutes for costly, nutritionally constrained
endogenous neurotransmitters (Sullivan and Hagen, 2002).
Medical treatments do not have an impact on evolution,
because the use of drugs eventually maintains this ability,
rather
least,
continuing this stimulation, medicine will
improve our
adaptability to tolerate foreign substances, acting in favor
of natural selection. At any case, a deeper knowledge of the
evolutionary origin of this human trait could be useful for
medicine to better design its treatment programs.

in whatever way. At

than changing it

Drugs and Vaccines for Infectious Diseases

Incidentally,

Concerning infectious diseases, it is well known that the
use of antibiotics causes a double effect. On the one hand,
antibiotics have been one of the prominent conquests of
Western medicine. Smallpox is the ﬁrst human infectious
disease eradicated worldwide,
thanks to a vaccination
campaign launched by the World Health Organization in
the 1960s, declared successfully concluded on December
09, 1979 (Fenner et al., 1988). Leprosy, syphilis, tubercu-
losis, cholera, and other infectious diseases, killing millions
of people in the past, now are curable and almost dis-
appeared in developed countries. Antisepsis favored an
extraordinary development of surgery, by which medicine
cures serious injuries and noninfectious diseases, such as
congenital malformations. The use of antibiotics, in sum, is
one of the determinant factors of the exponential growth of
global population during the last century, because of a
dramatic reduction of mortality rate.
this
global growth can be interpreted as acting both in favor and
against evolution of new adaptations in humans. A reduc-
tion of mortality rate could have lead harmful alleles to
increase in frequency, but also could have given to natural
selection a wider range of genetic variability from which to
select new advantageous alleles. This extraordinary success
led people to think that human’s struggle against infectious
diseases was over and that we will live, in a near future,
completely free from any kind of harmful germ. Moreover,
some evolutionary biologists in the past thought that the
relationship host-parasite necessarily evolved, by natural
selection, from an initial high virulence of the parasite to a
ﬁnal form of a mutualistic or commensalistic relation, in
which the parasite, in exchange for resources given by the
host, would not cause any harm (Dobzhansky, 1951). Un-
fortunately, the pandemic of HIV changed the mind of
scientists, who suddenly faced the emergence of a new
infectious disease with dramatic effects. Many of them get
back to study the evolution of virulence, understanding that
the relationship host-parasite only rarely reaches an equi-
librium. The optimal virulence of a pathogen is determined

The Impact of Modern Medicine on Human Evolution Chapter | 43 717

by a trade-off between maximizing the rate of transmission
and maximizing the duration of infectivity (Anderson,
1982). Virulence can increase, by consequence, when
germs ﬁnd cultural or biological vectors, and/or when they
can live also outside the host (Ewald, 1993). Natural se-
lection will remove highly lethal pathogens if the host’s
death greatly reduces transmission, but if there is a vector
which allows transmission, its death could even become the
best strategy for the parasite. On the other hand, scientists
are becoming more sensible about the evolution of resis-
tance in bacteria, realizing that massive use of antibiotics
inside and outside hospitals can favor this process by
determining a high selective pressure which, combined
with the high genetic variability of germs, have dramatic
effects on reducing the efﬁcacy of drugs. To treat
dangerous Staphylococcus infections, for instance, with
Penicillin (1946), we passed to Methicillin (1961), then to
Vancomycin (1986),
(Palumbi,
2001), and this arms race is destined to continue. Bacteria,
moreover, can rapidly acquire resistance by the phenome-
non of conjugation, according to which collections of
antibiotic genes are disseminated throughout an entire
population of pathogens (Davies, 1995).

then to Zyvox (1999)

At least in some circumstances, indiscriminate vacci-
nation campaigns can be more harmful than beneﬁcial for
populations because they select for the evolution of greater
virulence, causing higher mortality among hosts (Boots,
2015). In particular, an “imperfect” vaccine that keeps alive
the host but does not prevent transmission of germs will
favor strains of bacteria that extend the infectious period at
the point to be lethal for the host. A paper shows experi-
mentally that immunization of chickens against Marek’s
disease enhances the ﬁtness of more virulent strains, mak-
ing it possible for hyperpathogenic strains to transmit (Read
et al., 2015). A vaccination that “sterilizes” the host, pre-
venting the infection of vaccinated individuals, represents a
dead-end for parasites, but also in this case there is the
possibility that a mutant bacteria would be immune to the
host’s defense. Fortunately, human vaccination programs
have mostly been “sterilizing” up to now, but vaccination
programs with “imperfect” vaccines are being imple-
mented, thus representing this kind of threat (Boots, 2015).
Hospitals are probably where new multidrug-resistant
(MDR) strains of bacteria are mostly favored, because of
massive use of antibiotics, continuous circulations of peo-
ple, and air conditioning, which contributes to the diffusion
of germs. About 4.5% of patients admitted in US hospitals
in 2002 were estimated to be affected by hospital-acquired
infections (Peleg and Hooper, 2010). Most frequent and
dangerous are the resistant gram-negative bacteria, such as
Escherichia coli, Salmonella enterica, and Klebsiella
pneumoniae. Pseudonomas aeruginosa has evolved from
being a burn-wound infection into a major nosocomial
threat, of considerable concern for patients with cystic

lengthy antibiotic treatment

ﬁbrosis, because resistance development is associated with
their
(Davies and Davies,
2010). These and other gram-negative pathogens can sur-
vive outside the host, use medical staff and ventilators as
vectors, and use some medical instruments and procedures
to enter into the host (eg, the catheters), not to mention the
approximate hygiene in some hospital contributing to this
threat (Peleg and Hooper, 2010). Given the rapidity by
which bacteria became resistant, pharmaceutical companies
are investing even less money in research programs for new
drugs, raising a big concern in national and international
health care systems (Boucher et al., 2009)da concern
coupled with that of the continuous emerging of new
resistant
example, MDR
M. tuberculosis is a major pathogen found in both devel-
oping and industrialized nations, being the 20th century
version of an old pathogen (Davies and Davies, 2010).

strains

of

parasites. For

Besides the vaccines, most of the treatments act by
reducing the infectious period, being only “symptomatic.”
This reduction can both decrease and increase virulence of
parasites, depending on other variables such as pathogens
load within host, transmissibility of germs among hosts,
contact rate and modalities among infected patients and
susceptible individuals, and so on. In general, given that
pathogen virulence evolves according to a trade-off be-
tween maximizing the number of new cases generated per
unit time and maximizing the duration of infectivity, the
reduction of duration by treatment may increase the viru-
lence when it is proportionally related with transmission
(Porco et al., 2005). The virulence of a germ often co-
incides with its load in the host, so that the more germs
there are in a host, the more probability some of them have
to be transmitted to other hosts. By consequence, a path-
ogen which cannot remain longer in its host reacts by
increasing its virulence and transmissibility.

Medicine seems to act both in favor and against the
evolution of adaptive changes in humans, according to its
effects on the evolution of more or less virulent germs.
However, to foretell an evolutionary effect, we should be in
front of long-term changes, while these processes are, by
deﬁnition, strictly related to contingency factors. The
continuous arms race between humans and pathogens will
almost surely remain stable in our evolutionary history, and
medicine is and will be a powerful, but not determinant,
tool to cope with the continuous genetic variability by
which germs try to escape our defenses.

Genetic Therapies

In regards to genetic therapies, from the work of Victor
McKusick (1921e2008), pioneer of American genetic
medicine (Romeo, 2008), we dispose of an even more
detailed “morbid anatomy of human genome” (McKusick
and Amberger, 1993). Medical genetics is a frontier

718 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

discipline, given that molecular mapping of genes was
possible not before the 1980s, and genetic therapies are
under rapid development but they are not a real therapeutic
option yet. McKusick was editor in chief of the Mendelian
Inheritance in Man, published by the John Hopkins Uni-
versity Press until 1998, and father of the Online Mendelian
Inheritance in Man (www.omim.org), which is still the
most consulted genetic database in the world for human
genes, genetic disorders, and traits, continuously updated
up to now (McKusick, 2007).

McKusick deﬁned genes as the “neo-Vesalian basis for
medicine in the 21st century” (McKusick, 2001). Given that
Andreas Vesalius (1514e1564) is the founder of modern
human anatomy, this means that genes are the new frontier
for the study of human health and disease. The linear
arrangement of genes on our chromosomes forms our
“microanatomy” and medical genetics has its speciﬁc “or-
gan” of study, the “nucleus” of cells, as cardiology has the
heart, neurology the nervous system, etc. (McKusck, 2001).
These statements conﬁrm what we have discussed in the
Introduction of this chapter, that is to say that “modern
medicine” is focused from macroscopical substrates of dis-
eases to the ﬁnest molecular organization and it is, by
consequence, predisposed to affect the evolution of our body.
Of the approximately 25,000 genes of human genome,
mutations in more than 1800 have already been identiﬁed
as causing hereditary disorders, but this does not imply we
are able to correct these mutations in the human genetic
pool (O’Connor and Crystal, 2006). First, we have to
consider that there are different kinds of genetic diseases,
the main two categories being dominant and recessive, even
if they represent a simpliﬁcation of a much more complex
situation. In McKusick’s Mendelian Inheritance in Man, in
fact, a distinction between autosomal dominant and auto-
somal recessive traits has not been maintained since 1994.
The reasons for discontinuing this distinction included the
fact
that entries were being created for an increasing
number of genes for which there was extensive informa-
tion, including location on a speciﬁc autosome, but no
associated Mendelian phenotypic variation with either
dominant or recessive inheritance. In addition, the distinc-
tion is only relativedthat is, whether dominant or recessive
sometimes depends on the level at which the phenotype is
analyzed. Furthermore, there are rather numerous examples
of particular phenotypes that are inherited as dominant or
recessive based on different mutations in the same gene
(McKusick, 2007). The concept itself of a monogenetic
trait and monogenetic disease is an oversimpliﬁcation,
because the complexity of relationship between genotype
and phenotype is maintained also in these cases, such as
PKU (Scriver, 1999). For any genetic trait and disease, in
fact, is valid based on the equation, Vp ¼ Vg þ Ve, Where
“V” is variation, “p” is the phenotype, “g” the genotype,
and “e” the environment (Speicher et al., 2010).

If the distinction between autosomal dominant and
autosomal recessive is removed, it results that the effects of
medical care are very difﬁcult to verify and quantify in
evolutionary terms. While if we maintain the distinction, the
hypothetical effects seem to be low. For recessive genes, the
number of people with the disease is vastly outnumbered by
the number of carriers. Depending upon how rare the reces-
sive allele is, there may be thousands or even millions of
carriers for every person with homozygosis of the recessive
allele. Removing the affected individuals from the breeding
population will have an insigniﬁcant effect on the frequency
of the recessive allele in the population (Novella, 2007).
Moreover, some monogenetic diseases in recessive homo-
zygosis seem to have an advantage in heterozygosis. This
advantage, in terms of survival and reproduction, is believed
to have been the cause of the maintenance of these alleles,
throughout our evolutionary history, in high frequency. We
have already mentioned the hypothetical advantage of the
PKU; here we can mention sickle cell anemia and cystic
ﬁbrosis. The ﬁrst disease is caused by genes that in hetero-
zygosis give a protection against malaria and are found in
higher frequency in the environment where this infection is
endemic (Luzzatto, 2012). The second one gives protection,
in an analogous way, against typhoid fever (Pier et al., 1998).
Dominant genetic diseases are different: every person
carrying even one allele with the disease variant will have
the disease. It should be further enquired how and when
the disease manifests. If it manifests after the age at which
most people have children, then it will not necessarily be
selected against anyway, as in the case of Huntington’s
disease. If it manifests in childhood and is very severe,
even fatal, despite modern medicine, then medicine will
not be salvaging the disease allele. Nevertheless, if we can
keep children with the dominant disease alive long
enough to have children of
their own, we will be
increasing the frequency of the disease in the population.
In such cases, people know they have the disease because
everyone with the gene has the disease. This means that
they can decide not to have children to avoid passing on
their dominant gene (Novella, 2007). We have already
mentioned the case of Down syndrome, so we can just
reafﬁrm that ethical concerns will play an important role
in preconception and prenatal genetic screening. In the
case of monogenetic dominant disease, given there will be
no doubt for the parents that their children will have the
disease, to decide not to have a baby would be easier.
Other more uncertain cases will represent very complex
situations, both from an individual and a social point
of view.

Spontaneous mutation rate is another

fundamental
element to take into account. All genetic diseases, in fact,
have a spontaneous rate at which they renew in the popu-
lation. Even if we removed all genetic diseases from the
population,
they would reappear again by mutation,

The Impact of Modern Medicine on Human Evolution Chapter | 43 719

eventually reaching a steady state in the population.
Improving the survivability may increase the frequency rate
of these alleles, and by consequence the steady state of a
genetic disease, but then genetic testing and counseling
decreases its steady state. The latter effect may be greater
than the former, which means that modern medicine may
actually decrease genetic disorders, not
increase them
(Novella, 2007). When a genetic disease is diagnosed with
more or less probability in the fetus, this would lead parents
to decide to stop pregnancy. Or when prenatal counseling
predicts that parents carrying harmful alleles will surely
give birth to a diseased child, this would led parents not to
initiate pregnancy. As already discussed, however, of
fundamental
importance will be the way in which in-
stitutions will give information about genetic screening.
From an ethical and legal point of view, to constrain parents
not to have children is unacceptable, even if they carry
genetic disorders heritable by their child. By consequence,
institutions should give the best information on these dis-
orders, as parents will be able to make the best decision
about their pregnancies, looking not only for their desires,
but also for the wealth of their child and eventually also
their grandchild. For instance, CHOICES is a Web-based
multimedia education program on implementing informed
reproductive plans for patients affected by sickle cell ane-
mia or trait. This program proved to be effective in assisting
reproductive health decision making in populations affected
by these genetic defects (Gallo et al., 2015).

Finally, we have to consider the speciﬁc “ecology” of
human species. What we know about evolutionary change
suggests that genetic innovations are only likely to
become ﬁxed in small,
isolated populations. Human
populations are no more in that situation from the 20th
century, because also isolated ones are now connected to
the world by information networks and, more important
from an evolutionary point of view, by the transports. It is
even rarer that a population reject any kind of contact
from outside, or that some of its members do not leave the
place of origin or that foreign people do not came to live
in the previous isolated place. If populations are not iso-
lated, as we are now, crossbreeding makes it much less
likely for potentially signiﬁcant mutations to become
established in the gene pool. However, this does not mean
that human species are not evolving, because we have
proof that this is not the case. A strict physical isolation
doesn’t exist anymore, but some kinds of cultural borders
among populations continue to allow genetic changes to
become more or less frequent and ﬁxed, as seen for
populations in different continents (Voight et al., 2006;
Genovese et al., 2010; Norris, 2014). Moreover, we may
advance that, in the future, humans would reach the form
of a “global isolated population” because of continuous
reciprocal exchanges among previously separated pop-
ulations thorough the elimination of any border. This

unprecedented situation should create new possibilities
for natural selection to operate. As we can see, the human
niche construction is deeply affecting our own evolution.
Going back to genetic medicine, the great challenge of
current basic research is to create therapies centered on
transferring genetic material to correct or compensate for an
abnormal phenotype associated with a particular genotype.
The genetic material can be of three different types: (1)
Coding for a single gene, as in gene therapy, which replaces
the mutated gene or which helps the body to ﬁght a disease;
(2) Fragments of coding sequences, as in RNA modiﬁca-
tion therapy, for inactivating, or “knocking out,” a mutated
gene that is functioning improperly; (3) Entire genome, as
in somatic stem cells (SSCs) or embryonic stem cells
(ESCs) therapy. These types of genetic material represent
the three main categories and strategies of genetic medicine
(O’Connor and Cristal, 2006). Until 2006, pluripotent stem
cells could be obtained only from human embryos, but this
procedure involved ethical concerns hard to solve. SSCs,
even if they divide or self-renew indeﬁnitely as ESCs,
generate only the cells of the organ in which they are
located, and this represents an important
limit of their
application.
the Japanese physician Shinya
Yamanaka discovered a technique to induce human ﬁbro-
blast
to pluripotent stem cells, overcoming the ethical
problem of obtaining this kind of cells from embryos
(Takashashi et al., 2007). Gene therapy, by consequence, is
becoming the target for even more diseases and syndromes.
For the moment, however, genetic medicine regards only
monogenetic hereditary disorders, because it
is actually
impossible to modify the genes involved in nonmonogenetic
diseases, also given that some of them could have important
functions. In these cases, however, genetic medicine could
play an important role to compensate or modify diseased or-
gans. Examples include gene therapy to induce angiogenesis
to bypass blocked coronary arteries, or stem cell therapies to
regenerate cardiac myocytes to treat a failing myocardium
(O’Connor and Crystal, 2006). Cancer, disease related to a
complex series of multiple mutations, is another issue in which
gene therapy is already used (Brenner et al., 2013).

In 2007,

These therapies do not affect

the human genome
because they do not delete or substitute mutations. If they
became effective and routinely practiced, they could favor
some change in the same way organ transplant could do
(see later in this chapter). To be able to treat a diseased
organ could cause a fall of selective pressure toward the
organ, and eventually favor the frequency rate of harmful
mutations. In fact, also those who have mutations for
diseased organs will be able to reproduce, spreading their
harmful alleles. However, this situation will represent the
scenario predicted by optimistic eugenicists who think we
will be able to repair the known deleterious mutations by
engineering the soma (rather than the germ line), without
negatively affecting our evolution.

720 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

In regards to monogenetic diseases, though relatively
rare,
they affect millions of people worldwide and are
responsible for a heavy loss of life. The global prevalence
of all single gene diseases at birth is approximately 10/
1000. In Canada, monogenic diseases, taken together, may
account for up to 40% of the work of hospital based pe-
diatric practice (Scriver et al., 2001). Monogenetic disease
can be treated with gene-transfer ex vivo, by removing,
modifying, and replacing cell population; or in vivo, by
administrating a vector (plasmid, retrovirus, or adenovirus)
containing the therapeutic DNA, either directly to the organ
or into blood vessels that feed the organ. Ex vivo strategy
could have a positive impact on human evolution, only if
the modiﬁcation passes hereditary to next generations,
otherwise it may favor an increase of frequency rate of
harmful alleles. In vivo should be the best strategy from this
point of view, because it represents the possibility to repair
our genome even against
the eventual accumulation of
deleterious mutations due to medical care, as advanced by
optimistic eugenicists. Of course, natural variability of our
genome will continue to produce harmful mutations each
generation, but thanks to this technique, we should able to
delete them. Two different strategies are possible. When the
disease is caused by an intracellular phenotype, the gene
has to be transferred to the speciﬁc population of affected
cells. When the phenotype results from a secreted protein, it
does not matter to which cells or organ the gene is trans-
ferred, with the caveat that proteins must be appropriately
posttranslationally modiﬁed and proteins’ levels appropri-
ately regulated. Unfortunately, both of them are still not
available for humans (O’Connor and Cristal, 2006). Re-
searchers must overcome many technical challenges before
gene therapy will be a practical approach for treating dis-
ease. For example, scientists must ﬁnd better ways to
deliver genes and target them to particular cells. They must
also ensure that new genes are precisely controlled by the
body. Finally, they require circumventing immune defenses
against the vectors that carry the new gene, given that
vectors used are plasmid, adenovirus, retrovirus, or lenti-
virus. The immunosuppressive therapies can have an
impact on quality of life or lifespan of patients, decreasing
their positive effect in evolutionary terms. Moreover, only
retrovirus and lentivirus vectors, at present, mediate per-
manent insertion into the genome, which means that they
are the only ones able to have an evolutionary impact.
Adenovirus vectors cause innate and acquired host re-
sponses against viral capsids and transgene products, which
limit expression of the transgene to only a few weeks at the
most
(Fausther-Bovendo and Kobinger, 2014). While
retrovirus, permanently inserting into host genome, carries
the risk of insertional mutagenesis, and consequent devel-
opment of neoplasm (Suerth et al., 2014).

In addition, for the numerous gene-therapies in use,
based on RNA modiﬁcation or stem cells, similar problems

arise. According to the Gene Therapy Clinical Trial Data-
bases (http://www.abedia.com/wiley/), provided by the
“Journal of Gene Medicine,” in 2014 only 130 approved
gene-therapy trials worldwide toward treating monogenetic
disorders have successfully directed. Hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation, for instance, is the most diffuse SSC
therapy for various inherited diseases, such as lysosomal
storage disorders,
immunodeﬁciencies, hemoglobinopa-
thies, and leukodystrophies. As in any kind of organ
transplant, it entails the risk related to the requirement for
immunosuppression of the host (O’Connor and Cristal,
2006).

With RNA modiﬁcation, genetic therapy is focusing not
on genes, but on epigenesis, a basic mechanism in the
differential expression of our genes according to changing
environments. The recent development of epigenetics is
affecting our understanding of genetics itself and, by
consequence, of genetic medicine. The eventual target of a
genetic therapy, in fact, is not structural DNA sequences,
but regulatory ones. Interesting to note that current genetic
medicine, as already mentioned, tries to modify genetic
expression, with RNA fragment, to correct or compensate
for an abnormal phenotype, because a method permanently
changing DNA sequences still does not exist. The modiﬁ-
cation on gene expression made by medicine, however,
does not have an impact on human evolution, because it is
not heritable.

In sum, treating monogenetic diseases by modifying
phenotypic expression, such as in RNA therapy, could
favor the spread of harmful mutations because individuals
affected can survive and reproduce. To treat
them by
“extirpating” the mutations, such as in gene therapy, could
have a positive effect by eliminating a detrimental variation
from the genetic pool any time it will emerge. Stem cell
therapies represent another frontier that can have a positive
effect only if stem cells are taken from the patient, other-
wise immunological defenses have to be overcome at a
detriment to patient health. The new technique for reprog-
ramming SSCs in pluripotent ones seems to not represent a
signiﬁcant advancement
in evolutionary terms, again
because it depends on if these changes are transmitted to
offspring.

Finally, we have to consider also the cost of these
techniques. The broad application of gene therapy has been
hampered by its lack of similarity to the traditional phar-
maceutical model of drug development. Contrary to normal
drugs, the cost of gene therapy remains high after approval,
an effect compounded by stacked license fees for the many
patents needed for the various intellectual properties of one
product. Moreover, given that most genetic drugs are
designed for the genetic speciﬁcity of single patients, each
of them became an “orphan drug.” These market issues can
lead to an unaffordable pricing structure with little appeal to
major pharmaceutical companies (Brenner et al., 2013). For

The Impact of Modern Medicine on Human Evolution Chapter | 43 721

the moment, by consequence, the speciﬁcity of these ther-
apies means that only a small subset of patients might be
suited to treatment and the eventual evolutionary effect,
either positive or negative, is very negligible, and probably
will remain as such for a long time.

Organ Transplant

it

Since the discovery of cyclosporine in 1971 (ﬁrst use in
1979), organ transplant gained an enormous success in the
cure of irreversible organ pathologies. In regards to genetic
diseases just discussed, it has been advanced that organ
transplantation for a monogenetic hereditary disorder is the
ultimate genetic medicine in that
involves replacing,
along with the relevant SSCs and differentiated cells, the
organ that is malfunctioning secondary to the abnormal
phenotype (O’Connor and Crystal, 2006). However, one
should be concerned because this procedure could have the
effect to remove a selective pressure for the evolutionary
improvement of a given organ. Can we say, for instance,
that
the cardiovascular system to
cholesterol due to modern diet, or of the respiratory system
to modern pollution, or of the liver to modern poisons, will
increment because of a selective pressure’s relaxation? Can
we say, moreover, that this technique allows surviving and
reproducing individuals with poor genetic constitutions for
these organs?

the vulnerability of

As in almost all

the other cases discussed in this
chapter, the answer could be neither yes nor no, because it
depends on too many variables that could not be directly
related to medicine or natural selection, and because of that,
we cannot make long-term previsions. From the natural
selection perspective, transplanted patients are, in many
cases, in a postreproductive period, so their contribution to
evolution could be low. Eventually they can favor a
diffusion of their “poor” genetic constitution for a given
organ or system among the population, but they can also
represent an evolutionary advantage for their families,
taking care of their grandchild, as mentioned discussing
about kin selection. In many cases, moreover, even the
highest selective pressure can do nothing for the improve-
ment of a given organ, because of developmental, struc-
tural, or physiological constraints. Human coronaries
probably will always be vulnerable to atherosclerosis
because it is not possible for natural selection to shape
bigger or more than two or three arteries on the heart,
because these vessels are already well designed for heart
blood supply in a physiological condition. Given that
humans do not have cutaneous respiration, moreover, they
need coronary vessels to deliver oxygen to myocardium
(Liem et al., 2001). Natural selection could not redesign
completely the human system of oxygen supply just “for
saving” some individuals who died for cardiac stroke due to
coronary arteries occlusion. Again, some genetic feature

that predispose to atherosclerosis seems to have been
positively selected during our evolutionary history. Higher
serum cholesterol, for instance, may have been advanta-
geous in the course of the rapid increase in human brain
size during human evolution and for its role in steroid
hormone synthesis
(Ding and Kullo, 2009). Finally,
atherosclerosis is a disease of aging, affecting individuals in
a period almost completely beyond natural selection’s work
(Thomson, 2013).

Another aspect worth considering is that transplanted
organs could represent, rather than a dead-end for natural
selection, a new adaptive challenge for human bodies and
their immunological system. They could favor an immune
system able to recognize between harmful and beneﬁcial
“nonself” molecules, cells, and organs. Even the new
frontier of artiﬁcial organs may represent such a challenge.
Artiﬁcial knees and hip are part of the daily surgical
practice. Brain-controlled robotic arms, as well as a per-
manent artiﬁcial heart, are becoming real and effective
surgical options. As our bodies will be constrained to adapt
to new external “artiﬁcial” environments, such as the
absence of gravity in space, so too will our bodies be forced
to adapt to new internal artiﬁcial parts.

Finally, we have to consider the economic costs of
medical care. In modern societies, due to economic con-
straints, it is impossible to translate in practice the entire
technical wherewithal of medicine. This limit, in some sense,
solves upstream eugenics concerns. The translation depends
also from any country’s health care system. In Italy, where
health care is free and guaranteed by constitutional law, there
is the tendency to reduce the costs for treating chronic dis-
eases of the old to gain more resources for the young.
Transplantation is discouraged in cases of old patients. For a
liver transplant, for instance, the limit is 65 years. Physicians
and health politicians have to optimize resources that are
even more limited. If on the one hand the improvement of
medicine changes acute diseases in chronic diseases, on the
other hand medicine is decreasing economic resources for
dealing with chronic diseases, because these pathologies are
often in the old rather than in the young. Medicine, is
increasing the life expectancy of populations, but at the same
time is facing a decline of economic resources for dealing
with aging-associated diseases.

Iatrogenic Disruption of Adaptive Symptoms

Therapeutic procedures of ancient medicine were more
harmful than healthy. For almost every kind of pathology,
physicians practiced aggressive bloodletting and purgatives.
In this way, we should advance, with a little bit of joking, that
ancient medicine contributed to natural selection because
only the strongest survived from diseases and medical care.
Even if modern medicine is different, we may state that
something similar continues to happen. Many disease

722 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

symptoms are adaptive defenses, in particular against path-
ogens and other kinds of environmental threats. Pain, nausea,
cough, fever, vomiting, diarrhea, fatigue, and anxiety are
ways by which the human body tries to react to these factors
(Nesse and Williams, 1994). However, modern medicine
often cures symptoms such as unpleasant complications by
using symptomatic treatments. As illustrated by evolutionary
medicine, to block these symptoms could slow down the
process of healing (Nesse, 2001a). In this sense, we can
support the idea that modern medicine determines an iatro-
genic pressure against physiological process of healing. To
be optimistic, we should say that it is indirectly favoring, by
this pressure,
the evolution of human defenses against
pathogens less unpleasant for individuals.

Research supports that the so-called “multiple organ
failure syndrome” could be an adaptive process. Sepsis and
other critical illnesses produce a biphasic inﬂammatory,
immune, hormonal, and metabolic response. The combi-
nation of severe inﬂammation and secondary changes in the
endocrine proﬁle diminish energy production, metabolic
rate, and normal cellular processes, leading to multiple
organ dysfunction. This perceived failure of organs might
instead be a potentially protective mechanism, because
reduced cellular metabolism could increase the chances of
survival of cells, and thus organs, in the face of an over-
whelming insult. The procedures of current emergency
medicine seem not appropriate to sustain this adaptive
mechanism, in particular in its later phase. For instance,
attempts to stimulate metabolismdsuch as with glucose-
insulin or thyroid hormonesdmight be appropriate as
part of early management but could be potentially
damaging if the organism has entered a phase of established
multiorgan dysfunction in which cells have reduced their
intracellular metabolism to improve their chances of sur-
vival (Singer et al., 2004).

Finally, Randolph Nesse, father of current evolutionary
medicine, elaborated the concept of “Smoke detector
principle” for describing many defensive mechanisms
during pathological processes (Nesse, 2001b). Defenses,
such as ﬂight, cough, stress, and anxiety, should theoreti-
cally be expressed to a degree that is near the optimum
level needed to protect against a given threat. Many de-
fenses seem, however, to be expressed too readily or too
intensely. This is because when the cost of expressing an
all-or-none defense is low compared to the potential harm it
protects against, the optimal system will express many false
alarms. By consequence, even if diseases’ symptoms
sometimes are more harmful than beneﬁcial, they have to
be maintained and even reinforced by medical practice,
otherwise medicine will act against a fundamental adaptive
process of our physiology. The smoke detector principle is
an essential foundation for making decisions about when
drugs can be used safely to relieve suffering and block
defenses
(Nesse, 2001b). A better understanding of

evolutionary history and evolutionary processes seems to
be crucial, once again, for improving medical care and its
impact on human evolution.

shows

a

A change in lifespan is,

Public Health
Populations are healthier than in the past thanks to ad-
vances in medicine, which is promoting a signiﬁcant
enlargement of lifespan. While in the ﬁrst half of the 18th
century, European populations had a mean life expectancy
of 30 years, value similar to that in prehistory, now it is
about 80 years, and it seems to be continuously increasing.
At the beginning of the 20th century lifespan increased
because more children reached adulthood, while it was not
until the second half of the century that mortality rates
began to decline within the older ages. Research for more
recent periods
surprising and continuing
improvement in life expectancy among those aged 80 or
above (Oeppen and Vaupel, 2002; Christensen et al., 2009).
in itself, an evolutionary
change, but it is even more signiﬁcant because it is related
to other characteristics; between them the most important,
from an evolutionary point of view,
is probably that
humans tend to reproduce at a later age. By consequence,
the average number of children per family is progressively
diminishing, which, in turn, means that there is less varia-
tion in population and that natural selection has less ma-
terial to act upon. At the same time, to reproduce at a later
age implies also more genetic variability in germ cells (Paul
and Robaire, 2009). Researchers have shown that the di-
versity in mutation rate of SNPs is dominated by the age of
the father at conception of the child. The effect is an in-
crease of about two mutations per year. An exponential
model
estimates paternal mutations doubling every
16.5 years (Kong et al., 2012). If this surplus of variation,
on the one hand, causes a rise of frequency rate of harmful
mutations, it represents, on the other hand, more opportu-
nities for natural selection to select new adaptive alleles.
Moreover, if the population becomes, on average, older
than before, this could give to natural selection the op-
portunity to act more on the individuals in the post-
reproductive period because they remain important
in
family economies, for instance, in terms of parental care of
grandchildren, etc. The extension of aging in humans has
surely a social and evolutionary impact which has to be
carefully analyzed (Trevathan, 2007). Changes in devel-
opmental patterns, as already mentioned, have been
fundamental in driving evolutionary changes of humans
and other organisms in the past (Gluckman et al., 2009).

The diminution of the average number of children per
family can have an impact on women’s reproductive
health because they have a greater number of menstrual
cycles, which might be related to an increased risk of
ovarian cancer. A study conducted on 410 women founds

The Impact of Modern Medicine on Human Evolution Chapter | 43 723

that risk for death of ovarian cancer was higher among
women with highest number of lifetime ovulatory cycles
(LOC) compared with those having the fewest LOC. It
found also that women whose
at menarche
was <12 years had a higher risk of death compared with
women whose menses began at 14 years (Robbins et al.,
2009). These conclusions are reinforced by the fact that
pregnancies seem to reduce risk of ovarian cancer by
clearing transforming cells from the ovaries (“ovarian
clearance”) (Adami et al., 1994).

age

treatment of

Another issue of reproductive health related to human
evolution is the medical treatment of infertility. If infer-
tility is caused by a genetic defect that can be transmitted
to offspring, medical treatment could cause a rise in the
frequency rate of this mutation. Another risk is that
medical
infertility gives the chance to
reproduce at an even later age. Current socioeconomic
conditions of occidental countries show an important
change of the role of women in society. The majority of
women now work, and they have even less time to devote
to pregnancy and to cure offspring. By consequence,
women tend to delay pregnancy more than before. This
change can have an effect on women’s health, as
mentioned before, because it might be related to an in-
crease on ovarian cancer and, in general, a late pregnancy
is more difﬁcult and risky than an earlier one (Dietl et al.,
2015). A late pregnancy also can affect offspring health
because it has more probabilities to produce unhealthy
offspring.

The use of antibiotics and the vaccination campaigns
have the positive effect to reduce the incidence of infectious
diseases. At the same time, however, they could determine
a strong selective pressure for germs to mutate, escape
drugs, become more virulent, and use vectors. We have
discussed this issue earlier.

The improvement of hygiene in population, supported
from the second half of the 19th century by medicine, could
have caused, paradoxically, health problems. The use of
disinfection, if it decreases our exposure to germs and in-
fections, could lead to a lack of important stressors for our
immunological system. It seems that the many allergies
which have become so common in modern populations are
caused by an excessive hygiene that does not allow our
immunological system a proper development. The an-
thropic extinction of microfauna, caused in particular by
urbanization and pollution, has impoverished ecosystems
and weakened the necessary training of the immune system.
The “Hygiene hypothesis” states that we are in a state of
evolved dependence on organisms with which we co-
evolved (and that had to be tolerated) as inducers of
immunoregulatory
(“Old
Friends”) are depleted from the modern urban environment,
causing a rise in frequency of autoimmune diseases such as
allergy, type 1 diabetes and multiple sclerosis (Okada et al.,

circuits. These

organisms

2010; Rook, 2012). Again, the human niche construction
promoted by medical practice is having a deep impact on
how we are evolving.

CONCLUSION
Natural selection is always present and works when there
are organisms who reproduce, sexually or not, with modi-
ﬁcations between parents and offspring that could be mu-
tations, DNA recombination, epigenetic, or phenotypic
changes. Natural selection is the necessary consequence of
these fundamental mechanisms which are the essence of
reproduction itself. We do not see how humans could back
out of that. Maybe in a future civilization of clones? Natural
selection is also the consequence of human behaviors, in
the sense that the changes that organisms bring about in
their own environments can be an important source of
modiﬁed natural-selection pressures. Medicine sometimes
assists natural selection in shaping adaptations and some-
times it favors the rise of frequency rate of harmful muta-
tions, as any other human activity, as shown by the niche
construction model.

Modern medicine affects natural selection in different
ways. From one side it can directly act upon genes, with
genetic screening, genetic therapies (in the future), and with
selective abortion. From the other, it could affect evolution
by changing human behavior and human environment. The
hospital, in particular, is a new niche, which did not exist in
our evolutionary past, expressly designed for curing dis-
eases. This new environment has been fundamental
in
decreasing the mortality rate of human populations and in
expanding our life expectancy. At the same time, it favors
the emergence of resistant strains of bacteria.

the same time,

The creation of hospitals may have analogous effects to
the creation of the ﬁrst human residences during the tran-
sition from nomadism to sedentarism. These new niches
have given the advantage to protect humans against pred-
ators and atmospheric agents. At
they
caused new health problems, related to the closeness among
men and domestic animals, which favored the emergence of
many modern zoonoses and related to the smoke of ﬁres
inside houses, used for warmth and cooking. The inspira-
tion of this smoke seems related to atherosclerosis. A paper
found atherosclerosis in 137 mummies from ca. 3100 BCE
to the early 20th century. While modern lifestyles can
accelerate the development of plaque on arteries,
the
prevalence of the disease across human history shows it
may have a more basic connection to inﬂammation and
aging. Inﬂammation in the arteries,
in particular, was
probably caused in ancient people by the continued inspi-
ration of smoke from the ﬁres installed inside ancient huts
and primitive houses (Thomson, 2013).

Many modiﬁcations caused by medicine are related to
new selective pressures that could drive genetic frequencies

724 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

by favoring or opposing the ﬁxation of new mutations or
combinations. We cannot say, however, that medicine has
favored or opposed human adaptive evolution in an abso-
lute sense. When acting upon genes, in fact, only rarely
would we have a net effect, positive or negative. Mono-
genic diseases are relatively rare, while in the case of
polygenic diseases we cannot predict if the elimination of
one gene would be healthier or harmful. When acting upon
behavior or environment, the effects could be very different
according to many factors. We can say, for instance, that a
learned behavior that improves ﬁtness also prevents genetic
adaptation, which could be interpreted as a potential
depletion of genetic heritage, but if this behavior or its
learning gain a hereditary basis,
there would be an
enrichment of our genetic program.

We can safely say that modern medicine has not eliminated
natural selection, for there is still plenty of individual variation
in reproductive success in modern human populations. During
the last 40,000 years, selection in humans has accelerated with
a large amount of recent positive selection. This acceleration
was mainly caused by the larger size and lesser reproductive
isolation of the current human population, allowing for a
higher probability that a potentially advantageous mutation
could occur and, in some area, persist.

infectious diseases (HIV,

There is no reason to think that natural selection has
been eliminated among humans, because miscarriage or
spontaneous abortion, habitual abortion, stillbirth, prema-
ture birth, maternal death, and incurable infertility are ex-
amples of this mechanism in humans. Further examples are
childhood deaths,
inﬂuenza,
measles, EHEC, Ebola), and many incurable genetic dis-
eases. When looking globally, infectious diseases are the
number one killer of humans and therefore the main se-
lective pressure exerted on our species. The H2N2 ﬂu virus
killed 70,000 people in 1957 in the United States alone.
SNPs in a number of genes governing immunity affect a
person’s susceptibility to infectious diseases, and how sick
he or she becomes from those infections. This creates an
opportunity for natural selection (Novella, 2007).

Another important issue to underline is that modern
medicine has probably affected human evolution very little
until now and that’s because, ﬁrst of all, evolution occurs
very slowly and most of the things that modern medicine
have accomplished really affect people’s lives when they
have ﬁnished reproducing. Most people are having kids
between the ages of 20 and 40 and this is a very healthy
population, so most of those people do not really get the
beneﬁt of modern medicine.

Ethics and economy, ﬁnally, constitute further elements
that constrain and contextualize the impact of modern
medicine on human evolution. Not everything we would
think theoretically justiﬁable or technically feasible could
be done, either because it
is not morally desirable or
because it is not economically sustainable.

Given that medicine, as any other human activity, is
related to human evolution, medical sciences should be
well informed about evolutionary theory and processes.
Evolutionary biology can be fundamental for disease con-
trol and suggests that it may therefore have an important
role to play in the design of medical intervention both in-
side and outside hospitals. Evolutionary biology gives
theoretical and experimental models by which it is possible
to predict, given speciﬁc circumstances, the evolution of
virulence in relationship to vaccinations or treatments.
Medicine, using these models, can avoid a detrimental
impact on the evolution of virulence and, by consequence,
on human evolution. Evolutionary biology gives new
insight about the nature of our body, our reactions, and
symptoms against diseases. It is fundamental, by conse-
quence, for making decisions about when drugs can be used
safely. All of that represents further reasons to support the
development of evolutionary medicine and its use as a basic
science for all medical sciences.

REFERENCES

Adami, H., Hsieh, C., Lambe, M., Trichopoulos, D., Leon, D., et al., 1994.
Parity, age at ﬁrst childbirth, and the risk of ovarian cancer. Lancet
344, 1250e1254.

Anderson, R.M., May, R.M., 1982. Coevolution of host and parasites.

Parasitology 85, 411e426.

Baldwin, J.M., 1896. A new factor in evolution. American Naturalist 30,

441e451.

Beldade, P., Brakeﬁeld, P.M., 2002. The Genetics and Evo-Devo of but-

terﬂy wing patterns. Nature 442, 442e452.

Bersaglieri, T., Sabeti, P.C., Patterson, N., Vanderploeg, T.,
Schaffner, S.F., et al., 2004. Genetic signatures of strong recent pos-
itive selection at the lactase gene. American Journal of Human Ge-
netics 74, 1111e1120.

Byars, S.G., Ewbank, D., Diddahally, R., Govindaraju, R., Stearns, S.C.,
2009. Natural selection in a contemporary human population. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 107, 1787e1792.

Blackfan, K.D., Yaglou, C.P., Wyman, K.M., 1933. The premature infant:
a study of the effects of atmospheric conditions on growth and on
development. American Journal of Diseases of Children 46,
1175e1236.

Boots, M., 2015. The need for evolutionarily rational disease interventions:
for higher virulence. PloS Biology 13,

vaccination can select
e1002236.

Boucher, H.W., Talbot, G.H., Bradley, J.S., Edwards, J.E., Gilbert, D., et al.,
2009. Bad bugs, no drugs: No ESKAPE! an update from the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. Clinical Infectious Diseases 48, 1e12.
Brenner, M.K., Gottschalk, S., Leen, A.M., Vera, J.F., 2013. Is cancer

gene therapy an empty suit? Lancet Oncology 14, e447ee456.

Bubela, T., Li, M.D., Hafez, M., Bieber, M., Atkins, H., 2012. Is belief
larger than fact: expectations, optimism and reality for translational
stem cell research. BMC Medicine 10, 133.

Caplan, A.L., 2015. Chloe’s law: a powerful legislative movement chal-
lenging a core ethical norm of genetic testing. PloS Biology 13,
e100221.

The Impact of Modern Medicine on Human Evolution Chapter | 43 725

Chisholm, R.H., Lorenzi, T., Lorz, A., Larsen, A.K., de Almeida, L.N.,
et al., 2015. Emerge of drug tolerance in cancer cell populations: an
evolutionary outcome of selection, nongenetic instability, and stress-
induced adaptation. Cancer Research 75, 930e939.

Hawks, J., Wang, E.T., Cochran, G.M., Harpending, H.C., Moyzis, R.K.,
2007. Recent acceleration of human adaptive evolution. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
104, 20753e20758.

Christensen, K., Doblhammer, G., Rau, R., Vaupel, J.W., 2009. Aging

Haig, D., 2003. The science that dare not speak its name. Quarterly Review

populations: the challenges ahead. Lancet 374, 1196e1208.

of Biology 78, 327e335.

Cronin, H., 1993. The Ant and the Peacock: Altruism and Sexual Selection
from Darwin to Today. Press Syndicate of the University of Cam-
bridge, Cambridge.

Hamilton, W.D., 1968. The genetical evolution of social behaviour.

Journal of Theoretical Biology 7, 1e16, 17e52.

Hamilton, W.D., 1988. Sex and disease. In: Stevens, G., Bellig, R. (Eds.),

Davies, J., 1995. Vicious circles: looking back on resistance plasmids.

Evolution of Sex. Harper and Rowe, San Francisco, pp. 175e180.

Genetics 139, 1464e1468.

Davies, J., Davies, D., 2010. Origins and evolution of antibiotics resis-
tance. Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews 74, 417e433.
Dietl, A., Cupisti, S., Beckmann, M.W., Schwab, M., Zollner, U., 2015.
Pregnancy and obstetrical outcomes in women over 40 years of age.
Geburtshilfe Frauenheilkd 75, 827e832.

Ding, K., Kullo, I.J., 2009. Evolutionary genetics of coronary heart dis-

ease. Circulation 119, 459e467.

Dobzhansky, T., 1951. Genetics and the Origins of the Species. Columbia

University Press, New York.

Ewald, P.W., 1993. Evolution of Infectious Disease. Oxford University

Press, New York.

Fausther-Bovendo, H., Kobinger, G.P., 2014. Pre-existing immunity
against Ad vectors: humoral, cellular, and innate response, what’s
important? Human Vaccines & Immunotherapeutics 10, 2875e2884.
Fenner, F., Henderson, D.A., Arita, I., Jezek, Z., Landy, I.D. (Eds.), 1988.

Smallpox and Its Eradication. World Health Organization, Geneva.

Flintoft, L., 2006. Following the signposts of selection. Nature Reviews

Genetics 7, 246.

Friedmann, T., Roblin, R., 1972. Gene therapy for human genetic disease?

Science 175, 949e955.

Gallo, A.M., Wilkie, D.J., Yao, Y., Molokie, R.E., Stahl, C., et al., 2016.
Reproductive health CHOICES for young adults with sickle cell
disease or trait: randomized controlled trial outcomes over two years.
Journal of Genetic Counseling 25, 325e326 [Epub ahead of print].

Galton, F., 1883. Inquiries into Human Faculty and Its Development.

Macmillan and Co., London.

Genovese, G., Friedman, D.J., Ross, M.D., Lecordier, L., Uzureau, P.,
et al., 2010. Association of trypanolytic ApoL1 variants with kidney
disease in African Americans. Science 329, 841e845.

Gerbault, P., Liebert, A., Itan, Y., Powell, A., Currat, M., et al., 2011.
Evolution of lactase persistence: an example of human niche con-
struction. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London.
Series B: Biological Sciences 366, 863e877.

Gilad, Y., Oshlack, A., Smyth, G.K., Speed, T.S., White, K.P., 2006.
Expression proﬁling in primates reveals a rapid evolution of human
transcription factors. Nature 440, 242e245.

Hamilton, W.D., 1991. Seething genetics of health and the evolution of
sex. In: Osawa, T., Honjo, T. (Eds.), Evolution of Life. Fossils,
Molecules, and Culture. Springer, Berlin, pp. 229e251.

Hamilton, W.D., 2000. A review of dysgenics: genetic deterioration in

modern populations. Annals of Human Genetics 64, 363e374.

Hamilton, W.D., 2001. Narrow roads of gene land: the collected papers of
W. D. Hamilton. In: The Evolution of Sex, vol. 2. Oxford University
Press, New York.

Harper, K., Armelagos, G., 2010. The changing disease-scape in the third
transition. International Journal of Environmental

epidemiological
Research and Public Health 7, 675e697.

Jablonka, E., Raz, G., 2009. Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance:
prevalence, mechanisms, and implications for the study of heredity
and evolution. Quarterly Review of Biology 84, 131e176.

Kendal, J., Tehrani, J.J., Odling-Smee, J., 2011. Human niche construction
in interdisciplinary focus. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences 366, 785e792.

Kong, A., Frigge, M.L., Masson, G., Besenbacher, S., Sulem, P., et al.,
2012. Rate of de novo mutations and the importance of father’s age to
disease risk. Nature 488, 471e475.

Laland, K.N., Odling-Smee, J.F., Feldman, M.W., 1999. Evolutionary
consequences of niche construction and their implications for ecology.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 96, 10242e10247.

Lahtinen, A.M., Lehtonen, E., Marjamaa, A., Kaartinen, M., Heliö, T.,
et al., 2011. Population-prevalent desmosomal mutations predisposing
to arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy. Heart Rhythm 8,
1214e1220.

Leroi, A.M., March 14, 2005. A family tree in every gene. The New York

Times.

Liem, K.F., Bemis, W.E., Walker, W.F., Grande, L., 2001. Functional
Anatomy of the Vertebrates: An Evolutionary Approach. Harcourt
College Publishers, Orlando.

Luzzatto, L., 2012. Sickle cell anemia and malaria. Mediterranean Journal

of Hematology and Infectious Diseases 4, e2012065.

Lynn, R., 1996. Dysgenic: Genetic Deterioration in Modern Population.

Praeger, Westport & London.

Gluckman, P.D., Beedle, A., Hanson, M., 2009. Principles of Evolutionary

McDougall, W., 1927. An experiment for the testing of the hypothesis of

Medicine. Oxford University Press, New York.

Lamarck. British Journal of Psychology 17, 267e275.

Gluckman, P.D., Hanson, M.A., Cooper, C., Thornburg, K.L., 2008. Effect
of in utero and early-life conditions on adult health and disease. New
England Journal of Medicine 359, 61e73.

Gluckman, P.D., Hanson, M.A., Buklijas, T., 2010. A conceptual frame-
work for the developmental origins of health and disease. Journal of
Developmental Origins of Health and Disease 1, 6e18.

Gould, S.J., Vrba, E.S., 1982. Exaptation e a missing term in the science

of form. Paleobiology 8, 4e15.

McDougall, W., 1930. Second report on a Lamarckian experiment. British

Journal of Psychology 20, 201e215.

McDougall, W., 1933. Fourth report on a Lamarckian experiment. British

Journal of Psychology 28, 321e333.

McDowell, M.A., Brody, D.J., Hughes, J.P., 2007. Has age at menarche
changed? results from the National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey (NHANES) 1999e2004. Journal of Adolescent Health 40,
227e231.

726 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

McGuire, M., Troisi, A., 1998. Darwinian Psychiatry. Oxford University

Proctor, R.N., 1988. Racial Hygiene: Medicine under the Nazis. Harvard

Press, New York.

University Press, Cambridge, MA.

McKusick, V., 2001. The anatomy of the human genome. A neo-Vesalian
basis for medicine in the 21st century. Journal of the American
Medical Association 286, 2289e2295.

Read, A.F., Baigent, S.J., Powers, C., Kgosana, L.B., Blackwell, L., et al.,
2015. Imperfect vaccination can enhance the transmission of highly
virulent pathogens. PloS Biology 13, e1002198.

McKusick, V., 2007. Mendelian inheritance in man and its online version,

Rhine, J.B., McDougall, W., 1930. Third report on a Lamarckian experi-

OMIM. Journal of Medical Genetics 80, 588e604.

ment. British Journal of Psychology 24, 213e226.

McKusick, V., Amberger, J.S., 1993. The morbid anatomy of the human
genome: chromosomal location of mutations causing disease. Journal
of Medical Genetics 30, 1e26.

Milot, E., Mayer, F.M., Nussey, D.H., Boisvert, M., Pelletier, F.,
Réale, D., 2011. Evidence for evolution in response to natural selec-
tion in a contemporary human population. PNAS 108, 17040e17045.
Mishra, G., Hardy, R., Kuh, D., 2007. Are the effects of risk factors for
timing of menopause modiﬁed by age? Results from a British birth
cohort study. Menopause 14, 717e724.

Robbins, C.L., Whiteman, M.K., Hillis,

S.D., Curtis, K.M.,
McDonald, J.A., et al., 2009. Inﬂuence of reproductive factors on
mortality after epithelial ovarian cancer diagnosis. Cancer Epidemi-
ology, Biomarkers & Prevention 18, 2035e2041.

Romeo, G., 2008. Victor McKusick, 1921e2008: the founder of medical
genetics as we know it. European Journal of Human Genetics 16,
1161e1163.

Rook, G.A., 2012. Hygiene hypothesis and autoimmune disease. Clinical

Reviews in Allergy & Immunology 42, 5e15.

Nesse, R.M., 2001a. How is Darwinian medicine useful? Western Journal

Saah, T., 2005. The evolutionary origins and signiﬁcance of drug addic-

of Medicine 174, 358e360.

tion. Harm Reduction Journal 2, 8.

Nesse, R.M., 2001b. The smoke detector principle. Natural selection and
the regulation of defensive responses. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences 935, 75e85.

Saugstad, L.F., 1977. Heterozygote advantage for the phenylketonuria

allele. Journal of Medical Genetics 14, 20e24.

Scriver, C.R., Waters, P.J., 1999. Monogenetic traits are not simple.

Nesse, R.M., 2005. Maladaptation and natural selection. Quarterly Review

Lessons from phenylketonuria. Trends in Genetics 15, 267e272.

of Biology 80, 62e71.

Nesse, R.M., Williams, G.C., 1994. Why We Get Sick? The New Science

of Darwinian Medicine. Time Books, New York.

Scriver, C.R., Beaudet, A.L., Sly, W.S., Valle, D., Childs, B., et al., 2001.
The Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited Diseases, eighth ed.
McGraw-Hill, New York.

Norris, K., February 01, 2014. On race and medicine. The Scientist. http://
www.the-scientist.com/?articles.view/articleNo/38950/title/On-Race-
and-Medicine/.

Singer, M., De Santis, V., Vitale, D., Jeffcoate, W., 2004. Multiorgan
failure is an adaptive, endocrine-mediated, metabolic response to
overwhelming systemic inﬂammation. Lancet 364, 545e548.

Novella, S., May 07, 2007. Modern Medicine and Evolution. www.

theness.com/neurologicablog.com.

O’Connor, T.P., Crystal, R.G., 2006. Genetic medicine: treatment strate-

gies for hereditary disorders. Nature 7, 261e276.

Odling-Smee, F.J., 2003. Niche Construction. Princeton University Press,

Princeton, NJ.

Speicher, M., Antonarakis, S.E., Motulsky, A.G. (Eds.), 2010. Vogel and
Motulsky’s Human Genetics. Problems and Approaches. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin.

Suerth, J.D., Labenski, V., Schambach, A., 2014. Alpharetroviral vectors:
from a cancer-causing agent to a useful tool for human gene therapy.
Viruses 6, 4811e4838.

Oeppen, J., Vaupel, J.W., 2002. Broken limits to life expectancy. Science

Sullivan, R.J., Hagen, E.H., 2002. Psychotropic substance-seeking:

296, 1029e1031.

evolutionary pathology or adaptation? Addiction 97, 389e400.

Okada, H., Kuhn, C., Feillet, H., Bach, J.-F., 2010. The ‘hygiene hy-
pothesis’ for autoimmune and allergic diseases: an update. Clinical &
Experimental Immunology 160, 1e9.

Takahashi, K., Tanabe, K., Ohnuki, M., Narita, M., Ichisaka, T., 2007.
Induction of pluripotent stem cells from adult human ﬁbroblasts by
deﬁned factors. Cell 131, 861e872.

Omran, A.R., 1971. The epidemiologic transition: a theory of the epide-

The International HapMap Consortium, 2005. A haplotype map of the

miology of population change. Milbank Quarterly 49, 509e538.

human genome. Nature 437, 1299e1320.

Palumbi, S.T., 2001. Humans as the world’s greatest evolutionary force.

Science 293, 1786e1790.

Paul, C., Robaire, B., 2009. Ageing of the male germ line. Nature Reviews

Urology 10, 227e234.

Peleg, A.Y., Hooper, D.C., 2010. Hospital-acquired infections due to
gram-negative bacteria. New England Journal of Medicine 362,
1804e1813.

Pier, G.B., Grout, M., Zaidi, T., Meluleni, G., Mueschenborn, S.S., et al.,
1998. Salmonella typhi uses CFTR to enter intestinal epithelial cells.
Nature 393, 79e82.

Pievani, T., Serrelli, E., 2011. Exaptation in Human evolution: how to test
adaptive vs exaptive evolutionary hypotheses. Journal of Anthropo-
logical Sciences 89, 9e23.

Porco, T.C., Lloyd Smith, J.O., Gross, K.L., Galvani, A.P., 2005. The
effect of treatment on pathogen virulence. Journal of Theoretical
Biology 233, 91e102.

Thiene, G., Nava, A., Corrado, D., Rossi, L., Pennelli, N., 1988. Right
ventricular cardiomyopathy and sudden death in young people. New
England Journal of Medicine 318, 129e133.

Thiene, G., 2015. The research venture in arrhythmogenic right ventricular
cardiomyopathy: a paradigm of translational medicine. European
Heart Journal 36, 837e846.

Thomson, R.C., 2013. Atherosclerosis across 4000 years of human his-
the Horus study of four ancient populations. Lancet 381,

tory:
1211e1212.

Trevathan, W., 2007. Evolutionary medicine. Annual Review of Anthro-

pology 36, 139e154.

Voight, B.F., Kundaravalli, S., Wen, X., Pritchard, J.K., 2006. A map of
recent positive selection in the human genome. Plos Biology 4,
446e458.

Williams, G.C., 1966. Adaptation and Natural Selection. Princeton Uni-

versity Press, Princeton, NJ.

The Impact of Modern Medicine on Human Evolution Chapter | 43 727

Wilson, E.O., 1975. Sociobiology: The New Synthesis. Harvard Univer-

sity Press, Cambridge, MA.

Yaglou, C.P., 1938. Hospital air conditioning. Journal of the American

Medical Association 110, 2003e2009.

Zampieri, F., 2009. Medicine, evolution and natural selection: an historical

overview. Quarterly Review of Biology 84, 333e335.

Zampieri, F., Zanatta, A., Thiene, G., 2014. An etymological “autopsy” of
Morgagni’s title: De sedibus et causis morborum per anatomen
indagatis (1761). Human Pathology 45, 12e16.

Zimmer, C., 2009. The origin of tomorrow. Science 326, 1334e1336.

Chapter 44

Science and Technology in Human
Societies: From Tool Making to
Technology

C.J. Cela-Conde1 and F.J. Ayala2
1University of the Balearic Islands, Palma de Mallorca, Spain; 2University of California, Irvine, CA, United States

TOOL MAKING

The adaptive strategies of all taxa belonging to the genus
Homo included the use of stone tools, although the char-
acteristics of the lithic carvings changed over time. The
earliest and most primitive culture, Oldowan or Mode 1,
appears in East African sediments around 2.4 Ma in the
Early Paleolithic. Around 1.6 Ma appears a more advanced
tradition, the Acheulean or Mode 2. The Mousterian culture
or Mode 3 is the tool tradition that evolved from Acheulean
culture during the Middle Paleolithic. Finallydfor the
limited purposes of this chapterdthe Aurignacian culture,
or Mode 4, appeared in the Upper Paleolithic. The original
proposal of cultural modes by Grahame Clark (1969)
included a Mode 5 by differentiating some technical details,
allocating to Mode 4 the punch-struck blades from pris-
matic cores of the Upper Paleolithic, while the Mode 5 was
reserved for the microliths and compound tools of the late
Upper Paleolithic. We believe that this distinction is not
necessary for the present chapter, whose aim is to relate
cultural development to human evolution. A ﬁrst approach
attributes each cultural stage to a particular human taxon.
Thus, the beginning of tool making, ie, Mode 1, is linked to
Homo habilis, and “technology”dunderstood as the mak-
ing of tools which require a modern mind necessary for
Mode 4dto Homo sapiens. Although we will also examine
the technical advances assigned to Mode 5 by Clark (1969),
these are part of an evolution that does not involve a change
of species. In fact, the “technology” may be adding new
modes due to the multiple technological advances that the
cultural evolution of H. sapiens has achieved, starting with
agriculture. It doesn’t make sense to suggest such a model,

nor will we go into the later cultural developments that
follow the evolution of the modern mind.
We should already express a methodological caveat
before proceeding: the scheme Cultural Mode ¼ species, is
too general and incorrect. The assumption that a certain
kind of hominin is the author of a speciﬁc set of tools is
grounded on two complementary arguments: (1) the hom-
inin specimens and lithic instruments were found at the
same level of the same site; and (2) morphological in-
terpretations attribute to those particular hominins the
ability to manufacture the stone tools. The ﬁrst kind of
evidence is, obviously, circumstantial. Sites yield not only
hominin remains, but those of a diverse fauna. The belief
that our ancestors rather than other primates are responsible
for the stone tools comes from the second type of argument,
the capacity to manufacture. This consideration is perfectly
characterized by the episode involving the discovery and
proposal of the species H. habilis. As Louis et al. (1964)
said, “When the skull of Australopithecus (Zinjanthropus)
boisei was found [in Olduvai, Bed 1] no remains of any
other type of hominid were known from the early part of
the Olduvai sequence. It seemed reasonable, therefore, to
assume that this skull represented the makers of the Old-
owan culture. The subsequent discovery of H. habilis in
association with the Oldowan culture at three other sites has
considerably altered the position. While it is possible that
Zinjanthropus and H. habilis both made stone tools, it is
probable that the latter was the more advanced tool maker
and that the Zinjanthropus skull represents an intruder (or a
victim) on an H. habilis living site.” (Leakey et al., 1964).
Here we have a clear example of the argumentative
sequence: First, a Paranthropus boisei cranium and

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00044-2
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

729

730 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

associated lithic instruments were discovered at the FLK I
site, Olduvai. Later, hominins with a notably greater cranial
capacity,
included in the new species H. habilis, were
discovered at the same place. Eventually, stone tools were
attributed to H. habilis, morphologically more advanced in
its planning capacities. Leakey et al. (1964) paper included
a cautionary note. Even though it is less probable, it is
conceivable that Zinjanthropus also made lithic tools.

However,

the attribution of capacities that

identify
H. habilis as the author of Olduvai lithic carvings has some
reservations. John Napier (1962) published an article on the
evolution of the hand two years before, relating stone tools
to the discovery of 15 hominin hand bones by Louis and
Mary Leakey at the site where Zinjanthropus had been
found. According to Napier, “Prior to the discovery of
Zinjanthropus, the South African man-apes (Australopith-
ecines) had been associated at least indirectly with fabri-
cated tools. Observers were reluctant to credit man-apes
with being toolmakers, however, on the ground that they
lacked an adequate cranial capacity. Now that hands as
well as skulls have been found at the same site with un-
doubted tools, one can begin to correlate the evolution of
the hand with the stage of culture and the size of the brain”
(Napier, 1962).

Napier’s

(1962),

al.

(1964)

and Leakey et

in-
terpretations of the Olduvai ﬁndings exempliﬁes the risks
involved in the correlation of specimens and tools. Both the
skull of Zinjanthropus (OH 5) as well as the OH 8
collection of hand and feet bones (with a clavicle), all of
them found by the Leakey team in the same stratigraphic
horizon, could be related to lithic making. Sites yielding
tools and fossil samples of australopiths and H. habilis
require deciding which of those taxa made the tools. The
widespread attribution of Mode 1 to H. habilis is based on a
set of indicators among which are hand morphology and
size, as well as brain lateralizationdan expression of the
control capabilities of either handd(Ambrose, 2001; Pan-
ger et al., 2002).

PRECULTURAL USES OF TOOLS

Regarding the use of stones or other materials for obtaining
food, one must distinguish between two different opera-
tions. One matter is to make use of pebbles, sticks, bones,
or any available object to, for example, break nutshells and
access the fruit; another is to manufacture very deliberately
tools with a speciﬁc shape to carry out a precise function.
Although we are speaking in speculative terms,
is
conceivable that the spontaneous use of objects as tools
preceded stone carving.

it

By means of the comparative study of the behavior of
African apes, ethology has provided some interesting in-
terpretations about how chimpanzees use, and sometimes
modify, stones and sticks to get food. Since the ﬁrst

evidence of such behaviors collected by Jane Goodall and
Jordi Sabater Pi (Goodall, 1964; Sabater Pi, 1984), many
cases of chimpanzee tool use that can be considered cul-
tural have been brought to light. Very diverse cultural tra-
ditions have been documented, including up to 39 different
behavioral patterns related with tool use by chimpanzees
(Boesch and Tomasello, 1998; Vogel, 1999; Whiten et al.,
1999). Some of these patterns include the use of different
tools in sequence, as it is done by the Loango chimpanzees
(Gabon) for obtaining honey (Boesc et al., 2009). It is, of
course, true that the use of tools includes different patterns
in the case of humans, who carry out operational planning
tasks and, in particular, technical improvement processes
(Davidson and McGrew, 2005). However, it is also true
that chimpanzees are able to consider future uses of tools,
which involves some planning (Mulcahy and Call, 2006). It
has even been observed experimentally in these apes a
conformity to cultural norms used by dominant individuals
in the group, an attitude similar
to human behaviors
(Whiten et al., 2005).
One of the most

interesting aspects of chimpanzee
behavior, to understand the evolution of the lithic tradi-
tions, is the production, at the beginning unintentional, of
ﬂakes which resemble those produced by the ﬁrst human
cultures. This “spontaneous” production appears when
chimpanzees accidentally shatter a stone while trying to
crack nuts; the result can lead to sets of cores and ﬂakes
that are reminiscent of those in the oldest hominin sites
containing tools (Mercader et al., 2002, 2007).
is
reasonable to think that the hominins themselves would
use, at least as much as chimpanzees, the spontaneous
tools available (Panger et al., 2002). And they would do it
for a considerable time before starting to produce tools
explicitly. This idea was expressed by John Robinson
(1962) when he said that the australopiths did not produce
the complex carved stone found in Sterkfontein; but, for
this author, this does not mean they lacked culture. When
seeking food they could have used rocks, sticks, bones,
and any other tools that would be useful for their purposes.
Eudald Carbonell et al. (2007) have referred to these us-
ages prior to tool production as the “biofunctional stage”
or “Mode 0.” Shannon McPherron et al. (2010) have
the site of Dikika (Ethiopia) stone toole
identiﬁed at
inﬂicted marks on bones whose age is more than 3.39 Ma.
Even though McPherron et al. (2010) found no tools in
Dikika, Sonia Harmand presented at the meeting of the
Paleoanthropology Society in San Francisco on April 14,
2015, the ﬁnding at the site of Lomekwi (Lake Turkana,
Kenya) of tools coming from sediments with an age of
around 3.3 Ma (Callaway, 2015). There are, moreover,
very heavy artifacts, some of them up to 33 lbs. Although
at the time of writing this chapter the research on these
tools has not been published, clues about the ancient use of
stone tools are increasing.

It

Science and Technology in Human Societies Chapter | 44 731

It should be noted that suspicions about the existence of
a distinct cultural level for australopiths were for a long
time tied to evidence coming from Taung and Sterkfontein.
The fractured bases of baboon skulls of Taung and other
places, for example, indicated to Raymond Dart that they
were cracked to consume their insides. Dart (1957) argued
that the bones themselves had been used by australopiths as
tools to strike, crush, and cut, giving rise to a tradition of
using tools of “natural” origin, the osteodontokeratic cul-
ture prior to the use of stone tools.

Although the osteodontokeratic culture was eventually
considered as a misinterpretation, and taphonomic studies
would tend to argue that the identiﬁed bones were not
actually tools, studies such as that of Francesco d’Errico
and Lucinda Backwell (2003) on the uses of bones from
Sterkfonteindmembers 1e3, between 1.8 and 1.0 Mad
have shown indications, in the form of wear marks, of their
being used in milling tasks. In a later work, d’Errico and
Backwell (2009) studied the different uses of bones. Once
again, for the functions assigned to bones as tools, the use
of sticks by chimpanzees in tasks such as digging, to extract
termites or to separate the bark of trees, can serve as a
model. Optical interferometer analysis of terminal areas of
bones used as tools has revealed different wear patterns on
specimens from Swartkrans and Drimolen. d’Errico and
Backwell (2009) concluded that
the differences found
indicate diverse activities, as well as contacts with abrasive
particles of various sizes, that would point to tasks similar
to those that have been observed in chimpanzees.

The use of bones as tools extends to the African Middle
Paleolithic, and even to the Upper Paleolithic, although
with very different purposes to those inferred for tools of
Swartkrans lower levels, as is evidenced, for example, by
the small ivory points from Upper Semliki Valley, Zaire
(Brooks et al., 1995; Yellen et al., 1995). The markings
found on the bones have been used as evidence of butch-
ering activities. If appropriate taphonomic considerations
are taken into account, the markings observed on carcasses
are an irrefutable proof of the use of cutting tools on them.
However, according to Sherwood Washburn (1957) the
accumulation of remains in the breccias of South African
caves is unrelated to hominin butchering tasks. There is a
predominance of mandibular and cranial remains because
they are the bones most difﬁcult to break, so that they tend
to accumulate in the lairs of predators and scavengers.
Ancestral hyenas are likely responsible for the accumula-
tion of remains that we now ﬁnd fossilized, australopiths
included. It has been suggested that the Taung child itself
was the victim of a predator, probably an eagle (Berger and
Clarke, 1996), though this hypothesis has been criticized
(Hedenström, 1995).

Manipulated stones cannot be attributed to predators.
Many lithic instruments have been found at the Sterkfon-
tein Extension Sitedhand axes, cores, ﬂakes, and even a

spheroiddwhich are unequivocal signs of the manipulation
of raw materials to obtain tools designed to cut and crush
(Robinson and Manson, 1957). However, there are doubts
regarding the association between stone tools and their
authors. The sites that have provided Australopithecus
africanus, Sterkfontein, Makapansgat and Taung, are not
the only ones that have provided samples of an early lithic
culture. There is also a stone industry at Swartkrans (Brain,
1970; Clarke et al., 1970), though it was found a long time
after Dart elaborated his idea of hominization. The inter-
pretation of the possible stone artifacts found at Kromdraai
is not easy (Brain, 1958). But even in Sterkfontein, the
Extension Site belongs to Member 5, whereas Member 4,
older than 5, has provided a great number of Au. africanus
specimens although it has yielded no lithic tool whatsoever.
If the accumulation of bones at Sterkfontein Member 4
was due to scavengers, and if australopiths were the hunted
and not the hunters, the question concerning the ﬁrst tool-
makers remains unanswered. The answer will depend on
preconceptions regarding cognitive capacities and hominin
adaptive strategies. New kinds of evidence have bearing on
this issue: the paleoclimate to which different genera and
species were adapted; the morphology of certain key ele-
ments required for the intentional manipulation of objects,
such as hands and the brain; the diet and the taphonomic
study of the relation at the sites of bones and tools.

TAPHONOMIC INDICATIONS OF
CULTURE

Paleoclimatological conclusions regarding early hominin
taxa suggest they were adapted to tropical forests. This is
the case of Australopithecus anamensis (Leakey et al.,
1995), Ardipithecus ramidus (WoldeGabriel et al., 1994),
Australopithecus afarensis (Kingston et al., 1994) and Au.
africanus (Rayner et al., 1993). This argues against Ray-
mond Dart’s original hypothesis that related bipedalism, the
expansion of open savannas, and the appearance of the ﬁrst
hominins. The ﬁrst hominins would have emerged long
before the expansion of the savanna in Africa and before
any evidence of lithic tool use.

But in Dart’s time no Miocene hominins were known,
so it was logical
that he spoke of “the ﬁrst humans,”
referring to those who colonized the savanna during the
Pliocene-Pleistocene. Which of them ﬁrst began to use
stone tools? Again, we are facing the necessity to associate
fossil remains to the lithic tools found at the sites.

We said before that

the attribution of a particular
hominin taxon to the making of a speciﬁc culture type is
based on ﬁnding the hominin specimens and lithic in-
struments at the same level of the same site. However, we
must avoid falling into circularity. Especially, every pre-
caution should be taken when attributing manipulation of
ancient tools to hominins of different sympatric species. If

732 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

we ﬁnd two taxa, T1 and T2, present at the same site and
stratigraphic horizondas happens with H. habilis and
P. boisei at Olduvaidand if we claim that the authors of
the carvings belong to one of them, let’s say to T1, because
we assume that they have the ability to make tools, we will
be falling into a circular argumentation. When ﬁnding the
tools, we assume that those who carved them are precisely
those individuals to whom we had previously attributed the
possession of a cognitive level and manual capacity for
manufacturing them.

Circularity can be broken if in sites where the alleged
authors, such as T1, are found, of the carvings, tools are
also found in a fairly widespread way, while that is not the
case for T2 or any other taxon, which only sporadically are
found associated with tools. In that case, it is reasonable to
accept T1 as the toolmaker.

The systematic coincidence between a specimen of a
particular morphology and lithic carvings of a speciﬁc
cultural tradition is what has led us to consider the ﬁrst
species of the genus Homo as responsible for the oldest
culture.

With regard to South Africa, the issue is uncertain.
Sterkfontein Member 5 has yielded the Stw 53 cranium,
which, as we saw, is considered as either H. aff. habilis or
an Australopithecus of an unspeciﬁed species; and it was
considered as the specimen-type of Homo gautengensis by
Darren Curnoe (2010). Swartkrans has also provided some
exemplars attributed to H. habilis and, regarding Taung, the
most widespread opinion argues that the stone tools are
much more recent and that
they were made by more
evolved hominins.

The words “more evolved” obscure the circularity trap
about which we spoke earlier. It makes us think that, as the
carving of lithic tools imply high cognitive abilities, the
presence of tools of that type leads us to conclude that their
creators had reached a higher cognitive development. To
accept that as a truth it is necessary to relate that “cognitive
leap” with some other evidence aside from stone tools.

Taphonomic studies, which reconstruct the process of
accumulation of available fossil evidence at a site, have
enabled further progress in understanding the behavior of
ancient hominins. Different sites in East Africa (Olduvai,
Koobi Fora, Olorgesailie, Peninj) provide evidence of
hominin habitation with direct association of hominin fossil
remains and manipulated stones. As a result of such studies,
Raymond Dart’s idea of hominins as hunters in the open
savanna was followed by the hypothesis that the ﬁrst stone
tool makers were scavengers who cooperated to a greater or
lesser degree to obtain food (Binford, 1981; Blumenschine,
1987; Bunn, 1981; Isaac, 1978). The role of cooperation
and the type of activity aimed to obtain meat are still
controversial, and some authors advocate the idea that
hominins associated to sites with ancient cultural presence
were hunters
example,

than scavengers

rather

(for

Domínguez-Rodrigo et al., 2007). In fact, the controversy is
not decisive. Once again, it is reasonable to think that the
ﬁrst Homo were opportunists, and in their carnivorous
behavior beneﬁted from the available opportunities to both
scavenge and hunt.

MODE 1: OLDOWAN CULTURE

Taphonomic studies, aimed at reconstructing the process of
accumulation of available fossil evidence at a site, have
increased our understanding of
the behavior of early
hominins. Different East African sites (Olduvai, Koobi
Fora, Olorgesailie, Peninj) provide samples of hominin
living sites with a direct association of hominin fossil re-
mains and manipulated stones.

Although Olduvai gorge was not the ﬁrst place in which
early stone tools were found, it gave name to the earliest
known lithic industry: Mode 1, also known as Oldowan
culture. The excellent conditions of the Olduvai sites pro-
vided paleontologists and archaeologists with the chance to
carry out
taphonomic interpretations for reconstructing
hominin habitats. Any lithic culture can be described as a
set of diverse stones manipulated by hominins to obtain
tools to cut, scrape, or hit. They are diverse tools obtained
by hitting pebbles of different hard materials. Silex, quartz,
ﬂint, granite, and basalt are some of the materials used for
tool making. In the Oldowan culture, the size of the round
shaped cores is variable, but they usually ﬁt comfortably in
the hand; they are tennis ballesized stones. Many tools
belonging to different traditions ﬁt within these generic
characteristics. What speciﬁcally identiﬁes Oldowan cul-
ture is that its tools are obtained with very few knocks,
sometimes only one. The resultant tools are misleadingly
crude. It is not easy to hit the stones with enough precision
to obtain cutting edges and efﬁcient ﬂakes.

The Oldowan tools are usually classiﬁed by their
shapes, with the understanding that differences in appear-
ance imply different uses. Large tools include: (1) cobbles
without cutting edge, but with obvious signs of being used
to strike other stones, with the very appropriate name of
hammerstones; (2) cobbles in which a cutting edge was
obtained by striking, which served to break hard surfaces
such as long bones (to reach the marrow, for example).
They are called choppers; (3) ﬂakes resulting from the blow
to a core. Their edges are very sharp, as much as one of a
metal tool, and their function is to cut skin, ﬂesh, and the
tendons of animals that need to be butchered. They can be
retouched or not; (4) scrapers, retouched ﬂakes with an
edge which recall in some ways a serrated knife, and whose
function would have been to scrape the skin into rawhide;
(5) polyhedrons, spheroids, and discoids. Cores manipu-
lated in various ways, as if ﬂakes had been removed from
their outer perimeter. Their function is uncertain; they may
be nothing more than waste without particular utility.

Science and Technology in Human Societies Chapter | 44 733

It

is not easy to arrive at deﬁnitive conclusions
regarding the use of Oldowan tools. The idea we have of
their function depends on the way we interpret the adap-
tation of hominins that used them, based on arguments
that are often circular. Toolmakers can be seen, as Lewis
Binford (1981) did, as a last stage in scavenging, when only
large bones are available. If this were the case, the most
important tools would be the hand axes that allow hitting a
cranium or femur hard enough to break them. If, on the
contrary, we understand that early hominins butchered
almost whole animals, then ﬂakes would be the essential
tools. A functional explanation can be established between
hand axes, manipulated with power grips, and ﬂakes, which
require handling them with the ﬁngertips using a precision
grip. It is not easy to go beyond this, but some authors, like
Nicholas Toth (1985a,b), have carried out much more
precise functional studies. Toth argued that ﬂakes were
enormously important for butchery tasks, even when they
were unmodiﬁed, while he doubted the functional value of
some polyhedrons and spheroids.

Several kinds of evidence have been used to resolve the
question of how early hominins obtained animal proteins.
One is the detailed analysis of the tools and their possible
functionality. The microscopical examination of the edge of
a lithic instrument allows inferring what
it was used
fordwhether it served as a scraper to tan skin, or as a knife
to cut meat, or as a hand axe to cut wood. This affords an
explanation of behavior that goes beyond the possibilities
of deducing a tool’s function from its shape. In certain
instances lithic tools might have been used as wood-
working tools. Indications of the use of wood instruments
are not rare in the Late Pleistocene. In the Middle Pleis-
tocene, the ﬁnding of plant microremains (phytoliths, ﬁ-
bers) on the edges of Peninj (Tanzania) Acheulean bifaces
is the earliest proof of processing of wood with artifacts
(Dominguez-Rodrigo et al., 2001).

interpretations of cutmarks

The examination of the marks that tools leave on fossil
bones provides direct evidence of their function. Tapho-
nomic
suggest hominins
deﬂeshed and broke the bones to obtain food. This butchery
function related to meat intake portrays early hominins as
scavengers capable of taking advantage of the carcasses of
the prey of savanna predators (Blumenschine, 1987). But in
some instances the evidence suggests other hypotheses.
Travis Pickering et al.
(2000) analyzed the cutmarks
inﬂicted by a stone tool on a right maxilla from locality Stw
53 at Sterkfontein Member 5. The species to which the
specimen belongs is unclear, but it is certainly a hominin.
They noted that “[t]he location of the marks on the lateral
aspect of the zygomatic process of the maxilla is consistent
with that expected from slicing through the masseter
muscle, presumably to remove the mandible from the cra-
nium.” In other words, a hominin from Sterkfontein
Member 5 dismembered the remains of another.

Are these marks indicative of cannibalistic practices, or
are they signs of something like a ritual? The available
evidence does not provide an answer to this question. It is
not even possible to determine whether the hominin that
disarticulated the Stw 53 mandible and its owner belonged
to the same species. But cannibalistic behaviors have been
inferred from Middle Pleistocene cutmarks. This is how
the cutmarks on the Atapuerca (Spain) ATD6-96 mandible
have been interpreted (Carbonell et al., 2005). It has
also been suggested regarding the Zhoukoudian sample
(Rolland, 2004). Cannibalism seems to have been common
among Neandertals and the ﬁrst anatomically modern
humans.

The Oldowan culture is not restricted to Olduvai. Stone
tools have also been found at older Kenyan and Ethiopian
sites, though in some occasions their style was slightly
different. These ﬁndings have extended back the estimated
time for the appearance of lithic industries (Table 44.1). For
a list of Mode 1 main sites, see Plummer (2004).

Close to 3000 artifacts were found in 1997 at

the
Lokalalei 2C site (West Turkana, Kenya), with an estimated
age of 2.34 Ma. They were concentrated in a small area,
about 10 square meters, and included a large number of
small elements (measuring less than a centimeter) (Roche
et al., 1999). The tools were found in association with some
faunal remains, but these show no signs of having been
manipulated. Nearby sites, LA2A, LA2B and LA2D, and
the more distant LA1 have also provided stone tools; LA1
and LA2C, with an age of 2.34 Ma, are the oldest sites with
utensils in Kenya (Tiercelin et al., 2010).

The importance of the Lokalalei tools lies primarily in
the presence of abundant debris, which allows establishing
the sequence of tool making in situ. Helene Roche et al.
(1999) have argued that the technique used by the makers
of these tools required very careful preparation and use of
the materials, previously unimaginable for such early
hominins. This suggested that the cognitive capacities of
those toolmakers were more developed than what is usually
believed. One of the cores was hit up to 20 times to extract
ﬂakes, and the careful choice of the materials (mostly
volcanic lavas
those who
manipulated them knew their mechanical properties well.

like basalt)

indicates

that

TABLE 44.1 The Oldest Cultures

Name

Lokalalei

Shungura

Hadar

Gona

Localities

West Turkana

Omo

Hadar

Middle Awash

Age (Ma)

2.34
2.2e2.0

2.33

2.5e2.6

734 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

Lokalalei ﬁndings indicate that hand control and,
therefore, brain development, must have been already quite
developed for nearly two and a half million years ago. The
question of what species would have been responsible for
manipulating these artifacts is a different matter, as we have
repeatedly pointed out. James Steele (1999) raised the issue
of the cognitive capacities and knowledge of the authors of
the Lokalalei 2C tools. Steele admitted that the available
evidence does not allow going beyond hypotheses similar
to the one which attributed the Olduvai tools to H. habilis
because of
its larger cranial capacity compared with
P. boisei. The Lokalalei ﬁndings indicate that almost two
and a half million years ago the motor control of the hands,
and thus the development of the brain, must have been
considerable. The identity of the species responsible for
manipulating those artifacts is a different issue, difﬁcult to
answer. In his commentary about Roche and colleagues’
discovery, Steele (1999) refused to give a deﬁnitive answer.
He simply argued that we still have similar doubts to those
of the authors who, in 1964, associated the tools found at
Olduvai with the species H. habilis.

The Middle Awash region includes many sites that have
yielded Oldowan and Acheuleanda culture which replaced
the Oldowan over timedtools, described for the ﬁrst time
by Maurice Taieb (1974) in his doctoral thesis. A Homo
maxilla (AL 666-1) was found in association with Oldowan
tools at Hadar (Ethiopia), to the north of Middle Awash.
The sediments from the upper part of the Kada Hadar
Member were estimated to 2.33 Ma; this was the earliest
association between lithic industry and hominin remains
(Kimbel et al., 1996). The 34 instruments found in the 1974
campaign (indicative of a low density of lithic remains) are
typical of Oldowan culture: choppers and ﬂakes. In addi-
tion,
three primitive bifaces, known as end-choppers,
appeared on the surface, but it is difﬁcult to associate these
tools with the excavated ones.

The earliest known instruments have been found at the
Gona site (Ethiopia), within the Middle Awash area, in
sediments dated to 2.6e2.5 Ma by correlation of
the
archaeological
localities with sediments dated with the
40Ar/39Ar method and paleomagnetism (Semaw et al.,
1997). Thus, they are about 200,000 years older than the
Lokalalei tools.

Gona has provided numerous tools, up to 2970,
including cores, ﬂakes, and debris. Many of the tools were
constructed in situ. No modiﬁed ﬂakes have been found,
but the industry appears very similar to the early samples
from Olduvai. Sileshi Semaw et al. (1997) attributed the
differences, such as the greater size of the Gona cores, to
the distance between the site and the places where the raw
materials (trachyte) were obtained; these are closer in Gona
than in other instances. As hominins have not been found at
the site, it is difﬁcult to attribute the tools to any particular
taxon. Semaw et al. (1997) believed it was unnecessary to

suggest a “pre-Oldowan” industry. Rather, the Oldowan
industry would have remained in stasis (presence without
notable changes) for at least a million years. The precision
of the Gona instruments led Sileshi Semaw’s team to as-
sume that their authors were not novices, so even earlier
lithic industries might be discovered in the future.

That future may have already arrived. Nature (Callaway,
2015) has reported the ﬁnding of stone cores and ﬂakes,
likely intentionally crafted, at the Lomekwi site, west of
Kenya’s Lake Turkana. The sediments are dated 3.3 Ma,
much older than H. habilis. Sonia Harmand of Stony Brook
University in New York reported the ﬁndings at a meeting of
the Paleoanthropology Society in San Francisco on April 14,
2015. Harmand’s team concluded that the tools represent a
distinct culture, which they have named the Lomekwian
culture. Harmand pointed out at the meeting of the Paleo-
anthropology Society that the cores are enormous, some
weighing as much as 15 kg, which is surprising considering
the small size of the australopithecines. How could they
handle such large stones? And what were they used for?

Bernard Wood (1997) wondered about the authors of
the tools found at the site. The great stasis of the Oldowan
culture suggested by the tools raises a problem for the usual
assignation of the Oldowan tradition to H. habilis. Given
that the latest Oldowan tools are about 1.5 -Ma old, this
tradition spans close to a million years. This is why Wood
(1997) noted that if Oldowan tools had to be attributed to a
particular hominin, then the only species that was present
during the whole interval was P. boisei. This is circum-
stantial evidence in favor of the notion that robust aus-
tralopiths manufactured tools. But as we have mentioned
several times in this book, there is no need for making a
close identiﬁcation between hominin species and lithic
traditions, because cultural sharing must have been quite
common. In any case, de Heinzelin et al. (1999) attributed
the Gona utensils to the species Australopithecus garhi,
whose specimens were found at Bouri, 96 -km south of
where the tools come from.

The comparison between instruments from different
sites has its limitations. As Glynn Isaac (1969) noted, it is
not uncommon to ﬁnd that the differences between the
Oldowan techniques found at different
locations of the
same age are as large as those used to differentiate suc-
cessive Oldowan stages, or even larger. This problem il-
lustrates that the complexity of a lithic instrument is a
function of its age, but also of the needs of the toolmaker.

THE TRANSITION MODE 1 (OLDOWAN)
TO MODE 2 (ACHEULEAN)

Mode 2, or Acheulean culture, corresponds to a new
carving procedure whose most characteristic element is the
biface, “teardrop shaped in outline, biconvex in cross-
section, and commonly manufactured on large (more than

Science and Technology in Human Societies Chapter | 44 735

10 cm) unifacially or bifacially ﬂaked cobbles, ﬂakes, and
slabs” (Noll and Petraglia, 2003). These tools, made with
great care, were identiﬁed for the ﬁrst time at the St. Acheul
site (France), and are known as “Acheulean industrial
complex” or “Acheulean culture” (Mode 2). Acheulean
culture appeared in East Africa over 1.7 Ma, and extended
to the rest of the Old World reaching Europe, where the
oldest Acheulean tools received the local name of “Abbe-
villian industry.” The life of the Acheulean continued in
Europe until about 50,000 years ago, although since
0.3 Ma more advanced utensils could be found from other
cultural traditions, the Mousterian or Mode 3, which we
will discuss later.

Mary Leakey (1975) described the transition observable
at Olduvai from perfected Oldowan tools to a different and
more advanced industry. The oldest instruments of Old-
uvai, which come from Bed I, were in a level dated by
40K/40Ar method at 1.7e1.76 Ma (Evernden and Curtiss,
1965). The ﬁrst Acheulean tools are from Bed II. Between
both beds there are tuffs, but the section that corresponds
precisely to the time of the transition between the two
cultures cannot be precisely dated (Isaac, 1969). If,
in
addition, we point out that both cultures overlap in Olduvai
for a considerable time, with the concurrent presence of
utensils from both Mode 1 and 2, the difﬁculties to deter-
mine the precise moment of the cultural transition increase.
Nevertheless, a gradual transition from Oldowan culture to
Acheulean culture was justiﬁed by the sequence established
by Mary Leakey for the Olduvai beds (Table 44.2).

Louis Leakey (1951) had previously considered the
coexistence of cultures and the evolution of Oldowan
instruments as evidence of gradual change. However,
subsequent studies painted another scenario. Glynn Isaac

TABLE 44.2 Cultural Sequence at Olduvai
Established by Mary Leakey (1975, Modiﬁed)

Beds

Masek

IV

Age in Ma

0.2
0.7e0.2

Middle part
of III

1.5e0.7

Middle part
of II

I and lower
part of II

1.7e1.5

1.9e1.7

Number
of Pieces

187

686

979

99

 

683

537

Industries

Acheulean

Acheulean

Developed
Oldowan C

Acheulean

Developed
Oldowan C

Developed
Oldowan A

Oldowan

(1969) argued that
the improvement of the necessary
techniques to go from the Oldowan to the Acheulean tra-
ditions could not have taken place gradually. A completely
new type of manipulation would have appeared with
Acheulean culture, a true change in the way of carrying out
the operations involved in tool making. A similar argument
has been made by Sileshi Semaw et al. (2009) when
interpreting the sequence of cultural change. Depending on
the archaeological record of Gona (Ethiopia) and other
African locations, Semaw et al. (2009) concluded that the
Mode II would have arisen rather abruptly by a rapid
transition from the Oldowan technique.

the different cultural

If so, it would be important to determine exactly when
that jump forward occurred and to establish the temporal
distribution of
traditions. Such
detailed knowledge is not easy to achieve. The Olduvai site
does not reveal precisely when the cultural change took
place. The earliest instruments, from Bed I, are found in a
level dated to 1.7e1.76 by the potassium/argon method
(Evernden and Curtiss, 1965). The later Acheulean utensils
appeared at the Kalambo Falls locality at Olduvai, in as-
sociation with wood and coal materials. The age of these
materials was estimated by the 14C method at 60,000 years
(Vogel and Waterbolk, 1967). There are other volcanic
tuffs between both points, but the 1.6 Ma interval between
the most recent level and Kalambo Falls limits the precision
of the chronometry. This period corresponds precisely to
the time of the transition between both cultures (Isaac,
1969). If we take into account the evolution within Mode 1,
with developed Oldowan tools that overlap in time with
Acheulean ones, the difﬁculties involved in the description
of the cultural change increase.

The technical evolution from Mode 1 to Mode 2 can also
be studied at other places, such as the Humbu Formation
from the Peninj site, to the west of Lake Natron (Tanzania).
After the discovery made by the Leakys and Isaac in 1967,
authors such as Amini Mturi (1987) or Kathy Schick and
Nicholas Toth (1993) carried out research at the Natron area.
Several Natron sites show a transition from Oldowan to
Acheulean cultures close to 1.5 Ma (Schick and Toth, 1993).
The correlation of the Peninj and Olduvai sediments allows
the identiﬁcation of the Oldowan/Acheulean transition with
the upper strata of Bed II from Olduvai. But neither Olduvai
nor the western area of Lake Natron allow a more precise
estimate of the time of the change.

Another site excavated after the works at Olduvai and
Peninj, Olorgesailie (Kenya), provided precise dating (by
means of the 40K/40Ar method) for the Acheulean tools
from Members 5 through 8 of that Formation, but they
are recent sediments, estimated to between 0.70 and
0.75 Ma (Bye et al., 1987). The precise time of the sub-
stitution of Oldowan by Acheulean tools cannot be speci-
ﬁed. Any group of hominins capable of using Acheulean
techniques could have very well employed, on occasions,

736 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

simple tools to carry out
complex instruments.

tasks which did not require

An illustrative example is the large number of Acheu-
lean artifacts found at Locality eight of the Gadeb site
(Ethiopia) during the 1975 and 1977 campaigns. One
thousand eight hundred forty-nine elements, including 251
hand axes and knives, were found at the 8A area, a very
small excavation; whereas 20,267 artifacts appeared at 8E
(Clark and Kurashina, 1979). The age estimates for the
different Gadeb localities with lithic remains are imprecise:
they range from 0.7 to 1.5 Ma. These localities contain, in
addition to Acheulean tools, developed Oldowan utensils,
which led J. Desmond Clark and Hiro Kurashina (1979) to
conclude that two groups of hominins would have alter-
nated at Gadeb, each with its own cultural tradition. But it
is curious that the examination of the bones from Gadeb
showed that the butchery activities had been carried out
mostly with the more primitive hand axes, those belonging
to developed Oldowan. This fact raises an alternative
interpretation, namely,
tools obtained by advanced
techniques are not necessary for deﬂeshing tasks.

that

Konso-Gardula (Ethiopia), south of the River Awash
and east of River Omo, has allowed the most precise dating
of the beginning of the Acheulean culture. In addition, it
has provided the oldest-known tools belonging to that
culture. Since its discovery in 1991, Konso-Gardula has
provided a great number of tools, which include rudimen-
tary bifaces,
trihedral-shaped burins, cores, and ﬂakes,
together with two hominin specimens, a molar and an
almost complete left mandible (Asfaw et al., 1992). The
sediments were dated by the 40Ar/39Ar method to
1.34e1.38 Ma (Asfaw et al., 1992). Berhane Asfaw and
colleagues (1992) associate the Konso-Gardula hominin
specimens with the Homo ergaster specimens from Koobi
Fora, especially with KNM-ER 992.

THE ACHEULEAN TECHNIQUE

To what extent can the Acheulean tradition be considered a
continuation or a rupture regarding Oldowan? Was devel-
oped Oldowan a transition phase toward subsequent cul-
tures? Mary Leakey (1966) believed that developed
Oldowan was associated with the presence of primitive
hand axes, protobifaces that anticipated Acheulean bifaces.
However, protobifaces cannot be strictly considered as a
transitional form between Oldowan and Acheulean tech-
niques. Marcel Otte (2003) argued that natural constraints
(eg, mechanical
laws of the raw materials) forces the
manufacture of similar forms, which thus may be consid-
ered successive stages of a single or very close elaboration
sequence, although this may not always be the case.

The successive manipulation of a core, passing through
several steps until the desired tool is obtained, is a task that
Leroi-Gourhan (1964) named chaîne opératoire (“working

sequence”). While a chopper and a protobiface respond to
the same chaîne opératoire, the manufacture of Acheulean
bifaces is the result of a completely different way of
designing and producing stone tools. The main objective of
Oldowan technique was to produce an edge, with little
concern for its shape. However, Acheulean bifaces had a
very precise outline, which evinces the presence of design
from the very beginning. The existence of design has
favored speculation about the intentions of the toolmakers.
In the tradition of Leroi-Gourhan, Nathan Schlanger
(1994) suggested that the sequence of operations in the
making of tools reﬂects an intention and a mental level of
some complexity. One might, accordingly, distinguish be-
tween two types of “knowledge”:

l Practical knowledge, necessary for any carving opera-
tion. It is what psychologists call “procedural knowl-
edge,” as it is needed to ride a bicycle without falling.
l Abstract knowledge, or posing problems and their solu-
tions. This is closer to “declarative knowledge,” such as
designing a route for cycling around town from one
place to another with the least risk.

An easy way to distinguish between both is to under-
stand that declarative knowledge can be transmitted
through a spoken or written description, while the proce-
dural knowledge cannot. However, as we will discuss, it is
doubtful
the Acheulean culture involves accurate
mental models of the tools that will be obtained, which
brings into question the very chaîne opératoire of the
Acheulean. The manufacture of accessories for transporting
objects such as stones would be the real innovation of
Mode 2 in that hypothesis.

that

Despite such doubts, the most common view holds that
while a chopper and a protobiface belong to the same
chaîne opératoire, obtaining Acheulean bifaces is the result
of an entirely different approach when designing and pro-
ducing a stone tool. The most conspicuous novelty is the
diversity of Acheulean instruments. Sometimes it is difﬁ-
cult to assign a function to a stone tool. We have already
seen that Oldowan chaîne opératoire and ﬂakes have been
interpreted both as simple debris and as valuable tools.
However, Acheulean tools include knives, hammers, axes,
and scrapers, whose function seems clear. The materials
used to manufacture lithic instruments are also more varied
within the new tradition. But the most notorious difference
associated with the Acheulean culture is the tool we
mentioned before: the hand axe.

The work of Glynn Isaac (1969, 1975, 1978, 1984) in
Olorgesailie and Peninj (Tanzania) showed the main role of
hand axes in the form of
large ﬂakes (Large Flake
Acheulean, LFA) of more than 10 cm, in African Lower
Paleolithic tool production. The study by Ignacio de la
Torre et al. (2008) on the amount of raw material used for
manufacturing various tools within two lithic sets found

Science and Technology in Human Societies Chapter | 44 737

in Peninj, RHS-Mugulud, and MHS-Bayasi,
showed
convincingly that the essential goal of hominins was to
obtain large cutting tools, among which are the cleavers
(without retouched edge), hand axes, and ﬂakes, to use as
knives. The carving technique used followed a character-
istic pattern with a succession of steps not exclusive to
Peninj carvings; it is the key to the Acheulean tradition:

1. The transformation of raw materials to be converted
into cutting instruments involved, ﬁrst, selecting suit-
able large stones to carve. The availability or lack of
stone quarries with such raw materials may lead to sig-
niﬁcant differences between the cultural content of
different sites.

2. Once the rock is selected, it is reduced by chipping off
large ﬂakes until obtaining still sizable blocks with a
suitable form to begin careful carving.

3. The blocks are worked in chaîne opératoire, obtaining
three different sizes of ﬂake: small, medium, and large.
The large ﬂake, still of considerable size, is a hand axe
in its basic shape which still needs a sharpened edge.
4. Larger ﬂakes, which contrast with the intermediate ones
by size, shape, and weight, are subjected to precision
carving, with a number of successive blows to achieve
its edge and ﬁnal form: thus, an LFA appears. The num-
ber and accuracy of the blows contrast with the less sys-
tematic and manipulated of the protobifaces.

Peninj hand axes weighed, once ﬁnished, about 1 kg, so
the waste materials from the large initial stones are abun-
dant. In the intermediate stages of the Acheulean chaîne
opératoire, ﬂakes of different sizes are obtained, which can
be in turn simultaneously used as tools for further carving.
Smaller chips come from preparing the blocks or from
shaping the hand axe. LFA production is complex and in
most hand axes there are notches of 2e3 -cm long, which
show that fragments, or chips, were knocked ofdsimilar to
those obtained intentionally in the Oldowan traditiondbut
they are actually the result of percussion while retouching.
Medium-size ﬂakes from LFA carving were found both in
Olduvai and Peninj, although they are larger in the latter
location (de la Torre et al., 2008). They are large but very
thin ﬂakes, so that their volume and weight are modest.
They could have served for carving tasks or used as blades,
just in the same condition as we have found them.

The most advanced Acheulean technique, with sym-
metrical bifaces and carefully carved edges, required a
soft-hammer technique. This method consists in striking
the stone core obtained in step 3 with a hammer of lesser
hardness, such as of wood or bone. The blows delivered
with such a tool allow a more precise control but requires,
of course, much more labor. A detailed description of the
process was provided by Schick and Toth (1993). The
manipulation of large stones (mostly basalt and quartzite)
for making hand axes seems to have been the turning

for

the development of

point
the Acheulean culture.
Incidentally, it would also create a signiﬁcant risk to those
who had to manipulate stones of large size (Schick and
Toth, 1993).

Schick and Toth (1993) noted that bifaces can also be
obtained, in the absence of sufﬁciently large raw material,
from smaller cores similar to those that served as a starting
point for the manufacture of Oldowan choppers. But the
manipulation of large blocks of material (mostly lava and
quartzite) to produce long ﬂakes seems to have been the
turning point for the development of the Acheulean culture.
It would also have involved risk for those who had to
manipulate stones of large size (Schick and Toth, 1993).

The oldest Acheulean tool presence documented cor-
responds to the Kokiselei 4 site of Nachukui formation,
West Turkana (Kenya). By radiometry of nearby volcanic
tuffs (40Ar/39Ar), stratigraphic equivalence with Koobi Fora
and paleomagnetism, Christopher Lepre et al.
(2011)
assigned to the terrain of Kokiselei 4 an age of 1.76 Ma.
The site has the added advantage of also containing Old-
owan utensils, which supports the idea that Mode 1 and
Mode 2 technologies were not mutually exclusive. Lepre
et al. (2011) argued as alternative hypotheses for the
presence of Acheulean tools at Kokiselei 4, that they were
either brought there from another locationdunidentiﬁed
yetdor carved by the same hominins of the site which
produced Oldowan tools.

The last Acheulean utensils of East Africa, that is, the
most recent, are from Kalambo Falls location (Tanzania),
associated with coal and wood materials. The age of these
materials was ﬁxed by 14C method at 60,000 years (Vogel
and Waterbolk, 1967). With regard to South Africa, tools
attributed to the Late Acheulan appear in various sitesd
Cape Hangklip, Canteen Kopje (stratum 2A), Montagu
cave, Wonderwerk cave, Rooidam, Duinefontain 2, for
exampledwith an age of z0.2 Ma (Kuman, 2007).

CULTURE AND DISPERSAL

The occasional presence of Oldowan tools is not proof
indicating that a certain group had a primitive cultural
condition. It is possible to ﬁnd simple carvings in epochs
and places that correspond to a more advanced industry.
There is no reason to manufacture a biface by a long and
complex process if what is needed at a given time is a
simple ﬂake. But the argument does not work in reverse.
The presence of Mode 2 clearly indicates a technological
development.

As we have seen, Oldowan culture is generally attrib-
uted to H. habilis. However,
the identiﬁcation of the
Acheulean culture with the African Homo erectus is also
very common. The strength of the bond of Acheulean/
erectus led Louis Leakey to consider the emergence of
Acheulean tools at Olduvai as the result of an invasion by

738 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

taxon,

H. erectus from other localities (Isaac, 1969). Fossils of the
taxon H. habilis are African, but numerous exemplars
which can be attributed to H. erectus have appeared out of
Africa. In fact, the taxon was named by Eugène Dubois
(1894) from fossils found in Trinil, Java. Asians and Af-
rican specimens had remarkable similarities, but also some
differences, a fact that has led to the proposal of the species
H. ergaster for the African erectus (Groves and Mazák,
1975). Although there is no general consensus on the need
for that distinct
those who deny the validity of
H. ergaster commonly refer to Asian erectus as H. erectus
sensus stricto, and to the African as H. erectus sensu lato.
Why is it necessary to propose two different species, or
two degrees of
the same species, when referring to
H. erectus? One of the main reasons for the need to
distinguish two groups of populations has to do with the
culture. The oldest H. erectus of Java and China, unlike
their coetaneous in Africa, did not exhibit Mode 2 culture.
Obviously, the occupation of Asia began with one or
more African hominin dispersals. The natural way out of
Africa is the Levantine corridordMiddle and Near Eastda
path that is widely understood as the one used by hominins
during their various departures from the African continent.
Located between the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea,
Georgia is part of the transit area between Africa, Asia, and
Europe. A site in Georgia, Dmanisi, has provided the best
existing evidence to characterize the ﬁrst hominin exit from
their continent of origin. Since the initial discovery of a
jaw, D211 (Gabunia and Vekua, 1995) in Dmanisi, other
cranial specimens have appeared, such as D2280 and
D2282 (Gabunia et al., 2000), of modest volumed775 and
650 cm3 respectively. In 2002 the existence of another
cranium of the same age, D2700, was reported (Vekua
et al., 2002) that had an even smaller volume: 600 cm3. We
offer these details to contextualize the problem of attrib-
uting to which species these fossils belong. After hesitating
to attribute them to H. habilis or H. ergaster, Léo Gabunia
et al. (2002) proposed for Dmanisi hominins a new species:
Homo georgicus. Two more exemplars, a cranium D3444
and its associated jaw D3900, were discovered in
2002e2004 campaigns (Lordkipanidze et al., 2005, 2006).
New postcranial specimens from Dmanisi, belonging to an
adolescent and three adults, one of large size and two
smaller, were described in 2007 (Lordkipanidze et al.,
2007). Although the authors did not ascribe the remains to
any particular species, they indicated that the Dmanisi set
lack those derived features characteristic of H. erectus.

Besides these fossils, from Dmanisi also come stone
artifacts and animal bones with cutting and percussion
marks. More than 8000dsome choppers and scrapers, and
abundant ﬂakesdhave been found in the two stratigraphic
units, A and B, of the site. Reid Ferring et al. (2011)
maintained that the stratigraphic study of the Dmanisi set of
lithic utensils indicates that
this place was repeatedly

occupied during the last segment of the Olduvai subchron,
ie, between the range of 1.85e1.78 Ma. In the authors’
opinion, such an antiquity implies that the Georgia speci-
mens precede the African H. erectus or H. ergaster
emergence.

But Dmanisi is not the only site providing us with ev-
idence of the migration out of the African continent. In the
Yiron site, to the North of Israel near the valley of the
Jordan River, instruments were found in 1981 consisting of
ﬂakes of a very primitive appearance, adding to other more
modern tools previously found. The primitive artifacts were
found in the stratigraphic horizon below the basaltic vol-
canic intrusion dated by radiometry at 2.4 Ma, thus the age
of Yiron tools was considered comparable to the oldest
culture of Mode 1 from the Rift (Ronen, 2006).

an

age

it

thus

subchron,

attributing

At least four other sites in Israel have provided old lithic
utensils. Chronologically, Yiron is followed by the Erk-el-
Ahmar formation, a few kilometers south of Ubeidiya, also
in the Jordan Valley, where cores and silex ﬂakes were
found (Tchernov, 1999). After a few failures to date it by
paleomagnetism,
the magnetostratigraphy of the Erk-el-
Ahmar formation made by Hagai Ron and Shaul Levi
(2001) correlated the normal events of the area with the
Olduvai
of
1.96e1.78 Ma. However, the tools appeared at 1.5 km from
the collected samples. Ron and Levi (Ron and Levi, 2001)
accepted an age for the silex utensils of 1.7e2.0 Ma, a date
supported by fauna studies (Tchernov, 1987), and that, by
the way,
is coincident with that of Dmanisi. Ubeidiya
(Israel) is a locality between Yiron and Erk-el-Ahmar. Be-
tween 1959 and 1999, numerous lithic instruments were
found, similar in age and appearance to those at
the
OldowaneAcheulean transition of Olduvai Bed II, along
with cranial fragments, a molar, and an incisor attributed
Homo sp. indet (Tobias, 1966), or to Homo cf. erectus
(Tchernov, 1986). An additional incisor was described in
2002 (Belmaker et al., 2002). The horizon with hominin
remains was dated by fauna comparisons and stratigraphic
study at z1.4 Ma, on the basis of the deposits age and tooth
similarities with KNM-ER 15000 and the Dmanisi speci-
mens. Miriam Belmaker et al. (2002) maintained that the
last incisor found in Ubeidiya, UB 335, could be tentatively
identiﬁed as H. ergaster. The utensils from Gesher Benot
Ya’aqov are 0.8 Ma of age, dated by paleomagnetism.
Finally, utensils found in Bizat Ruhama are younger than
Gesher Benot Ya’aqov, which belongs to the lower part of
the Matuyama chron (in both cases the information comes
from Ronen, 2006).

All the tools found in these sites, which indicate the ﬁrst
dispersals out of Africa, are of Mode 1. Around
1.7e1.6 Ma hominins undertook various successful dis-
reaching the SoutheastdJava
persals throughout Asia,
(Indonesia)dand the Far EastdChina. This means that
vast zones of the Asian continent were occupied without

Science and Technology in Human Societies Chapter | 44 739

Acheulean utensils. However,
Mode 2 out of Africa as well.

later migrations brought

that

the available evidence at

Acheulean instruments have a geographical eastern
limit in the Indian subcontinent. With a detailed compila-
tion of all
time, Hallam
Movius (1948) established two areas: the ﬁrst in Africa,
West Asia, and West Europe, and the second ranging from
the Far East to Southeast Asia. During the Middle Pleis-
tocene, both had lithic industries, corresponding to different
technical levels: choppersdie, Mode 1din the East, and
bifacesdMode 2din the West. This is known as the
“Movius line,” the virtual limit that separates these two
vast areas.

The Movius line was not a permanent obstacle for a long
period of time. Truman Simanjuntak et al. (2010) claimed
that around 0.8 Ma a noticeable change occurred in Java,
when tools emerged which have been classiﬁed as Acheu-
lean by these authors. Ngebung cleavers are the oldest
indication, followed by the three human occupations of
Song Terus cave (Punung, East Java), among which
the “Terus period,” of 0.3 to c. 0.1 Ma,
is the oldest
(Simanjuntak et al., 2010). Other Southeast Asian locations
which also contain ancient lithic utensils are the island of
Flores (Mata Menge site), with an age of 0.88e0.8 Ma
obtained by ﬁssion track (Morwood et al., 1998), Bukit
Bunuh (Malaysia), Ogan (Sumatra), Sembiran (Bali), Nul-
baki (West Timor), Wallanae (Sulawesi) and Arubo (Luzon,
Philippines) (Simanjuntak et al., 2010), as sufﬁcient exam-
ples of a Mode 2 late dispersal. The overview of the various
described industries of Southeast Asia led Sheila Mishra
et al. (2010) to draw several somewhat controversial con-
clusions with regard to cultural dispersion. First, that Mode
2 reached Java and other Asian areas. Second, an indicative
sequence of an initial period with an absence of large hand
axes does not actually exist in India; all occupations of
Southeast Asia would have had the set H. erectus/LFA as a
protagonist. Third, a more bold assumption, India might
have been both the origin of Mode 2 and of H. erectus, as
well as the source of what later would become their African
counterparts (H. ergaster and the Acheulean technique) by a
reverse dispersal from Asia to Africa.

Regarding China, the oldest tools come from the basins
of Yuanmou and Nihewan. Majuangou, the eastern border of

In accordance with paleomagnetic studies,

the Nihewan basin has four stratigraphic horizons in which
Mode 1 utensils have appeared, which are, from top to
bottom, Banshan, MJG-I, MJG-II, and MJG-III (Table 44.3).
the four
beds with tools of Majuangou are distributed over
340,000 years, between Olduvai and Cobb Mountain sub-
chrons. Fossils of mollusk shells and aquatic plants indi-
cate a lacustrine environment. The lower bed is of 1.66 Ma
(Zhu et al., 2004).

In the Yangtze riverbed, Sichuan province, is Longgupo
site, with Mode 1 instruments of an uncertain age. They
could be 1.9e1.7 Ma, in accordance to paleomagnetism
(Wanpo et al., 1995), but electron spin resonance analysis
on the cave specimens’ dental enamel have indicated a
much later date.

Cultural indications of very ancient human presence
exist at Yuanmou, with four members, which are, from the
oldest to the youngest, M1 (lacustrine and ﬂuviolacustrine
deposits), M2 (ﬂuvial), M3 (ﬂuvial), and M4 (ﬂuvial and
alluvial) (Zhu et al., 2008). The Member M4 in Niu-
jiangbao has provided hominin remains and four stone tools
which were found in 1973: a scraper, a small biface core,
and two ﬂakes of Mode 1 with evidence of laborious pro-
duction (Yuan et al., 1984).

All the utensils of the described Chinese sites belong to
Mode 1 (Oldowan). However, it has been claimed that tools
from more modern locations correspond to Mode 2. Thus,
Yamei et al. (2000) pointed out the presence at various sites
in Bose basin, Guanxi province in Southern China, of more
advanced tools. Although two-thirds of the basin contain
only monoface tools, from the western area of Bosedin
which the adequate raw material existsdcome large cutting
tools bifaces of 803,000  3000 years of age, described by
Yamei et al. (2000). According to that presence, Yamei
et al. (2000) afﬁrm that “Acheulean-like tools in the mid-
Pleistocene of South China imply that Mode 2 technical
advances were manifested in East Asia contemporaneously
with handaxe technology in Africa and western Eurasia.”
In the same Bose basin, but in its northern zoned
Fengshudao sitedwere found an industry set with an
abundance of hand axes, although smaller in size, of an
age of 0.8 Ma, obtained by the 40Ar/39Ar method (Zhang
et al., 2010). Pu Zhang et al. (2010) attributed these

TABLE 44.3 Stratigraphic Horizons With Lithic Tools of Majuangou (Zhu et al., 2004)

Bed

Banshan

MJG-I

MJG-II

MJG-III

Location
44.3e45 m
65.0e65.5
73.2e73.56

75.0e75.5

Area (m2) 3 Depth (in cm) of the Excavation
2  70
20  50
40  36
85  50

Year

1990

1993
2001e2002

2001e2002

Number of Tools

95

111

226

443

740 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

characteristics to Fengshudao industry and, in particular,
the absence of cleavers due to the lack of adequate raw
material (big blocks). In their view, the tools correspond to
the variability of the Acheulean, with its own particular-
ities, such as unidirectional carving.

AN ANCIENT MODE 2 IN ASIA?

The cultural dispersal hypotheses, as the one by Sheila
Mishra et al. (2010) mentioned before, or any other argu-
ment in favor of an ancient Mode 2 in the Far East (Java
and China), such as that of Hou Yamei et al. (2000),
stumble upon the idea of Asia colonization, which is widely
accepted as the most probable and based on the Movius
model. In fact, the controversy between the idea of an
ancient presence of LFA in Java and the Movius line is
more substantial. Mishra et al., in a paper of 2010 as well as
in other previous works, denied the presence of different
chaînes opératoires characteristics of Mode 1 and Mode 2,
which is tantamount to denying the distinction between
these two techniques. If it is the same industry with a higher
or lesser development encompassing the entire ancient
world, then the Movius line lacks meaning. However, in
spite of the limitations of a simple geographic scheme, the
common view accepts the Movius line, although its
meaning has been much debated and there are still details to
be explained, such as the absence of bifaces in Eastern
Europe.

A cultural dispersal synthesis of the Middle Paleolithic
highlights the following points indicated by Ofer Bar-Yosef
and Miriam Belmaker (2011):

l absence of Acheulean culture in Southeast Asia
l presence in numerous locations of Mode 2 in Western
AsiadNear Eastddecreasing abundance of bifaces as
we approach the EastdCaucasus and Anatolia

l discontinuity between the two areas with evident pres-

ence of Mode 2, the Levant, and India

l absence of Mode 2 in China, with the exception of Bose

basin

The best explanation for cultural dispersal patterns of
that kind requires that migrations from and to the west were
discontinuous, in subsequent waves. But the evidence in
relation to Java indicated by Sheila Mishra et al. (2010)
cannot be thus justiﬁed. Critiques,
like that of Parth
Chauhan (2010), point to an incorrect age estimation due to
inherent dating problems of the 230Th/234U technique.
Although it
the Acheulean arrived in
Southeast Asia as early as the Brunhes-Matuyama limit, ie,
0.78 Ma, additional evidence is required.

is possible that

Naturally, the problem of cultural dispersal doesn’t end
with the absence or presence of Mode 2 in the Far East.
Indeed, local particularities lead to the need to make more
precise distinctions to account for what was an evolution

subject to large population movements. As Marcel Otte
(2010) has said, the Movius line exists, rather, as a frontier,
it is like a veil which moves as time passes by the hand of
ethnic traditions. Neither these should be confused with
carving techniques, nor is it possible to identify a biface or
hand axe with an Acheulean utensil. In the strictest sense,
Mode 2 refers to a speciﬁc chaîne opératoire which never
is the ﬁrst to appear in a site, nor is it required to be
exclusive, because it can coexist with simpler carvings.
Otte (2010) recognized that, exceptionally, bifaces are
present in the Middle Paleolithic of China, but a close look
at Bose hand axes led him to argue that they cannot be
considered Mode 2 at all. They would be the result of a
discovery: from cores of adequate origin, bifaces could be
obtained with not much manipulation. The procedure is the
opposite of Olorgesailie or Peninj technique, in which a
huge block is ﬂaked to obtain LFA. In an unfortunate
expression, Marcel Otte (2010) qualiﬁed the Chinese
Acheulean as a “research artifact.” In the best of cases, it
could be considered as cultural parallelism.

THE TRANSITION MODE 2 (ACHEULEAN)
TO MODE 3 (MOUSTERIAN)

in order of

and Magdalenian,

Mode 3, or Mousterian culture, is the lithic tool tradition
that evolved in Europe from Acheulean culture during the
Middle Paleolithic. The name comes from the Le Moustier
site (Dordogne, France), and was given by the prehistorian
Gabriel de Mortillet in the 19th century, when he divided
the Stone Age known at
the time in different periods
according to the technologies he had identiﬁed (Mortillet,
1897). Mortillet introduced the terms Mousterian, Auri-
gnacian,
increasing
complexity, to designate the tools from the French sites of
Le Moustier, Aurignac, and La Magdalene. However, as we
said earlier, almost all the sites belonging to the Würm
glacial period mentioned in the previous chapter contain
Mousterian tools. In many instances, their lower archaeo-
logical levels also show the transition of Acheulean to
Mousterian tools, and even from the latter to Aurignacian
ones. The archaeological richness and sedimentary breadth
of some of these sites, like La Ferrassie, La Quina, and
Combe-Grenal, grants them a special interest for studying
the interaction between cultural utensils and adaptive re-
sponses. Most European sites belonging to the Würm
glacial period contain Mousterian tools. Similar utensils
have appeared in the Near East, at Tabun, Skuhl, and
Qafzeh.

Mousterian techniques changed in time. Geoffrey
Clark’s (1997) study of the Middle and Upper Paleolithic
cultural stages convincingly demonstrated how wrong it is
to speak about “Mousterian” as a closed tradition, with
precise limits, or as a unit with precise temporal boundaries.
Even so, we will talk about a Mousterian style, as Clark

Science and Technology in Human Societies Chapter | 44 741

himself did, which becomes apparent when compared with
the Upper Paleolithic technical and artistic innovations
which constitute Mode 4. However,
to understand the
magnitude of Mode 3, we must extend the consideration of
“Mousterian culture” from lithic tools to other products and
techniques that appear at Mousterian sites. In a broad sense,
Mode 3 culture includes controversial features, such as
objects created with a decorative intention and indications
of funerary practices.

Let us begin with the Mousterian tool-making tech-
niques. They were used to produce tools that were much
more specialized than Acheulean ones, The most typical
Mousterian tools found in Europe and the Near East are
ﬂakes produced by means of the Levallois technique, which
were subsequently modiﬁed to produce diverse and shaper
edges. Objects made from bone are less frequent, but up to
60 types of ﬂakes and stone foils can be identiﬁed, which
served different functions (Bordes, 1979).

The Levallois technique appeared during the Acheulean
period, and was used ever since. The oldest Levallois
carvings are probably c. 400 ka and come from the Lake
Baringo region (Kenya) (Tryon, 2006). Its pinnacle was
reached during the Mousterian culture. The purpose of this
technique is to produce ﬂakes or foils with a very precise
shape from stone cores that serve as raw material. The cores
must ﬁrst be carefully prepared by trimming their edges to
remove small ﬂakes until the core has the correct shape.
Thereafter, with the last blow, the desired ﬂakeda Leval-
lois point, for instancedis obtained. The ﬁnal results of the
process, which include points, scrapers, and other in-
struments, are subsequently modiﬁed to sharpen their
edges. The amazing care with which the material was
worked constitutes, according to Bordes (1953), evidence
that these tools were intended to last for a long time in a
permanent living location.

Tools obtained by means of the Levallois technique are,
as we said earlier,
typical of European and Near East
Mousterian sites. Bifaces, on the contrarydso abundant in
Acheulean sitesdare scarce. The difference has to do
mostly with the manipulation of the tools; scrapers were
already produced using Acheulean, and even Oldowan,
techniques. The novelty lies in the abundance and the
careful tool retouching.

NEANDERTALS AND MOUSTERIAN
CULTURE

Both in spatial and temporal terms, the Mousterian culture
coincides with Neandertals. This identiﬁcation between the
Mousterian culture and Homo neanderthalensis has been
considered so consistent that, repeatedly, European sites
yielding no human specimens, or with scarce and frag-
mented remains, were attributed to Neandertals on the sole
basis of the presence of Mousterian utensils. Despite the

difﬁculties inherent in associating a given species with a
cultural
that Mousterian
culture was part of the Neandertal identity. Exclusively?

it was beyond doubt

tradition,

This perception changed with the reinterpretation of the
Near East sites (Bar-Yosef and Vandermeersch, 1993).
Scrapers and Levallois points, which were very similar to
the typical European ones, turned up there. Neandertals
also existed there, of course, but in contrast with European
sites a distinction could not be drawn between localities
that had housed Neandertals and anatomically modern
humans solely on the grounds of the cultural traditions. The
more or less systematic distinction between Neandertale
Mousterian and Cro-MagnoneAurignacian helped to
clarify the situation in Europe. But it could not be trans-
ferred to the Near East, where sites occupied by Neander-
tals and those inhabited by anatomically modern humans,
proto-Cro-Magnons, yielded the same Mousterian tradi-
tion utensils.

This coincidence implies several things. First, that cul-
tural sharing was common during the Middle Paleolithic, at
least in Levant sites. Second, that during the initial stages of
their occupation of the eastern shore of the Mediterranean,
anatomically modern humans made use of the same utensils
as Neandertals. Hence, it seems that at the time Skuhl and
Qafzeh were inhabited, there was no technical superiority
of modern humans over Neandertals. The third and most
important implication has to do with the inferences that can
be made because Neandertals and H. sapiens shared iden-
tical tool-making techniques. As we have already seen, the
interpretation of the mental processes involved in the pro-
duction of tools suggests that complex mental capabilities
are required to produce stone tools. We are now presented
with solid proof that Neandertals and modern humans
shared techniques. Does this mean that Neandertal cogni-
tive abilities to produce tools were as complex as those
currently characteristic of our own species? Many authors,
headed by Trinkaus, Howells, and Zilhão, believe so. But
some authors arguing in favor of high cognitive capacities
in Neandertals went beyond lithic culture shared at the Near
East. They presented other kinds of items which, in their
opinion, were indications of Neandertal aesthetic, religious,
symbolic, and even maybe linguistic, capacities.

thought

The possibility that Neandertals buried their dead is the
best basis to attribute transcendental
to them.
Voluntary burial is indicative of respect and appreciation,
as well as a way to hide the body from scavengers. This
may also imply concern about death, about what
lies
beyond death, and the meaning of existence. The argument
for religiousness is convincing when burial is accompanied
by some sort of ritual.

Neandertal burials have been located in four areas:
Southern France, Northern Balkan, the Near East (Israel
and Syria), and Central Asia (Iraq, Caucasus, and Uzbe-
kistan). In most cases these burials seem to be deliberate.

742 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

Hence,
the “old man” from La-Chapelle aux Saints
appeared in a rectangular hole dug in the ground of a
cave that could not be attributed to natural processes
(Bouyssonie et al., 1908). In regard to La Ferrassie and
Shanidar, the possible evidence of the existence of tombs
led Michael Day (1986) to remark,
in a technical and
unspeculative treatise, that these exemplify the ﬁrst inten-
tional Neandertal burial that has been reliably determined.
Eric Trinkaus’ (1983) taphonomic considerations point in
the same direction. The abundance and excellent state of
Neandertal remains at those sites, together with the pres-
ence of infantile remains, are proof that the bodies were out
of the reach of scavengers. Given that there is no way
natural forces could produce those burials, Trinkaus be-
lieves the most reasonable option is to accept that the re-
mains were intentionally deposited in tombs. However,
William Noble and Ian Davidson (1996) argued that, at
least in the case of Shanidar (Iraq), it is probable that the
cave’s ceiling collapsed while its inhabitants were sleeping.
Some of the aforementioned remains are not only buried
intentionally, but they are accompanied by evidence of
rituals. This is the case of the Kebara skeleton (Israel),
which, despite being excellently preserveddit even in-
cludes the hyoid bonedis lacking the cranium. Everything
suggests that the absence of the cranium is due to deliberate
action carried out many months after the individual died
(Bar-Yosef and Vandermeersch, 1993). It is difﬁcult to
imagine a different taphonomic explanation. Bar-Yosef and
Vandermeersch (1993) wondered about
the reasons for
such an action, suggesting that the answer might lie in a
religious ritual.

A Neandertal

tomb with an infantile specimen was
found in the Dederiyeh cave (Syria), 400 -km north of
Damascus. Takeru Akazawa et al. (1995) interpreted the
burial as an indication of the existence of a ritual. The
reason behind this argument is the posture in which the
specimen was deposited in the tomb. The excellently pre-
served skeleton was found with extended arms and ﬂexed
legs. Mousterian lithic industry also turned up in the cave,
which Akazawa et al. (1995) associated with that from
Kebara and Tabun B, though there were few tools at the
burial level. An almost rectangular limestone rock was
placed on the skeleton’s cranium, and a small triangular
piece of ﬂint appeared where the heart had once been.
Although Akazawa et al. (1995) did not elaborate an
interpretation of these ﬁndings, they implicitly suggest that
these objects had ritual signiﬁcance.

The Shanidar IV specimen is one of the most frequent
references in relation to ritual behaviors. The discovery of
substantial amounts of pollen at the tomb was interpreted as
evidence of an intentional ﬂoral offering (Leroi-Gourhan,
1975). If this were the case, it would represent the begin-
ning of a custom that lasts today. It must not be forgotten
either that two of the Shanidar crania, I and V, show a

deformation that was attributed to aesthetic or cultural
motives. However, Chris Stringer and Eric Trinkaus (1981)
indicated that
the specimens had been reconstructed
incorrectly and that the shape of the ﬁrst one was due to
pathological circumstances. In his study of the Shanidar IV
burial, Ralph Solecki (975) argued that there is no evidence
of an intentional deposit of ﬂowers at the burial. The pollen
must have been deposited there in a natural way by the
wind. Supporting the notion of an unintentional presence,
Robert Gargett (1989) suggested that the pollen could have
been introduced simply by the boots of the workers at the
cave’s excavation. Paul Mellars (1996) believes that the
accidental presence of objects at French burial sites, such as
La Ferrassie or Le Moustier, is inevitable: the tombs were
opened at places in which faunal remains and Mousterian
utensils were abundant.

The Teshik-Tash site (Uzbekistan), located on high and
precipitous terrain, contains an infantile burial associated
with wild goat crania. According to Hallam Movius (1953),
the horns formed a circle around the tomb. This would
support a symbolic purpose and a ritual content associated
with the burial. Currently, however, even those who favor
Neandertals as individuals with remarkable cognitive ca-
pacities are quite skeptical about the presumed intentional
arrangement of the crania (Trinkaus and Shipman, 1993;
Akazawa et al., 1995; Mellars, 1996).

Neandertal burials can be interpreted as a functional
response to the need of disposing of the bodies, even if only
for hygienic reasons. But they could also be understood as
the reﬂection of transcendent thinking, beyond the simple
human motivation of preserving the bodies of deceased
loved ones. According to Mellars (1996), “we must assume
that the act of deliberate burial implies the existence of
some kind of strong social or emotional bonds within
Neandertal societies.” However, Mellars believes that there
is no evidence of rituals or other symbolic elements in those
tombs. The appearance of such evidence would demon-
strate that Neandertals were capable of religious thinking.
Similarly, Gargett (1989) argued that
the evidence of
Neandertal burials is much more solid than the evidence of
offering or rituals. Julien Riel-Salvatore and Geoffrey A.
Clark (2001) have noted that applying Gargett’s criterion to
the Early Upper Paleolithic would also lead to doubting the
intentionality of the ﬁrst modern human burials. They
believe that there is a continuity, regarding the tombs, be-
tween the Middle and Early Upper Paleolithic archaeo-
logical records. True differences do not appear until the
Late phase of the Upper Paleolithic (20e10 ka).

However, Neandertal burials contrast sharply with the
burials made by modern humans, living approximately at
the same time. The differences are especially illustrative in
the Near East. The only intentional, and potentially sym-
bolic, funerary Middle Paleolithic objects are the bovid
and pig remains found in burials at Qafzeh and Skuhl

Science and Technology in Human Societies Chapter | 44 743

(Mellars, 1996). Both appeared in modern human sites.
Taking into account that humans and Neandertals living at
those sites shared the same Mousterian tradition, this is a
signiﬁcant difference. It not only has to do with the
manufacture of objects, but with much more subtle aspects,
which are associated with mental processes like symbolism,
aesthetics, or religious beliefs.

William Noble and Ian Davidson (1996) stressed that
Neandertal burials have not been found outside caves. In
contrast, there are examples of very early human tombs in
open terrains at places such as Lake Mungo (Australia),
Dolni Vestonice (Czech Republic) and Sungir (Russia). In
Noble and Davidson’s (1996) view, the appearance of a
Neandertal tomb outside the caves would be the best proof
that this is an intentional burial. For now, known tombs
provide no conclusive clues about Neandertal
self-
awareness, not to speak of their religion.

THE TRANSITION MODE 3
(MOUSTERIAN) TO MODE 4
(AURIGNACIAN)

The Mode 3, ie, the Mousterian culture characteristic of
the Neandertals in Europe and Near East Asia during
the Middle Paleolithic, ranged from about 100 to 40 ka.
Around these dates more developed technocomplexes
appeared in Europe. Industries called “transitional,” to
contrast them with the “real” Mode 4, a set of cultural
traditions of the Upper Paleolithic, coincided with the entry
of the ﬁrst modern humans, the Cro-Magnon, into Europe
between 40 and 28 ka. Traditions of the Upper Paleolithic
include not only tools that are more precise and sophisti-
cated than those from the earlier Mousterian culture but
also abundant representations of real objects in the form of
engravings, paintings, and sculptures, realistic representa-
tions that display signiﬁcant differences in favor of the
development of Mode 4. A good example is the large
mammal paintings of the Chauvet cave, dated by radio-
carbon calibration (14C) at c. 36 ka (von Petzinger and
Nowell, 2014). Such a realistic intensity of the poly-
chromes of the Upper Paleolithic have led to the argument
that modern humans achieved an artistic revolution
explainable only by a corresponding cognitive revolution
attaining what we call
the “modern mind.” Does this
cognitive revolution appear suddenly and exclusively in our
species?

As McBrearty and Brooks (2000) pointed out,

the
proposal of a cognitive revolution repeats a scenario
introduced in the 19th century with the Age of the Reindeer
(Lartet and Christy, 1865e1875). Around the 1920s the
Upper Paleolithic was generally characterized by the pres-
ence of sculptures, paintings, and bone utensils. But ac-
cording to McBrearty and Brooks (2000), the evidence
used to determine the changes between the Lower, Middle,

and Upper Paleolithic was always taken from the Western
Europe archaeological
record. During the last glacial
period, the human occupation of that area was irregular, as
F. Clark Howell (1952) pointed out, with populations
periodically reduced, or even extinguished. McBrearty and
Brooks (2000) argued that the “revolutionary” nature of the
European Upper Paleolithic is mainly due to the disconti-
nuity in the archaeological record, rather than to cultural,
cognitive, and biological transformations, as suggested by
advocates of the “human revolution.” Instead, McBrearty
and Brooks (2000) hold that there was a long process that
gradually led to the European Aurignacian richness.

Was the transition to the European Aurignacian gradual
or sudden? To analyze the process of change from Mode 4
to Mode 5, which is the same as specifying the time and
mode of the emergence of the modern mind, we need to
clarify a number of interrelated processes:

l the appearance of H. sapiens
l its dispersal from the place of origin
l cultural development leading to the industries of the Eu-

ropean Upper Paleolithic

The ﬁrst step to clarify the origin of the modern mind
raises the issue of identiﬁcation of the oldest members of
our species. The name Cro-Magnon corresponds to fossils
discovered in 1868 near Eyzies-de-Tayac (Dordogne), of c.
30 ka of age, obtained by comparison with 14C date of the
Aurignacian levels of the Pataud rock shelter (Dordogne)
(Henry-Gambier, 2002), but applied in general to the ﬁrst
modern humans which entered Europe. The ﬁrst entry
could have been around z45 ka (Paul Mellars, 2005) (we
will come back later to this issue). However, the age of
H. sapiens would be considerably older. The numbers ob-
tained by molecular methods have a remarkably broad
range: 290e140 ka (Cann et al., 1987); 249e166 ka
(Vigilant et al., 1991) obtained by coalescence of mtDNA.
But, the paleontological record contains exemplars tenta-
tively attributed to H. sapiens of much older age. The
640 ka old specimens from Bodo (Clark et al., 1994), if the
“Bodo man” is thought to be a modern human, would make
the origin of H. sapiens much older. The origin of our
species would go even further back if the Danakil spec-
imen, with almost a million years of age (Abbate et al.,
1998), is included. All these fossils, besides their dubious
ascription, are of a very different age than that indicated by
molecular methods.

If we merely consider those specimens whose attribu-
tion to our species is most likely, various cranial materials
from Aduma region (Middle Awash) should be mentioned,
including the partial skull ADU-VP-1/3. Found on the
surface, their age was attributed by morphological com-
parisons. When Yohannes Haile-Selassie et al. introduced
them, they claimed that these crania “are similar in pre-
served parts to specimens from the Middle East, and from

744 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

northern and eastern Africa, between 100 and 300 ka.
Speciﬁcally, the most complete Aduma cranium is most
similar to crania thought to belong to the younger part of
that range. This Middle Stone Age cranium, in most of its
characters,
is indistinguishable from other anatomically
modern human crania” (Haile-Selassie et al., 2004). From
the same formation, found on the surface, is the parietal
BOU-VP-5/1, also attributed to H. sapiens (Haile-Selassie
et al., 2004). In the Herto Member of the Bouri formation
appear fossils, such as the cranium BOU-VP-16/1 (White
et al., 2003), which were classiﬁed as H. sapiens by Tim
White et al. The age of Herto specimens, obtained by
40Ar/39Ar method, is of 160e154 ka (Clark et al., 2003).
From Singa (Sudan) came a calvarium found in 1924 and
ascribed to H. sapiens (Rightmire, 1984) whose dating by
mass-spectrometric U-Th is of 133  2 ka (McDermott
et al., 1996). Günther Bräuer et al. (1997) proposed that the
oldest modern humans evidences would be a cranium
(KNM-ER 3884) and a femur (KNM-ER 999) from Koobi
Fora (Kenya), dated by uranium series, respectively, at 270
and 300 ka. Nevertheless, the most interesting fossils are
the South African.

role

in

documenting

its

Along with

cultural
evolutiondwhich we will see soondSouth Africa has
also provided evidence on the origin and dispersals of the
ﬁrst H. sapiens. Various sites from the most southerly part
of South Africa, near Cape Town, such as Border cave (de
Villiers, 1973), Klasies River Mouth (Singer and Wymer,
1982), Equus cave (Grine and Klein, 1985), Die Kelders
cave, Blombos cave (Henshilwood et al., 2001), Sibudu
(Backwell et al., 2008), Hofmeyr (Grine et al., 2007) and
Hoedjiespunt
(Berger and Parkington, 1995), among
others, have provided the most important samples of the
emergence of modern humans. The fossils from these
sites are normally of lesser signiﬁcance and of dubious
dating. But the importance of the association between
fossil specimens and archaeological remains in South
Africa lies in the fact that the Khoe-San hunter-gatherers,
the oldest
living identiﬁed ethnicity, are found there.
Their separation from the rest of human populations
occurred at least 100,000 years ago (Schlebusch et al.,
2012);
the age of our species should be older
than that.

thus,

The evidence of an earlier division of H. sapiens pop-
ulations reveals that the transit from Mode 3 to Mode 4
could not be deduced by comparison between the techno-
logical level of Neandertals and Cro-Magnon in the range
of z40 ka. It must be found in the cultural development of
in Africa, which took place at a time
H.
(100e200 ka) when the appearance and early evolution of
our species occurred. A review of African cultural evolu-
tion of that period reveals the meaning of the proposed
model of gradual change by McBrearty and Brooks (2000)
to which we referred earlier.

sapiens

THE AFRICAN MIDDLE STONE AGE

The traditional consideration of the African archaeological
record was inﬂuenced by the scheme used to create the
European sequence of Lower, Middle, and Upper Paleo-
lithic stages. The cultural phases of Africa were conso-
nantly grouped into Early, Middle, and Late Stone Age
(ESA, MSA, and LSA, respectively). ESA encompasses
not only Mode 1 but also Mode 2, so that the difference
between the cultural level of ESA and MSA comes from
innovations that go beyond the tools of the Acheulean
culture. If ESA is linked especially with large bifaces (LFA
hand axes), the MSA has been traditionally characterized
by the absence of large bifaces, an emphasis on Levallois
technology, and the presence of points (Goodwin and Van
Riet Lowe, 1929).

Both East Africa as well as South Africa contain evi-
dence of an ancient presence of MSA technocomplexes. In
addition to the ﬁndings on the surface, whose age is
imprecise, about 60 sites in East Africa susceptible to
dating which contain MSA utensils (Basell, 2008) have
been described. According to the review by Laura Basell
(2008), their ages range from <200 ka to about 40 ka.
The beginning of MSA could be even much older. Jayne
Wilkins (2013) indicated that there are MSA utensils at
Kathu Pan 1 site (Northern Cape, South Africa) of an age of
up to z500 ka.

In principle, ESA and MSA could be distinguished
simply by the presence of hand axes or points. But, as
clariﬁed by Sally McBrearty and Christian Tryon (2006),
the sites normally lack tools capable of leading to a formal
classiﬁcation. The problem is that “formal tools are vastly
outnumbered at nearly all sites by ﬂakes, cores, and expe-
dient tools, and the basic ﬂake and core artifact inventories
[of the Acheulean and MSA], are in many cases indistin-
guishable” (McBrearty and Tryon, 2006). In the absence of
reliable dating, we face the fact that the method of direct
percussion is not an accurate chronological marker. How-
ever, MSA can also be associated with “blade and micro-
lithic technology, bone tools, increased geographic range,
specialized hunting,
long
distance trade, systematic processing and use of pigment,
and art and decoration” (McBrearty and Brooks, 2000).
And among the innovations related to hunting are pro-
cedures and resources that were attributed initially to Mode
4 of European Cro-Magnon, as is the use of hafting adhe-
sives, identiﬁed in the South African MSA (Charrié-Duhaut
et al., 2013).

the use of aquatic resources,

Considering the novelty of compound-adhesive manu-
facture, the age of the emergence of the oldest MSA is ﬁxed
at z300 ka (Henshilwood and Dubreuil, 2012; Wadley,
2010). Dates of that range are similar to those of the lower
horizon of Gademotta formation (Ethiopia), 276  4 ka
(Morgan and Renne, 2008) and the Bedded Tuff Member

Science and Technology in Human Societies Chapter | 44 745

of Kapthurin formation (Kenya), 284  24 ka (Deino and
McBrearty, 2002), obtained both by 40Ar/39Ar. However,
as argued by Robert Foley et al. (2013) “The majority of
MSA sites postdate 130 Ka, and it is from the beginning of
MIS5 (z130e74 Ka) and during MIS4 (74e60 Ka) that
the
classic African MSA becomes widespread and
abundant.”

South African sites have allowed the study in greater
detail of the development of MSA, especially in its ﬁnal
stages, and the transition to LSA.

There are several concurrent processes at the temporal
range of 80e60 ka:
the expansion of modern human
populations, their exit from Africa, and the emergence of
technological and symbolic innovations associated with
the modern mind. Naturally, the possibility of specifying
dates, in particular for new tools, becomes the key to relate
all those events. The ﬁnal stages of cultural evolution
within the MSA correspond in South Africa to the tradi-
tions of Still Bay (SB) and Howiesons Poort (HP), wide-
spread in the southern cone of Africa. The study of
Zenobia Jacobs et al. (2008) characterizes SB as ﬂake-
based technology, which includes ﬁnely shaped, bifa-
cially worked, lanceolate points that were probably parts
of spearheads. On the other hand, HP is described as
“blade-rich . associated with backed (blunted) tools that
most likely served as composite weapons, made of mul-
tiple stone artifacts.” However, both traditions share
“associated bone points and tools, engraved ochres and
ostrich eggshells, and shell beads.” Four South African
sites are particularly useful to detail the scope of SB and
HP phases: Diepkloof, Sibudu, Blombos, and Klasies
River. The ﬁrst two because they have tools of both tra-
ditions. Blombos, because the abundance of engravings,
pigments, and perforated beads. Klasies River, because the
fossil remains led to clariﬁcation of which hominins were
responsible for the transition from MSA to LSA. This is
something of special interest because both SB and HP
already show different innovations which previously were
associated only with the most advanced culture of the
Upper Paleolithic.

Sibudu cave, located in KwaZulu-Natal North coasts,
near Durban (South Africa), include a remarkable sequence
of MSA occupations extending over a short timeframe. The
ﬁrst MSA tools which appeared in the Marine Isotope Stage
(MIS) 4, ie, are older than z61 ka. From that point, phases
follow one after another: pre-SB, SB, HP, post-HP, and late
and ﬁnal MSA phases directly overlain by Iron Age
occupation (Backwell et al., 2008). The ﬁnal phases, post-
HP, of Sibudu have been studied by Manuel Will et al.
(2014), attributing to MIS 3 around 58 ka. This prolifera-
tion of different traditions over a short period may have
been related to both climate change as well as the ten-
dencies of hunter-gatherers in regard to their use of local
resources.

Diepkloof Rock Shelter shows a similar succession. It is
located on the west coast of South Africa (Western Cape
Province), 14 km from the Atlantic at the Table Mountain
Group, very close to various sites with MSA industry. The
excavation completed up to 2013 reveals the following
sequence: MSA (type “Mike”); Pre-SB-SB-Early HP-MSA
(type “Jack”); Interm. HP-Late HP-Post-HP (Porraz et al.,
2013b). The change from SB-HP in Diepkloof is abrupt and
that rapid shift has been interpreted in three ways: a pop-
ulation replacement, a discontinuity in the archaeological
record, and/or a fast innovation, with a new way of hafting
(and using) tools (Igreja and Porraz, 2013). However,
Porraz et al. (2013b) disagree with the hypothesis con-
necting the appearance of the SB and the HP to the arrival
of new populations. Instead, the authors support a scenario
based on local evolution with distinct technological tradi-
tions that coexisted in South Africa during MIS 5. As
argued by Porraz et al. (2013a), during MIS 5 there was
“the coexistence of multiple, distinct technological tradi-
tions. We argue that the formation of regional identities in
southern Africa would have favored and increased cultural
interactions between groups at a local scale, providing a
favorable context for the development and diffusion of
innovations . The southern African data suggest that the
history of modern humans has been characterized by mul-
tiple and independent evolutionary trajectories and that
different paths and scenarios existed toward the adoption of
‘modern’ hunter-gatherer lifestyles.” Within that indepen-
dent evolution SB and HP traditions appear and disappear
at the sites in very short periods. But on the whole these
technocomplexes “are neither of short duration in time, nor
homogeneous across space” (Porraz et al., 2013b). Conse-
quently, for Porraz et al. (2013b), the traditions SB and HP
cannot be considered as horizon markers.

THE PROTAGONISTS OF THE SOUTH
AFRICAN MSA

Jayne Wilkins (2013) pointed out the general character-
istics of the human evolution related to the development of
MSA in South Africa. For this author the earlier MSA is
“generally attributed to a group of hominins that are var-
iably described as late archaic H. sapiens, or H. helmei
[meanwhile] by w195e150 ka, anatomically modern
human fossils are known from East Africa . and modern
H. sapiens are responsible for the later MSA” (Wilkins,
2013).

In a review article that overviews how the South Afri-
can Pleistocene Homo fossil record correlates with the
Stone Age sequence, Gerrit Dusseldorp et al. (2013) have
argued about the basic problem to establish the correlation
between fossils and tools: few South African hominin
fossils can be placed between z200 ka and 110 ka,
ie, during the probable dates of
transformation from

746 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

Mid-Pleistocene Homo to modern H. sapiens in the region.
With an age ranging between z110 and 40 ka, specimens
appeared at Klasies River, such as jaws KRM 41,815 and
16,424 and the cranial fragments KRM 27,070 attributed to
H. sapiens. From Border cave site came the jaw BC 5, with
an accurate dating of 74  5 ka, obtained by electronic spin
resonance from a tooth fragment (Grün et al., 2003). In
such a manner, 74,000 years would be the minimum age for
the presence of H. sapiens in South Africa (a complete list
of Early, Middle Pleistocene, and Modern Homo of South
Africa is given in Dusseldorp et al., 2013, Supplementary
material). The set of South African fossils, associated with
MSA technocomplexes mainly belong to MIS 5 and MIS 4,
and can be called “transitional.” Its morphology is modern,
but the process of gracilization, leading to the form and
dimensions of contemporary populations, was not yet
completed (Dusseldorp et al., 2013). As Dusseldorp et al.
(2013) said: “On the whole, the fossil record from this
period suggests that South Africa was occupied by pop-
ulations showing a wide range of anatomical variation.”

Between the end of MSA and the beginning of LSA,
two complete fossils of modern morphology are available
in South Africa: the Hofmeyr skull and the jaw of Bushman
Rock Shelter. Both specimens are attributed to MIS 3, with
an age for the child’s jaw of Bushman Rock Shelterd
assigned tentatively to site levels 16 or 17dof z29.5 ka
(Protsch and de Villiers, 1974). The Hofmeyr skull has
been dated at 36.2  3.3 ka by thermoluminescence and
uranium series. The phenetic afﬁnities of the Hofmeyr skull
were studied by Frederick Grine et al. (2007) using a
multivariant analysis of linear measurements, as well as the
coordinates of 19 three-dimensional points in comparison
with those of modern humans from North Africa (Meso-
lithic), sub-Saharan Africa, West Eurasia, Oceania, and
East Asia/New World, along with two Neandertals, four
Upper Paleolithic modern humans, and one modern human
from the Levant, also of Upper Paleolithic. The result of the
analysis indicates that the anatomy of the Hofmeyr skull is
closer to that of modern human populations from Eurasia of
the Upper Pleistocene than to the current Khoe-San (Grine
et al., 2007). This result supports, according to Grine et al.
(2007), the hypothesis that early modern humans, which
migrated to Eurasia, came from South Africa.

This anatomical connection,

the presence of an
advanced technology of tool making and the evidence of
the emergence of what could be called modern behavior, in
cognitive terms which go beyond the technological level,
make South Africa a site of great value to understand the
last steps of human evolution. In this respect Blombos site
becomes important. Its human remains provide only a little
information; during 1997e1998 campaigns, four teeth were
found in Blombos cave, two of them deciduous teeth, some
of which, with respect to the crown diameter, belong to the

modern human range. But the peculiarity of Blombos is
linked to the presence of ocher pieces.

The presence of red ocherdhematite (iron oxide)dis
very common in all South African sites of the Late MSA,
and stones with signs of use have striations which are
attributed widely to the acquirement of powder for pigment
making. In the absence of polychrome on the walls of
caves, it is possible to infer that the use of the pigment is
related to other symbolic behavior. As argued by Christo-
pher Henshilwood et al. (2001), one intuitive conclusion,
shared by most archaeologists, is that MSA ocher was used
for body-paint/cosmetic and possibly the decoration of
organic artifacts. But, in the absence of empirical evidence,
that hypothesis is entirely speculative. Blombos’ value lies
in the contribution of evidence linking ocher and
symbolism.

Blombos cave is located near the Indian Ocean, 25 -km
west of SB town and 300 -km east of Cape Town. The site
is located 100 m from the coast and at an elevation of
34.5 m above sea level. In Blombos MSA levels more than
8000 pieces of ocher have been found, many with signs of
use (Henshilwood et al., 2002), among which the most
outstanding are the geometric engravings, present in the
three sedimentary phases of Blombos, thus, over nearly
100 ka (Henshilwood et al., 2009). As Henshilwood et al.
(2009) pointed out, “The fact that they were created, that
most of them are deliberate and were made with repre-
sentational intent, strongly suggests they functioned as ar-
tefacts within a society where behavior was mediated by
symbols.” In other words, we ﬁnd an empirical example of
the “new mind.” Blombos documents undoubtedly the
presence of Mode 4.

THE WAY OUT OF AFRICA FOR HOMO
SAPIENS

The process leading to modern humans, from their emer-
gence and development of Mode 4 in Africa, to their entry
into Europe, and to the “artistic explosion” that appears in
the caves of Southern France and Northern Spain,
is
controversial. To clarify the ancestral genetic blueprint of
current humans, Toomas Kivisild et al. (2006) conducted
an analysis of the whole mtDNA of 277 individuals from
ﬁve African haplogroups, L0 to L5. The most parsimonious
cladogram obtained shows that the L0d, corresponding to
Khoe-San people,
is the ancestral subhaplogroup with
respect to the rest of Africans. Recent analysis of single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the nuclear DNA,
supported the sub-Saharan origin of modern humans
(Jakobsson et al., 2008; Li et al., 2008). The details of
Khoe-San genetic variation have been offered by Carina
Schlebusch et al. (2012) by genotyping z2.3 million SNPs
in 220 South Africans. The results of the study indicated

Science and Technology in Human Societies Chapter | 44 747

humans

took

the divergence between the Khoe-San and other
that
modern African
than
100,000 years agodthat is to say, near the very beginning
of the emergence of H. sapiensdalthough the genetic
distribution of the modern day Khoe-San goes back only
about 35,000 years.

place more

Paul Mellars (2006b) has proposed a model for the
origin and dispersal of modern humans, which could be
summarized in the following events:

l genetic evidence:

l MIS 5 (130e80 ka)

- Presence of H. sapiens in the Near East
- Evolutionary changes in South Africa

l MIS 4 (71e60)

- Expansion to Africa
- Dispersal to Eurasia

l Archaeological evidence

l MIS 5

- Emergence of the “modern mind” in South Africa
- Dispersal to North Africa and the Near East

l MIS 4

- Dispersal of the “modern mind” into Eurasia

A key element of this model is formed by the episode of
z65 ka ago, with a coastal dispersal of H. sapiens pop-
ulations which took advantage of high-productivity areas of
resources to expand into Asia until they reached the Wal-
lacea and Sahul regions (Mellars et al., 2013). As Jane
Balme et al. (2009) indicated, the occupation of diverse
ecosystems with hostile environments and depressed fauna,
could only have occurred with the use of complex systems
of exchange and communication,
including language.
Although it is difﬁcult to verify this hypothesis, what these
authors argue is equivalent to an acceptance that Southeast
Asian settlers in that time range possessed the modern
mind.

Cultural evolution in Asia associates H. sapiens as the
only species to which the cognitive traits of the modern
mind can be attributed; however, the European case is
different. If the southern and coastal dispersals of modern
humans into Asia took place c. 65e60 ka ago, the dispersal
permitting the occupation of Europe by the Cro-Magnon is
later: 47e41 ka, according to data calibrated by radio-
carbon (Mellars, 2006a). Cultural
traditions commonly
attributed to modern humans entering Europe are, cited in
order of antiquity, the industries Aurignacian, Gravettian,
Solutrean, and Magdalenian.

The Aurignacian culture was deﬁned by Edouard Lartet
(1860) in accordance with the tools found at the site of
Aurignac (French Pyrenees), but is also assigned to similar
industry sets from large parts of Eastern, Western, and
Central Europe, and also to some of the existing tech-
nocomplexes in parts of the Middle East (Mellars, 2006a).

The technological level of Aurignacian contrasts with the
Mousterian Mode 3 of Neandertals. The most obvious
difference is the use of microbladelet technology, repre-
senting a major difference from the most advanced tools up
to that time. If Châtelperronian points, as well as bladelets,
fulﬁll the same purpose, to serve as projectiles, the Auri-
gnacian microliths are “serially,
laterally hafted along
the shaft of projectiles, not mounted at their extremities”
(Bon, 2006).

The need to compare the technocomplexes of Mode 3
and Aurignacian led to distinguish the latter as belonging to
a homogeneous tradition, following the initial descriptions
such as those by Abbe Breuil (1913). However, techno-
logical analysis determined the presence of different forms
of tool production in the Aurignacian. For the initial carv-
ings, in contrast with Mode 3, several different names were
proposedd“Classic Aurignacian,” “Aurignacian I,” “Proto-
Aurignacian,” “Early Aurignacian,” “Pre-Aurignacian,”
“Archaic Aurignacian,” “Initial Aurignacian”dand applied
to techniques that in some instances are quite similar. Some
authors have even suggested that between the initial carv-
ings of Mode 4 and the most advanced Aurignacian
there are very few differences (Nejman, 2008). However,
François Bon (2006) has argued that, from a technological
point of view, two different systems can be distinguished,
which the author called “Archaic (or Proto) Aurignacian”
and “Early Aurignacian.” The difference consists in that
only one chaîne opératoire is required to obtain Archaic
Aurignacian tools, meanwhile two distinct chaînes opér-
atoires are required to obtain blades and bladelets of the
Early Aurignacian (Bon, 2006). As William Banks et al.
(2013) stated, “For the Proto-Aurignacian, blades and bla-
delets were produced from unidirectional prismatic cores
within a single, continuous reduction sequence . During
the Early Aurignacian, blades and bladelets were produced
via two distinct core reduction strategies. Blades continued
to be produced from prismatic cores, were robust, and were
typically heavily retouched on their lateral edges. Carinated
‘scrapers’ served as specialized cores whose reduction
yielded short, straight, or curved bladelets that were typi-
cally left unretouched. The Early Aurignacian is also char-
acterized by the appearance of split-based bone points.”
(Banks et al., 2013).

l’Arbreda, Catalonia,

The oldest documented presence of Archaic or Proto-
Aurignacian is found before the cold Heinrich Event 4
(HE4) (z40 ka) in Northern Spain (El Castillo, Cantabria,
level 18, 41e38 ka;
level 11,
41e39 ka) and Northern Italy (Paina 38.6e37.9; Fumane
36.8e32.1) (Kozlowski and Otte, 2000), Southern France
(Isturitz 37.18  4.2 ka (Szmidt et al., 2010)), and Moravia
(Brno-Bohunice, z48 ka (Hoffecker, 2009)). The oldest
evidence of the Early Aurignacian would be of almost
34 ka in France (Castanet Lower, Combe Saunière VIII,

748 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

Flageolet I XI, Pataud 11 and 13, Roc de Combe 7c, Tuto
de Camalhot 70e8) and Germany (Geissenklösterle IIIa,
Wildscheuer III) (Banks et al., 2013). The lowest strata of
Hohle Fels cave, which ranged between 36 and 33 ka,
contains ivory sculptures in addition to facies of Early
Aurignacian (Conard,
(2013,
Table 44.2) give radiocarbon calibrated dates associated
with the Proto-Aurignacian and Early Aurignacian in
Europe.

2003). Banks

et

al.

The biggest obstacle to give meaning to the Archaic and
Early Aurignacian cultures is the absence of associated
fossils. Therefore, as stated by Joao Zilhao (2006), these
industries can be attributed to both Neandertals and modern
humans. We have, then, a problem for the identiﬁcation of
the “modern mind.” If we associate it to the technological
level of cultures immediately preceding the advanced
Aurignacian, Neandertals could also have had that cogni-
tive capacity. But,
if we relate the modern mind with
realistic representations of ﬁgurative cave art, these only
appear at the end of the Aurignacian. Early modern humans
would then have lacked such a capacity.

TRANSITIONAL INDUSTRIES

The meaning of the emergence of the modern mind in both
technological and symbolic terms becomes clearer by
analyzing the transitional
industries. According to Ivor
Jankovic et al. (2006), these “include the Châtelperronian
of France and northern Spain, Szeletian and Jankovichian
of central and parts of eastern Europe, Uluzzian of Italy
(Tuscany, Calabria, southern Adriatic part, Uluzzo Bay,
etc.), Streletskian of eastern Europe, Jerzmanowician of
eastern Germany and Poland, Althmulian of southern
Germany, Bohunician of Czech Republic, Brynzeny and
Kostenki Szeletian of Russia and several other unnamed or
site-speciﬁc assemblages from Poland, Slovakia, Czech
Republic, Romania, etc.” They are called “transitional”
because they contain elements of the Middle Paleolithic
(Mousterian, Micoquian), absent in the Early Aurignacian,
such as curved-backed points and foliate points (Kozlowski
and Otte, 2000), but also tools that are considered charac-
teristic of the Upper Paleolithic, such as carinated scrapers
or bone points. David Brose and Milford Wolpoff (1971,
Table 44.1) provide a long list of Upper Paleolithic utensils
found in Middle Paleolithic contexts.

The problem of the transitional industries appears when
we need to assign them to a species. As was indicated by
Jankovic et al. (2011), “even if we accept
the earliest
Aurignacian as an industrial complex that has its origins
outside this area . (which is far from proven) and attribute
it to anatomically modern newcomers (for which there are
no known hominin/ industrial associations) we are left with
the problem of who is responsible for these Initial Upper
Paleolithic assemblages.” The absence of fossil remains

associated with almost every transitional technocomplex
generally prevents the association of hominin/industry, and
of conﬁrming who were the architects of this cultural
change. However, two sites with Châtelperronian culture,
Saint-Césaire (c. 36 ka)
(Lévêque and Vandermeersch,
1980; Mercier et al., 1991) and Arcy-sur-Cure (c. 34 ka)
(Hublin et al., 1996), contain in the same stratigraphic level
fossils of H. neanderthalensis (questioned by Bar-Yosef
and Bordes, 2010; Higham et al., 2010). This coincidence
has been at times enough to attribute all transitional in-
dustries to Neandertals (Allsworth-Jones, 1986; Mellars,
1996; Stringer and Gamble, 1993); a consideration sus-
tained in some revisions of specialists (Churchill and
Smith, 2000; Francesco d’Errico, 2003).

The general assignment of transitional industries to the
Neandertals encounters the problem of the morphology of
fossil specimens found at Uluzzian levels. In the Grotta di
Fumane (Lessini Mountains, North Italy) several human
teeth have been found: Fumane, 1, 4, 5, deciduous; Fumane
6, adult. Stefano Benazzi et al. (2014) classiﬁed Fumane 1
as clearly Neandertal, and Fumane 5 as supporting Nean-
dertal afﬁnity. Both specimens come from the Mousterian
levels of Fumane. At the same time, Fumane 6, of the
Uluzzian levels, does not show morphological features
useful for taxonomic discrimination (Benazzi et al., 2014).
Fumane fossil specimens, therefore, do not contradict the
general attribution of Uluzzian to Neandertals. However, a
new analysis by Stefano Benazzi et al. (2011) of two de-
ciduous molars from the Uluzzian levels (EIII) of the Grotta
del Cavallo (Apulia, Southern Italy), one initially classiﬁed
as a Neandertal, leads to different conclusions. By means of
morphometric methods based on microtomographic data,
Benazzi et al. (2011) stated that the Cavallo specimens can
be attributed to modern humans. In addition, in the EIII
level of the Grotta del Cavallo appeared several marine
shells (Dentalium sp., Nuculana sp., and Cyclope neritea)
snapped or pierced to be transformed into beads.

If the Uluzzian technocomplex, very ancient,

is the
production of modern humans, we ﬁnd ourselves with the
possibility to establish plausible dates for the entry into
Europe of H. sapiens. The Grotta di Fumane (Lessini
Mountains, North Italy) contains levels of the late Mous-
terian (A11, A5), Uluzzian (A4, A3),
and Proto-
Aurignacian (A2, A1 up to D3) technocomplex (Benazzi
et al., 2014). Fumane Mousterian levels were dated by
calibrated radiocarbon between 45.4 and 41.7 (A11) and
38.875  1.497 ka (A5), while the Uluzzian level (A4)
received 37.8e36.9 ka (Peresani et al., 2008). Applying a
development of radiocarbon dating (acid-base-oxidation-
stepped combustiondABOx-SCdand acid-base-acidd
ABAdpretreatments for
then
accelerator mass spectrometrydAMS), Thomas Higham
et al. (2009) increased the age of the fossils of Cavallo.
The age of the Proto-Aurignacian A2 level would be

removing contaminants,

Science and Technology in Human Societies Chapter | 44 749

41.20e40.45 ka,
ie, prior to the Campanian Ignimbrite
eruption. The latest Mousterian occupation (A5) would be
43.58e42.98 ka, and the Uluzzian levels should be found
between that date and 41.20e40.45 ka. The analysis by
Katerina Douka et al. (2014) pushed back even further the
age of the Uluzzian. By an integrated synthesis of new
radiocarbon results and a Bayesian statistical approach
from four stratiﬁed Uluzzian cave sequences in Italy and
Greece (Cavallo, Fumane, Castelcivita, and Klissoura 1),
Douka et al. (2014) concluded that the Uluzzian arrived in
Italy and Greece shortly before 45 ka. Its ﬁnal stages are
z39.5 ka, coinciding with the Campanian Ignimbrite
eruption. Fumane dates agree with that of the Grotta del
Cavallo. Benazzi et al. (2011) dated the Cavallo shells by
AMS radiocarbon at an age of 45.01e43.38 ka.

The latest scenario presents, therefore, the arrival of
Uluzzian technocomplexesdie, of modern humansdin
Italy and Greece, with the modern mind necessary to use
personal ornaments (beads), shortly before 45 ka, a date
old enough to match the Châtelperronian levels of Nean-
dertals in France and northern Spain. Additionally, beads
and ocher pigments also appear at the Châtelperronian
sites. The Grotte du Renne, Arcy-sur-Cure (France), a site
inhabited by Neandertals (Hublin et al., 1996), in addition
to Châtelperronian tools constructed in situ has yielded a
series of up to 36 objects such as carved ivory pieces and
perforated bones, the sole purpose of which must have
been decorative.
In addition to Châtelperronian tools
constructed in situ, the Grotte du Renne (Arcy-sur-Cure,
France) has yielded a series of up to 36 objects such as
carved ivory pieces and perforated bones, the sole purpose
of which must have been decorative (Hublin et al., 1996).
Since 1949 Leroi-Gourhan carried out
that
revealed important differences between the engraving
techniques used to produce the Arcy-sur-Cure Châ-
telperronian artifacts and the latest Aurignacian utensils
that were found in the most modern strata of the same cave
(Leroi-Gourhan, 1958, 1961). Hence, the Châtelperronian
(Neandertal) and Aurignacian (modern human) cultures
were different. But the decorative objects from the Grotte
du Renne raised doubts about these differences existing
between modern humans and Neandertals. Thus, Hublin
et al. (1996) interpreted the Arcy-sur-Cure artifacts as the
result of trading process rather than the result of technical
imitation of modern human technology. Francesco d’Er-
rico et al. (1998) arrived at a different conclusion: those
objects were the result of an independent and character-
istically Neandertal cultural development, which had
managed to cross the threshold of the symbolism inherent
in decorative objects. There is no reason to assume that the
biological differences between Neandertals and modern
humans necessarily translated into differences between
their
intellectual capacities. Paul Bahn (1998) also
believed the Arcy-sur-Cure objects merited attributing

studies

Neandertals
behavior.

a

sophisticated and modern symbolic

Randall White (2001) has offered an alternative inter-
pretation of the decorative objects from the Grotte du
Renne: “It seems implausible that . Neandertals and Cro-
Magnons independently and simultaneously invented per-
sonal ornaments manufactured from the same raw materials
and using precisely the same techniques.” Consequently, he
argues that the Châtelperronian ornaments from the Grotte
du Renne are Aurignacian and were produced by modern
humans. The question whether the authors of the Châ-
telperronian culture were Neandertals, modern humans, or
both, has sparked numerous discussions. The evidence
from Saint-Césaire (France), with both Middle and Upper
Paleolithic strata, allowed in situ studies of the association
of specimens and tools, as well as the cultural transition
(Mercier et al., 1991). Norbert Mercier et al. (1991) used
thermoluminescence to estimate the age of the Neandertal
specimens found in levels with Châtelperronian industry.
Their results suggest they were 36,300  2700 years old.
Mercier et al. (1991) argued that there was contact between
Neandertals from Western Europe and the ﬁrst modern
humans that arrived there. They also noted something we
have said on several occasions: the straightforward identi-
ﬁcation of cultures with taxa is not possible.

Arcy-sur-Cure suggests Neandertals were possibly
capable of producing decorative objects; other sites provide
evidences of cultural sharing. Ivor Karavanic and Fred
Smith (1998) documented the presence of two contempo-
rary sites at Hrvatsko Zagorje (Croatia) which are close to
each other. The Vindija cave has yielded Neandertals,
while Velika Pécina has only produced remains of
anatomically modern humans. The authors believed that the
coincidences exhibited by the tools from both sites are due
to imitation or even commercial exchange. These Croatian
sites do not include ornaments, but they provide remarkable
indications of cultural exchange. This is corroborated
beyond a doubt by H. neanderthalensis and H. sapiens
coincident at Palestine caves. Although the shared Near
East Mousterian culture could be interpreted as the
maximum horizon Neandertals could reach, the Arcy-sur-
Cure objects, assuming they were constructed or used by
Neandertals, suggest this was not the case. They seem to
support the notion that Neandertals appreciated pendants
enough to identify them as “beautiful objects.” At least in
this sense, they would have achieved the “modern mind.”
The hypothesis that Neandertal decorative elements
found in the Châtelperronian deposits are imitations of
Aurignacian objects made by modern humans implies that
both cultures were contemporary or that the Aurignacian
culture was older. Joao Zilhão et al. (2006) have investi-
gated the sequence of
sediments and the archaeo-
logical association of the Grotte des Fées at Châtelperron
(France)
the Châtelperronian-Aurignacian

and reject

750 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

contemporaneity: They assert that “its stratiﬁcation is poor
and unclear, the bone assemblage is carnivore accumulated,
the putative interstratiﬁed Aurignacian lens in level B4 is
made up for the most part of Châtelperronian material, the
upper part of the sequence is entirely disturbed, and the few
Aurignacian items in levels B4e5 represent isolated in-
trusions into otherwise in situ Châtelperronian deposits”
(Zilhão et al., 2006). Their conclusion is that “as elsewhere
in southwestern Europe,
that
the Aurignacian postdates the Châtelperronian and that the
innovations are better explained as the
latter’s cultural
Neandertals’
independent development of behavioral
modernity” (Zilhão et al., 2006). This hypothesis deserves
attention, but
to be accepted similar studies should be
carried out at places other than the Grotte des Fées.

this evidence conﬁrms

Any chronological table of the cultural sequences reveals
the difﬁculties we are encountering. Direct correspondences
are usually drawn between cultural manifestations and spe-
cies, associating Mousterian with Neandertals and Auri-
gnacian with modern humans. Hence, it seems clear that
attributing or not to Neandertals sufﬁcient cognitive capac-
ities for aesthetic experience is heavily inﬂuenced by a given
author’s point of view about the Mousterian evidence. Those
who argue that Neandertals and H. sapiens belong to
different species tend to reject the presence of the “modern
mind” in the former’s contrivances, and vice versa.

REFERENCES

Abbate, E., Albianelli, A., Azzaroli, A., et al., 1998. A one-million-year-
old Homo cranium from the Danakil (Afar) depression of Eritrea.
Nature 393, 458e460.

Akazawa, T., Muhesen, M., Dodo, Y., et al., 1995. Neanderthal infant

burial. Nature 377, 585e586.

Allsworth-Jones, P., 1986. The Szeletian and the Transition from Middle to
Upper Paleolithic in Central Europe. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Ambrose, S.H., 2001. Paleolithic technology and human evolution.

Bar-Yosef, O., Bordes, J.-G., 2010. Who were the makers of

the
Châtelperronian culture? Journal of Human Evolution 59 (5), 586e593.
Bar-Yosef, O., Vandermeersch, B., 1993. Modern humans in the levant.

Scientiﬁc American 268 (4), 94e100.

Basell, L.S., 2008. Middle Stone Age (MSA) site distributions in eastern
Africa and their relationship to Quaternary environmental change,
refugia and the evolution of Homo sapiens. Quaternary Science Re-
views 27 (27e28), 2484e2498.

Belmaker, M., Tchernov, E., Condemi, S., et al., 2002. New evidence for
hominid presence in the lower pleistocene of the southern levant.
Journal of Human Evolution 43 (1), 43e56.

Benazzi, S., Bailey, S.E., Peresani, M., et al., 2014. Middle Paleolithic and
Uluzzian human remains from Fumane cave, Italy. Journal of Human
Evolution 70, 61e68.

Benazzi, S., Douka, K., Fornai, C., et al., 2011. Early dispersal of modern
humans in Europe and implications for Neanderthal behaviour. Nature
479 (7374), 525e528.

Berger, L.R., Clarke, R.J., 1996. The Load of the Taung child. Nature 379,

778e779.

Berger, L.R., Parkington, J.E., 1995. A new Pleistocene hominid-bearing
locality at Hoedjiespunt, South Africa. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology 98, 601e609.

Binford, L.R., 1981. Bones: Ancient Men and Modern Myths. Academic

Press, New York.

Blumenschine, R., 1987. Characteristics of an early hominid scavenging

Niche. Current Anthropology 28, 383e408.

Boesch, C., Head, J., Robbins, M.M., 2009. Complex tool sets for honey
extraction among chimpanzees in Loango National Park, Gabon.
Journal of Human Evolution 56, 560e569.

Boesch, C., Tomasello, M., 1998. Chimpanzee and human cultures. Cur-

rent Anthropology 39, 591e595.

Bon, F., 2006. A brief overview of Aurignacian cultures in the context of
the industries of the transition from the Middle to the Upper Paleo-
lithic. In: Bar Yosef, O., Zilhão, J. (Eds.), Towards a Deﬁnition of the
Aurignacian. American School of Prehistoric Research/Instituto
Português de Arqueologia, Lisbon, pp. 133e144.

Bordes, F., 1953. Nodules de typologie paléolithique I. Outils musteriens à
fracture volontaire, vol. 1. Bulletin de la Societé Préhistorique Fran-
çaise, Paris, p. 50.

Bordes, F., 1979. Typologie du Paléolithique ancien et moyen, vol. 1.

Science 291, 1748e1753.

CNRS, Paris.

Asfaw, B., Beyene, Y., Suwa, G., et al., 1992. The earliest Acheulan from

Konso-Gardula. Nature 360, 732e735.

Backwell, L., d’Errico, F., Wadley, L., 2008. Middle stone age bone tools
from the Howiesons Poort layers, Sibudu Cave, South Africa. Journal
of Archaeological Science 35 (6), 1566e1580.

Bahn, P.G., 1998. Neanderthals emancipated. Nature 394, 719e720.
Balme, J., Davidson, I., McDonald, J., et al., 2009. Symbolic behaviour
and the peopling of the southern arc route to Australia. Quaternary
International 202, 59e68.

Banks, W.E., d’Errico, F., Zilhão, J., 2013. Human-climate interaction
during the early upper Paleolithic: testing the hypothesis of an adap-
tive shift between the proto-Aurignacian and the early Aurignacian.
Journal of Human Evolution 64 (1), 39e55.

Bar-Yosef, O., Belmaker, M., 2011. Early and middle pleistocene faunal
and hominins dispersals through southwestern Asia. Quaternary Sci-
ence Reviews 30 (11e12), 1318e1337.

Bouyssonie, A., Bouyssonie, J., Bardon, L., 1908. Découverte d’un
squelette humain mousterian à la boufﬁa de la Chapelle-aux-Saints
(Corrèze). L’Anthropologie 19, 513e519.

Brain, C.K., 1958. The Transvaal ape-man bearing cave deposits. Trans-

vaal Museum Memoir 11, 1e125.

Brain, C.K., 1970. New ﬁnds at

the Swartranks site. Nature 225,

1112e1119.

Bräuer, G., Yokoyama, Y., Falguères, C., et al., 1997. Modern human

origins backdated. Nature 386, 337.

Breuil, H., 1913. Les subdivisions du Paléolithique supérieur et

leur
signiﬁcation. In: Paper presented at the Congrès International d’An-
thropologie et d’Archéologie préhistoriques. Compte-rendu de la
14ème session, Genève 1912, tome 1, Genève.

Brooks, A.S., Helgren, D.M., Cramer, J.S., et al., 1995. Dating and context
of three middle stone age sites with bone points in the upper Semliki
Valley, Zaire. Science 268, 553e556.

Science and Technology in Human Societies Chapter | 44 751

Brose, D.S., Wolpoff, M.H., 1971. Early upper Paleolithic man and late

middle Paleolithic tools. American Anthropologist 73, 1156e1194.

Bunn, H.T., 1981. Archaeological evidence for meat-eating by Plio-
pleistocene hominids from Koobi Fora and Olduvai gorge. Nature
291, 574e577.

Bye, B.A., Brown, F.H., Cerling, T.E., et al., 1987. Increased age estimate
for the lower Paleolithic hominid site at Olorgesailie, Kenya. Nature
329, 237e239.

Callaway, E., 2015. Oldest stone tools raise questions about their creators.

Nature 520, 421.

Cann, R.L., Stoneking, M., Wilson, A.C., 1987. Mitochondrial DNA and

human evolution. Nature 325, 31e36.

Carbonell, E., Bermudez de Castro, J.M., Arsuaga, J.L., et al., 2005. An
early pleistocene hominin mandible from Atapuerca-TD6, Spain.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 102 (16), 5674e5678.

Carbonell, E., Mosquera, M., Rodríguez, X.P., 2007. The emergence of
technology: a cultural step or long-term evolution? Comptes Rendus
Palevol 6 (3), 231e233.

Charrié-Duhaut, A., Porraz, G., Cartwright, C.R., et al., 2013. First mo-
lecular identiﬁcation of a hafting adhesive in the late Howiesons Poort
at Diepkloof rock shelter (western Cape, South Africa). Journal of
Archaeological Science 40 (9), 3506e3518.

Chauhan, P.R., 2010. Comment on ‘Lower and Early Middle Pleistocene
Acheulian in the Indian sub-continent’ by Gaillard et al. (2009)
223e224,
(Quaternary
International
248e259. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.quaint.2010.01.021.

International). Quaternary

Churchill, S.E., Smith, F.H., 2000. Makers of the early Aurignacian of
Europe. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 113 (Suppl. 31),
61e115.

Clark, G.A., 1969. World Prehistory: A New Synthesis. Cambridge Uni-

versity Press, Cambridge.

Clark, G.A., 1997. The middle-upper Paleolithic transition in Europe: an
American Perspective. Norwegian Archaeological Review 30, 25e53.
Clark, J.D., Beyene, Y., WoldeGabriel, G., et al., 2003. Stratigraphic,
chronological and behavioural contexts of pleistocene Homo sapiens
from middle Awash, Ethiopia. Nature 423 (6941), 747e752.

Clark, J.D., Heinzelin, J., Schick, K.D., et al., 1994. African Homo erectus:
old radiometric ages and Young Oldowan assemblages in the middle
Awash valley, Ethiopia. Science 264, 1907e1920.

Clark, J.D., Kurashina, H., 1979. Hominid occupation of the east-Central

Highlands of Ethiopia in the Plio-pleistocene. Nature 282, 33e39.

Clarke, R.J., Howell, F.C., Brain, C.K., 1970. More evidence of an

advanced hominid at Swartranks. Nature 225, 1219e1222.

Conard, N.J., 2003. Palaeolithic ivory sculptures from southwestern Ger-
many and the origins of ﬁgurative art. Nature 426 (6968), 830e832.
Curnoe, D., 2010. A review of early Homo in southern Africa focusing on
cranial, mandibular and dental remains, with the description of a new
species (Homo gautengensis sp. nov.). HOMO e Journal of
Comparative Human Biology 61 (3), 151e177. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.jchb.2010.04.002.

d’Errico, F., Backwell, L.R., 2003. Possible evidence of bone tool shaping
by Swartkrans early hominids. Journal of Archaeological Science 30
(12), 1559e1576. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0305-4403(03)00052-9.
d’Errico, F., Zilhão, J., Julien, M., Bafﬁer, D., Pelegrin, J., 1998. Nean-
derthal acculturation in western Europe? A critical review of the ev-
idence and its interpretation. Current Anthropology 39 (S1), S1eS44.
Dart, R.A., 1957. The Osteodontokeratic Culture of Australopithecus

Prometheus (Pretoria).

Davidson, I., McGrew, W.C., 2005. Stone tools and the uniqueness of
Institute 11,

human culture. Journal of Royal Anthropological
793e817.

Day, M.H., 1986. Guide to Fossil Man, fourth ed. The University of

Chicago Press, Chicago.

de Heinzelin, J., Clark, J.D., White, T., et al., 1999. Environment and
behavior of 2.5-million-year-old Bouri hominids. Science 284,
625e629.

de la Torre, I., Mora, R., Martínez-Moreno, J., 2008. The early Acheulean
(Lake Natron, Tanzania). Journal of Anthropological
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/

244e264.

in Peninj
Archaeology
27
j.jaa.2007.12.001.

(2),

de Villiers, H., 1973. Human skeletal remains from border cave, Ingwa-
vumu District, KwaZulu, South Africa. Annals of the Transvaal
Museum 28, 229e256.

Deino, A., McBrearty, S., 2002. 40Ar/39Ar chronology for the Kapthurin
formation, Baringo, Kenya. Journal of Human Evolution 42, 185e210.
Domínguez-Rodrigo, M., Barba, R., Egeland, C.P., 2007. Deconstructing
Olduvai: A Taphonomic Study of the Bed I Sites. Springer, Dordrecht.
Dominguez-Rodrigo, M., Serrallonga, J., Juan-Tresserras, J., et al., 2001.
Woodworking activities by early humans: a plant residue analysis on
Acheulian stone tools from Peninj (Tanzania). Journal of Human
Evolution 40, 289e299.

Douka, K., Higham, T.F.G., Wood, R., et al., 2014. On the chronology of

the Uluzzian. Journal of Human Evolution 68, 1e13.

Dubois, E., 1894. Pithecanthropus erectus. Eine menschanähnliche Über-

gangsform aus Java. Landsdruckerei, Batavia.

Dusseldorp, G., Lombard, M., Wurz, S., 2013. Pleistocene Homo and the
updated stone age sequence of South Africa. South African Journal of
Science (5/6), 1e7.

Evernden, J.F., Curtiss, G.H., 1965. Potassium argon dating of late
Cenozoic rocks in East Africa and Italy. Current Anthropology 6,
348e385.

Ferring, R., Oms, O., Agustí, J., et al., 2011. Earliest human occupations at
Dmanisi (Georgian Caucasus) dated to 1.85e1.78 Ma. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
108, 10432e10436.

Foley, R.A., Maíllo-Fernández, J.M., Mirazón Lahr, M., 2013. The Middle
Stone Age of the Central Sahara: Biogeographical opportunities and
technological strategies in later human evolution. Quaternary Inter-
national 300, 153e170.

Gabunia, L., Vekua, A., 1995. A Plio-pleistocene hominid from Dmanisi,

east Georgia, Caucasus. Nature 373, 509e512.

d’Errico, F., 2003. The invisible frontier. A multiple species model for the
origin of behavioral modernity. Evolutionary Anthropology 12,
188e202.

Gabunia, L., Vekua, A., Lordkipanidze, D., 2000. The environmental
contexts of early human occupation of Georgia (Transcaucasia).
Journal of Human Evolution 38 (6), 785e802.

d’Errico, F., Backwell, L., 2009. Assessing the function of early hominin
bone tools. Journal of Archaeological Science 36 (8), 1764e1773.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2009.04.005.

Gabunia, L., de Lumley, M.A., Vekua, A., Lordkipanidze, D., de
Lumley, H., 2002. Découverte d’un nouvel hominidé à Dmanissi
(Transcaucasie, Géorgie). Comptes Rendus Palevol I, pp. 243e253.

752 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

Gargett, R., 1989. Grave shortcoming: the evidence for neandertal burial

(commentary). Current Anthropology 30, 157e180.

Goodall, J.M., 1964. Tool-using and aimed throwing in a community of

free-living chimpanzees. Nature 201, 1264e1266.

Goodwin, A.J.H., Van Riet Lowe, C., 1929. The Stone Age Cultures of
South Africa, vol. 27. Annals of the South African Museum, Cape
Town.

Grine, F.E., Bailey, R.M., Harvati, K., et al., 2007. Late pleistocene human
skull from Hofmeyr, South Africa, and modern human origins. Sci-
ence 315 (5809), 226e229.

Grine, F.E., Klein, R.G., 1985. Pleistocene and Holocene human remains

from Equus Cave, South Africa. Anthropology 8, 55e98.

Igreja, M., Porraz, G., 2013. Functional insights into the innovative early
Howiesons Poort
technology at Diepkloof rock shelter (western
Cape, South Africa). Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (9),
3475e3491.

Isaac, G.L., 1969. Studies of early cultures in East Africa. World

Archaeology 1, 1e28.

Isaac, G.L., 1975. Stratigraphy and cultural patterns in East Africa during the
middle ranges of Pleistocene time. In: Butzer, K.W., Isaac, G.L. (Eds.),
After the Australopithecines. Mouton, The Hague, pp. 495e542.

Isaac, G.L., 1978. The archaeological evidence for the activities of early
African hominids. In: Jolly, C.J. (Ed.), Early Hominids of Africa.
Duckworth, London, pp. 219e254.

Groves, C.P., Mazák, V., 1975. An approach to the taxonomy of the
Hominidae: Gracile Villafranchian hominids of Africa. Casopis pro
Mineralogii a Geologii 20, 225e247.

Isaac, G.L., 1984. The archaeology of human origins: studies of the Lower
Pleistocene in Africa. In: Wendorf, F., Close, A. (Eds.), Advances in
World Archaelogy, vol. 3. Academic Press, New York, pp. 1e87.

Grün, R., Beaumont, P., Tobias, P.V., et al., 2003. On the age of Border
Cave 5 human mandible. Journal of Human Evolution 45 (2), 155e167.
Haile-Selassie, Y., Asfaw, B., White, T.D., 2004. Hominid cranial remains
from upper pleistocene deposits at Aduma, Middle Awash, Ethiopia.
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 123 (1), 1e10.

Hedenström, A., 1995. Lifting the Taung’s child. Nature 378, 670.
Henry-Gambier, D., 2002. Les fosssiles de Cro-Magnon (Les Eyzies-de-
tayac, Dordogne): Nouvelles données sur leur position chronologique
et leur attribution culturelle. Bulletins et Mémoires de la Société
d’Anthropologie de Paris 14 (1e2), 89e112.

Henshilwood, C.S., d’Errico, F., Watts, I., 2009. Engraved ochres from the
middle stone age levels at Blombos cave, South Africa. Journal of
Human Evolution 57 (1), 27e47.

Henshilwood, C.S., d’Errico, F., Yates, R., et al., 2002. Emergence of
modern human behavior: middle stone age engravings from South
Africa. Science. http://www.sciencexpress.org/10 January 2002/Page
4/10.1126/science.1067575.

Henshilwood, C.S., Dubreuil, B., 2012. Style, symbolism, and complex
technology: the middle stone age in southern Africa: a response to
Shea. Current Anthropology 53 (1), 132e133.

Henshilwood, C.S., Sealy, J.C., Yates, R., et al., 2001. Blombos
cave, southern Cape, South Africa: Preliminary report on the 1992,
Äì1999 excavations of the middle stone age levels. Journal of
Archaeological Science 28 (4), 421e448.

Jacobs, Z., Roberts, R.G., Galbraith, R.F., et al., 2008. Ages for the middle
stone age of southern Africa: implications for human behavior and
dispersal. Science 322 (5902), 733e735.

Jakobsson, M., Scholz, S.W., Scheet, P., et al., 2008. Genotype, haplotype
and copy-number variation in worldwide human populations. Nature
451 (7181), 998e1003.

Jankovic, I., Karavanic, I., Ahern, J.C.M., et al., 2006. Vindija cave and
the modern human peopling of Europe. Collegium Antropologicum
30, 457e466.

Jankovic, I., Karavanic, I., Ahern, J.C.M., et al., 2011. Archaeological,
paleontological and genomic perspectives on late European Nean-
dertals at Vindija cave, Croatia. In: Condemi, S., Weniger, G.-C.
(Eds.), Continuity and Discontinuity in the Peopling of Europe: One
Hundred Fifty Years of Neanderthal Study. Springer Science þ -
Business Media B.V, Dordrecht, pp. 299e313.

Karavanic, I., Smith, F.H., 1998. The Middle/Upper Paleolithic interface
and the relationship of Neanderthals and early modern humans in
Hrvatsko Zagorje, Croatia. Journal of Human Evolution 34, 223e248.
Kimbel, W.H., Walter, R.C., Johanson, D.C., et al., 1996. Late Pliocene
Homo and Oldowan tools from the hadar formation (Kada hadar
member), Ethiopia. Journal of Human Evolution 31, 549e561.

Kingston, J.D., Marino, B.D., Hill, A., 1994. Isotopic evidence for
Neogene hominid Paleoenvironments in the Kenia Rift valley. Science
264, 955e959.

Higham, T., Brock, F., Peresani, M., et al., 2009. Problems with radio-
carbon dating the middle to upper palaeolithic transition in Italy.
Quaternary Science Reviews 28 (13e14), 1257e1267.

Kivisild, T., Shen, P., Wall, D.P., et al., 2006. The role of selection in the
evolution of human mitochondrial genomes. Genetics 172 (1), 373e387.
Kozlowski, J.K., Otte, M., 2000. The formation of the Aurignacian in

Higham, T., Jacobi, R., Julien, M., et al., 2010. Chronology of the Grotte
du Renne (France) and implications for the context of ornaments and
human remains within the Châtelperronian. Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 107,
20234e20239.

Hoffecker, J.F., 2009. The spread of modern humans in Europe. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 106, 16040e16045.

Howell, F.C., 1952. Pleistocene glacial ecology and the evolution of
‘classic neanderthal’ man. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 8,
377e410.

Hublin, J.J., Spoor, F., Braun, M., Zonneveld, F., Condemi, S., 1996.
A late neanderthal associated with upper Palaeolithic artefacts. Nature
381, 224e226.

Europe. Journal of Anthropological Research 56 (4), 513e534.

Kuman, K., 2007. The earlier stone age in South Africa: site context and
the inﬂuence of cave studies. In: Pickering, T.R., Schick, K., Toth, N.
(Eds.), Breathing Life into Fossils. Stone Age Institute Press, Gosport,
IN, pp. 181e198.

Lartet, E., 1860. Mémoire sur la station humaine d’Aurignac. ASNZ 15,

177e253.

Lartet, E., Christy, H., 1865e1875. Reliquiae Aquitanicae. Williams &

Norgate, London.

Leakey, L.S.B., 1951. Olduvai Gorge. A Report on the Evolution of the
I-IV. Cambridge University Press,

Handaxe Culture in Beds
Cambridge.

Leakey, L.S.B., Tobias, P.V., Napier, J.R., 1964. A new species of the

genus Homo from Olduvai. Nature 202, 7e9.

Science and Technology in Human Societies Chapter | 44 753

Leakey, M., 1966. A review of the Oldowan culture from Olduvai gorge,

Tanzania. Nature 212, 577e581.

Leakey, M.D., 1975. Cultural patterns in the Olduvai sequence. In:
the Australopithecines.

(Eds.), After

Butzer, K.W.,
Mouton, The Hague, pp. 477e493.

Isaac, G.L.

Leakey, M.G., Feibel, C.S., McDougall, I., et al., 1995. New four-million-
year-old hominid species from Kanapoi and Allia Bay, Kenya. Nature
376, 565e572.

Mellars, P., Gori, K.C., Carr, M., et al., 2013. Genetic and archaeological
perspectives on the initial modern human colonization of southern
Asia. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 110 (26), 10699e10704.

Mercader, J., Barton, H., Gillespie, J., et al., 2007. 4300-Year-old chim-
panzee sites and the origins of percussive stone technology. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 104 (9), 3043e3048.

Lepre, C.J., Roche, H., Kent, D.V., et al., 2011. An earlier origin for the

Mercader, J., Panger, M., Boesch, C., 2002. Excavation of a chimpanzee

Acheulian. Nature 477 (7362), 82e85.

stone tool site in the African Rainforest. Science 296, 1452e1455.

Leroi-Gourhan, A., 1958. Étude des restes humains fossiles provenant des
grottes d’Arcy-sur-Cure (Yonne). Annales de Paléontologie 44,
87e148.

Mercier, N., Valladas, H., Joron, J.L., et al., 1991. Thermoluminescence
dating of the late Neanderthal remains from Saint-Césaire. Nature 351,
737e739.

Leroi-Gourhan, A., 1961. Les fouilles d’Arcy-sur-Cure (Yonne). Gallia

Préhistoire 4, 3e16.

Leroi-Gourhan, A., 1964. Le Geste et la Parole. Albin Michel, Paris.
Leroi-Gourhan, A., 1975. The ﬂowers found with Shanidar IV, a nean-

derthal burial in Iraq. Science 190, 562e564.

Lévêque, F., Vandermeersch, B., 1980. Les découvertes de restes humains
dans un niveau castelperronien à Saint-Césaire (Charente-Maritime).
Comptes rendus de l’Académie des Sciences de Paris 291D, 187e189.
Li, J.Z., Absher, D.M., Tang, H., et al., 2008. Worldwide human re-
lationships inferred from genome-wide patterns of variation. Science
319 (5866), 1100e1104.

Lordkipanidze, D., Jashashvili, T., Vekua, A., et al., 2007. Postcranial
evidence from early Homo from Dmanisi, Georgia. Nature 449
(7160), 305e310.

Lordkipanidze, D., Vekua, A., Ferring, R., et al., 2006. A fourth hominin
skull from Dmanisi, Georgia. The Anatomical Record. Part A Dis-
coveries in Molecular, Cellular, and Evolutionary Biology 288,
1146e1157.

Mishra, S., Gaillard, C., Hertler, C., et al., 2010. India and Java: contrasting
records, intimate connections. Quaternary International 223e224 (0),
265e270. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.quaint.2009.11.040.

Morgan, L.E., Renne, P.R., 2008. Diachronous dawn of Africa’s middle
stone age: new 40Ar/39Ar ages from the Ethiopian Rift. Geology 36
(12), 967e970.

Mortillet, G., 1897. Formation de la Nation Française. Plon-Nourrit, Paris.
Morwood, M.J., O’Sullivan, P.B., Aziz, A., et al., 1998. Fission-track ages
of stone tools and fossils on the east Indonesian island of Flores.
Nature 392, 173e176.

Movius, H.L., 1948. The Lower Paleolithic cultures of southern and eastern
Asia. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society 38, 330e420.
Movius, H.L., 1953. The mousterian cave of Teshik-Tash, Southeastern
Uzbekistan, central Asia. Bulletin of the American School of Prehis-
toric Research 17, 11e71.

Mturi, A.A., 1987. The archaeological sites of Lake Natron. Lac Natron,

Sciences Geologique 40, 209e215.

Mulcahy, N.J., Call, J., 2006. Apes save tools for future use. Science 312

Lordkipanidze, D., Vekua, A., Ferring, R., et al., 2005. The earliest

(5776), 1038e1040.

toothless hominin skull. Nature 434, 717e718.

Napier, J.R., 1962. Fossil hand bones from Olduvai gorge. Nature 196,

McBrearty, S., Brooks, A.S., 2000. The revolution that wasn’t: a new
interpretation of the origin of modern human behavior. Journal of
Human Evolution 39, 453e563.

McBrearty, S., Tryon, C., 2006. From Acheulean to middle stone age in
the Kapthurin formation, Kenya. In: Hoverm, E., Kuhn, S.L. (Eds.),
Transitions Before the Transition. Springer, New York, pp. 257e277.
McDermott, F., Stringer, C., Grün, R., et al., 1996. New Late-Pleistocene
uranium-thorium and ESR dates for the Singa hominid (Sudan).
Journal of Human Evolution 31 (6), 507e516.

McPherron, S.P., Alemseged, Z., Marean, C.W., et al., 2010. Evidence for
stone-tool-assisted consumption of animal tissues before 3.39 million
years ago at Dikika, Ethiopia. Nature 466 (7308), 857e860.

Mellars, P., 1996. The Neanderthal Legacy. Princeton University Press,

Princeton, NJ.

Mellars, P., 2005. The impossible coincidence. A single-species model for
the origins of modern human behavior in Europe. Evolutionary An-
thropology 14, 12e27.

Mellars, P., 2006a. Archeology and the dispersal of modern humans in
Europe: deconstructing the “Aurignacian”. Evolutionary Anthropol-
ogy: Issues, News, and Reviews 15 (5), 167e182. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1002/evan.20103.

Mellars, P., 2006b. Why did modern human populations disperse from
Africa ca. 60,000 years ago? A new model. Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 103 (25),
9381e9386.

409e411.

Nejman, L., 2008. A reinterpretation of early upper palaeolithic assem-
blages from Stránská Skála: the differences in lithic Economy between
the Aurignacian and the Bohunician assemblages. Prehled Výzkumu
49, 24e45.

Noble, W., Davidson, I., 1996. Human Evolution, Language and Mind.

Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Noll, M.P., Petraglia, M.D., 2003. Acheulean bifaces and early human
behavioral patterns in East Africa and south India. In: Soressi, M.,
Dibble, H.L. (Eds.), Multiple Approaches to the Study of Bifacial
Technologies. University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology
and Anthropology, Philadelphia, pp. 31e53.

Otte, M., 2003. The Pittfalls of using bifaces as cultural markers. In:
Soressi, M., Dibble, H.L. (Eds.), Multiple Approaches to the Study of
Bifacial Technologies. University of Pennsylvania Museum of
Archaeology and Anthropology, Philadelphia, pp. 183e192.

Otte, M., 2010. Before Levallois. Quaternary International 223e224,

273e280.

Panger, M.A., Brooks, A.S., Richmond, B.G., et al., 2002. Older than the
Oldowan? Rethinking the emergence of hominin tool use. Evolu-
tionary Anthropology 11, 235e245.

Peresani, M., Cremaschi, M., Ferraro, F., et al., 2008. Age of the ﬁnal
middle palaeolithic and Uluzzian levels at Fumane cave, northern
Italy, using 14C, ESR, 234U/230Th and thermoluminescence methods.
Journal of Archaeological Science 35 (11), 2986e2996.

754 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

Pickering, T.R., White, T.D., Toth, N., 2000. Cutmarks on a Plio-
Pleistocene hominid from Sterkfontein, South Africa. American
Journal of Physical Anthropology 111, 570e584.

Simanjuntak, T., Sémah, F., Gaillard, C., 2010. The palaeolithic in
Indonesia: nature and chronology. Quaternary International 223e224,
418e421.

Plummer, T., 2004. Flaked stones and old bones: biological and cultural
evolution at the dawn of technology. Yearbook of Physical Anthro-
pology 47, 118e164.

Porraz, G., Parkington, J.E., Rigaud, J.-P., et al., 2013a. The MSA
sequence of Diepkloof and the history of southern African Late
Pleistocene populations. Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (9),
3542e3552.

Porraz, G., Texier, P.-J., Archer, W., et al., 2013b. Technological suc-
cessions in the middle stone age sequence of Diepkloof rock shelter,
western Cape, South Africa. Journal of Archaeological Science 40 (9),
3376e3400.

Protsch, R., de Villiers, H., 1974. Bushman rock shelter, Origstad, eastern
Transvaal, South Africa. Journal of Human Evolution 3 (5), 387e396.
Rayner, R.J., Moon, B.P., Masters, J.C., 1993. The Makapansgat
australopithecine environments. Journal of Human Evolution 24,
219e231.

Riel-Salvatore, J., Clark, G.A., 2001. Grave markers. Middle and early
upper Paleolithic burials and the use of chronotypology in contem-
porary Paleolithic research. Current Anthropology 42, 449e479.

Rightmire, G.P., 1984. Homo sapiens in sub-Sarahan Africa. In: Smith, F.,
Spencer, F. (Eds.), The Origins of Modern Humans. Alan R. Liss,
New York, pp. 295e325.

Robinson, J.T., 1962. The origin and adaptive radiation of the Australo-
(Ed.), Evolution und Hominization.

pithecines.
Stuttgarter Verlagskontor Gmbh, Stuttgart, pp. 150e175.

In: Kurth, G.

Robinson, J.T., Manson, R.J., 1957. Occurrence of stone artefacts with

Australopithecus at Sterkfontein. Nature 180, 521e524.

Roche, H., Delagnes, A., Brugal, J.-P., et al., 1999. Early hominid stone
tool production and technical skill 2.34 Myr ago in West Turkana,
Kenya. Nature 399, 57e60.

Rolland, N., 2004. Was the emergence of home bases and domestic ﬁre a
punctuated event? A review of the middle pleistocene record in Eur-
asia. Asian Perspectives 43, 248e280.

Singer, R., Wymer, J., 1982. The Middle Stone Age of Klasies River

Mouth in South Africa. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Solecki, R., 1975. Shanidar IV, a neanderthal ﬂower burial in northern

Iraq. Science 190, 880e881.

Steele, J., 1999. Stone legacy of skilled hands. Nature 399, 24e25.
Stringer, C., Gamble, C., 1993. In: Search of the Neanderthals (Ed. cas-
tellana, En busca de los neandertales. Barcelona, Crítica, 1996 ed.).
Thames and Hudson, London.

Stringer, C.B., Trinkaus, E., 1981. The Shanidar neanderthal crania. In:
Stringer, C.B. (Ed.), Aspects of Human Evolution. Taylor & Francis,
London, pp. 129e165.

Szmidt, C.C., Normand, C., Burr, G.S., et al., 2010. AMS 14C dating the
Protoaurignacian/Early Aurignacian of Isturitz, France. Implications
for Neanderthal-modern human interaction and the timing of technical
and cultural innovations in Europe. Journal of Archaeological Science
37 (4), 758e768.

Taieb, M., 1974. Évolution Quaternaire du Bassin de l’Awash (Ph.D.

dissertation). University of Paris VI.

Tchernov, E., 1987. The age of the Ubeidiya formation. Israel Journal of

Earth Sciences 36, 3e36.

Tchernov, E., 1999. The earliest hominids in the southern Levant. In:
Proceedings of the International Conference of Human Palaeontology,
Orce, Spain, 1995. Museo de Prehistoria y Paleontologia, Orce,
pp. 369e406.

Tchernov, E. (Ed.), 1986. Les Mammifères du Pléistocene Inférieur de la
Vallée du Jourdain a Oubeidiyeh, vol. 5. Association Paléorient, Paris.
Tiercelin, J.-J., Schuster, M., Roche, H., et al., 2010. New considerations
on the stratigraphy and environmental context of the oldest (2.34 Ma)
Lokalalei archaeological site complex of the Nachukui Formation,
West Turkana, northern Kenya Rift. Journal of African Earth Sciences
58 (2), 157e184.

Tobias, P.V., 1966. Fossil hominid remains from Ubeidiya, Israel. Nature

211, 130e133.

Ron, H., Levi, S., 2001. When did hominids ﬁrst leave Africa? New high-
resolution magnetostratigraphy from the Erk-el-Ahmar Formation,
Israel. Geology 29, 887e890.

Toth, N., 1985a. Archaeological evidence for preferential right-handedness
in the lower and middle Pleistocene, and its possible implication.
Journal of Human Evolution 14, 607e614.

Ronen, A., 2006. The oldest human groups in the Levant. Comptes Rendus

Toth, N., 1985b. The Oldowan Reassessed: a close look at early stone

Palevol 5, 345e351.

Sabater Pi, J., 1984. El chimpancé y los orígenes de la cultura. Anthropos,

Barcelona.

artifact. Journal of Archaeological Science 12, 101e120.

Trinkaus, E., 1983. The Shanidar Neandertals. Academic Press, New York.
Trinkaus, E., Shipman, P., 1993. The Neandertals. Changing the Image of

Schick, K.D., Toth, N., 1993. Making Silent Stones Speak. Simon &

Mankind. Alfred A. Knopf, New York.

Schuster, New York.

Tryon, C., 2006. Le concept Levallois en Afrique. Fontation Fyssen e

Schlanger, N., 1994. Châine opératoire for an archaeology of the mind. In:
Renfrew, C., Zubrow, E.B.W. (Eds.), The Ancient Mind. Elements of
Cognitive Archaeology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
pp. 143e151.

Schlebusch, C.M., Skoglund, P., Sjödin, P., et al., 2012. Genomic varia-
tion in seven Khoe-San groups reveals adaptation and complex african
history. Science 338, 374e379.

Annales 20, 132e145.

Vekua, A., Lordkipanidze, D., Rightmire, G.P., et al., 2002. A new skull of

early Homo from Dmanisi, Georgia. Science 297 (5578), 85e89.

Vigilant, L., Stoneking, M., Harpending, H., et al., 1991. African pop-
ulations and the evolution of human mitochondrial DNA. Science 253,
1503e1507.

Vogel, G., 1999. Chimps in the wild show stirrings of culture. Science

Semaw, S., Renne, P., Harris, J.W.K., et al., 1997. 2.5-million-year-old

284, 2070e2073.

stone tools from Gona, Ethiopia. Nature 385, 333e336.

Vogel, J.C., Waterbolk, H.T., 1967. Groningen Radio Carbon dates VII.

Semaw, S., Rogers, M., Stout, D., 2009. The Oldowan-Acheulian transi-
tion: is there a “developed Oldowan” artifact tradition? In: Camps, M.,
Chauhan, P. (Eds.), Sourcebook of Paleolithic Transitions. Springer,
New York, pp. 173e193.

Radio Carbon 9, 145.

von Petzinger, G., Nowell, A., 2014. A place in time: situating Chauvet
within the long chronology of symbolic behavioral development.
Journal of Human Evolution 74, 37e54.

Science and Technology in Human Societies Chapter | 44 755

Wadley, L., 2010. Compound-adhesive manufacture as a behavioral proxy
for complex cognition in the middle stone age. Current Anthropology
51 (S1), S111eS119.

Yellen, J.E., Brooks, A.S., Cornelissen, E., et al., 1995. A middle stone age
worked bone industry from Katanda, upper Semliki Valley, Zaire.
Science 268, 553e556.

Wanpo, H., Ciochon, R., Yumin, G., et al., 1995. Early Homo and asso-

ciated artefacts from Asia. Nature 378, 275e278.

Washburn, S.L., 1957. Australopithecines; the hunters or the hunted?

American Anthropologist 59, 612e614.

White, R., 2001. Personal ornaments from the Grotte du Renne at Arcy-

sur-Cure. Athena Review 2 (4), 41e46.

White, T.D., Asfaw, B., DeGusta, D., et al., 2003. Pleistocene Homo sa-

piens from middle Awash, Ethiopia. Nature 423 (6941), 742e747.

Whiten, A., Goodall, J., McGrew, W.C., et al., 1999. Cultures in chim-

panzees. Nature 399, 682e685.

Whiten, A., Horner, V., de Waal, F.B.M., 2005. Conformity to cultural

norms of tool use in chimpanzees. Nature 437 (7059), 737e740.

Wilkins, J., 2013. Technological Change in the Early Middle Pleistocene:
The Onset of the Middle Stone Age at Kathu Pan 1, Northern Cape,
South Africa (Ph.D.). University of Toronto.

Will, M., Bader, G.D., Conard, N., 2014. Characterizing the late pleisto-
cene MSA lithic technology of Sibudu, KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa.
PLoS One 9 (5), e98359.

WoldeGabriel, G., White, T.D., Suwa, G., et al., 1994. Ecological and
temporal placement of early Pliocene hominids at Aramis, Ethiopia.
Nature 371, 330e333.

Wood, B., 1997. The oldest whodunnit

in the world. Nature 385,

292e293.

Yamei, H., Potts, R., Baoyin, Y., et al., 2000. Mid-Pleistocene Acheulan-
like stone technology of the Bose basin, south China. Science 287,
1622e1626.

Yuan, Z.X., Lin, Y.P., Zhou, G.X., et al., 1984. Field report of an exca-
vation at Yuanmou Man’s site. In: Zhou, G.X., Zhang, X.Y. (Eds.),
Yuanmou Man. Yunnan People’s Press, Kunming, China, pp. 12e22.
Zhang, P., Huang, W., Wang, W., 2010. Acheulean handaxes from
Fengshudao, Bose sites of south China. Quaternary International
223e224, 440e443.

Zhu, R.X., Potts, R., Pan, Y.X., et al., 2008. Early evidence of the genus
Homo in East Asia. Journal of Human Evolution 55 (6), 1075e1085.
Zhu, R.X., Potts, R., Xie, F., et al., 2004. New evidence on the earliest
human presence at high northern latitudes in northeast Asia. Nature
431 (7008), 559e562.

Zilhão, J., 2006. Aurignacian, behavior, modern: issues of deﬁnition in the
emergence of the European Upper Paleolithic. In: Bar-Yosef, O.,
Zilhão, J. (Eds.), Towards a Deﬁnition of the Aurignacian. American
School of Prehistoric Research/Instituto Português de Arqueologia,
Lisboa, pp. 53e69.

Zilhão, J., d’Errico, F., Bordes, J.G., et al., 2006. Analysis of Aurignacian
interstratiﬁcation at the Chatelperronian-type site and implications for
the behavioral modernity of Neandertals. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 103 (33),
12643e12648.

Chapter 45

Biology, Psychology, Ethics, and Politics:
An Innate Moral Sense?

K.R. Monroe
University of California, Irvine, CA, United States

The underlying premise of social science is that certain
human behaviors occur with enough regularity, across time
and geographic and cultural space, that we can speak with
conﬁdence and a sense of predictability about
the in-
stitutions and functioning of human society and the inter-
personal relationships of individuals as members of that
society. The goal of the social scientist is to determine what
these behaviors are, the conditions under which they hold,
and then develop theories of social life that incorporate
these behaviors about our daily life into theories and
models of human behavior. At the founding of social sci-
ence, as the 19th century turned into the 20th, this premise
was hotly debated, with many scholars arguing that cultural
variations were so great that all behavior was contextual.
Vilfredo Pareto supposedly landed in the middle of this
debate when he gave a lecture at Lausanne and spoke of the
science of economics. A questioner in the audience chal-
lenged Pareto, insisting there were no rules of economics,
no consistent behavior, and hence economics was not a
science in the same way that physics or biology would be a
science.1

Pareto’s answer was surprising: “Are there good res-

taurants in Lausanne?”

The audience thought Pareto had lost it, and the ques-

tioner responded, a bit disdainfully, “Of course!”

“So I can get a good meal here after the lecture?” Pareto

continued.

“Of course,” was again the scornful reply.
“Well, are there any restaurants where I can eat for

free?” Pareto countered.

“No. That’s ridiculous. You have to pay when you go to

a restaurant.”

“Ah, yes,” was Pareto’s response. “Congratulations!

You have just discovered a law of economics.”

This possibly apocryphal anecdote illustrates both the
strength of the assumption that social science is indeed a
science and the problem with the assumption: What be-
haviors occur frequently enough that we can speak of them
as part of a human social science? Nowhere is this quan-
dary greater than in the area of ethics and morality.

causes

it, most

When asked where ethical behavior comes from, and
laymen anddprobablydmost
what
scholars immediately think of religion or socialization. We
are taught what is right and wrong by our parents, by our
faith, by studying great philosophical systems, such as
Utilitarianism or Kantian ethics. Largely forgotten in
contemporary analyses of morality and ethics, certainly
among the dominant philosophical approach in the United
States and Western Europe, is moral sense theory. In this
chapter, I want to discuss moral sense theory and how it
relates to the general theme of this volume, which concerns
what we think of as human nature.2

sense? In addressing these questions,

I begin by asking: What is moral sense theory? Why is
it important for ethics? What can a consideration of recent
work in biology and psychology tell us about an innate
moral
I cite
convincing scientiﬁc evidence, in ﬁelds as wide ranging as
linguistics, behavioral economics,
child development,
neuroscience, moral psychology, and primatology,
that
supports the belief in universal drives that can be said to
constitute a biologically prepared moral architecture within
human nature. Not limited to self-interest, these include
what might be called a moral sense, akin to the olfactory
lobes that provide us with a sense of smell. This evidence
suggests all human beings are born with the prototypes of a
sense that fosters anxiety when they witness others in
distress and, similarly, promotes positive feelings when that
distress is alleviated. Indeed, some empirical work suggests

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00045-4
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

757

758 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

that incorporating the concept of an innate moral sense into
our basic models of social and political life will improve
ethical analysis.

The analysis presents an overview of moral sense the-
ory and its criticisms in Part 1. Part 2 turns to recent sci-
entiﬁc evidence suggesting human beings are born with
substrates of a moral faculty hardwired into their neural
circuitry. The normative implication is that agents of so-
cialization traditionally said to inculcate ethics actually
may be reinforcing parts of an instinctive moral sense. Part
3 suggests what this evidence sheds on the basic tenets of
moral sense theory. It then proposes critical questions that
might inform research as we scrutinize this old theory via a
more focused, scientiﬁcally informed,
interdisciplinary
examination.

Analysis emphasizes three points. (1) It challenges
existing claims for strong cultural relativity.3 Instead, the
empirical evidence supports claims of an innate human
nature that varies, according to the environmentdbroadly
conceptualizeddin phenotypic fashion. (2) Ethical theories
and models based on psychological egoism leave unex-
plained much of political behavior since they rest on too
narrow a conceptualization of human nature, and they omit
crucial elements of the sociability that moral sense theory
places as a fundamental part of our human nature. In this
regard, my chapter relates closely to other chapters on
altruism. Finally, (3) the conclusion calls for increased
continuing dialogue with other disciplines since, as the
present
interdisciplinary work
with the natural sciences can yield important insight into
basic tenets of ethics. The need for this kind of integrated
interdisciplinary work illustrated the value and the intel-
lectual signiﬁcance of the current volume.

illustration demonstrates,

THE ORIGINAL MORAL SENSE THEORY
As a philosophical theory, moral sense theory holds that we
are able to distinguish between right and wrong through a
distinctive moral4 sense.5 Although human nature is a
perennial philosophical theme, dating from Plato, the idea
of an innate moral sense reﬂects the Enlightenment’s
attempt to explain how human psychology might justify
political and moral theories.6 As part of the Enlighten-
ment’s quest for the scientiﬁc analysis of moral issues,
moral sense theory inquires about the realities of human
nature to construct our disquisitions on government and
moral conduct on this nature and, presumably, construct
polities that then can more realistically hope to achieve an
ethical politics and society. In this regard, we discern the
inﬂuence of both Locke and Hobbes.

In An Essay Concerning Human Understanding (1690/
2000), Locke attempted to develop a mental science much
as Isaac Newton had developed a physical science. Locke
was not the only scholar to reject the scholasticism and

rationalism of his time, and to eschew the approach in
which we deduce “truths” from abstract premises that were
otherwise unavailable to ordinary experience. In this, Locke
followed the scientiﬁc tradition of both Newton and Bacon
in stressing an approach that attempted to discern the nature
of human beings through an empirical method that was
systematic and available to anyone who had ordinary
powers of perception and unprejudiced judgment.7

This

scientiﬁc approach to morality rejected the
approach in which abstract rationality reduces the senses to
a minor role. It generated a school known as moral sense
theory, also referred to as British sentimentalism.8 Moral
sense theorists argued that moral
terms must refer to
something that is ultimately observable. The reference of
such terms is a sentiment or a feeling of revulsion or
approval. The moral quality of any act is the sentiment it
elicits, and the core of morality is a distinctly human nature
that
forms of
connection. This makes the moral sense a substrate of all
human behavior. At its core, it remains the same, despite
cultural variations.

is inclined toward social and political

Hobbes’s inﬂuence on moral sense theory is less direct
than Locke’s but nonetheless powerful. Perhaps we best
discern Hobbes’s inﬂuence by noting that moral sense
theory attempts to answer both the questions left unan-
swered by theorists who ﬁnd reason the driving force
behind moral action, and the questions left unanswered by
the intuitionists who opposed the primacy of reason. The
problem for
those who argue in favor of moral
intuitionsdas opposed to reasondas the impetus for
morality is the following: If reason does indeed tell us it
would be wrong to be immoraldto lie, for exampledhow
does this discernment provide a motive to be moral? Is
merely recognizing that something is wrong enough to
move us to do the right thing, even when our desires
suggest otherwise? For example, why would we not lie
anyway,
in a particular
instance? The intuitionist position separates our moral
knowledge from the forces that motivate us. Intuitionists
make moral knowledge a matter of reason; but they locate
our drive toward selﬁshnessdsuch as lying or other forms
of immoralitydin the passions. This then raises obvious
questions: Will
reason dominate the passions? What
happens if it does not?

if lying is in our self-interest

An answer from religion is the blessing and sanction of
God; the deity will react punitively in the absence of con-
trol of our selﬁsh passions. Others (Durkheim) found an
answer in the socializing role of community. Hobbes
answered this same question via the strong sovereign of
social contract theory. In all these explanations, we are
compelled to act morally by an external force, whether
sacred (God) or secular (society or the political authorities).
The external thus provides the impetus to do good. These
answers were unacceptable to the intuitionists, who wanted

to demonstrate that morality had innate bases within human
beings themselves and that it is reasonable to do good
regardless of threats from any external power, divine or
human. It is the attempt to construct such a demonstration
that lies behind moral sense theory. Although the initial
discussion occurred during the 17th to 18th centuries, the
debate touches on an issue still under contention today:
does the drive toward morality lie in conscious reasoning or
in affective processes?

Shaftesbury
The term “moral sense” was ﬁrst used by Shaftesbury, who
argued we are able to distinguish between right and wrong
by a distinctive moral sense that provides a special type of
affective response. For Shaftesbury, the ability to sense
virtue was akin to an aesthetic act, comparable to sensing
beauty in art. Both senses have much to do with whether an
act contributes to the general harmony of mankind.
Therefore, the moral sense as such is closely related to
considerations of the general welfare.

Shaftesbury9 argued against the Hobbesian view that
the prime motivation driving human behavior is self-
interest. For Shaftesbury, Hobbes erred in privileging
self-interest as an explanation; Shaftesbury agreed that self-
interest is a natural passion in humankind but held that self-
interest is but one of many passions. Shaftesbury claimed
that self-interest is joined (and often superseded) by other
passions, such as benevolence, sympathy, gratitude, and
generosity. For Shaftesbury,
these feelings create an
“affection for virtue,” which then naturally leads to the
promotion of public interest. This affection, which Shaf-
tesbury thought created a natural harmony between virtue
and self-interest, was called the moral sense. Shaftesbury
thus recognized that people had contrary desires, of the
kind made central by Hobbes, and did not expect people to
be virtuous at all times. But he contended that the pleasures
of virtue are superior to those of vice and expected that the
dual motives of self-interest and the social interest would
work together in perfect adjustment.

The originator of the theory thus set it up as a distinctive
moral sense. It is a feelingeresponse, analogous to sensing
beauty. For Shaftesbury, the test of a proposed action was
whether it contributes to the general harmony of mankind,
which Shaftesbury identiﬁed as the general welfare. This
harmony of the senses follows the Greek tradition (eg,
Plato) in which the harmony of the two drives in human
naturedthat of self-interest and social
interestdwork
together in equilibrium. For moral sense theorists, as for
other Enlightenment thinkers, morality does not require
supernatural sanctions and religion. Nonetheless, while
religion is not critical for moral sense theory, the early
moral sense theorists were at least nominally Christian and
did allow that it may be God who implanted this moral

An Innate Moral Sense? Chapter | 45 759

sense in man. Moral sense theory thus is not antithetical to
religious views of a moral sense, and it might be said
merely to substitute nature for God as the key agent, as the
Deist responses of the Enlightenment made plain. But the
spurs to moral activity have their base in human nature,
extraneous to religious sanction and prior to deliberative
reason.

Hutcheson
Shaftesbury’s general ideas are expanded upon by Francis
Hutcheson, whose analysis of human nature claimed there
were a great number of special senses.10 Essentially,
Hutcheson argued that humans possess more than just the
ﬁve external senses that allow us to smell, taste, see, hear,
and touch. We also have a variety of internal senses. These
internal senses include a sense of honor, of beauty, a sense
of the ridiculous, and more important for our purposes,
what Hutcheson called a “public sense” that entailed the
feeling of being pleased by the happiness of others and
uneasy over human misery.

According to Hutcheson,

these internal senses are
implanted in us, much as are the senses of taste, smell, etc.
These internal senses cause us to react immediately and
instinctively to the character of actions. The moral sense
causes us to approve of acts that are good and virtuous and to
disapprove of those that are bad or vicious, much as humans
exhibit disgust at foul odors or salivate in the presence of
food. Hutcheson went even farther than the original in-
tuitionists in asserting that moral judgment is not based on
reason. He held that our moral sense does not simply, or
even predominantly, ﬁnd pleasing those acts that beneﬁt our
own interest. For Hutcheson, moral sense seems based on a
disinterested benevolence, with the ultimate desideratum
“the greatest happiness for the greatest number.” (This
argument anticipates the Utilitarians in both phrasing and in
its concern to promote the general welfare à la Bentham.)

Hutcheson suggested the moral sense is an internal re-
ﬂex, responding both to external and internal precepts.
While custom, education, and example may reﬁne and even
extend this sense, a natural substrate or proto-sense must
exist to perceive the moral right and wrong. Hutcheson
based part of his argument on the fact that benevolence is
pleasing to man. He maintained that since man’s power to
reason is,
too weak to match his moral
there must be a moral sense to which
perceptiveness,
benevolent activity is pleasing. This approach later
appeared in work by Hume and Adam Smith,11 Hutch-
eson’s most famous student.12

in general,

Hume
David Hume agreed that reason cannot constitute the
foundation for morality since reason, for Hume, is the slave

760 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

of the passions.13 Reason cannot determine our ultimate
desires and cannot move us toward action unless there is a
prior desire; all it can do is tell us how best to achieve these
desires. For Hume, all substantive knowledge ultimately
must be derived from sense experience. But Hume broke
with his predecessors who sought to provide a rational
warrant for most of our original beliefs and held that many
beliefs had no such warrant. Instead, Hume contended, they
should be explained in psychological terms. They were the
results of mental processes of a non-rational, though prac-
tically irresistible kind. Hume drew particular attention to
the role played by the imagination, and the importance of
the imagination as a source of conventional rules and
custom.

Contemporary work in neuroscience and cognitive
psychology conﬁrm many of Hume’s claims. Among phi-
losophers, however, Hume’s argumentdthat ethics is
rooted in emotion or feelings instead of reasondmoved the
debate away from the speciﬁc claim of a moral sense, and
Hume is conventionally understood to be arguing primarily
for the predominance of emotion as the foundation of ethics
rather than to be arguing in favor of a speciﬁc moral sense.
In this regard, Hume’s heirs are the students of human
nature and the historical development of society, and we
ﬁnd the concept of a moral sense surfacing most promi-
nently among developmental psychologists concerned with
ethics14 and ethologists concerned with the extent to which
human beings resemble other animals in having an inborn
sense of morality, much as they have an instinct for
survival.15

Moral sense theory was strongly criticized,16 and the
main currents in Western philosophy have largely ignored
ideas linking17 morality with natural, affective faculties.
For example, Marx and Engels18 reduce morality to a kind
of ideological reﬂex that is the epiphenomenal by-product
of the concrete, material life and the relations of produc-
tion. Certain varieties of analytic philosophy attempt to
rigorously distinguish values from facts and question
whether moral statements have any validity at all.19
Certainly, Kant helped make deliberative reason the privi-
leged site of moral
judgment. Contemporary Anglo-
American ethics20 generally argues that reason provides
the foundation for moral duty, helps us discover what
morality is, and constitutes the tool by which we reach
agreement when we disagree over or are torn by the par-
ticulars of moral choice.

CONTEMPORARY EVIDENCE OF A
MORAL SENSE
Despite this lack of attention to the idea of an inborn moral
sense among philosophers and political scientists, the idea
nonetheless perseveres in other disciplines. Arguments that
human beings have an inborn sense of morality, much as

they have an instinct for survival, surfaces prominently in
the contemporary literature of a wide variety of quite
diverse disciplines. Ethology and anthropology,
for
example, share a concern for human sociability and ask
whether there are behaviors, such as mothering, that are
socially constructed or if such behaviors contain an innate
element. Anthropologists ask about human behavior in the
ancestral environment
to discern the role of culture in
inﬂuencing moral behavior. Animal ethologists ask if the
ethical nature of human beings is rooted in the biological
nature we share with other species. Developmental psy-
chologists examine children in their earliest years, before
culture and language have shaped what might be innate
tendencies
toward certain kinds of behavior. And,
increasingly, moral psychologists and neuroscientists are
making inroads into the biological substrates of moral
behavior not only in animals or infants but also in adults
throughout the life cycle.

Some of the empirical research described next can be
fragmentary and preclusive; it occasionally involves ques-
tions about the scientiﬁc reliability of certain ﬁndings.21
Nonetheless, this evidence is salient enough to justify a
reconsideration of the existence of an innate moral sense.
We need to ask if this assumption, or at least its possibility,
should be built into our political models.22

Developmental Psychology
Contemporary psychologists build on Piaget23 who, while
not explicitly proposing a moral sense, did assume people
have a built-in capacity for morality. Piaget’s heirs24 privi-
lege reason in constructing cognitive-developmental models
that tie the idea of an innate moral sense to developmental
reasoning as they ask how people progress through different
stages of moral reasoning and, later, ask how factors such as
gender inﬂuence a general developmental process that exists
innately in all humans. Analysts such as Kohlberg25 and
Gilligan,26 however, made moral development an extended
process, wherein moral reasoning continues to develop well
into adolescence and adulthood. Because their work
emphasized reason, not an innate moral sense, it thus has only
a tangential relevance for us.27 Other child psychologists
(Kagan, Lamb) provide clearer illustrations of develop-
mental work arguing for an innate moral sense, work that
does not rely on more complex cognitive processes of
reasoning of the kind found only in adolescents or adults.28
Let us thus turn to work on child development, treating
research by Jerome Kagan, one of the most
important
developmentalists, as illustrative of the genre.

Kagan’s lifetime of experiments with children asks
whether human action is motivated by a desire for sensory
pleasure. He ﬁnds the emergence of a moral sense in
children at the end of the second year is universal and,
perhaps more than language or reason, distinct to people.

Humans seem biologically programmed with an innate
moral sense of ethics and morality, much as we are pro-
grammed for language. As with language, the form this
ethics takes in practice will vary according to external
factors. In making this argument, Kagan juxtaposes what he
considers an innate moral sense in children with the kind of
explanation offered by Utilitarians, who root the drive for
ethics in the desire to maximize pleasure and minimize
pain. Kagan concludes that the conscious feeling of plea-
sure that originates in one or more of
the sensory
modalitiesdthose found in the sensory pleasure at eating
food, touching something that appeals to us, or in sexual
arousaldare indeed innate. But it is not this kind of plea-
sure that Kagan makes critical in his conceptualization of a
moral sense. Instead, Kagan (1998, p. 151) locates a moral
sense in the “conceptual consonance between an idea,
called a standard, and the chosen action. When that
consonance occurs, the person momentarily experiences a
pleasant feeling because his behavior is in accord with a
standard he has categorized as good.”29

This distinction is critical for our purposes. Kagan
claims the pleasures of sensory experience discussed in
Utilitarian thought can be conﬁrmed with laboratory in-
vestigations. This particular sensory pleasure is found in a
variety of animals, not just in humans. In the mammalian
brain, this sensory pleasure centers in a set of neurons that,
when excited, create a state of sensory enjoyment. Bio-
logical tests conﬁrm the existence of such neuronal trans-
mitters and reveal activity in the centers of the brain in
which such sensory stimuli originate. For theorists who
locate the drive toward morality in such a sensory pleasure,
then, scientiﬁc evidence seems to validate the existence of
centers.30 Nonetheless, Kagan notes,
such pleasure
attempting to root morality in sensory pleasure still in-
volves us in difﬁculties. “The traditional argument that
moral standards are derived from sensory pleasure or the
reduction of pain cannot explain the universal fact that
people become angry when they see others violate stan-
dards they believe are right” (1998, p. 158). Does this mean
we must abandon the idea of a moral sense? Not for Kagan,
who argues that the biological foundation of this moral
sense is critical, and emerges from our primate ancestry.
But the good feelings, the pleasures that come when we
experience consonance with our standards, these are what
Kagan argues drive us toward moral action, and these are as
difﬁcult to measure as they are critical for morality. Kagan
proposes that these more complicated good feelings consist
of ﬁve unique abilities that humans inherit genetically,
much as both humans and other primates inherit the ten-
dency to be attentive to the voice, face, and actions of
others. For Kagan, these ﬁve components constitute the
moral sense: (1) the ability to infer others’ feelings and
thoughts,31 (2) the capacity for self-awareness, (3) our
penchant to categorize events and ourselves as good or bad,

An Innate Moral Sense? Chapter | 45 761

(4) our capacity to reﬂect on past actions, and (5) our
capability to know that a particular act could have been
suppressed. These ﬁve abilities exist in all human beings.
They merge to form a moral sense around the second year
in children, thus making the human moral sense a biolog-
ically prepared competence.

These developmental arguments about our moral sense
correspond to arguments about our innate mathematical
abilities. The human ability to conceptualize numbers and
grasp the rules of arithmetic is innate,32 but an innate
mathematical ability does not necessitate the particular set
of mathematical principles that has been conceptualized
and passed on to us as children. The form of the mathe-
matics is arbitrary; other principles could equally well have
been generated and transmitted. Thus, although a founda-
tion for a moral sense does exist, the mere existence does
not necessarily imply that a particular ethical system is
more natural
than others. The wide “variety of moral
standards across cultures in history” supports Kagan’s
(1998 p. 12) claim that it is “very difﬁcult to argue that one
inherits a tendency for certain morals.” In this regard, ethics
resembles language.

[B]ecause we’re humans, we inherit a capacity to learn a
language. But the language that we learn could be Swahili,
French, English, Japanese. The same thing [is true] with
morality. We inherit, because we are humans, a concern with
right and wrong, and empathy with others. But the speciﬁc
actions that we regard as moral, can vary with culture, just as
the speciﬁc language you learn can vary with culture.

Kagan (1998, p. 13)

the particularities of

The proclivity toward ethical behavior thus is innate,
but
the ethical action are not.
Accordingly, a cultural relativist could accept the concept
of an innate moral sense while still arguing that what some
ethicists ﬁnd an innate prohibitionda taboo against incest
or murder, for exampledis socially constructed. Despite
this conclusion, Kagan argues against cultural relativism
when discussing the stages reached by normal children.33
These stages include the cognitive sophistication necessary
to integrate the past, present, and future in what Piaget
called reversibility, a process necessary for the assumption
of responsibility for one’s actions.34 Most 2-year olds have
a capacity to “infer the thoughts and feelings of another and
will show signs of tension if another person is hurt, or may
offer penance if they caused another’s distress” (Kagan,
1998, p. 173). The ability to anticipate the feelings of
another is linked with the suppression of the child’s desire
to hurt that person. This connection between empathy and
anticipation of another’s feelings, however, is the result of
speculation and inference, not the result of experiments.
Nonetheless, the “appearance of empathy in all children by
the end of the second year implies that two-year-olds are

762 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

prepared by their biology to regard hurting others as
baddthat is, [as] a moral violation” (Kagan, 1998, p. 173).
At the same age, most children become aware of them-
selves as individuals with speciﬁc characteristics,
in-
tentions, and feelings. They recognize that they can be
labeled “bad” or “good” and will try to avoid creating
unpleasant feelings in others since they know that if they do
so, they in turn will be avoided (Kagan, 1998, p. 173).

insight

is a seminal origin of

That
the moral motive,
although it will not be the only basis for morality in later
years. A desire to avoid or to deny the labeling of self as
bad increases in intensity as the child matures; in time, it
will take precedence over fear of disapproval or punish-
ment as the primary governor of behavior. This means
shame and guilt are biologically prepared, developmentally
timed emotions.

(Kagan, 1998, p. 175)

Child developmentalistsdsuch as Kaganddo not take
us to speciﬁc morality, just to our need to classify acts as
“good” or “bad.” We ﬁnd little in his system to distinguish
an Oskar Schindler from a Nazi genocidalist. Nor do they
totally separate morality from a developmental process that
controls out the inﬂuence of reason and culture, although
references to cross-cultural studies allow for many cultural
factors. For this, we turn to literature in primatology that
attempts to achieve both these goals, and which suggests
animals other than human beings have a moral sense that is
expressed in speciﬁc behaviors. Such works are not refer-
ring to the kind of consonance between act and standard
that Kagan makes his hallmark of morality. Further, Kagan
himself would take strong exception to classifying other
animals in the same category as humans, since Kagan holds
humans the only species to have the particular form of a
moral sense that moves beyond the pleasure principle or
psychological egoism.35 This view from one of the key
child developmentalists,
the human moral
sense is biologically prepared, that it develops early, and
that it is adaptive, a product of evolution unique to human
beings. “That’s why a lot of the animal research that tries to
inform the human condition has limited value because we,
only we, not chimpanzees, are aware of right and wrong,
and we wish to do the right thing” (Kagan, 1998, p. 11).

is that

then,

Evolutionary Biology and Animal
Behavioral Economics
Other scholars take strong exception to Kagan’s insistence
on the unique human claim to a moral sense. In searching for
biology’s ability to encode behavior, they focus on primitive
behaviors that do not require the cognitive development
Kagan required for his moral sense as consonance (For
example, Darwin36 embraced the concept of a moral sense

but did not specify what he meant by it.). Do animals exhibit
behavior that corresponds with what we humans think of as
“moral”? Do nonhuman animals feel the kind of sentiments
that Hume made the impetus for morality? Do animal
possess the cognitive abilities necessary to engage in the
relatively sophisticated developmental processes underlying
Kagan’s concept of morality as consonance? If so, which
animals? Where do we draw the line in terms of cognitive
development? Is animal behavior that looks moral to us the
product of more primitive stimulus-response patterns that
occur without the complex neurotransmitter responses of the
neo-cortex? A host of questions remain to be answered, but
the preliminary evidence is intriguing.

scientists do not

Relatively few works by evolutionary biologists focus
on morality among human beings. Consequently,
this
literature does not often ﬁnd its way into discussions of
human morality, and evolutionary biological analyses of a
human moral sense seldom are found in contemporary
political science.37 For empirical, albeit still controversial,
evidence on the idea of a moral sense, we turn to scholars
studying animal behavior, especially primatology. These
animal behavioral
adopt Kagan’s
conceptualization of a more cognitively developed conso-
nance; yet Kagan and animal ethologists share one impor-
tant theme: disputing the idea that the only drive behind
behavior is psychological egoism. Their success in this
endeavor has salience for political science, since psycho-
logical egoism is the sole or dominant force for many po-
litical theorists (Hobbes) and evolutionary biologists38 who
argue that human beings resemble other animals in being
born selﬁsh and lacking in true generosity and altruism.
Animal behavioral scientists39 challenge this view, and
they offer intriguing evidence to support their view that
animals have an innate moral sense.

Much of this literature is designed to demonstrate that
morality is not merely man’s cultural invention but is instead
the product of millions of years of evolution. These evolu-
tionary biologists concede that the strong have an advantage
in any society built on individual strength. But this advantage
shifts once additional factors relevant for survival are intro-
duced. Any complex society, they argue, will make coop-
eration a valued form of behavior and thus evolutionarily
adaptive. Working together helps individualsdbe they
capuchin monkeys or human beingsdwho do better than
they would alone. In game theoretic terms, joint efforts
produce joint payoffs; with cooperation comes increased
sensitivity concerning who gets what for their efforts. Thus,
some evolutionary biologists ﬁnd the Hobbesian world
mischaracterizes empirical reality. Instead, animal behav-
ioral economics turns to the Adam Smith of A Theory of
Moral Sentiments, emphasizing the way in which kindness
begets kindness. They argue that human beings have a
concern with fairness and justice, but some40 critique polit-
ical theorists41 for focusing on how much we care about

fairness when we should be asking why primates came to care
about justice and fairness in the ﬁrst place. Animal behavioral
economists argue that humans come from a long line of social
primates and believe there are quite concrete advantages
associated with fairness in our primate past.

These conclusions are supported by a host of empirical
studies, from animals as diverse as chimpanzees and lions to
ﬁsh and humans.42 Chimpanzees will groom in exchange for
food, for example, suggesting memory-based and partner-
speciﬁc exchanges that mimic what humans call gratitude.43
Research on capuchins suggests they demonstrate cooperation,
communication, and even obligations, as when two monkeys
work together to get the reward of individual bowls of food.44
Monkeys demonstrate a sense of fairness, protesting when one
monkey gets grapes (a preferred food) while the others get
cucumbers, even going on strike until they all get grapes.45 The
monkeys thus seem to reject unequal pay, behavior at variance
with the ﬁtness maximization, which stipulates they should
take what they can get and not let another’s resentment or envy
interfere with maximizing behavior.

Behavioral economists argue that

the evolution of
emotions serves to preserve the spirit of cooperation. Car-
ing what others get might seem irrational to some schools
of economics, but it keeps us from being taken advantage
of in the long run.46 Discouragement of exploitation, free-
riding, and cheating thus is evolutionarily advantageous.
Such empirical work has been developed into a sophisti-
cated theory of cooperation, mutual aid, gratitude, reci-
procity, and sharing.47 Mammalian preferences for equity
have been found among dogs, not just among primates.48
These experiments in animal behavior conclude that the
source of the fairness principle is conﬂict avoidance. It
begins with individual animals noticing resentment and
their concern about how others will react if one animal gets
more. It ends with more complex declarations proclaiming
inequity a bad practice in general. Human beings thus
“embrace the golden rule not accidentally, as Hobbes
thought, but as part of our background as cooperative pri-
mates” (DeWaal in Markey, 2003). In this sense, animal
behavioral scientists might provide one answer
to an
important criticism posed to the original moral sense the-
orists: How do we choose between the variousdand
conﬂictingdbehaviors
that people judge moral? One
plausible answer is to favor whatever behavior is more
evolutionarily adaptive.

But what if we reject this route as too simplistic? Is the
literature on animal behavior still relevant for us? Yes. If
we are asking about an innate moral sense, and whether or
not human beings possess this sense, then an important way
to approach the problem is to conceive of humans as a
subset of the animal kingdom. If other animals, especially
primatesdof which humans are a subsetddemonstrate
behavior that appears to correspond to what we would
conceptualize as moral,
then that constitutes inferential

An Innate Moral Sense? Chapter | 45 763

evidence suggesting human beings possess this moral sense
as part of our animal biology.

Humans and Their Primate Nature
Drawing on more than 25 years of experiments with pri-
mates, primatologists such as Frans DeWaal argue that an
innate moral sense exists in all primates, and that animals
have both culture and emotions.49 This work challenges both
the philosophical
tendency to privilege human beings
and the premise that self-interest drives our animal nature.50
“[M]orality is as ﬁrmly grounded in neurobiology as any-
thing else we do or are” (DeWaal, 1986, p. 217). Indeed,
DeWaal ﬁnds a wide range of ethical acts among primates,
from reciprocity and cooperation to helping those who are
hurt or feeding the hungry. Such acts, for DeWaal, indicate
the ability of animals to feel sympathy. “Survival of the weak,
the handicapped, the mentally retarded, and others who
posed a burden was depicted as the ﬁrst appearance on the
evolutionary scene of compassion and moral decency”
(1996, p. 7). He cites numerous examples of animal suc-
corance demonstrating the “functional equivalent of human
sympathy” in animals as different as whales and macaques
(1996, p. 40). DeWaal further argues that animals respond to
social rules to help each other and to share food and resolve
conﬂicts. He does not argue that animals are morally good,
but he does claim they exhibit behavior that looks like
cooperation, altruism, sharing, helping, etc., in addition to
demonstrating the kinds of behavior that ensures survival.
His picture of animals, then, is a more complex picture of
morality than that usually attributed to animals in a simpliﬁed
model of Darwinian “survival of the ﬁttest.” Whether this
behavior in animals corresponds to what we think of as
moral, and whether we should further infer from this
behavior that there is an underlying animal emotion that
corresponds to the human emotions that drive similar
behavior on our part are two important questions DeWaal
does not address directly.

DeWaal does provide extensive evidence from animal
behavior, however, that suggests animals exhibit behavior
suggestive of an inborn sense that corresponds closely to
what we might think of as morality. He provides numerous
illustrations suggesting all social mammalsdfrom ele-
phants and dolphins to primates as well as humansdshare
four distinct characteristics that constitute the roots of a
moral system. These traits are sympathy, hierarchy, reci-
procity, and reconciliation.

Sympathy

DeWaal’s observations of primates suggest all social mam-
mals recognize each other as individuals and have feelings for
each other. These feelings include sadness at long separations,
happiness on being reunited, and the drive to help members

764 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

who are in trouble in their community. Demonstrations of
sympathy and concern include dolphins supporting an injured
companion at the water’s surface to keep it from drowning, an
elephant returning to the spot where his mother died and
touching her skull sympathetically, or an elephant herd trying
to revive a young female elephant who was shot by a poacher
and then, when their helpful efforts provided unsuccessful,
spreading earth and branches over her body before they leave
it. DeWaal argues that sympathy is the cornerstone of moral-
ity. It is sympathy that leads us to recognize the existence of
others and to treat others with the consideration we would like
to have shown us.

Hierarchy

DeWaal next suggests animals exhibit an inborn drive for
hierarchy, another characteristic of morality he ﬁnds
shared by animals and humans. Generally, DeWaal notes,
all social mammals live in hierarchies and follow the
rules enforced by the dominant group. Once the social
order is established, breaking this order leads to the
anticipation of punishment.51 Primates will administer
beatings, among other forms of punishment,
to group
members who break group rules.52 DeWaal ﬁnds such
behavior resembles the human need to enforce the rank
and order of a community through the institutions of law,
politics, and government. For DeWaal, this demonstrates
a sense of culture and a society that has rules and reg-
ulations that must be abided by. For the animals DeWaal
studied, when behavior deviated from the norms of the
group, punishment was effective, and the established
order was maintained.

Reciprocity

DeWaal notes a phenomenon closely related to dominance
and hierarchy: reciprocity, a kind of quid pro quo that exists
in all primate communities. Male chimpanzees, for example,
pursue dominance and form coalitions that depend on mutual
support during confrontations with their rivals. Repeated
failure to support a partner destroys the coalition. Moreover,
DeWaal ﬁnd some primates appear to remember who has hit
them and will take revenge on these individuals afterwards.
Even in sharing food, primates tend to share food with those
who have shared food with them in the past. For DeWaal,
this parallels the human need for fulﬁllment of obligations
and keeping agreements. DeWaal concludes that primates
have the intuitive ability to be generous and to expect a
similar show of generosity in return.

Reconciliation

Finally, primates appear to resolve communal conﬂict over
food, resources, and other social
incidents in a similar
manner. Reconciliation has to occur, and third parties play
an important role in eliminating the conﬂict. Primates do

this through grooming, embracing, or kissing in patterns
that DeWaal ﬁnds evocative of forgiveness and mediation
to maintain the peacefulness in the human community.

Space constraints limit fuller discussion of this research,
but DeWaal’s work illustrates the trends among primatol-
ogists to view human beings in evolutionary terms, not as a
distinct moral species.53 What we ﬁnd in human beings,
they argue, is a difference in degree, not a difference in
kind. Thus, nonhuman animals share distinct aspects of a
moral system that are akin to that of their human cousins. In
particular, primatologists have gathered clear and striking
scientiﬁc evidence that suggests psychological egoism is
not all there is to our inherent primate nature. If our social
nature exists as part of our primate genotype, our political
theories should recognize this. When broken down to its
most
and
politicsdmorality can be found in animals. If it exists in all
primates, the conclusion then must be that it exists in man
as well, as part of our primate nature.54

indicatorsdculture,

essential

language,

Behavioral economics also sheds light upon how the
presence of basic “moral emotions” could lead to coop-
erative economic outcomes. Bowles and Gintis have
modeled a public goods game whereby in addition to
personal material payoffs, subjects’ utility functions can
incorporate one’s valuation of the payoff to others, one’s
“degree of reciprocity,” and moral emotions such as guilt
of shame at one’s own or another’s deeds; these factors
can promote cooperation in a group setting. This tendency,
they propose, points to the role of internalized norms
building upon the moral emotions to construct socially
optimal results. Such an “internalization of norms” serves
to “eliminate(s) many of the cost-beneﬁt calculations and
replaces them with simple moral and prudential guidelines
for action” (Bowles and Gintis, 2002, p. 21). This means
norm-internalizers are more “biologically ﬁt than those
who do not
[internalize norms] so the psychological
mechanisms of internalization are evolutionarily selected”
(2002, p. 21).

The evolutionary and genetic implications of these
ﬁndings have been plausibly modeled as well.55 Such an
approach provides a valuable addendum to the self-
interest-based models56 and its cognate parallels
in
biology.57 In experimental situations, drives toward social
motivesdsuch as equalitydhave also been noted. Dawes
et al. (2007) found that in constructing a game isolating
egalitarian motives, participants would alter the incomes
of other players even at a cost to themselves, given a
chance, when inequality was perceived. In other words,
players’ negative affect at
inequality drove them to
“reduce above-average earners’ incomes and to increase
below-average earners’ incomes” (2007, p. 794). Dawes
and his colleagues believe such behavior points to the
evolutionary development of “strong reciprocity.”58 This
is an exciting area, and I expect much work in this ﬁeld in
the future.59

innate linguistic grammar

A Moral Grammar
substitutes
Recent work builds on this analogy but
Chomsky’s60 model of
for
math61 and links this to Rawls’s (1971) work on justice.62
This work draws on evolutionary psychology, biology,
linguistics, neuroscience, and primate cognition to argue
that humans are endowed with a moral faculty that pro-
nounces on right and wrong based on principles of action
that are unconsciously derived.63 The moral grammar
consists of a set of principles that operate on the basis of the
causes and consequences of action. Hence, just as humans
are endowed with innate capacity for language, we also
possess a moral faculty. We are born with a sense of ab-
stract rules or principles. Nurture enters the picture to set
the parameters and guide us toward the acquisition of
particular moral systems. Empirical research distinguishes
the principles from the parameters to discover limitations
on the range of possible moral systems. It may be that the
brain acts as a circuit, like a toolkit specializing in recog-
nizing certain problems as relevant for ethics. Many of the
experiments here try to delimit stages in child development.
For example, Hauser ﬁnds that 3-year olds are already
aware of intention. They judge less severely acts that cause
harm when the intention is good. Hauser deems this ability
an innate way to detect cheaters who violate social norms.64
Hauser rejects the Kantian perspective on morality as
relying too exclusively on reason and principles, ﬁnding
this Kantian view undermined by research65 into the
emotions.66 This suggests people do not act by principled
reasoning alone. Indeed, when questioned after an action,
people frequently cite gut feelings or intuitions as their
motivating force. Hauser also rejects the Humean position,
however, which predicates the validity of a moral judgment
on how one feels. If morality simply resides in how one
feelsdie, it is grounded in individual self-referencedthen,
moral pronouncements would be inﬁnitely heterogeneous,
atomistic, and internally inconsistent with a concept of
morality as a referential behavior for a collective.67

Different locations (attitudes toward a moral dilemma)
can be explained as variation from some mean. This is
where the innate grammar analogy comes into play.

Paralleling the story of language, one path to discovering
whether our moral faculty consists of universal principles and
parameters that allow for cultural variation is to tap into the
anthropological literature with its rich descriptions of what
people across the globe do when confronted with selﬁsh and
beneﬁcent options.

(Hauser, 2006, p. 131)

This suggests we might expect something akin to lin-
guistic variation,
is, systematic differences among
cultures based on parametric settings. These parametric

that

An Innate Moral Sense? Chapter | 45 765

fairness. What varies between cultures

settings explain diverse cultural responses in behavior
and principles of harming and helping others (Hauser,
2006, p. 129). “All societies have a normative sense
of
the
range of
tolerable responses to situations that elicit
judgments of fairness. In essence, each culture sets the
boundary conditions, by tweaking a set of parameters for
a fair transaction” (Hauser, 2006, p. 99). For Hauser
(2006, p. 121), our moral judgments also reﬂect “intui-
tion percolating up from unconscious and inaccessible
principles of action.”

is

Hauser’s work thus suggests we have a moral faculty
that leads us to judge situations based on notions of fair-
ness. This moral faculty is modeled after innate grammar:
there are both strong and weak forms. The strong or nativist
form argues that all content
(rules, values, meaning,
application) is innate. The weak form posits that a general
principle is combined with some acquisition mechanism,
which in turn provides content speciﬁcity. A hybrid form
would argue that some content is innate, but other content
is acquired.68 This makes the universal moral grammar a
“theory about the suite of principles and parameters that
enable humans to build moral systems. It is a toolkit for
building a variety of different moral systems as distinct
from one in particular. The grammar or set of principles is
ﬁxed, but the output is limitless within a range of logical
possibilities” (Hauser, 2006, p. 300).

When applied to moral behavior, moral principles may
be gleaned from anthropological sources. For instance, the
edict “thou shall not kill” is a principle holding of many
religions. Yet, killing in the form of infanticide or honor
killing is accepted by some cultures. These are exceptions to
the rule. Hauser’s moral faculty approach holds that exam-
ples of killing are permissible deviations (parametric settings
according to culture). Thus, Hauser accounts for societal and
cultural variation of norms by positing an absolute norm that
is universal but with local departures based on speciﬁc so-
ciohistorical conditions. “Underlying the extensive cross-
cultural variation we observe in our expressed social
norms is a universal moral grammar that enables each child
to grow a narrow range of possible moral systems. When we
judge an action as morally right or wrong, we do so
instinctively, tapping a system of unconsciously operative
and inaccessible moral knowledge. Variation between cul-
tures in their expressed moral norms is like variation be-
tween cultures in their spoken languages. Both systems
enable members of one group to exchange ideas and values
with each other, but not with members of another group”
(Hauser, 2006, p. 420). “To say that we are endowed with a
universal moral grammar is to say that we have evolved
general but abstract principles for deciding which actions are
forbidden, permissible, or obligatory. There are no principles
dictating which particular sexual, altruistic, or violent acts
are permissible” (Hauser, 2006, p. 420).

766 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

MORAL PSYCHOLOGY AND
NEUROSCIENCE
Related advances in moral psychology also shed light upon
the substrates of moral behavior in human evolution and its
legacy on the neuroscientiﬁc level. Building on Robert
Trivers and Edward O. Wilson, several research programs
have converged upon results lending support to the moral
sense hypothesis as features of the pressures of natural
selection upon our human ancestors.69 More speciﬁc ﬁnd-
ings about the emotional role provided in moral behavior
pinpoints the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPC),
especially as assessed by tests of moral cognition of pa-
tients subject to VMPC damage. (Research into the neural
basis of perceived fairness reveals that fairer offers in
game-based experiments lead to greater activity in the
ventral striatum, the VMPC, and the left amygdala, areas
known to be “reward centers.” Reactions against unfairness
also have physiological markers, such as increased skin
conductance.) Cooperation can provoke similar neural
reward responses. Charitable donations similarly seem tied
to frontal mesolimbic structures, relying upon two parallel
reward systems, one linking the ventral segmental area with
mesolimbic areas and the ventral
striatum (typically
involved in pecuniary reward) and one including the sub-
genual area for donations. This is noteworthy since the
subgenual area (at the nexus of the posterior part of the
medial orbitofrontal cortex, the ventral cingulated cortex,
and septal region) is tied to social attachment
in both
humans and other animals. Decisions to donate similarly
have their roots in measured compassion and anger. The
opposition to donation had its own network of brain re-
gions, comprising a network between the lateral orbito-
frontal cortex,
the anterior insula, and the dorsolateral
cortex; some of these have been previously implicated in
the experience of disgust.

Altruism has often been linked to empathy, and the
neural mechanisms of empathy appear to be recruited for
altruistic feelings. Perceiving the actions and intentions of
others has been found to involve the posterior superior
temporal cortex, particularly in the right hemisphere; vari-
able activity in these regions has been linked to variation in
levels of self-reported altruism. Empathy itself also has
correlates in the cerebral cortex;
its perspective-taking
manifestation results in activation of middle insula, anterior
mid-cingulate cortex (aMCC), medial, and lateral premotor
areas, and selectively in left and right parietal cortices.

Additional studies have implicated key brain structures
contributing to moral affect. When these are personal di-
lemmas in which danger or moral violation happens to
immediate subjects, heightened activity arises in the medial
frontal gyrus, posterior cingulate gyrus, and the bilateral
superior temporal sulcus, while impersonal dilemmas acti-
vate more “working memory” segments,
including the

dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and the parietal cortex. Hor-
monal elements likewise appear to support a human “moral
sense,” particularly that of oxytocin, the presence of which
encourages trust in others, as well as generosity. The roots
of oxytocin in human physiology also are clear for vicari-
ously witnessing “morally elevating” stimuli. (Breastfeed-
ing women seeing a morally uplifting video were more
likely to nurse their babies.)

Recent work in social psychology also lends credence
to elements of a moral sense. For example, in constructing
his social intuitionist model of moral judgment, Jonathan
Haidt acknowledges his debt
to moral sense theorists:
“Where do moral beliefs and motivations come from? They
come from sentiments which give us an immediate feeling
of right and wrong, and which are built into the fabric of
human nature. Hume’s answer is our answer too.”70 Haidt’s
social intuitionist model draws upon previous work in so-
cial psychology pointing to a “dual process” system in
which an “intuitive” system responds quickly, effortlessly,
and automatically, with its contents seldom available to
introspection, and affectively laden. A second system is
more ponderous, deliberate, linear, and devoted to serial
reasoning, with limited computing power to bear on im-
mediate objects of attention. The relative inaccessibility of
such automatic processes to conscious thought and the
contribution of such automatic processes to moral behav-
iors like altruism have been previously documented, and
they have provided the groundwork for social intuitionist
models and experiments. (Haidt suggests the affective
system is what leads in moral judgments and that much of
what is deemed “moral reasoning” à la Kant and Kohlberg
is often actually post hoc rationalizing of judgments already
made.) If moral reasoning does enter into the process, it is
secondary.

CONCLUSION
This chapter summarizes evidence from a wide range of
disciplines supporting the idea of an innate moral sense.
Empirical evidence from a wide range of ﬁelds supports the
claim that people have an innate ethical framework, much
as we have an innate predisposition for language. Mother
Nature may encode ethical content on our ethical frame-
work, predisposing us toward certain moral choices. The
range, direction, and extent of this predisposition is far from
clear, and I am not arguing that moral sense theory is the
deﬁnitive moral theory. Nonetheless, the analysis presented
here does matter since arguments derived from utilitari-
anism and modern economics suggest humans adopt a
calculative prompting of self-interest. Kantian approaches
further suggest a role for obeying categorical rules. Both
moral sense theory and my own empirical work on moral
choice draw attention to an alternative to these two
important ethical theories.

Empirically grounded theories provide scientiﬁc evi-
dence about how it is humans are prompted to be moral, not
why they should be moral. These are large and important
questions, and ethicists should be addressing them using all
the evidence of science at
their disposal. By drawing
attention to the possible sources of moral intuitions and
innate drives to act morally and thinking about the theo-
retical implications of works related to moral sense theory,
the intellectual payoff is clearly evident.

ENDNOTES
1. Vilfredo Pareto (1848e1923) was an Italian economist, en-
gineer, philosopher, and sociologist. Best known for intro-
ducing the concept of Pareto efﬁciency, Pareto helped
developed the ﬁeld of microeconomics by making important
contributions to the study of income distribution and the
analysis of how individuals make choices. I do not remember
where I heard this story but believe it may have been Robert
Fogel who told it to me.

2. Parts of this chapter appeared in Ethics in an Age of Terror
and Genocide (Monroe, 2012). I am grateful to Princeton
University Press for their permission to reprint this argument
here.

3. I am using culture, society, time, etc., interchangeably. A full
discussion of the differences lies beyond the space constraints
of one chapter and is not necessary for the purposes of our
discussion of the particular topic of this volume.

4. I use the terms “ethics” and “morality” interchangeably, both
because this is the common practice in everyday language and
because there is no one commonly accepted distinction among
the scientists working in the diverse ﬁelds we have discussed
here. Nonetheless, there are basic, albeit subtle, differences
that moral philosophers or ethicists would recognize. In gen-
eral, morals refer to personal character, while ethics tends to
refer to a social system in which those personal morals are
applied. This means “ethics” tends to point to standards or
codes of behavior expected by the group to which individuals
belong. Further discussion of the myriad other intricate sub-
tleties lies beyond the scope of this chapter.

5. Other theoristsdfrom Plato to Arendtdoften allude to ele-
ments of moral sense theory. The description just presented
focuses on theorists who explicitly concentrated on the theory
and identiﬁed themselves as moral sense theorists. Late
Enlightenment thinkers found much to criticize in moral sense
theory. These critiques cluster in four areas.
(1) Feelings and a moral imperative. Critics argued that there
is more to morality than feeling and that a feeling, as such,
cannot create a moral imperative to action. They argued,
further, that the mark of moral responsibility is the actor’s
freedom to reach a moral judgment and to choose a moral
course of action. Given this, they ﬁnd moral sense theory
reduces the human being to an instrument of his own
dispositions if the moral dimensions of life arise by sen-
timents, and if “right” and “wrong” are only the conse-
quences of a kind of emotional reﬂex over which the
moral agent has little control.

An Innate Moral Sense? Chapter | 45 767

(2) Reason versus emotions. Closely related to this critique is
Kant’s (1797/1991) argument that if an action is impelled
by any desires emanating from the psychological or bio-
logical facts of life, then it is determined by these factors
and cannot be considered moral at all. Hence, as rational
beingsdthis criticism continuesdwe occupy the “intel-
ligible” realm, and actions are determined in this realm not
by causes but by reasons. Actions are morally right to the
extent that they instantiate a moral maxim.

(3) Sentiment versus reasoned judgment of worthiness of the
sentiment. Critics who grant that the moral side of life
does include emotionsdsuch as anger and lovedraise a
further question: Does moral action have to do just with
the emotions themselves? Is not the object to which we
feel emotionally disposed also relevant? In other words,
should not the critical issue be more than just the senti-
ments of approval or approbation but also the judgment of
what and who deserves such attitudes and feelings? This
view also argues that such judgment comes from delib-
erative processes and, therefore, the moral life cannot be
separated from reason.

(4) Resolving difference in innate moral senses. Finally,
the difﬁculties in resolving different
critics ask about
moral senses. If morality is determined by sentiment and
feelings, and does not reﬂect any objective state in the
world, what happens when these feelings vary from per-
son to person? How are these disputes resolved? By
reason? Force? Convention? By what is evolutionarily
adaptive? If the moral sense is a feeling common to all,
then these moral sentiments should retain a kind of ob-
jectivity. Even if they do not reﬂect anything in the uni-
verse apart from human feelings, our moral judgments
may be true or false, depending on whether they capture
the universal human moral sentiment. But, if feelings vary
from one individual to the next, moral judgments become
entirely subjective, leaving no acceptable way to adjudi-
cate competing moral claims. Alternative choices and
preferences may be irreconcilable.

How does moral sense theory propose to resolve such
disagreements?

6. Porter (2001).
7. Myers (1985).
8. This school included Francis Hutcheson, Anthony Ashley
Cooper (aka the third Earl of Shaftesbury), Adam Smith,
Bishop Butler, and David Hume as its best known advocates.
While these men did not always agree on fundamental prin-
ciples, they nonetheless shared a common outlook that dis-
tinguishes them from other ethicists.

9. Shaftesbury (1699/1977).
10. Hutcheson’s ethical theory is expressed in three works: In-
quiry into the Original of Our Ideas of Beauty and Virtue
(1725/1971), An Essay on the Nature and Conduct of the
Passions and Affections, With Illustrations upon the Moral
Sense (1728/1969), and System of Moral Philosophy (1755/
1968). First written in 1738, this book was expanded and
revised throughout Hutcheson’s life and published after his
death. It contains the fullest expression of Hutcheson’s phi-
losophy, ranging from discussions of our human nature,

768 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

duties to God and to each other, the rights and duties of
parents, civil liberty, rights and contracts, and laws of peace
and war. It contains an argument against slavery that was
inﬂuential in providing academic legitimacy to the anti-slave
movement. Reprinted in colonial Philadelphia, it supposedly
inﬂuenced authors of the US Constitution.

11. Smith (1759).
12. Smith maintains the basis of morality in the sentiment but
moves toward the device of an impartial spectator. He thus
shifts from reliance on an innate moral sense and is not
considered a moral sense theorist. Other, more minor moral
sense theorists, however, such as Joseph Butler, emphasized
harmony between morality and enlightened self-interest,
though Butler claims that happiness is a by-product of the
satisfaction of desires for things, not
the desire for
happiness in and of itself. Such direct and simple egoism was
a self-defeating strategy for Butler, who argued that egoists
would do better for themselves if they adopt immediate goals
other than their own interests and then live their everyday life
in accord with these more immediate goals.

just

13. Hume (1777/1978, 1999).
14. Piaget (1932), Kohlberg (1981, 1984).
15. DeWaal (1986, 2001), Goodall (1986, 1990).
16. See Monroe et al. (2009) for a review.
17. Hume’s emphasis on the consequence of an act as the test of
morality, however, was accepted by many theorists. Hence
the split between deontologists and consequentialists.

18. Marx and Engels (2004).
19. Wittgenstein (1963).
20. Rawls (1971).
21. See Geertz (2001) on the debate over observer contamina-
tion and fabricated data in anthropology. The 2010 inves-
tigation into the reliability of Marc Hauser’s empirical work
is one illustration of the general criticisms of this work but
should not call into question the reliability of the entire
ﬁeld.

truth. What

is often referred to as “ethical

22. Moral sense theory, as generally construed, assumes it is
grounded in sentiments or emotions. Hence, our basic sense
of what is good or bad is neither inferred from nor based upon
any propositions. Such non-inferential moral knowledge is
based on a priori non-empirical knowledge such as mathe-
matical
intui-
tionism” is distinguished from moral sense theory and is said
to model the acquisition of such non-inferential knowledge
about right and wrong on empirical grounds, in the manner
that we acquire knowledge of the color of objects. Since our
interest here is not in constructing an extended discussion of
the concept of morality, we deﬁne it simply as behavior
designed to further the well-being of others. See Monroe
(2004) for fuller discussion.

23. Piaget (1932).
24. Kagan (1981).
25. Kohlberg (1976).
26. Gilligan (1982).
27. See Monroe (1996) for a discussion of such work.
28. Kagan (1981, 1989), Kagan et al. (1979), Kagan and Lamb

(1987).

29. While Kagan ﬁnds no English word for this concept and re-
fers to it as virtue, his elaboration on this consonance appears
to correspond closely to what Freud called the super-ego.

30. Research dating from the 1950s found that mice that had stimulus
applied to the pleasure centers of their brains would ignore food
in preference for behavior that triggered such stimuli. See Inside
the Animal Mind for a fascinating, visual overview of these ex-
periments, which includes excerpts from experiments on many
kinds of animals, not just laboratory mice.

31. This resembles Smith’s concept of empathy in many regards.
32. Malcolm Gladwell, Books, “Baby Steps,” The New Yorker,

January 10, 2000, p. 80.

33. The entire discussion is directed at what might be considered

the normal pattern and ignores pathology or extremes.

34. Kagan (1998, p. 175).
35. “What is biologically special about our species is a constant
attention to what is good and beautiful and a dislike of all
that
is bad and ugly. These biologically prepared biases
render the human experience incommensurable with that of
any other species” (Kagan, 1998, p. 191). Kagan does not
discuss the link between moral superiority of humans and
keeping slaves. “The biological imperative for all animals is
to avoid hunger and harm and to reproduce, and adult
chimps spend much of each day doing just that. But humans
in ancient societies established cities, wrote laws forbidding
certain behaviors, built ships, wore ﬁnery, used slaves,
attended plays, and, in Greece, admired the Parthenon.”

36. Darwin (1889).
37. Wilson’s APSA Presidential address and his subsequent book
were an exception. Wilson (1993, p. 13) asked whether
“people everywhere have a natural moral sense that is not
entirely the product of utility or convention.” Wilson deﬁned
moral sense as “a directly felt impression of some standards
by which we ought to judge voluntary action. The standards
are usually general and imprecise. Hence, when I say that
people have a moral sense, I do not wish to be understood as
saying that they have an intuitive knowledge of moral rules.
Moral rules are often disputed and usually in conﬂict; but the
process by which people resolve those disputes or settle those
conﬂicts leads them back to sentiments that seem to them to
have a worth that is intuitively obvious” (1993, p. 13). Un-
fortunately, Wilson’s own demonstration of a moral sense left
much to be desired. We need greater speciﬁcity and testable
ideas for political scientists to reexamine moral sense theory
as a plausible account of moral behavior.

38. Dawkins (1976).
39. DeWaal (1986), Goodall (1986).
40. Hauser (2006).
41. Rawls (1971).
42. Crawford (1937), DeWaal (1982).
43. Bonnie and DeWaal (2004).
44. In one experiment, for example, a monkey called Sammy was
in such a hurry to get her food reward that she released the
tray before her coworker (Bias) got her reward. When Bias
realized that her tray had bounced out beyond her reach, she
screamed. Sammy then approached her own pull bar and
released it so Bias could get Bias’s cup of food. Sammy did so
despite the fact
that her own food cup was now empty
(DeWaal, 1986).

45. Brosnan and DeWaal (2003).
46. See Animal Spirits by Akerloff and Schiller (2009) as one

illustration of this work.

47. Clark and Grote 2003, Smaniotto (2004), Brosnan et al.

(2005).

48. Range et al. (2009).
49. See DeWaal (2001) for arguments on animal culture and

1982, 1996 on animal emotions.

50. DeWaal’s (2001) most recent work focuses more on the
ability of animals to learn behavior, much as humans do, but
since that is not directly relevant to my argument here, I do
not pursue the line of inquiry it suggests about the possibil-
ities of shaping the moral sense.

51. Interestingly, Kagan also notes this phenomenon in very

young children (Kagan, 1984).

52. DeWaal notes the example of two chimpanzees who did not
come when they were called by their keepers at feeding time.
Because these two stayed out late, the other members of the
group were not fed at the normal feeding time, and the entire
group remained hungry. The rest of the group retaliated, and
beat the two miscreants. The next night, these two were the
ﬁrst to come in at feeding time, and they never again dallied
when called for food (1996, p. 89).

53. See Goodall (1986, 1990), Sapolsky (2002).
54. DeWaal, himself, raises a further possibility by suggesting
morality ought to be universal and holistic. Other primatol-
ogists do not go this far in their argument, however, and I am
not making such a claim here, even though such an argument
could plausibly be made (see DeWaal et al., 2009).

55. Gintis (2003).
56. Axelrod (1984).
57. Trivers (1971).
58. Such results corroborate “public goods” experiments such as

that of Fehr and Gachter (2002).

59. See work by Bruno Frey and Alois Stutzer (2001) entering
happiness into the economic calculus or Amatrya Sen’s cre-
ative work on introducing the concept of capabilities into our
estimates of a nation’s wealth.

60. See Chomsky (1965) for the distinction between competence

and behavior.

61. Ironically,

the main proponent of

this approachdMarc
Hauserdrefers neither to the original work on an innate
moral sense nor to Kagan’s work.

62. Hauser (2006), Young et al. (2007).
63. Hauser (2006).
64. Hauser focuses on traditional perspectives of morality as they
confront archetypal moral dilemmas. He then outlines three
main moral philosophical approaches: the Kantian, Humean,
and Rawlsian perspectives. (Hauser ignores the extent
to
which Rawls’s work is based on Kant’s.) He ﬁnds strong
forms of Kantian and Humean moral philosophy unable to
account for the diverse behavior of those entangled in moral
quandaries.

65. Damasio (1994, 1999), Kahneman and Tversky (2000).
66. “Reasoning and emotion play some role in our moral
behavior, but neither can do complete justice to the process
leading up to moral judgment.” Hauser (2006, p. 11).

67. Hauser blends evolution and moral psychology, classifying
Piaget and Kohlberg as Kantian and arguing (1) that neither
psychologist offers a convincing account of how children or
adults move from one stage to the next and (2) that both
psychologists conﬂate correlation with causation. Thus, while
Hauser ﬁnds their stage theories of moral development

An Innate Moral Sense? Chapter | 45 769

interesting, he ﬁnds both theorists offer a map rather than a
progression of moral development.

68. Hauser seems to favor three models of the Rawlsian creature:
weak, temperate, and staunch. He considers these as pheno-
typic expressions of a genetic potential set in different con-
texts. A weak Rawlsian “as a species, distinct from all others
. has the capacity to acquire morally relevant norms, but
nature hasn’t provided any of the relevant details” (2006, p.
198). A temperate Rawlsian is “equipped with a suite of
principles and parameters for building moral systems. These
principles lack speciﬁc content, but operate over the causes
and consequences of action” (2006, p.198). Finally,
the
staunch person “is equipped with speciﬁc moral principles
about helping and harming, genetically built into the brain
and unalterable by culture” (2006, p. 199).

69. See Monroe (2012) for full citations of this work.
70. Haidt and Bjorklund (2008, p. 185)

REFERENCES

Ackerloff, G., Schiller, R.J., 2009. Animal Spirits: How Human Psy-
chology Drives the Economy, and Why It Matters for Global Capi-
talism. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Axelrod, R., 1984. The Evolution of Cooperation. Basic Books, NY.
Bonnie, K.E., DeWaal, F., 2004. Primate social responsibility and the
origin of gratitude. In: Emmons, R.A., McCullough, M.E. (Eds.), The
Psychology of Gratitude. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
pp. 213e229.

Bowles, S., Gintis, H., 2002. Prosocial Emotions. Santa Fe Institute

Working Paper #02-02-028.

Bronson, S.E., DeWaal, F., 2003. A proximate perspective on reciprocal

altruism. Human Nature 13, 129e152.

Bronson, S.E., Schiff, H., DeWaal, F., 2005. Tolerance for inequity in-
creases with social closeness in chimpanzees. Proceedings of the
Royal Society B 272, 252e258.

Chomsky, N., 1965. Syntactic Structures. Mouton, The Hague.
Clark, M.S., Grote, N.K., 2003. Close relationships. In: Milton, T.,
Lerner, M.J. (Eds.), Handbook of Psychology: Personality and Social
Psychology. Wiley, NY, pp. 446e461.

Crawford, M., 1937. The cooperative solving of problems by young

chimpanzees. Comparative Psychology Monographs 14, 1e85.

Damasio, A., 1994. Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human

Brain. Putnam, NY.

Damasio, A.M., 1999. The Feeling of What Happens: Body and Emotions

in the Making of Consciousness. Harcourt Brace, New York.

Darwin, C., 1889. The Origin of Species. Appleton, NY.
Dawes, C., Fowler, J., Johynson, T., et al., 2007. Egalitarian motives in

humans. Nature 446, 794e796.

Dawkins, R., 1976. The Selﬁsh Gene. Oxford University Press, NY.
DeWaal, F., 1982. Chimpanzee Politics: Power and Sex among
Apes. Revised edition 1998. Johns Hopkins University Press,
Baltimore.

DeWaal, F., 1986. The integration of dominance and social bonding in

primates. Quarterly Review of Biology 61 (4), 459e479.

DeWaal, F., 2001. The Ape and the Sushi Master. Cultural Reﬂections of a

Primatologist. Basic Books, NY.

DeWaal, F., Macedo, S., Ober, J., 2009. Primates and Philosophers: How

Morality Evolved. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Fehr, E., Gachter, S., 2002. A theory of fairness, competition, and coop-

eration. Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 817e868.

770 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

Frey, B., Stutzer, A., 2001. Happiness and Economics: How the Economy
and Institutions Affect Human Well-being. Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ.

Geertz, C., 2001. “Life among the Anthros.” Book review of Patrick
Tierney’s Darkness in El Dorado: how scientists and journalist
devastated the Amazon. New York Review of Books 48 (2), 18e21.
Gilligan, C., 1982. In a Different Voice: Psychological Theory and
Women’s Development. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Gintis, H., 2003. The Hitchhiker’s guide to altruism: genes, culture and the
internalization of norms. Journal of Theoretical Biology 220 (4),
407e418.

Kohlberg, L., 1981. Essays on Moral Development. Harper and Row, San

Francisco.

Kohlberg, L., 1984. Essays on Moral Development, vol. 2. Harper and

Row, NY.

Locke, J., 2000. John locke: an essay concerning human understanding. In:
Fuller, G., Stecker, R., Wright, J. (Eds.), Routledge Philosopher in
Focus Series. Routledge, London.

Markey, S., September 17, 2003. Monkeys Show Sense of Fairness, Study

says. National Geographic News.

Marx, K., Friedrich, E., 2004. The Communist Manifesto. Barron’s,

Hauppauge, NY.

Goodall, J., 1986. The Chimpanzees of Gombe: Patterns of Behavior.

Monroe, K., 2004. The Hand of Compassion: Portraits of Moral Choice

Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

During the Holocaust. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Goodall, J., 1990. Through a Window: My Thirty Years with the Chim-

panzees of Gombe. Houghton Mifﬂin, Boston.

Haidt, J., Bjorklund, F., 2008. Social intuitionists answer six questions
about moral psychology. The Cognitive Science of Morality. In:
Sinnott-Armstrong, W. (Ed.), Moral Psychology, vol. 2. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, pp. 181e217.

Monroe, K.R., Martin, A., Ghosh, P., 2009. Politics and an innate moral
sense: scientiﬁc evidence for an old theory? Political Research
Quarterly (September) 62, 614e634.

Monroe, K.R., 1996. The Heart of Altruism. Princeton University Press,

Princeton, NJ.

Monroe, K.R., 2012. Ethics in an Age of Terror and Genocide. Princeton

Hauser, M., 2006. Moral Minds: How Nature Designed Our Universal

University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Sense of Right and Wrong. Ecco, NY.

Hume, D., 1777/1978. In: Nidditch, P.H. (Ed.), Enquiries Concerning
Human Understand and Concerning the Principles of Morals. Clar-
endon, Oxford.

Myers, M., 1985. The Soul of Modern Economic Man: Ideas of Self-
Interest, Thomas Hobbes to Adam Smith. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago.

Piaget, J., 1932. The Child’s Conception of Numbers. Routledge and

Hume, D., 1999. An Inquiry into the Original of Our Ideas of Beauty and

Kegan Paul, London.

Virtue. Garland, New York. Published originally in 1725.

Hutcheson, F., 1715/1971. Inquiry into the Original of Our Ideas of Beauty

and Virtue. Garland, New York.

Hutcheson, F., 1728/1969. An Essay on the Nature and Conduct of the
Passions and Affections, With Illustrations Upon the Moral Sense.
Scholars’ Facsimile and Reprints, Gainesville, FL.

Hutcheson, F., 1755/1968. System of Moral Philosophy. A. M. Kelley,

New York.

Kagan, J., Lamb, S. (Eds.), 1987. The Emergence of Morality in Young

Children. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Kagan, J., et al., 1979. A Cross-Cultural Study of Cognitive Development.

University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Kagan, J., 1981. The Second Year: The Emergency of Self-Awareness.

Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Kagan, J., 1984. The Nature of the Child. Basic Books, New York.
Kagan, J., 1989. Unstable Ideas: Temperament, Cognition, and Self.

Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Porter, R., 2001. The Enlightenment. Macmillan, NY.
Range, J., et al., 2009. The absence of reward induces inequality aversion
in dogs. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106 (1),
340e345.

Rawls, J., 1971. Theory of Justice. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Sapolsky, R., 2002. A Primate’s Memoir. Touchstone Books, NY.
Shaftesbury, 3rd Earl of

(Anthony Ashley-Cooper), 1699/1977.

In:
Walford, D. (Ed.), An Inquiry Concerning Virtue, or Merit. 1714
Edition With Toland’s 1699 Edition and Bibliography. Manchester
University Press, Manchester.

Smaniotto, R.C., 2004. You ‘Scratch My Back and I Scratch Yours’
Versus ‘Love thy Neighbour’: Two Proximate Mechanisms of
Reciprocal Altruism. PhD dissertation. University of Groningen.

Smith, A., 1759/1976. The Theory of Moral Sentiments. Introduction by
E.G. West. Liberty Classics, Indianapolis. Originally published in
1759 and 1854.

Trivers, R., 1971. The evolution of reciprocal altruism. Quarterly Review

Kagan, J., 1998. Three Seductive Ideas. Harvard University Press, Cam-

of Biology 46, 35e57.

bridge, MA.

Kahneman, D., Tversky, A., 2000. Choices, Values and Frames. Cam-

Wilson, J.Q., 1993. Moral Sense. Free Press, NY.
Wittgenstein, L., 1963. Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. Routledge and

bridge University Press, NY.

Kegan Paul, London.

Kant,

I., 1797/1991. The Metaphysics of Morals.

Introduction,
Translation, and Notes by Mary Gregor. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.

Kohlberg, L., 1976. Moral stages and moralization: the cognitive devel-
opmental approach. In: Likona, T. (Ed.), Moral Development and
Behavior. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York, pp. 31e53.

Young, L., Cushman, F., Hauser, M., Saxe, R., 2007. The neural basis of
the interaction between theory of mind and moral
judgment. In:
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of America, 104,
pp. 8235e8240.

Chapter 46

What HIV Has Taught About the
Interactions Between Biology, Culture,
and Other Evolving Systems

S. Mallal1,2
1Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, United States; 2Murdoch University, Murdoch, Western Australia

THE INTERACTION OF EVOLUTIONARY
SYSTEMS
Although our ﬁrst understanding of the evolutionary pro-
cess came from biology, we can deﬁne evolution more
broadly as a gradual process in which something changes
into a different and usually more complex or better form. A
key to understanding evolutionary systems is the concept of
an emergent property as a property of a collection or
complex system not present in its component parts. As
such, it could not have been predicted ahead of time. A
simple example is saltiness, an emergent property of salt,
present in neither sodium nor chloride on their own. The
ﬁeld of complexity science categorizes emergent properties
into various types (Fromm, 2005) and recognizes such
evolutionary processes work at many levels from cosmo-
logical, chemical, biological, cultural/political, commercial,
scientiﬁc/technical/industrial,
amongst
others (Fig. 46.1).

regulatory

and

These forms of evolution operate over very differing
time frames, and for this reason the emergent properties of
older and slower forms of evolution are more likely to exert
constraints and selective pressures on more recent or
rapidly changing systems than the other way around. This
hierarchy in no way implies the greater importance of one
ﬁeld over another but rather may provide guidance of the
likely dominant directionality of the inﬂuences.

Life on earth is estimated to have begun about 3.5 billion
years ago, marking the beginning of biologic evolution.
A critical threshold was the emergence of language and col-
lective learning that has only developed in man in the
last 250,000 years. This has underpinned downstream

evolutionary processes that have further accelerated the
appearance of additional emergent properties.

Biological evolution has provided solutions to improve
survival and reproductive success, and this has imbued us
with strong instincts to nurture our families and insiders and
defend against external threats. These instincts were selected
for by threats that could be defended, or opportunities that
could be exploited,
in our environment when we were
hunter-gatherers. As efﬁcient as these evolutionary processes
are at providing solutions to modiﬁable threats or exploitable

Evolutionary Processes 
EEvolutionary Processees

 
)
o
g
a

 

s
r
a
e
Y

(
 

e
m
T

i

300 

10 K 

250 K 

3.5 B 

12+ B 

13+ B 

Regulatory* 

Scientific/Industrial* 

Commercial* 

Cultural/Political* 

Biological 
Chemical 

Cosmological 

*Dependent on 
emergence of 
language and 
collective 
learning in man  

 
s
e
i
t
r
e
p
o
r
P

 
t
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

 
 

y
t
i

l

x
e
p
m
o
C

FIGURE 46.1 The pyramid of evolutionary processes: The universe has
become increasing complex since its formation over 13 billion years ago.
Out of this complexity, new properties have emerged such as language and
collective learning in man over the last 250,000 years. This has critically
underpinned cultural and other evolutionary processes that shape our world
today.

On Human Nature. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420190-3.00046-6
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

771

772 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

opportunities in our environment,
they do so without
simultaneously providing a rationale for why the solution
worked. In other words, the human brain is highly adapted,
individually and collectively,
to empirically solve such
problems in our environment, but we are prone to assign an
erroneous post-hoc explanation for our success. This may
cause a problem at a later time if we act on such assump-
tions. In contrast, the more painstaking, strictly logical, and
deterministic scientiﬁc process, a more recent emergent
system in evolutionary terms, provides understanding of
how things work to facilitate design of solutions.

Language, collective learning, agriculture, industrializa-
tion, and globalization have also emerged as solutions to
needs of our species, mitigating many of the modiﬁable
threats of our hunter-gatherer past that shaped our instincts.
These emergent properties have underpinned our accelerating
collective progress and rendered some of our more primitive
instincts, such as excessive food-seeking and other addictive
behaviors, aggression, paranoia, anxiety, and similar traits
unnecessary or maladaptive for most aspects of everyday life
today (Fig. 46.2). Commercial and political evolutionary
processes can very effectively ﬁnd and exploit such instincts
in an evolutionary arm race for proﬁt as exempliﬁed by the
excesses evident in many of the most successful contempo-
rary foods, computer games, social media, sports, entertain-
ment, literature, media, and political strategies.

We have an instinct to move to safe, resource rich set-
tings. Remarkably we live in one of the ﬁrst generations in
which the mass voluntary movement of people has become
possible. We have therefore witnessed the establishment
of remarkable genetic, ethnic and culture heterogeneity in
the developed world and a major translocation of nearly
2 billion people from rural into urban centers in emerging
nations. In our time, the basic needs of more people have

been met, trade and globalization has increased, and infor-
mation has come to ﬂow more freely. Altruistic cultural
mores have emerged as we have enjoyed an unprecedented
period of safety, afﬂuence, and relative peace. Unfortunately,
we may not be free to enjoy this as the products of intense
cultural and commercial evolution exploit more primitive
instincts of old to recreate an environment that often feels as
threatening as that of our hunter-gatherer past.

So, what can HIV teach about the interacting evolu-
tionary systems that shape our world? Speciﬁcally, why did
the HIV pandemic emerge when and where it did, and what
can be learned from our response to HIV that might guide
our response to other global challenges.

Why Did the HIV Pandemic Emerge When
and Where It Did?
The chimp virus Simian Immunodeﬁciency Virus (SIVcpz)
was ﬁrst transmitted to human hunters or bush meat ven-
dors, and mutated into HIV, in Cameroon at the beginning
of the last century. Other species of monkey in East Africa
have been found to have their own distinct stains of SIV but
not get sick or die. Evolving to this mutual accommodation
beneﬁtted both the virus and host and gave these monkeys
infectious disease missiles with the potential to annihilate a
closely related species competing for local resources. It is
of no surprise then that HIV, the greatest emerging infec-
tious disease of our time, came from the monkey species
most similar to us. We now know that chimps themselves
hunted and ate these two smaller species of ape, red-capped
mangabeys and greater spot-nosed monkeys, in west central
Africa, and the SIVs from those two viruses recombined to
create the hybrid virus SIVcpz that could infect their chimp
predators and later man (Bailes et al., 2003).

What Can Be Predicted

Human Behavior

– Instincts 

Selected by modifiable risks from past

What Cannot
New emergent properties 

– History no longer a guide
– Shape future evolution

Migration to resource rich areas
Huddle
Attend to danger
Trust empiricism 
Needs / Addictions
Conflict / Shifting Alliances
Altruism

– Motivators / Constraints
– Power of diversity / Core values

Food security
Globalization

-Commerce
-Free flow of information
-Diffusion of power

– Cultural shifts
– Political shifts
– Scientific and other discoveries

Pathogen Behavior

– Existing 

Resistance, Virulence Factors

– Newly Emerging

FIGURE 46.2 Predicting the Future: Human and Pathogen Behavior that may been predictable compared to emergent properties that could not have
been predicted before they occurred.

Interactions Between Biology, Culture, and Other Evolving Systems Chapter | 46 773

Driven by the changes associated with colonialism, HIV
is believed to have spread from the Cameroon from the 1920s
by road, rail, and river links to the rapidly growing population
of Kinshasa in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC)
and beyond (Faria et al., 2014). Demographic, cultural, and
economic changes also drove increased sexual promiscuity
and prostitution with an associated increase in the prevalence
of sexually transmitted diseases, which are known to sub-
stantially increase the risk of transmission of HIV. Haitian
professionals who went to the DRC in the 1960s probably
carried the virus back to Haiti in 1964 before a single
migration of HIV to the United States is believed to have
occurred around 1969 (Gilbert et al., 2007). The rare cancer
Kaposi’s Sarcoma and infection Pneumocystis jiroveci
pneumonia were ﬁrst recognized in homosexual men with
low CD4
T cell counts in New York and California in 1981
(Gottlieb, 1981). These and other unusual opportunistic in-
fections and malignancies were used to deﬁne the Acquired
Immunodeﬁciency Disease Syndrome (AIDS) in 1982, and
before long,
the AIDS epidemic was
spreading among hemophiliacs and others receiving blood
products, intravenous drug addicts, and the infants of those
with the syndrome.

it was apparent

þ

There was much initial speculation as to the cause of
AIDS until HIV was identiﬁed in 1983 (Gallo et al., 1983;
Barré-Sinoussi et al., 1983). Why did this take so long?
First, there is a latency period of several years between
silent infection with HIV and the development of symp-
tomatic AIDS. Second, unlike other viral epidemics such as
Ebola, inﬂuenza, or SARS, standard laboratory tools of the
time could not detect
the virus. HIV antibody testing
became available in 1984 allowing the identiﬁcation of
HIV-infected individuals before they developed AIDS.

MHC Coevolution With Herpes and Other
Viruses
The herpes viruses are large DNA viruses that share more
than 100 million years of coevolution with current hosts and
have hitched their survival to the particular species they
infect (McGeoch et al., 2006). The eight human herpes
viruses (Herpes Simplex-1 and -2, varicella zoster, Epsteine
Barr, cytomegalovirus, and human herpes virus-6, -7, and -8)
have different primary target cells and sites of latency and are
very efﬁcient at establishing chronic infection (Virgin,
2009). Herpes and other DNA viruses coadapted with their
vertebrate host are known to possess genes encoding mole-
cules that show evidence of homology to molecules of their
hosts presumably as a result of horizontal gene transfer
(Barry and McFadden, 1997; Lalani and McFadden, 1999).
For most of our evolution, these lifelong infections were
acquired early in life, and it has been proposed they provide
broadly protective immunodominant epitopes and a form of
natural immunization (Chiu et al., 2014). For example, the

pp65 protein of rhesus cytomegalovirus (CMV) generates a
T cell response that vigorously restricts viral replication dur-
ing primary infection but has little impact on viral shedding.
This appears to be an example of a viral protein that has
evolved to beneﬁt a chronic persistent virus by facilitating an
acute immune response to avoid overwhelming the host in
primary infection, while providing the host long-term beneﬁt
at an individual and population level (Malouli, 2014). This
symbiotic coevolution has been disrupted since industriali-
zation as infections such as EbsteineBarr virus (EBV) are
acquired later in life in the developed world, and it has been
proposed that this is responsible for the increasing incidence
of allergy and autoimmune conditions such as multiple
sclerosis (Shapira et al., 2010).

The extraordinary polymorphism of major histocom-
patibility complex (MHC) Class I and II alleles provides
protection to infectious diseases at a population level, but
the individual only inherits a very limited MHC repertoire.
So although every individual in the population inherits the
same potential
to generate the enormous number of
different T cell receptors, the functional T cell repertoire is
limited to those cells with T-cell receptors (TCRs) that bind
the self HLA-peptide complexes present in the individual
with moderate but not high afﬁnity (Bontrop et al., 1995).
The individual’s human leukocyte antigen (HLA) Class II
restricted T cell help, in turn, shape the B-cell repertoire
and HLA Class I restricted T cell cytotoxicity.

The key event resulting in the evolution of the molec-
ular components of antibody, TCR, and MHC molecules is
believed to have occurred at the base of the jawed verte-
brate evolution about 500 million years ago (Flajnik and
Kasahara, 2010; Kaufman, 2010). Binding of functionally
important and conserved epitopes in vertebrate proteins and
chronic persistent infections such as herpes viruses has
therefore shaped MHC and TcR coevolution. This phy-
logeny appears to be recapitulated in T cell ontogeny,
where TCRs are ﬁrst positively selected according to their
capacity to recognize the functionally important and
conserved host peptide bound by the particular HLA alleles
inherited by the individual, and then further activated by
conserved but subtly different epitopes from herpes viruses
that bind to those same HLA alleles. Some TCR clonotypes
are known to be produced more efﬁciently during V(D)J
recombination (Venturi, 2006). This convergent TCR
recombination is believed to contribute to the efﬁcient
production of TCR receptors that recognize immunodo-
minant herpes epitopes in CMV and EBV. The HLA
molecules are also tuned to efﬁciently recognize evolu-
tionarily conserved and functionally important epitopes.
Speciﬁcally,
the HLA-A alleles and the HLA- B57/58
group target conserved elements of human herpes viruses
and the human proteome most efﬁciently, while the HLA-B
alleles target conserved elements of most RNA viruses,
such as HIV, well (Hertz et al., 2011).

774 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

Human herpes virus infections facilitate the transmission
of HIV and its replication in activated CD4 T cells. HIV
infection, in turn, depletes CD4 T cells over time, which
ultimately results in severe herpes simplex virus (HSV),
CMV, EBV, and Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus
(or human herpes virus-8)-related AIDS diseases. Phyloge-
netic modelling that allows the strength of natural selection
to vary across the viral phylogeny and gene alignment
suggests that, after HSV-1 and chimp herpes virus (ChHV)
co-diverged around 6 million years ago, ChHV was trans-
mitted back to an ancestor of humans around 1.6 million
years ago (Wertheim, 2014). Many HLA-restricted epitopes
are shared between HSV-1, HSV-2, and ChHV, and many
MHC alleles have been conserved between chimp and man.
Similarly, human and chimp CMV are relatively conserved.
For example, the HLA-DR7 restricted CMV epitope DYS-
NTHSTRYV (DYS) is completely conserved in humans and
þ
chimps, and human DYS-speciﬁc CD4
T cells not only
recognize, and make an inﬂated response to, the epitope
þ
when presented by HLA-DR7
human cells but also
þ
recognize peptide-sensitized Patr-DR7
chimpanzee LCL
(Elkington et al., 2004). The Patr-DR7 b chain differs from
HLA-DR7 at only three amino acid residues. SIV and HIV
productively infect and replicate in activate CD4 T cells, and
infected cells are killed by cytotoxic T cells, and therefore
SIVs have been adapting to the common prevalent MHC-
restricted immune responses for at least 32,000 years. We
can therefore surmise that when SIVcpz was transmitted to
man, it found a favorable landscape of immunogenetics,
coinfections, and prevalent
and
þ
CD8
T cell responses in the rapidly growing population in
Kinshasa and beyond.

þ
immunodominant CD4

The principle of old and slow evolutionary processes
setting the context of more recent and rapidly adaptable
systems is well illustrated by HIV. The gradual evolution of
the MHC over about 500 million years in vertebrates (Flajnik
and Kasahara, 2010; Kaufman, 2010) and SIV over at least
32,000 years (Worobey et al., 2010) contrasts with HLA-
restricted cytotoxic T cell selection of HIV escape muta-
tions that can be observed within days of acute HIV infection
(Price et al., 1997) and HIV adaptation to HLA-restricted
immune responses at a population level (Moore et al.,
2002; Kawashima et al., 2009) and decreased virulence
(Payne et al., 2014) that becomes apparent within a few years.
On the other hand, despite the enormity of the HIV pandemic
over the last 35 years, we are yet to detect an effect of HIV on
the distribution of HLA alleles in any population.

ANTIRETROVIRAL THERAPY IN
TREATMENT AND PREVENTION
Azidothymidine (AZT or zidovudine), a nucleoside analog
reverse transcriptase inhibitor that had been originally been
developed as a potential anti-cancer drug, was licensed for

the treatment of HIV in 1987. This approval occurred only
25 months after the drug was shown to be active against the
virus in the laboratory, and it represents an unprecedented
example of accelerated drug development. However, AZT
rapidly induced resistance mutations in HIV, and the clin-
ical beneﬁts of monotherapy typically disappeared within
6e18 months. It was only with the advent of potent three-
drug combinations in 1996 that durable suppression of HIV
and avoidance of resistance became achievable,
trans-
forming HIV into a chronic manageable disease for those
with access to therapy. Although seemingly self-evident,
convincing evidence that treatment of HIV reduces trans-
mission to others was not available until 2011 (Cohen et al.,
2011), and in September 2015 the World Health Organi-
zation recommended treatment for all as soon after diag-
nosis as possible.

Preexposure prophylaxis with tenofovir-based ART
also has demonstrated efﬁcacy in the prevention of trans-
mission, but availability has been limited in the developing
world to date. Long-acting injectable anti-retrovirals such
as cabotegravir or rilpivirine are being actively investigated
and may ﬁnd a role in the prevention or treatment of HIV in
subjects that cannot access or adhere to contemporary oral
ART regimens.

CULTURAL AND POLITICAL CONTEXT
AND RESPONSE TO HIV
Denial, fear, and sometimes paranoia had a negative inﬂu-
ence on the ﬁght against AIDS in both the developed and
developing world. There was limited awareness of AIDS in
the early years, and it was 2 years into the epidemic before
the ﬁrst effective public health response was taken in the
United States, exclusion of at risk individuals from donating
blood. In 1985, Rock Hudson announced he had AIDS, and
Elizabeth Taylor became the ﬁrst celebrity to raise awareness
of AIDS and funds for research. Despite knowing that HIV
cannot be casually transmitted, Ryan White was barred from
attending school in Indiana. In 1987,
the United States
banned HIV-positive travelers from entering the country. In
that same year, activist groups mobilized and demanded
more research and accelerated approval of drugs. 1990 was
the year of the ﬁrst gulf war, led by President George Bush
senior against the regime of Saddam Hussein. The following
year, Magic Johnson announced that he had HIV, doing
much to increase understanding and acceptance of HIV. By
1992, HIV/AIDS was openly discussed for the ﬁrst time at
the US presidential conventions; Elizabeth Glaser addressed
the Democratic and Mary Fisher the Republican convention.
In 1994, Tom Hanks won the best actor Oscar for his role
in Philadelphia, playing a lawyer ﬁred because he was
HIV-positive.

Denial also had signiﬁcant negative impact on public
health in many parts of the developing world. One of the

Interactions Between Biology, Culture, and Other Evolving Systems Chapter | 46 775

most tragic and extreme forms of denial was HIV/AIDS
denialism as adopted by Thabo Mbeki during his presi-
dency of South Africa between 1999 and 2008. His
administration supported arguments that HIV was not the
cause of AIDS and denied antiviral treatment to AIDS
patients. His health minister advocated the use of unproven
herbal remedies instead. It has been estimated these policies
were to blame for more than 330,000 preventable deaths
(Chigwedere et al., 2008). It has been proposed that the
same tenacious antiestablishment attributes that drove
Mbeki to ﬁght Apartheid also contributed to his opposition
to mainstream scientiﬁc evidence on HIV and ART
(Gellman, 2000).

In 2003, President George W Bush led the second gulf
war against the regime of Saddam Hussein. In the same
year, he announced the President’s Emergency Plan For
AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) to provide access to prevention,
care, and treatment programs in many of the developing
countries in most need. In 2009, President Obama ordered
30,000 more troops to Afghanistan. In the same year, his
administration authorized the Global Health Initiative with
PEPFAR as a central component. As of September 2015,
the program continues to support provision of ART to
9.5 million people, 8.9 million male circumcisions, pre-
vention of mother to child transmission, training of health-
care workers, and support of orphans and vulnerable
children.

SIZE OF THE HIV EPIDEMIC
In 2014, an estimated 36.9 million people were living with
HIV, giving a global prevalence of 0.8%. By then,
approximately 78 million people had been infected with
HIV, and about 39 million people had died since the
beginning of the epidemic.

CURRENT TARGETS AND PRIORITIES TO
CONTROL THE HIV EPIDEMIC
UN AIDS has set the ambitious target that by 2020, 90% of
all people living with HIV will know their HIV status, 90%
of all people with diagnosed HIV infection will receive
sustained ART, and 90% of all people receiving ART will
have viral suppression. Meanwhile, considerable research
efforts continue to develop an effective preventative HIV
vaccine and to ﬁnd a functional cure for HIV that would
allow patients to stop their HIV medications. It is hoped
that it is not too long before these interventions become part
of
the multipronged prevention armamentarium that
currently includes risk reduction measures, male circum-
cision, use of HIV medications to prevent infection, and
treatment of those already infected to stop others becoming
infected.

WHAT CAN BE LEARNED FROM OUR
RESPONSE TO HIV?
HIV,
like many infectious diseases, primarily afﬂicts
disenfranchised out-groups, and HIV/AIDS has been, and
often still is, associated with considerable fear and stigma.
The early individual and collective response was often
dominated by denial and avoidance, which sometimes
progressed to fear, discrimination, and inappropriate ac-
tions, such as banning Ryan White from school or trav-
elers
entering the United States. However, once
individuals became personally touched by the suffering of
those they knew, as occurred for Elizabeth Taylor when
she saw her
friend Rock Hudson dying of AIDS,
compassion and altruism triumphed. Although commu-
nity response from the ground up has always been critical,
celebrities, the media, and the arts have also lead the
cultural and political evolution necessary for broader
mobilization of
support and resources. History has
repeatedly shown that nations are far better prepared and
resourced for war than they are to ﬁght infectious diseases
pandemics. It will ever be thus, as individual and col-
lective behavioral adaptations leading to success in
physical conﬂict have long been selected for, while few
behavioral solutions could be selected to prevent death
from infectious disease in our hunter-gather past.

Our positive cultural and political

response also
underpinned the subsequent rapid scientiﬁc and medical
progress (Fig. 46.1). The HIV epidemic has brought
together an army of creative and courageous individuals
driven by the needs of their time from a broad range of
backgrounds. This has resulted in unprecedented collab-
orative gain as patient and community groups, clinicians,
health care systems, public health ofﬁcials, government,
industry, regulators, the media, philanthropists, and many
others have worked together. We have seen the same type
of broad and compassionate and effective response to the
recent Ebola crisis that infects monkeys and other animals
in the same belt of Africa from which HIV originated.
Those countries and groups that were able to respond
rapidly with altruism and compassion have been rewarded
with a much lower burden of disease and cost to their
economies even though this was not the motivator at the
time. HIV and other infectious disease have taught us
time and again, “Just trust your better instincts and do the
right thing without delay.”

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The early history of HIV in the United States was provided by Dr.
Michael Gottlieb who recognized the ﬁrst AIDS cases in the United
States in Los Angeles in 1981. This work was supported in part by
the NIH-funded Tennessee Center
for AIDS Research (P30
AI110527).

776 PART | III Ethics, Politics and Religious Considerations

REFERENCES

Bailes, E., Gao, F., Bibollet-Ruche, F., et al., 2003. Hybrid origin of SIV in

chimpanzees. Science 300 (5626), 1713.

Barré-Sinoussi, F., Chermann, J.C., Rey, F., et al., 1983. Isolation of a T-
lymphotropic retrovirus from a patient at risk for acquired immune
deﬁciency syndrome (AIDS). Science 220 (4599), 868e871.

Barry, M., McFadden, G., 1997. Virus encoded cytokines and cytokine

receptors. Parasitology 115 (Suppl.), S89eS110.

Bontrop, R.E., Otting, N., Slierendregt, B.L., et al., 1995. Evolution of
major histocompatibility complex polymorphisms and T-cell receptor
diversity in primates. Immunological Reviews 143, 33e62.

Chigwedere, P., Seage 3rd, G.R., Gruskin, S., et al., 2008. Estimating the
lost beneﬁts of antiretroviral drug use in South Africa. Journal of
Acquired Immune Deﬁciency Syndromes 49 (4), 410e415.

Chiu, C., McCausland, M., Sidney, J., et al., 2014. Broadly reactive human
CD8 T cells that recognize an epitope conserved between VZV, HSV
and EBV. PLoS Pathogens 10 (3), e1004008.

Cohen, M.S., Chen, Y.Q., McCauley, M., et al., 2011. Prevention of HIV-
1 infection with early antiretroviral therapy. The New England Journal
of Medicine 365, 493e505.

Elkington, R., Shoukry, N., Walker, S., et al., 2004. Cross-reactive
recognition of human and primate cytomegalovirus sequences by
human CD4 cytotoxic T lymphocytes speciﬁc for glycoprotein B and
H. European Journal of Immunology 34, 3216e3226.

Faria, N.R., Rambaut, A., Suchard, M.A., et al., 2014. The early spread
and epidemic ignition of HIV-1 in human populations. Science 346
(6205), 56e61.

Flajnik, M.F., Kasahara, M., 2010. Origin and evolution of the adaptive
immune system: genetic events and selective pressures. Nature Re-
views Genetics 11 (1), 47e59.

Fromm, J., 2005. Types and Forms of Emergence. University Kassel,

Germany.

Gallo, R.C., Sarin, P.S., Gelmann, E.P., et al., 1983. Isolation of human
leukemia virus in acquired immune deﬁciency syndrome

T-cell
(AIDS). Science 220 (4599), 865e867.

Gellman, B., July 11, 2000. ‘Washington Post’: South African President
Thabo Mbeki Trying to Highlight ‘Grinding Poverty’ in Context of
AIDS Crisis.

Gilbert, M., Thomas, P., Rambaut, A., et al., 2007. The emergence of HIV/
AIDS in the Americas and beyond. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 104 (47),
18566e18570.

Gottlieb, M.S., 1981. Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia and mucosal
candidiasis in previously healthy homosexual men: evidence of a new

acquired cellular immunodeﬁciency. New England Journal of Medi-
cine 305, 1425e1431.

Hertz, T., Nolan, D., James, I., et al., 2011. Mapping the landscape of host-
pathogen coevolution: HLA class I binding and its relationship with
evolutionary conservation in human and viral proteins. Journal of
Virology 85 (3), 1310e1321.

Kawashima, Y., Pfafferott, K., Frater, J., et al., April 2, 2009. Adaptation
of HIV-1 to human leukocyte antigen class I. Nature 458 (7238),
641e645.

Kaufman, J., 2010. The evolution of the adaptive immune system of jawed
vertebrates. In: Kaufmann, S.H.E., Sacks, R.B. (Eds.), Immunology of
Infectious Diseases. American Society for Microbiology Press,
Washington.

Lalani, A.S., McFadden, G., 1999. Evasion and exploitation of chemo-
kines by viruses. Cytokine & Growth Factor Reviews 10, 219e233.
Malouli, D., Hansen, S.G., Nakayasu, E.S., et al., May 2014. Journal of

Clinical Investigation 124 (5), 1928e1944.

McGeoch, D.J., Rixon, F.J., Davison, A.J., 2006. Topics in herpesvirus

genomics and evolution. Virus Research 117 (1), 90e104.

Moore, C.B., John, M., James, I.R., et al., 2002. Evidence of HIV-1
adaptation to HLA-restricted immune responses at a population
level. Science 296 (5572), 1439e1443.

Payne, R., Muenchhoff, M., Mann, J., et al., 2014. Impact of HLA-driven
HIV adaptation on virulence in populations of high HIV seropreva-
lence. PNAS 111 (50), E5393eE5400.

Price, D.A., Goulder, P.J.R., Klenerman, P., et al., 1997. Positive selection
of HIV-1 cytotoxic T lymphocyte escape variants during primar-
y infection. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 94 (5), 1890e1895.

Shapira, Y., Agmon-Levin, N., Shoenfeld, Y., 2010. Deﬁning and
analyzing geoepidemiology and human autoimmunity. Journal of
Autoimmunity 34 (3), J168eJ177.

Venturi, V., Kedzierska, K., Price, D.A., et al., December 5, 2006. Sharing
of T cell receptors in antigen-speciﬁc responses is driven by conver-
gent recombination. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America 103 (49), 18691e18696. Epub 2006
Nov 27.

Virgin, H.W., Wherry, E.J., Ahmed, R., 2009. Redeﬁning chronic viral

infection. Cell 138 (1), 30e50.

Wertheim, J.O., Smith, M.D., Smith, D.M., et al., September 2014.
Evolutionary origins of human herpes Simplex viruses 1 and 2. Mo-
lecular Biology and Evolution 31 (9), 2356e2364.

Worobey, M., Telfer, P., Souquière, S., et al., 2010. Island biogeography

reveals the deep history of SIV. Science 329 (5998), 1487.

Index

‘Note: Page numbers followed by “f” indicate ﬁgures and “t” indicate tables.’

A
ABCA12, 101e102
Abnormality, 451e462, 464. See also

Normality

ABO haplotypes, 184e185, 185f
Acamprosate, 533
Acheulean culture, 613e617, 734e736, 735t

in Asia, 740

Acheulean technique, 736e737
Acromyrmex versicolour (A. versicolour),

391

Adaptation, 591e593, 606

to local pathogenic environments, 185e186

Adaptationist approach, 383
Adaptive archaic introgression (AAI), 94, 96
Adaptive immune response, 215e216
Adaptive immune system, evolution of,

183e184

Adaptive symptoms, iatrogenic disruption of,

721e722

Addiction, 517e545

dissecting, 526e534
medicine and research, milestones in history

of, 520f

psychological processes and constructs

associated to, 523t

reward dysregulation and, 522e524
scientiﬁc deﬁnition of, 521e522, 521t
substrate for neuroadaptations in, 524e525
symptoms of, 518
theories of, 522e524
vulnerability factors, 534e543

biological and developmental factors,

535e537

environmental and social factors,
gene  environment interactions,

539e541

542e543

genetic factors, 541e542
personality traits and psychiatric

disorders, 535e539

Addiction Severity Index (ASI), 537
Addictive drugs

in modern times, 519e521
prehistory and patterns of use, 518e519

Adenoviridae, 213
Admixture, 58e60, 59f, 65e66, 72, 75,

86e89, 92e93

effect on genetic diversity, 77e78

Admixture Graph Analysis, 58e59
Adolescence, and drug addiction, 536e537

Aesthetic appreciation, 612e613, 615
Aesthetics, 612e613

adaptive signiﬁcance of, 601e622
distinguished from ethics, 613
symbolism and, 620e621
Afﬂuent foragers, 299, 316
Africa, spread of agriculture, 317e319, 319f
African late stone age, 745e746
African middle stone age, 744e745
south, protagonists of, 745e746

Africans, dehumanization of, 628e629
Age, ageing

chronic diseases of, Hamiltonian approach

to, 699e700

evolutionary-genomic pharmaceutical

research and development for, 701

maternal, 271, 271t
and somatic evolution, 197e199

A gene for religion, 679
Aggression

coalitional, 241e243
same-sex, 238

Agricultural revolution, 299
Agriculture, 297e324
Americas, 319e321
China, 311e314
Fertile Crescent, 307e311
intraregional and interregional connections,

305e307, 306f

noncenters, spread of agriculture to,

314e319

Africa, 317e319, 319f
Europe, 314e315, 318f
India, 316e317
Japan, 315e316
Korea, 315e316
Mediterranean basin, 314e315
Southeast Asia, 316e317

terminology conundrum, 299e300

Alcohol Composite Index, 537
Alcohol deprivation effect (ADE), 533e534
Alkanes, 338, 338f
Allelic polymorphism, extensive, 214e215
Allometry, 221
Alloparenting, 361
Allopatry, 91
Altamira, 613, 620e621
Altruism, 333, 356f, 385e386, 389, 601,

606e607, 652
biological, 610e612
deﬁned, 358e359
through evolution to today, 360e361

mesolimbic and cortical systems relationship

with, 358

moral, 610e612
reciprocal, 604, 652

Altruistic teaching evolution, gene-culture

models for, 279e294

Alu gene, 6
Alzheimer’s disease (AD), 166, 226e227
Americas, agriculture in, 319e321
Amerindians, dehumanization of, 628e629
Amphipathic biomolecules, 339fe340f
Amyloid precursor protein (APP), 228
Anatomically modern humans (AMHs), 55,

57e58, 60e61

evolution of, 177

Anatomical structures, changes in, 266
Anatomy, 154
Ancestry informative markers (AIMs), 162,

634

versus self-reported ancestry, 93e94

Ancient DNA, 57

sequencing of, 94
studies, 74e75

Animal behavioral economics, 762e763
Animal kingdom, dominant hierarchies in,

475e478

Animals

addictive phenotypes in, measuring,

528e534

addictive behaviors, 532e534, 535t
drug-induced reinforcement, 529e532
domestication, 299, 301e303, 320, 323,

580, 626, 629, 712
homosexuality, 496e497

Anthropic principle (AP), 337
Anthropocene, 299
Anthropogeny

Comparative. See Comparative

anthropogeny; Matrix of Comparative
Anthropogeny (MOCA)

deﬁned, 152
systematic approach to, 152f

Anthropoid primates, phylogeny and

taxonomy of, 127f

Antiretroviral therapy, for HIV/AIDS, 774
Anxiety, and drug addiction, 537e538
Apc, 204e205
APOE alleles, 221, 227e230

and Alzheimer’s disease, 166
residues for human alleles and ancestors,

228t
APOE2, 229

777

778 Index

APOE3, 228e229
APOE4, 228e229

resistance to stress, 229

APOL1, 715

and cardiovascular diseases, 165

Apoptosis, 200
Applied research, mankind population
genetics framework for, 85e96

Approximate Bayesian computation (ABC),

72, 74, 79e80

Arachis sp., 320
Archaeology, 77
Archaic human genomes, 57e60

and modern human dispersals, 57e60
and selection, 60e61

Archicortex, 139
Ardipithecus

in Africa, 46
weapons use, 239

Ardipithecus kadabba (Ar. kadabba), 19, 21

evolution of, 25
ﬁrst and last appearance dates, 23t

endogenous, 366
exogenous, 366
joint, 582

Attentional cue, 365
Attributes of humans, 252te253t
Aurignacian culture, 620e621,

620fe622f, 743e744

Australopithecines

life history evaluation, 225
sexual size dimorphism, 225e226

Australopithecus, 18, 21,

134, 732

in Africa, 46e47
weapons use, 239

Australopithecus aethiopicus, 46
Australopithecus afarensis
(Au. afarensis), 731

in Africa, 46e48
bipedal locomotion, 10e11
evidence of diversity, 28e29
evolution of, 26e28
ﬁrst and last appearance

Ardipithecus ramidus (Ar. ramidus), 18, 21,

dates, 23t

731

evolution of, 23e25
ﬁrst and last appearance dates, 23t

Ardipithecus tchadensis, 23e25
Ardipithecus tugenensis, 23e25
Arginine-vasopressin (AVP), role in
relationships and attachment,
257e258
ARHGAP32, 228
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular

cardiomyopathy (ARVC), 715

Aryan, 119
ASDL, 228
Asexual reproduction and uniparental

transmission (ARUT), 281e285,
283fe285f, 293e294

ﬁxation of nonteachers with nonadaptive

phenotype, 282

ﬁxation of nonteachers, polymorphism of
adaptive and nonadaptive phenotype,
283

ﬁxation of teachers, polymorphism of

adaptive and nonadaptive phenotype,
283

global properties of, 282
model description, 281e282
Asia, Acheulean culture in, 740
Aspirin, 201
ASPM, 103
Association cortex, enlargement

or expansion of

by addition of areas, 131e132
without internal compartmentation, 132
with same areas, but reorganized, 132e133

Associative balancing complex evolution,

215

Associative learning, deﬁned, 523t
Asthma, 166e167
Asymmetric overdominant selection, 214
Attachment

hormonal basis for, 257e258
normality of, 463

Attention, 366

sexual dimorphism, 238e239

Australopithecus anamensis
(A. anamensis), 731

in Africa, 46
evidence of diversity, 25e26
evolution of, 25e26
ﬁrst and last appearance dates, 23t
habitual bipedalism in, 236
Australopithecus bahrelghazali

in Africa, 46e47
evolution of, 25e26
ﬁrst and last appearance dates, 23t

Australopithecus deyiremeda

Burtele foot, 27e28
evidence of diversity, 27e28
evolution of, 26e27
ﬁrst and last appearance dates, 23t

Australopithecus garhi, 734f

in Africa, 46
evolution of, 29
ﬁrst and last appearance

dates, 23t

Australopithecus sediba (Au. sediba)

in Africa, 46e47
evidence of diversity, 31
evolution of, 31
ﬁrst and last appearance dates, 23t

Australopiths, 47
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD),

165e166

Autochthonous expansions, in India,

112e113

Autocratic decision making, 488
Autoimmune diseases,

171e172

Autoimmune theory of male

homosexuality, 504e505

Autophagocytosis, 196
Autophagy, 196
AUTS2, 228
Axial age, 691e693
Azidothymidine (AZT),

for HIV/AIDS, 774

B
Baldwin effect, 171, 708
Basques, 94e95
Bayesian hypothesis testing, computer

simulations with, 72

Behavior, 154

Addictive. See Addiction
analysis, 397
drug-seeking, 532e533
ethical. See Ethical behavior
evolutionary explanations of. See

Evolutionary explanations of behavior

geneeculture interactions and, 585e587
moral. See Moral behavior
operant, 401
recurrence in, 402

Behavioral displays of formidability, 240
Behavioral economics perspective of reward,

527e528

Behavioral evolution, 397, 404

within cultural evolution, nesting of,

412e413, 412f

Benzene, 338e339, 338f
Between-sex sexuality, 499
Bhakti yoga, 417
Biased imitation, 582
Bicultural self, 418, 428
Big History, 685

as comprehensive context, 690e691

Biological altruism, 610e612
Biological cultures, strategies for bridging,

697e698

Biological dispersal, 65
Biological intelligence, 132
Biological progress, 570e571, 654
Biological race, 635
Biological risk factors, of serious mental

illness, 438e440
Biological variation, 263
Biomechanics, 154
Bipedalism

adaptive advantages of, 10e11

identiﬁcation of, 8e9

partial versus complete, 9e10
slow versus fast, 11

Bipolar disorder (BPD), 166
Birth order effect, 504
Bisexuality, 499
Blood group antigen (BGA) genes, 184
Body weight, changes in, 265e266
Brachycephalization, 264e265
Brain

and culture, interaction between, 579e585
evolution, 226e227, 227te228t
gay, and homosexuality, 500e501
geneeculture interactions on, 585e587
genes and cognition, 103e104
human. See Human brain
multiscalar hierarchy, 347f
structure of, 581e583
reward system, 524e525, 525f
self-stimulation reward paradigm, 531e532
transgender, and homosexuality, 501e503

Brain-as-computer, 333
BRCA1, and breast cancer, 167
BRCA2, and breast cancer, 167

Breast cancer, 167e168
Bride theft, 242
Broca’s area

changes in function and connectivity,

135e136

Buddhism, 661e662, 669e670
Burials, 741e743
Burtele foot, 27e28

ﬁrst and last appearance dates, 23t

C
Caenorhabditis elegans, 4
Calcium-calmodulin-kinase II (CaMKII),

344e345, 345f

Canarium spp., 316
Cancer, 167e168, 194

breast, 167e168
evolutionary understanding of, 205e207
group differences in, 167
suppression, evolutionary strategies for,

199e203, 203f

Candidate genes, 162e163
Cannabis, and serious mental illness,

439e440
Cannibalism, 611
Capital punishment, 483
Capsicum annuum, 320
Carcinogenesis, 194, 199e200
Cardiovascular diseases, geographical

distribution of, 164e165

Caseecontrol studies, 211
Case report, 517
CCR5, and HIV-1 infection, 186
Cebus capucinus, 224
Cebus paella, 611
Cell biology and chemistry, 154
Censorship, 644e645
Centers for plant cultivation and
domestication, 307e314

China, 311e314
Fertile Crescent, 307e311

Centrioles, 348
Change and progress, distinction between,

567

Cheirogaleus medius, 224
Chenopodium quinoa, 320
Childhood social adversity, and

schizophrenia, 442

Child-rearing, 423e424
Chimpanzee, 126

brain ontogeny and female reproduction,

227t

genome, 5e6

Chimp virus Simian Immunodeﬁciency Virus

(SIVcpz), 772

China

Chinese Communist Party (CCP), 671
plant cultivation and domestication,

311e314

Chloe’s law. See Down Syndrome Prenatal

Education Act

CHOICES program, 718e719
Christianity, 662
Chronic diseases

Index 779

of aging, Hamiltonian approach to,

progress and, 574e576

699e700

reductionist pharmaceutical research and

development for, 700e701

Civilization, self across, psychoanalyst views

of, 417e429

Classical conditioning, 397, 531
Clinal clusters, 86e90
Clines, 86e90
Clonal selection theory, 697
Clusters, 86e90
CNTNAP2, 228
Coalescent theory, 67e70
Coalitional aggression, 241e243
Cocaine, 533e534
Cognition, 154

moral, 357e358
uniquely human social, 480e482

Cognitive ethology, 368e380

dynamic images of people, 372e373, 372f
eye gaze, duality of, 375e377, 376f
images of one person, 369e370, 369f
images of people, 370e372, 371f
implied social presence, 377e378, 377f

Coherence, 335
Collective parenting, 272
Colocasia esculenta, 300
Commensalism, 302
Common variants (CVs), 96e97,

162, 164, 634, 641

Communication, 154, 425, 428

nonverbal, 421
verbal, 418, 426, 428e429

Comparative anthropogeny. See also Matrix

of Comparative Anthropogeny
(MOCA)

challenge of, 151
ethical and practical limitations on

acquisition of information, 153

need for, 152
storage of information, 152e153, 152f

Comparative genomics, 151e152, 179
Compulsivity, 533e534

deﬁned, 523t

Conscious observer, 335e336
Consequentialism, 606
Construct validity, 529
Contact inhibition, 203
Contest competition, 235
Control over the environment, 574e575
Cooperation hierarchies, 487e489
Cooperative coordination, physical intimacy

and, 511e512

Copenhagen interpretation, 335e337
Copying metaphor, 401e402
Copy-number variant (CNV), 86e89, 97,

162, 166

Cortex

association. See Association cortex,

enlargement or expansion of
higher-order, enlargement of, 135
limbic cortex, evolutionary modiﬁcations of,

138e139

sensory, evolutionary modiﬁcations of,

138e139

Cortical system, relationship with altruism,

358

Cortisol

and dominance behavior, 476e477
role in relationships and attachment, 257

Counter-adaptation opponent-process and

allostasis model, 522e523

Craving, 528

neuropsychological adaptations of, 525e526

Cucurbita moschata, 320
Cucurbita pepo (C. pepo), 320e321
Cultivation, 300e301
Cultural evolution, 397, 404

behavioral evolution within, nesting of,

412e413, 412f

within genetic evolution, nesting of,

410e411, 411f

in India, 112e114, 116

Cultural group selection, 393
Cultural neuroscience, 581
Cultural transmission, genetic models and,

279e280

Computed tomography (CT), for Alzheimer’s

Culture, 154

disease, 226e227

Computer simulations with Bayesian

hypothesis testing, 72

Condensation, 335
Conditioned place preference (CPP),

531e533, 537e538

Conditioning

classical, 397, 531
deﬁned, 523t
operant, 397

Conditioning taste aversion (CTA), 531
Conﬂict-based approach to hierarchies,

485e486

Confucianism, 671
Conscious awareness, 333
Conscious behaviour, 333e335
Consciousness, 334e337

in neuroscience and neurophilosophy,

686e688

Acheulean, 613e617, 734e737, 735t, 740
Aurignacian, 620e621, 620fe622f,

743e744

and brain, interaction between, 579e585
and development, interaction between,

593e594

and dispersal, 737e740, 739t
evoked, 404e405
and gene, interaction between, 585e587
and gene regulation in humans, 589e591
and genetics, coevolution between, 103
as isolation parameter, 116e117
Magdalenian, 620e621, 620fe622f
Mousterian, 617e620, 618fe619f, 740e743
Neandertals, 741e743
Oldowan, 613e617, 614fe616f, 616t,

732e734, 733t

research implications of, 587e588
selection in, 403

780 Index

Culture (Continued )

taphonomic indications of, 731e732

Curcurbita argyrosperma, 320
Cystic ﬁbrosis, 163
Cytoarchitecture, 128
Cytomegalovirus (CMV), 213

D
DARC, and malaria, 169
Darwin, Charles, 651e652
Darwinian evolutionary process, 398e407

recurrence, 401e402
selection, 402e405
variation, 398e401, 400f

Deccan, 114
Decoherence, 336
Default-mode network (DMN), 137
Dehumanization, 625e626

of Africans and Amerindians, 628e629
animalistic, 626e629
deﬁned, 625e626
dimensions of, 626
explicit, 629
from the history of philosophy, 627e628
implicit, 629
mechanistic, 626

Delayed gratiﬁcation, 333
Demic expansion, 114e115
Denisovans, 13e14, 58e59, 76

evolution of, 34
ﬁrst and last appearance dates, 23t
Dental biology and disease, 154e155
Dental reductions, 265
Dependence, 525

neuropsychological adaptations of, 525e526

Developmental origin of health and disease

(DOHaD), 713e714

Developmental psychology, 760e762
Dharma, 420, 422, 425, 670e671
Diabetes, type 2, geographical distribution

of, 165

Didelphis virginiana, 197
Diethyl ether, 341
Digitaria exilis, 318
Digitaria iburu, 318
Digitaria sp., 314
Dionaea, 575
Dioscorea retundata, 318
Direction(ality), distinguished from progress,

567e569

Disease deﬁnition, 272e273
Disease resistance, 102
Dmanisi, hominins from, 48e49, 49fe50f,

52e53

DNA

ancient studies, 74e75
methylation, 99f
mitochondrial, 69e71, 74
replication, 65, 195e196
Y-chromosomal, 69

Domestication

animal, 299, 301e303, 320, 323, 580, 712
China, 311e314
Fertile Crescent, 307e311

of plants, pathways to, 303e305, 305f
and relaxed sexual selection, 561e562
syndrome, 297e300

Dominance behavioral system (DBS), 476
Dominance displays, and sexual

selection, 240e241

anatomical threat displays, 240e241
behavioral displays of formidability, 240
mating and reproductive success, 241

Dominant hierarchies, 485e486
in animal kingdom, 475e478

Dopamine, role in relationships and

attachment, 257

Dose-effect comparison study, 526e527
Down syndrome, 718
Down Syndrome Prenatal Education Act,

714

Dravidian land, enigma of, 114
Drift, 195
Drinkometer system, 529e530, 530f
Drosophila, 699

homosexuality, 506

Drosophila melanogaster (D. melanogaster),

698e699

Drosophila willistoni, 572e573
Drug-induced reinforcement, 529e532
Drug intake despite negative consequences,

534

Drug-seeking behavior, 532e533
Dry land farmers (DLF), 114
DSM’s normality, 457e459
DTNBP1, 101e102

and schizophrenia, 166

E
Early Homo, history of, 45e53
Early settlers, in India, 112
Echinochloa sp., 314
Ecological approach, 379
Ecological optics, 379e380
Ecological validity, 380
Ecology, 155, 591e593
Ecosystem engineering, 709
EGLN1, 101
Ego boundaries, 426e427
Elaesis guineensis, 318
ELAVL4, 228
Elevated plus maze (EPM), 537e538
Embodiment, 591e593
Embryonic stem cells (ESCs), 719
Empathy, 355, 612

and moral cognition, relationship between,

357e358

and mortality, relationship between,

357e358

neuroscience and dynamics of, 356e357

Encephalization quotient (EQ), 132e134,

221e222,
222t, 224

Endocrinology, 155
Enlightenment, the, 580
Environment

and drug addiction, 539e541
information about, 574

EPAS1, 101

signals of adaptive introgression, 60t, 61

Epidemiological triangle approach, 434
Epigenetic process, 3e4
Epigenetics, 162
Epistasis, 162
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), 213
Equality, 764
Escherichia coli (E. coli), 641e642,

698e699, 717

Ethical behavior, 601, 604
conditions for, 605e606

Ethics

adaptive signiﬁcance of, 601e622
distinguished from aesthetics, 613
Ethnicity, 633e646. See also Race
Ethnocentrism, 630

normality, 460

Ethnographies of historical foragers,

482e483

Ethological approach, 379
Eugenics, 709e714

contemporary, 709e711
normality, 452e454
theories, weaknesses of, 711e714

Euglena, 575
Eukaryotic cell, 349f
Eulemur mongoz, 224
Euphausia superba, 572e573
Europe, 314e315

spread of agriculture, 314e315, 318f

Evo-devo, 557
Evoked culture, 404e405
Evolution

distinguished from progress, 567
human. See Human evolution
normality, 461e463

Evolutionary biology, 397, 697, 762e763
Evolutionary developmental biology

(EvoDevo), 708e709

Evolutionary explanations of behavior,

407e413

general evolutionary process, 409e410,

409fe411f

nesting cultural evolution within genetic

evolution, 410e411, 411f

nesting of behavioral evolution within
cultural evolution, 412e413, 412f

nesting of evolutionary processes,

408e409

proximate and ultimate operant conditions,

411e412

proximate explanation

cultural, 408
genetic, 407e408

self-control, 413
ultimate explanation

cultural, 408
genetic, 407e408

Evolutionary feedback, as missing

ingredient, 463

Evolutionary medicine, 264, 697e698

biological cultures, strategies for bridging,

697e698

Index 781

two cultures problem, 697

Evolutionary progress, 571e574
Evolutionary systems

interaction of, 771e774, 771f
predicting the future, 772f

Exaptation, 606, 713
Excitons, 340
Exploitation hierarchies, 487e489
External morphology, brain size evolution

and, 133e134

Extrasomatic relaxed selection, 560e561
Eye gaze, 366e367, 367f

duality of, 375e377, 376f

F
Face validity, 529
Factor V Leiden thrombophilia, 163
Facts

getting to the facts, 681e682
hard, 679e681
False beliefs, 481
Familial self, 424e427

social and cultural contexts of, 418e424

Fathers, 255e256
Fear of exclusion, 463
Feelings, 333
Fertile Crescent, plant cultivation and

domestication, 307e311

Fertility beneﬁt of homosexuality, 506e507
Fertility cost of homosexuality, 505e506
Fitness

as environment-dependent, dynamic

property, 199f

inclusive, 360, 385, 390
organismal versus stem cell, 194e197, 195f
skewed ﬁtness, normality of, 462

Fixation index, 181
FMO proteins, 340e341
Formidability, behavioral displays of, 240
Förster resonance electron transfer (FRET),

340, 346e347

Fossils, 47, 77
FOXP2, 6e7, 103, 142

and cardiovascular diseases, 165
and language evolution, 141
signals of adaptive introgression, 61

FRAPPE, 86e89
Free-rider problem, 360
Free will, 606e607
FtsZ proteins, 348
Functionalism, 337
Functionalist approach to hierarchies,

485e486

FUT2, and expression of ABO antigens, 185

G
Gametes, 193
Gaucher disease, 163e164
Gay brains, and homosexuality, 500e501
Gay genes, and homosexuality, 498e500
Gaze cueing task, 366e367, 367f
Gender

and drug addiction, 535e536
identity, homosexuality and, 508

Genealogy, 631

Geneeculture coevolution, 612, 712
Geneeculture interactions, 581e583,

585e587

Geneeculture models, for altruistic teaching

evolution, 279e294

Genitalegenital contact, 512
Genome sequence, 56e60
Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS),

97, 163e164, 166, 170e172,
185e187, 211, 698e699

asexual reproduction and uniparental

Genomic medicine, evolutionary perspective

transmission, 281e285, 283fe285f,
293e294

ﬁxation of nonteachers with nonadaptive

phenotype, 282

on, 698e699

evolutionary alternative to reductionist

genomics, 698e699

failed promise of reductionist genomics, 698

ﬁxation of nonteachers, polymorphism of

Genomics, 155

adaptive and nonadaptive phenotype,
283

ﬁxation of teachers, polymorphism of

adaptive and nonadaptive phenotype,
283

global properties of, 282
model description, 281e282

new model, background for, 281
sexual reproduction and biparental
transmission, 285e288, 294

additive vertical transmission

parameters, 287e288

equilibrium identiﬁcation, 286
model description, 285e286, 285t
nonteachers, genetically monomorphic

equilibria of, 286e287

teachers, genetically monomorphic

equilibria of, 287

social learning, 280
teachers and nonteachers, competition

between, 280e281
VTHT model, 289e291

invasion by teachers, conditions for,

290e291, 291f

model description, 289e290

VTOT model, 288e289

invasion by teachers, conditions for, 289,

290f

model description, 288e289

effect on genetic diversity, 77e78

Gene expression, evolution of, 227e228
Gene ﬂow, 75, 269e270
Gene  environment interactions, 542e543
General life history, 155
General progress, 570
Gene regulation, 98, 162
culture and, 589e591

Genetic disease, and

homosexuality, 503e505

candidate, 504e505
criterion for, 503e504

Genetic drift, 65e66
Genetic evolution, 397, 404

cultural evolution within, nesting of,

410e411, 411f

Genetic factors, and drug addiction,

541e542

Genetic models, and cultural transmission,

279e280

Genetics, 155

and culture, coevolution between, 103

Genetic stratiﬁcation, 90e91
Genetic therapies, 717e721
Genetic variation, within

continental groups, 86

comparative, 151e152

Geographical race, 641e642, 644
Geographic population structure (GPS)

algorithm, 91

Germ cells, 193
Germ theory, 434
Germline stem cell (GSC), 198e199
Getting to the facts, 681e682
Glucocorticoids, and dominance behavior,

477

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD)

and malaria, 186

Gluteus maximus, 10
Gobineau’s nightmare, 641
Gorillai, 235
Gossypium barbadense, 320
Gracilization, 264
Grandparents, 256
Great apes

brain evolution, 125e126, 133e135,

138e140, 142e143

life history evaluation, 224t
and modern humans, relationships among,

20f

supergeneric taxonomy of, 5t

Group selection, 385e386, 390e391,

606e607

cultural, 393

L-Gulanolactone oxidase (GULO), 561

H
Habit, deﬁned, 523t
Haplodiploid sex determination, 390
Haplotypes, 86e89
Hard facts, and religion, 679e681
Harmful prosocial behaviour, 359e360
Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori), 170e171
and expression of ABO antigens, 185

Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), 203e205
Hemochromatosis, 163
Hepatitis C virus (HCV), 213
HERC2, 101e102
Heroin, 533e534
Herpesviridae, 213
Heterocephalus glaber, 197
Heterosexuality, 497
Hierarchical relationship, 420e421, 423
Hierarchy(ies), 764, 475e490

ancestors’ challenges to, 482e485
conﬂict-based approach to, 485e486
cooperation, 487e489
dominant, in animal kingdom, 475e478
exploitation, 487e489
functional, 485e487
functionalist approach to, 485e486

782 Index

Hierarchy(ies) (Continued )

humans, 478e480
production, 485e486
reverse dominance, 483, 485
uniquely human social cognition, 480e482

Hinduism, 662
Historical explanation. See Selection by

consequences

Hitler, Adolf, 656e657
HIV/AIDS, 169e170, 772e773
antiretroviral therapy for, 774
cultural and political context response to,

774e775

current targets and priorities to control, 775
size of epidemic, 775

HLA, signals of adaptive introgression, 60t
Hobbit, 52
Holocene, 299
HOM genes, 560
Hominins, 49e50, 17e39

deﬁned, 4e5
from Dmanisi, 48e49, 49fe50f
evolution of, 134, 136

0.25 MA to the present, 33e35
1.0e0.25 MA, 32e33
1.5e1.0 MA, 31e32
2.0e1.5 MA, 30e31
2.5e2.0 MA, 29e30
3.0e2.5 MA, 28e29
4.0e3.0 MA, 26e28
5.0e4.0 MA, 25e26
circa 7.0e5.0 MA, 23e25

ladder or bush, 21e22
located in Tree of Life, 17
phylogeny, and brain size evolution, 128f
status, claims analysis for, 19e21, 20f
stem hominin, candidates for, 17e19

Ardipithecus kadabba, 19, 21
Ardipithecus ramidus, 18, 21
Orrorin tugenensis, 18, 21
Sahelanthropus tchadensis, 18e19, 21

taxic diversity, 37te38t

within clade structure, 22, 23t, 24f

Hominoid, evolution, 126, 134, 136e140
Homo, 6e7, 9, 21e22, 125, 134, 224e228,

483e485, 591, 729, 732

bipedal locomotion, 10e11
early, history of, 45e53
ﬁrst, 47e48
weapons use, 239

Homo antecessor (H. antecessor)

in Africa, 51
evolution of, 31, 33
ﬁrst and last appearance dates, 23t

Homo erectus (H. erectus), 9e10, 21e22,
66e67, 67f, 76, 95e96, 483e485,
602, 612e613, 615e616

in Africa, 45, 47e50, 52
bipedal locomotion, 10e11
discovery of, 48
evidence of diversity, 31e32
evolution of, 30e32, 34
ﬁrst and last appearance dates, 23t
post-evidence, 51

sexual dimorphism, 239

Homo ergaster (H. ergaster), 483, 736

in Africa, 48, 52
evidence of diversity, 31e32
evolution of, 30e31
ﬁrst and last appearance dates, 23t
Homo ﬂoresiensis (H. ﬂoresiensis), 96

in Africa, 52
evolution of, 34
ﬁrst and last appearance dates, 23t

Homo gautengensis, 732
Homogenization, 93
Homo georgicus (H. georgicus)

in Africa, 49e50, 52
evidence of diversity, 31
evolution of, 31
ﬁrst and last appearance dates, 23t

Homo habilis (H. habilis), 483, 574e575,
602, 607, 612e613, 615, 729e732,
734

in Africa, 46e49, 52e53
evolution of, 31

Homo habilis sensu lato

evidence of diversity, 31
evolution of, 29e30

Homo habilis sensu stricto, ﬁrst and last

appearance dates, 23t

Homo heidelbergensis (H. heidelbergensis),

134, 483e485

in Africa, 51
evolution of, 32, 34
ﬁrst and last appearance dates, 23t

Homo helmei

evolution of, 32
ﬁrst and last appearance dates, 23t

Homo moralis, 602, 604
Homo naledi (H. naledi), 48, 52
Homo neanderthalensis

(H. neanderthalensis), 12, 134, 607,
612e613, 615, 617, 619e620

evolution of, 33e34
ﬁrst and last appearance dates, 23t

Homonins, 45
Homoplasy, 86
Homo rationalis, 604
Homo rhodesiensis
evolution of, 32
ﬁrst and last appearance dates, 23t

Homo rudolfensis (H. rudolfensis)

in Africa, 47e48
evolution of, 30e31
ﬁrst and last appearance dates, 23t

Homo sapiens (H. sapiens), 12, 66e67, 96,
134, 269, 392, 482e485, 561, 574,
602, 606e607, 612e613, 615, 617,
619, 729

in Africa, 45, 51e52
evolution of, 33
ﬁrst and last appearance dates, 23t
out of Africa for, 746e748
reproductive ﬁtness of, 688
sexual dimorphism, 239
single nucleotide polymorphism,

12fe13f

Homo sapiens idaltu, 51
Homo sapiens sapiens, 112
Homosexuality, 495e513

alliances and partnerships promoted by, 511
animals, 496e497
and cooperative coordination, 511e512
fertility beneﬁt of, 506e507
fertility cost of, 505e506
genetic disease and, 503e505
humans, 497
selective neutrality
criterion for, 510
Japanese macaques, 509e510

substance of, 497e503
gay brains, 500e501
gay genes, 498e500
transgender brains, 501e503

Hordeum pusillum, 321
HOXD gene, 13f
HTR2B, 228
Hudson-Kreitman-Aguade (HKA) method,

179e180

Human accelerated regions (HARs), 6
Human adaptation

basic principles of, 263e264
at end of life, 270e271

Human African trypanosomiasis (HAT), 170
Human behavior

effect on human evolution, 708e709
impact on infectious disease transmission,

171

Human brain, 125e143. See also Brain

association cortex enlargement by addition

of areas, 131e132

association cortex enlargement with same

areas, but reorganized, 132e133
association cortex expansion, without
internal compartmentation, 132

external morphology, brain size evolution

and, 133e134

humans, as scaled apes, 133
internal changes, 135e140

changes in areal organization, function

and connectivity, 135e138

higher-order cortex and thalamus,

enlargement of, 135

microstructural changes, 139e140
new areas, evidence for, 138
sensory and limbic cortex, evolutionary

modiﬁcations of, 138e139

molecular specializations, 140e142
morphology, 129f
neuroanatomy, 128e131

Human evolution. See also Evolution

chance and necessity in, 7e8
concordance of fossils and archaeology

with, 77

for current patterns of human genetic
diversity, implications of, 77e79

models of, 67fe68f

ancient DNA studies, 74e75
building models through hypothesis

testing, 72e74

coalescent theory and mitochondrial eve,

and pathogens, coevolution between,

67e70

168e169

computer simulations with Bayesian

primate nature of, 763e764

hypothesis testing, 72

hypothesis compatibility versus

hypothesis testing, 70e72

multiregional lineage model, 71e72, 71f
phylogeography and, 67e75

Human family, 255e257

fathers, 255e256
grandparents, 256
kinship, 256e257
mating relationships, control of, 256e257
structure, inﬂuences of changes in, 272

Human Genome Project, 5, 85e86, 182, 698
Human leukocyte antigen (HLA), 117e118,

162e163, 168

class I system, 181, 183
inﬂuence on microbiome, 216
interaction with NK cells, 215e216
polymorphism, 641
system, evolution of, 211e217

allelic polymorphism, extensive, 214e215
extensive allelic polymorphism, 214e215
future considerations of, 216
multicopy gene families,

due to segmental duplications,
211e214, 212f

potential bottlenecks, 215

Human nature, 469e470

dehumanization. See Dehumanization
exclusion, 625e626, 629e630
functional perspective of, 629e630
inclusion, 625e626, 629e630
indexical, 630e631
politics of, 625e632
vernacular concept of, 631

Human origins, models of, 55e57, 56f
Humanness, 626e627, 629e631
Humans

addictive behavior in, 518e522
apomorphies, 7, 12
attributes of, 252te253t
brain and culture, interaction between,

583e585

coevolution of, 177e178, 270
common phenotypic features of, 151
continental populations, 86
culture and gene regulation in, 589e591
distinctive features of, 7
ecology, recent change of, 264
genetic diversity, in modern genomics,

633e635

hierarchies, 478e480
homosexuality, 497
life history evaluation, 224e226, 224t
lineage, 75e76
modern, and great apes, relationships

among, 20f

morphology, structural reduction of,

264e265, 265t

neuropsychological adaptations of

dependence, craving, and relapse in,
525e526

hierarchy, 764
reciprocity, 764
reconciliation, 764
sympathy, 763e764

recent evolution in, 161e162
reward in, measuring, 526e528, 529t
as scaled apes, 133
similarities and differences, 5e7
species, evolutionary and genetic unity of,

80

supergeneric taxonomy of, 5t
uniqueness

arises from non-uniquely human

mechanisms, 470e471

lie in uniquely modiﬁed interactions, 471

Human sociobiology
altruism, 385e386
cultural group selection, 393
deﬁned, 383
ﬁrst wave of criticisms of, 383e384
group selection, 385e386, 391e392
kin selection and, 384e385
misconception, 388e390
multilevel selection, 386e393
reciprocal cooperation, 392
religion, and human behaviour, 393e394
strong reciprocity, 392
Huntington’s disease, 714
Huxley, Julian, 657e658
HYAL2, signals of adaptive introgression, 60t
Hyaluronan, 203
Hygiene hypothesis, 171e172, 186, 723
Hylobates lar, 224
Hypothesis compatibility, 70e72
Hypothesis testing, 70e72

Bayesian, computer simulations with, 72
building models through, 72e74
in scientiﬁc inference, 79e80

I
Illumination, 621
Imitation, biased, 582
Immune surveillance, 200e201, 206e207
Immune system

adaptive, 183e184
innate, 184
pathogen-derived selection outside the,

184e185

Immunoediting, 200e201
Immunology, 155
Imperfect recurrence, 402
Impulsivity, impulsiveness, 404, 538e539

deﬁned, 523t
models, 524

INAH-3, 500e501
Incentive compatibility, 487
Incentive motivation, 528
Incentive sensitization

hypothesis, 528
theory, 523

Inclusive ﬁtness, 385, 390, 392e393

Index 783

Incubation of drug craving model, 533
India, 111e120

autochthonous expansions, 112e113
culture, an isolation parameter, 116e117
Deccan, 114
demic expansion, 114e115
Dravidian land, enigma of, 114
dry land farmers, 114
early settlers, 112
grandest experiment of nature, 119
implications in health and disease, 117e119

infectious diseases, 117, 118t
Lotus and Cactus model, 117
pharmacogenomics, 118
survival dictum, 118e119

neolithic farmers, arrival of, 113
NRY HG L1, 114
population stratiﬁcation, 114
settled agriculture, 115e116
spread of agriculture, 316e317

Individualism, Western social and cultural

contexts of, 428e429

Indo-Europeans, 94e95
Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), 141
Inequality, 764
Infectious diseases
history and, 169
human behavior, impact of, 171
in India, 117, 118t
natural selection associated with. See

Infectious diseases; natural selection
associated with

Infectious diseases, natural selection

associated with, 177e187

data sets and bioinformatic tools, 182
effect on site frequency spectrum, 179e180,

180f

forms of, 178
future perspectives of, 187
methods to detect signatures of, 178e182,

180f

pathogen-derived, signatures of, 182e186

adaptation to local pathogenic

environments, 185e186

adaptive immune system, evolution of,

183e184

innate immune system, evolution of, 184
outside the immune system, 184e185
selective pressure, 182e183

susceptibility to infectious diseases,

evolutionary causes of, 186e187

Inferior parietal lobule (IPL), anterior, 138
Inﬂammaging, 201
Inﬂammatory diseases, 171e172
Information about the environment, 574
Innate immune system, evolution of, 184
Innate moral sense, 757e768
Insider/outsider relationships, 421e422
Interactor, 404
Intracranial self-stimulation (ICSS), 531e532
Intragenomic relaxed selection, 558e560
Intraparietal sulcus (IPS), 138
Intrasomatic relaxed selection, 560
In vitro fertilization (IVF), 271e272

784 Index

Ipomoea batatas, 320
Islam, 662
Isoenzymes, 85e86, 87fe88f

J
Japan

Japanese macaques, homosexuality of,

509e510

spread of agriculture, 315e316

Jews, 94e95
Jnana yoga, 417
Joint attention, 582
Justice, 765

K
Karma yoga, 417
KATNA1, 228
Kekule’s dream, 338e339, 338f
Kenyanthropus platyops

evolution of, 26
ﬁrst and last appearance dates, 23t

Kin selection, 384e385, 388e391,

507e509, 607

Kinship, 256e257
KIR proteins, 215e216
Klebsiella pneumonia, 717
Korea, spread of agriculture, 315e316
Kras, 204e205

L
Ladder of life, 565e566
Lagenaria siceraria (L. siceraria), 320e321
Language

analogs to changes in ﬁnch song control,

562e563

domestication and, 561e562
implications of, 563e564
origins/evolution of, human variability and,

557e564

relaxed selection, 558e561

extrasomatic, 560e561
intragenomic, 558e560
intrasomatic, 560

Lascaux, 613, 620e621
Laws of nature, 678
LD 350-1, 28
Ledi-Geraru, ﬁrst and last appearance dates,

23t

Leishmania infantum, and visceral

leishmaniosis, 170

Leukemia, 167
Levallois technique, 617e619
Life history evolution, 221e230, 222f

APOE alleles, 228e230, 228t
brain evolution, 226e227, 227te228t
gene expression, 227e228
humans, 224e226
mammalian patterns, 221e222, 222t, 223f
primate patterns, 222e224

Lightedark box tests, 537e538
Limbic cortex, evolutionary modiﬁcations of,

138e139

Linkage approach, 163
Linkage disequilibrium (LD), 180, 211

extensive, between HLA loci, 215

Local adaptation, 98
Longevity quotient (LQ), 221e222, 222t,

223f, 224

Loss of control, 533e534
Lotus and Cactus model, 117
Love, hormonal basis for, 257e258
Low-frequency genetic variants (LFVs), 162,

164

Low frequency variants (LFVs), 96e97, 634,

641

Lucy, 46e47, 46f

M
Macrotia, 503
Magdalenian culture, 620e621, 620fe622f
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
for Alzheimer’s disease, 226e227
of cortex, 135

Major depression, 166
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC),

112, 162e163, 181, 183, 211
coevolution with herpes, 773e774
phylogenetic analysis of, 212f

Malaria, 169
Mammalian patterns, 221e222
Mankind, world dispersals and genetic

diversity of, 65e83

MAPT, 228
Mate choice, 235
Materialism, religion and, 677e678
Maternal age, 271, 271t
Mating relationships, control of, 256e257
Matrix of comparative anthropogeny

(MOCA), 65e83. See also
Comparative anthropogeny

absence of evidence, 158
examples of, 154e156

anatomy and biomechanics, 154
behavior, 154
cell biology and chemistry, 154
cognition, 154
communication, 154
culture, 154
dental biology and disease, 154e155
development, 155
ecology, 155
endocrinology, 155
general life history, 155
genetics, 155
genomics, 155
immunology, 155
medical diseases, 155
mental disease, 156
neuroscience, 156
nutrition, 156
organ physiology, 156
pathology, 156
pharmacology, 156
reproductive biology and disease, 156
skin biology and disease, 156
social organization, 156

future prospects of, 158
goals of, 153
moving the goalposts, 158
networks of relationships, generating, 157
organization into domains of human

knowledge, 153

origins and rationale, 153
synthesis with existing theories of human

origins, 157

topic timelines and relationships, 156e157,

157f

Matuyama Reversal, 48e49
McDonald-Kreitman (MK) test, 179
Mechanistic dehumanization, 626
Medical diseases, 155
Medicine

epistemological structure of, 707
evolution and future of, 695e702
evolutionary, 697e698
genomic medicine, evolutionary

perspective on, 698e699

evolutionary alternative to reductionist

genomics, 698e699

failed promise of reductionist genomics,

698

modern. See Modern medicine
personalized, 715
racial, 715

Mediterranean basin, 314e315

spread of agriculture, 314e315

MEF2A, 227
Melanoma, 167
Mendelian diseases, 163e164
Mendelian inheritance, 65e66
Mental illness, 156, 584e585

geographical distribution of, 165e166
Mentalizing. See Theory of mind (ToM)
Mental mechanisms,

evolution of, 467e473

classical versus hierarchical modularity,

468e469

evo-devo and descent with

modiﬁcation in brain, 468

evolutionary feedback, as missing

ingredient, 472e473
human nature, 469e470
human uniqueness

arises from non-uniquely human

mechanisms, 470e471

lie in uniquely modiﬁed interactions, 471

Mesolimbic system, relationship with

altruism, 358

Metaphysics, 676
Metastasis, 199e200
Methamphetamine, 533e534
Micelles, 341, 342f
Microarrays, 97
Microbiome, HLA inﬂuence on, 216
Microcephalin 1 (MCPH1), 103
Microcranialization, 264
Microsatellites, 86e89, 93e94
Microstructural changes, 139e140
Microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs),

344, 347

Index 785

Microtubules (MTs), 334e335, 344e350,

349f

Middle temporal gyrus (MTG), 136e137
Migration, 59f
Milk drinkers, 102
Mimosa, 575
Mind, 580e581

evolution of, 251e254

Mini-columns, 128
Miocene hominids, 7e8
Miscarriage rate, 271
Misconception, 388e390
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), 56e57,

69e71, 74

Mitochondrial Eve, 69
Modern genomics, human genetic diversity

in, 633e635

Modern humans

anatomically, evolution of, 177
dispersals, 57e60
and great apes, relationships among, 20f
origin of, 11e14, 12t

Modern medicine. See also Medicine

diagnostic procedures, 714e715
on human evolution, impact of, 707e724
meaning of, 707e708
therapeutic procedures, 715e722
acute versus chronic, 715e716
adaptive symptoms, iatrogenic disruption

of, 721e722

genetic therapies, 717e721
infectious diseases, drugs and vaccines

for, 716e717

organ transplant, 721

Modularity, classical versus hierarchical,

468e469

Molecular genetics, 12
Molecular self-replicators, 341
Monogamy, 611
Moral altruism, 610e612
Moral behavior

versus moral norms, 602e603
as rational behavior, 604e605
sociobiology’s account of, 608e610

Moral codes, 607e608
Moral grammar, 765
Morality, 392e393, 481e482, 602e605,

608, 762

Morals-based antiracism, 646
Moral sense, 602, 605

contemporary evidence of, 760e765

animal behavioral economics, 762e763
developmental psychology, 760e762
evolutionary biology, 762e763
primate nature of humans, 763e764

innate, 757e768
theory, 758e760

Hume, 759e760
Hutcheson, 759
Shaftesbury, 759

Mother-offspring relationship, 257
Motivation

deﬁned, 523t
incentive, 528

Mountaineers, 101
Mousterian culture, 617e620, 618fe619f,

740e741

coincides with Neandertals, 741e743

Mucolipidosis type IV, 163e164
Multicellularity, 193e194
Multicopy gene families, due to segmental

duplications, 211e214, 212f
Multilevel selection, 384, 386e391
Multiple endocrine neoplasia, 198e199
Multiple organ failure syndrome, 722
Multiple rare variant (MRV) hypothesis,

162e163

Multiple species, 75e76
Multiple worlds interpretation (MWI),

336e337

Multiregional hypothesis, 66e67
Multiregional lineage model of human

evolution, 71f

Musa spp., 316
Mutationeselection equilibrium, 503
Mycobacterium leprae (M. leprae), 170e171
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M.

tuberculosis), 170e171, 213, 270,
707, 717

Myeloarchitecture, 128
MYO5A, 101e102

N
Nalmefene, 533
Naltrexone, 533
Naturalistic fallacy, 609e610
Natural killer (NKI) cells, interaction with
human leukocyte antigen, 215e216

Natural lines of fracture, 399
Natural selection, 97, 100, 103, 168e171,

387, 391, 721

associated with infectious diseases,

177e187

changes in, 266e269, 267fe269f
data sets and bioinformatic tools, 182
effect on site frequency spectrum, 179e180,

180f

forms of, 178
future perspectives of, 187
methods to detect signatures of, 178e182,

180f

pathogen-derived, signatures of, 182e186

adaptation to local pathogenic

environments, 185e186

adaptive immune system, evolution of,

183e184

innate immune system, evolution of, 184
outside the immune system, 184e185
selective pressure, 182e183

susceptibility to infectious diseases,

evolutionary causes of, 186e187

Neandertals, 12e13, 55, 57e58, 617e620

coincides with Mousterian culture, 741e743
substitutions and Deletions in, 12t

Negative reinforcement, 523t
Neocortex, 139
Neolithic farmers, arrival of, in India, 113
Neolithic revolution, 299, 312fe313f

Nested clade phylogeographic analysis

(NCPA), 72e73

multilocus version of (MLNCPA), 73e75,

77, 79

Net progress, 567, 569e570
Neural networks, 357
Neuro-cultural interaction model, 580
Neurohormonal theory for homosexuality,

500e503

Neurological mechanisms, 257e258
Neurophilosophy, consciousness in,

686e688

Neuroscience, 156

consciousness in, 686e688
cultural, 581

NHLBI-Exome Sequencing Project, 182
Niche construction model/theory, 561, 709,

714

NiemannePick disease, 163e164
Nitrous oxide, 341
Noncenters, spread of agriculture to,

314e319

Africa, 317e319, 319f
Europe, 314e315, 318f
India, 316e317
Japan, 315e316
Korea, 315e316
Mediterranean basin, 314e315
Southeast Asia, 316e317

Nonreligion versus religion, 661e664
Nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs

(NSAIDs), 201

Nonteachers and teachers, competition

between, 280e281

Normality, 451e464. See also Abnormality

of attachment, 463
bias of, 460e461
DSM’s, 457e459
ethnocentrism’s, 460
eugenics, 452e454
evolution’s, 461e463
psychiatry’s, 454e456
of resource conservation, 462
Rosenhan’s, 456e457
of skewed ﬁtness, 462
of social competition, 462e463
of social risk and fear of exclusion, 463

NOS2A, 101
Novelty seeking, 538
NRY HG, 112e114, 113f
Nucleus accumbens (NAc), 524e526
Nutrition, 156

O
OAS2, signals of adaptive introgression, 60t
Objective reduction (OR), 334e336, 343
Obsessive-compulsive disorder, 528
Obstetric complications, and serious mental

illness, 438e439

OCA2, 101e102
Oldowan culture, 613e617, 614fe616f,

616t, 732e734, 733t

Oncogenes, 200
Operant behavior, 401

786 Index

Operant conditioning, 397
Operational sex ratio (OSR), 235e236

Phalaris carolinian, 321
Pharmaceutical development, strategies for,

reconciliation, 764
sympathy, 763e764

behavioral, 236
physiological, 236

Oppression, 488, 488f
Orchestrated objective reduction (Orch OR),

334e337, 345e346

Organismal ﬁtness versus stem cell ﬁtness,

194e197, 195f

Organs, 193

pathology, 707
physiology, 156
transplant, 721

Origin of life, 340f
Orphan drug, 720e721
Orrorin tugenensis (O. tugenensis), 18, 21

in Africa, 46
evolution of, 23e25
ﬁrst and last appearance dates, 23t

Oryza glaberrima, 318
Oryza indica, 314
Oryza japonica (O. japonica), 314
Out-of-Africa (OOA) migrations, 86e89,

95e96, 161e162, 65e80

for Homo sapiens, 746e748

Oxytocin (OT), role in relationships and

attachment, 257e258

P
p53, 195e196, 200
Paleocortex, 139
Paleoenvironment, 50e51
Paleoneurology, 125e127, 143
Pandanus conoideus, 316
Panexperientialism, 333
Panpsychism, 333
Pan troglodytes, 255
Paramecium, 575
Paramyxoviridae, 213
Paranthropus, 21, 134
Paranthropus aethiopicus (P. aethiopicus)

evidence of diversity, 28e29
evolution of, 28e29
ﬁrst and last appearance dates, 23t
LD 350-1, 28

Paranthropus boisei (P. boisei), 21e22,

729e732, 734

evidence of diversity, 31e32
evolution of, 29e31
ﬁrst and last appearance dates, 23t

Paranthropus robustus, 21e22

evidence of diversity, 31
evolution of, 30e31
ﬁrst and last appearance dates, 23t

Parental care, 611
Particular progress, 570
Pathogens, coevolution of, 177e178, 270
Pavlovian conditioning. See Classical

conditioning

“Pecking order” (Hackordnung), 475e476
Penetrance, 96
Peromyscus californicus, 243e244
Personalized medicine, 715
Peto’s paradox, 202, 206

700e702

aging, evolutionary-genomic pharmaceutical

research and development for, 701

chronic disorders, reductionist

pharmaceutical research and
development for, 700e701

Pharmacogenomics, 118
Pharmacology, 156
Phaseolus vulgaris, 320
Phenocopy, 560
Phenotype, extended, 399
Phenotypic geographical variation, 98e100
Phenotypic plasticity, 404e405
Phenylketonuria (PKU), 163, 714e715
Phoenix dactylifera, 311
Phylogenetically important events (PIEs),

403e404

Phylogenetic character mapping (PCM), 96
Phylogenetic race, 636e637
Physical intimacy, and cooperative

coordination, 511e512

Physiological mechanisms, 257e258
Pi electron resonance, 337, 339e343, 339f,

349f
Piltdown, 8
Pithecanthropus, 95
Pithecanthropus erectus, 8
Plant domestication, 303e305, 305f
Plasmodium falciparum (P. falciparum),

168e169

and expression of ABO antigens, 185
and malaria, 169, 184, 186

Plasmodium malariae, and malaria, 169
Plasmodium ovale, and malaria, 169
Plasmodium vivax (P. vivax), 168e169

and malaria, 169

Plasticity, phenotypic, 404e405
Pleasure principle, 333
Ploygonum erectum, 321
Pluralism, 692
Polygamy, 611
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR), 12
Population genetics, 181
Population stratiﬁcation, in India, 114
Population structure, 161e162
Population thinking, 397e398
Population trees, 78e79, 80f
Positive reinforcement, 523t
Positron emission tomography (PET)

of cortex, 137
of superior temporal sulcus, 138

Posner paradigm, 365e368, 366f
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 229
Prebiotic primordial soup, 341, 342f
Precultural uses of tools, 730e731
Predictive validity, 529
Prefrontal cortex (PFC), 356
Price’s equation, 405e407
Primary sensory areas, 128e129, 131f
Primate nature of humans, 763e764

hierarchy, 764
reciprocity, 764

Primates, homosexuality of, 496
Principal component analysis (PCA), 86e89,

95, 639

Prisoner’s Dilemma, The, 360
Private self, 419
PRKAA1, 101
Production hierarchies, 485e486
Progenitors, 194
Programmed cell death. See Apoptosis
Progress, 565e576

as biological concept, 570e571, 654
and consciousness, 574e576
deﬁned, 567e569
evolutionary, 571e574
general, 570
idea of, 566e567
net, 567, 569e570
particular, 570
uniform, 567, 569e570

Prokaryotes, 350
Prosocial behaviour

deﬁned, 359
harmful, 359e360

Prosociality, problem with, 359
Proto-oncogenes, 200
Proximate explanation of behavior

cultural, 408
genetic, 407e408

Pseudonomas aeruginosa, 717
Psychiatric disorders, 537e539

anxiety and, 537e538

Psychiatry’s normality, 454e456
Psychoanalysis, 418, 425, 428e429
Psychological disorders, geographical

distribution of, 165e166

Psychological risk factors, of serious mental

illness, 442e443

Psychological sexual orientation, 500
Psychosis, and serious mental illness, 440
Public health, 722e723
Pueraria lobata, 316
Pulmonary function tests (PFTs), for asthma,

166e167
Punishment, 404

Q
Quantitative trait loci (QTLs), 102
Quantum biology, 333e351
Quantum computer, 337
Quantum superposition, 335, 336f

R
Race, 66, 79, 99, 715, 633e646. See also

Ethnicity
biological, 635
detractors versus realists, 635e636
discrepancies of, 641
existence of, 638
Fst argument, 640e641
geographical, 641e642, 644
homogeneity and boundaries, 641e642

meanings of, 636
phylogenetic, 636e637
semantic clariﬁcation of, 635, 644
as social construction, 639e640
subspecies, 637e638, 643e644
taxonomy of, 635e638
tradition and relevance, role of, 643
typological, 636

Racial medicine, 715
Rare variants (RVs), 96e97, 162, 164, 166,

634, 641

Rational behavior, moral behavior as,

604e605

Rationality, 602e604, 607, 677, 683
Recent/contemporary evolution, 100e104
Recent African Origin (RAO), 55e56
Recent African Origin with assimilation

(RAO-A) model, 55e57

Recent African Origin with replacement

(RAO-R) model, 55e57

Reciprocal altruism, 604, 652
Reciprocal cooperation, 392
Reciprocity, 764
Reconciliation, 764
Recurrence, 401e402

in behavior, 402
copying metaphor, 401e402
imperfect, 402

Recursive regeneration, 590e591
Red queen hypothesis, 168e169

coevolution and, 168
geographical differences, 168e169
human leukocyte antigen features, 168
selective pressure and agriculture, 168

Reductionism, 677, 686
Reductionist genomics

evolutionary alternative to, 698e699
failed promise of, 698

Reinforcement, 404

drug-induced, 529e532
negative, 523t
positive, 523t

Reinforcer, deﬁned, 523t
Relapse, neuropsychological adaptations of,

525e526

Relaxed selection, 558e561

domestication and, 561e562
extrasomatic, 560e561
intragenomic, 558e560
intrasomatic, 560

Reliability, 529
Religion, 661e672

deﬁned, 666e668, 675
development and use of, in East Asia,

670e671

hard facts and, 679e681
and human behaviour, 393e394
materialism and, 677e678
problem of deﬁning, 664e666
as project of secular modernity, 668e670
science and, 675e679, 682e683
in sociobiology’s account of evolution,

688e690
Religious beliefs

and ethical norms, 608
and moral values, 608

Replicative senescence, 200
Reproductive biology and disease, 156
Reproductive success, primacy of, 403e404
Resistance against infection diseases, 181
Resistance alleles, 172
Resource conservation, normality of, 462
Respiratory diseases, 166e167
Reverse dominance hierarchies, 483, 485
Reverse tolerance. See Sensitization
Revitalization Act, 715
Reward, 333

deﬁned, 523t
dysregulation, and addiction, 522e524
in humans, measuring, 526e528
system, of brain, 524e525, 525f

Ring species phenomenon, 641e642
River transport, 306
Rodentia, 197
Rosenhan’s normality, 456e457
Runaway social selection, 251
Rungia klossii, 316
Russian Doll theory, 91e92, 435e436

S
Saccharum ofﬁcinarum, 316
Sahelanthropus tchadensis (S. tchadensis),

18e19, 21

in Africa, 46
evolution of, 23e25
ﬁrst and last appearance dates, 23t
weapons use, 239

Salmonella, 213, 641e642
Salmonella enteric, 717
Salmonella typhimurium, 170
Same-sex aggression, 238
Same-sex sexuality. See Homosexuality
Sasana, 670e671
Scala naturae, 566, 568f
Scheduled tribes (STs), 111e112
Schizophrenia (SCZ), 165e166, 437e438
Science

deﬁned, 675
distinguished from scientism, 690
and religion, 675e679, 682e683
Science-based antiracism, 645e646
Scientiﬁc inference, hypothesis testing in,

79e80
Scientism, 676

distinguished from science, 690

SCL4A1, and malaria, 169
Seasonality, and serious mental illness, 439
Sedentism, 300e301
Segmental duplication, 213e214
Selection, 402e405

by consequences, 397e398
in culture, 403
phenotypic plasticity, 404e405
reproductive success, primacy of, 403e404

Self

bicultural, 418, 428
across civilizations, psychoanalyst views of,

417e429

Index 787

familial, 418e427
private, 419
social, 419
spiritual, 427e428

Self-administration-based methods, for
reward measurement, 529e531

Self-control, 404, 413
Self-esteem, 425
Self-grooming, 537e538
Selﬁsh behaviour, 389
Self-reported ancestry versus ancestry

informative markers, 93e94

Self-reports, 527
Semisedentism, 300e301
Sensation seeking. See Novelty seeking
Sensitization, 525
Sensory cortex, evolutionary modiﬁcations

of, 138e139

Separation-individuation, 424
Serious mental illness

biological and social causation of, 431e447
biological risk factors of, 438e440
from complexity to utility, 445e447
diagnosis of, 431e433
new thinking and new science for,

443e445

psychological risk factors of, 442e443
schizophrenia, 437e438
social risk factors of, 440e442
theories of etiology, 433e436

Setaria palmifolia, 316
Settled agriculture, in India, 115e116
Sex-antagonistic pleiotropy, 506e507
Sexual coercion, 235
Sexuality

between-sex, 499
bisexuality, 499
homosexuality. See Homosexuality

Sexual maturity quotient (SMQ), 223e224
Sexual reproduction and biparental

transmission (SRBT), 285e288, 294
additive vertical transmission parameters,

287e288

equilibrium identiﬁcation, 286
model description, 285e286, 285t
nonteachers, genetically monomorphic

equilibria of, 286e287

teachers, genetically monomorphic equilibria

of, 287

Sexual selection, 235

alternatives to male contests, 243e244
for male contests, 237e243, 237t

anatomical adaptations for, 238e239
coalitional aggression, 241e243
dominance displays, 240e241
same-sex aggression, 238
traits favored by, 238t
weapons use, 239e240

in men, strength of, 235e237

Shukyo, 670e671
Sima de los Huesos (SH), ﬁrst and last

appearance dates, 23t

Sima de los Huesos, evolution of, 32e33
Sinanthropus, 95

788 Index

Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP),
12e13, 13t, 86e89, 91, 162e164,
179e180, 634

Site frequency spectrum (SFS), natural

selection effect on, 179e180,
180f

Skepticism, 683
Skewed ﬁtness, normality of, 462
Skin biology and disease, 156
Skin color, 115e116
SLC16A11, signals of adaptive introgression,

60t

SLC24A5, 101e102
SLC45A2, 101e102
Sleeping sickness. See Human African

trypanosomiasis (HAT)

SLITRK1, 228
SLTM, 228
Smoke detector principle, 722
SNCA, 228
Social attention, 365e380
Social cognition, uniquely human, 480e482
Social competition, normality of, 462e463
Social contract algorithm, 404e405
Social Darwinism, 651e659
Social dominance, 489
Social environment, and drug addiction, 541
Social isolation, 590
Social justiﬁcation, 489
Social learning, 582

and altruistic teaching, 280

Social organization, 156
Social presence, implied, 377e378, 377f
Social risk

factors, of serious mental illness, 440e442
normality of, 463

Social self, 419
Social views, 652e654
Socioeconomic status (SES), 479e480
Solanum tuberosum, 320
Somatic cells, 193
Somatic evolution, 193e194

aging and, 197e199

Somatic stem cells (SSCs), 719e721
SORL1, 228
Southeast Asia, spread of agriculture,

316e317

Spacetime geometry, 336f
Spartan paradigm, 367e368
Spencer, Herbert, 654e655
Sperm competition, 235
Spina biﬁda occulta, 266
Spiritual self, magic cosmic and, 427e428
SPON1, 228
Stabilizing selection, 196
STAT2, signals of adaptive introgression, 60t
Stem cell

ﬁtness versus organismal ﬁtness, 194e197,

195f

hematopoietic, 203e205
niche, 194

Stem hominin, candidates for, 17e19

Ardipithecus kadabba, 19, 21

Ardipithecus ramidus, 18, 21
Orrorin tugenensis, 18, 21
Sahelanthropus tchadensis, 18e19, 21

Sterile castes, 389
Stones ape theory of human evolution, 519
Stone tools, 51
Stress, and serious mental illness, 440
Strong reciprocity, 392
Structural reduction, of human morphology,

264e265, 265t

Structural variation (SV), 97
STRUCTURE approach, 86e89, 92e93,

639

Subspecies race, 637e638
Superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF), 137

inferior limb of (SLFIII), 137

Superior temporal gyrus (STG), 136
Superior temporal sulcus (STS), 138
Surrogate motherhood, 272
Survival dictum, 118e119
Susceptibility to infectious diseases,

evolutionary causes of, 186e187

Symbiotic reciprocity, 424
Symbolism, 620e621, 742e743, 746, 749
Sympathy, 93e94, 763e764
Synaptic proteins, 345
Synaptic pruning, 584

T
Taoism, 671
TAP2, 183e184
Taphonomic indications, of culture,

731e732

TAS2R38, 227e228
Taxic diversity within hominin clade, 22,

23t, 24f, 37te38t

Taxonomy, 635e638
Tay-Sachs disease, 163e164
Teachers and nonteachers, competition

between, 280e281

Telanthropus, 21e22
Telescoping, 535e536
Telomeres, 200
Tension reduction hypothesis, 537
Terminalia spp., 316
Territoriality, 300
Testosterone, and dominance behavior,

476e477, 479

THADA gene, 13
Thalamus, enlargement of, 135
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA),

205e206

Theories of causation, 434
Theory of cognitive dissonance, 489
Theory of fundamental social causes, 435
Theory of mind (ToM), 357
Theory of organic evolution, 603
Threat, anatomical displays, 240e241
Tissue maintenance, 201
TLR5, susceptibility to infectious diseases,

186e187

TNFSF5, and malaria, 186
Tolerance, 525

TOMM40, 230
Tool making, 729e730
Trade-offs, 443
Transcendence, 675e676
Transcription factors (TFs), 141
Transgender brains, and homosexuality,

501e503

Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance

(TEI), 3e4

Transitional industries, 748e750
Transition to habit theory, 523e524
Tree of Life (TOL), 21

hominins located in, 17

Trees, 86e90

least-squares, 89f
neighbor-joining, 90f
phylogenetic, 87fe88f
Treponema pallidum, 270
TRP53, 200, 204e205
Trypanosoma cruzi (T. cruzi), 642
Tuberculosis (TB), 117
Tubulin, 341, 344f, 346e347
Tumor organization, 203e205, 204f
Tumor suppression, 203e205
Tumor suppressor genes (TSG), 200
Two cultures problem, 697
Type 2 diabetes, geographical distribution of,

165

Typological race, 636
TYR, 101e102
TYRP1, 101e102

U
Ultimate explanation of behavior

cultural, 408
genetic, 407e408

Uniform progress, 567, 569e570
Utilitarianism, 606

V
Validity

construct, 529
face, 529
predictive, 529

Variation, 398e401

cultural practices and individual operant

behaviour, 401

functional deﬁnition, 398e399
pooling, 400e401, 400f

Ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC),

356e357

Vernacular concept of human nature, 631
Veromessor pergandei, 391
Vibrio cholera, and expression of ABO

antigens, 185

Vigna subterranea, 318
Violence, coalitional, 241e243
VIP-SCN, 501
Visceral leishmaniosis, 170
Vitalism, 337
Vitamin D, and serious mental illness, 439
Vitis silvestris, 311

Index 789

Vitis vinifera, 311
VMAT2, 678e679
Voandzeia subterrane, 318
Von Economo (VE) neurons,

139e140

VTHT model, 289e291

Weapons use, and sexual

selection, 239e240

Web of causation theory, 434
“Weighted toward empathy” approach, 355
Wernicke’s area, changes in function and

connectivity, 135e136

invasion by teachers, conditions for,

Western individualism, social and cultural

290e291, 291f

model description, 289e290

VTOT model, 288e289
invasion by teachers,

conditions for, 289, 290f
model description, 288e289

W
Wallace, Alfred Russel, 653

contexts of, 428e429

White-skinned, blue-eyed,

101e102

Whole-genome sequencing (WGS),

163e164, 634

Wilson, Edward O., 658

X
X chromosome, 155, 499, 503, 506e507

Y
Y-chromosomal DNA
(Y-DNA), 69
Yiersinia pestis, 170
Yoga

bhakti, 417
jnana, 417
karma, 417

Z
ZC3HAV1, and multiple sclerosis, 186
Zea mays, 320
Zidovudine, for HIV/AIDS, 774
Zinjanthropus, 21, 729e730
Zongjiao, 670e671

